Mosiah 1–3 391

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How is the Use of Deuteronomy in the Book of

Mormon Evidence for its Authenticity? (1 Nephi 4:34),” KnoWhy 428 (April 27, 2018).

Taylor Halverson, “Deuteronomy 17:14–20 as Criteria for Book of Mormon

Kingship,” Interpreter: A Journal of Latter-day Saint Faith and Scholarship 24 (2017): 1–10.

Mosiah 2:18–19 — Benjamin Teaches His People to Serve and Thank Their Heavenly King

One of the wonderful things about King Benjamin is that he does not require anyone to do anything that he has not been willing to do himself. Earlier in the chapter, he told the people that he had served them, with all his “might, mind and strength” (2:11). The scriptural exhortation to love God with all of your might, mind, and strength is in several biblical passages that King Benjamin, who knew the scriptures well, would have known (see, for example, Deuteronomy 6:5; 30:6; Proverbs 2:2). He brilliantly transforms that requirement to say, in essence, “I know that I am commanded to love God with all my heart, might and mind, but, you know, I have loved you and served you with all my heart, might and mind.” He is telling them, “I am your king and God has put me in as king, but I love you as much as I have loved God.” And thus, he will turn around and tell them that the same opportunity and reality applies to them as well: “And when you are in the service of your fellow beings you are only in the service of your God” (2:17).

And thus, “if I, whom ye call your king … do merit any thanks from you, O how you ought to thank your heavenly King!” (2:19), because I have only been in the service of God, and he has “kept and preserved” us from day to day, lending us breath, that we might live (2:21). And thus all thankful praise should be directed toward Him. This is not only logically coherent, but also ethically right and spiritually fulfilling.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Are Acts of Service Related to Wisdom? (Mosiah 2:17),” KnoWhy 308 (May 3, 2017).

Mosiah 2:17, 24 — When We Serve Others, We Are Merely Serving God To understand Benjamin’s full point here, the key word is only. This word does not just mean only or solely. It also means merely. So, what is King Benjamin trying to tell his people? He wants them to remember that when you serve God, he immediately blesses you, and thus, you do not get out of His debt that way. While it is a good thing to serve God (especially so you can know the voice of the Master whom you have served, 5:14), in reality, when you are in the service of other people, you are still only—merely—in the service of God (2:17). And thus, neither King Benjamin nor anyone else has reason to 392 John W. Welch Notes

boast, even if one serves God exclusively, with all of one’s whole soul (2:21). This is because, as Benjamin says, God always immediately blesses you (2:24).

Mosiah 2:15, 27 — Benjamin Wants to Stand before God with a Clear Conscience Above all, Benjamin wants to return to God with a clear conscience and with his garments pure, not stained by the blood of his people (2:27–28). At the beginning of his speech, Benjamin had similarly said that he wasn’t speaking to the people “this day” that “I might thereby accuse you,” but so that “I can answer a clear conscience before God” (2:15).

Mosiah 2:11, 28 — Benjamin States and Restates the Purposes of Their Gathering Finally, in conclusion of this first section of his speech, just as he had begun by telling his people that he had been consecrated by his father to be king and had been kept and preserved by God’s matchless power (2:11), Benjamin ends by returning to these same points. He notes that “the Lord God doth support me, … that I should declare unto you this day, that my son Mosiah is a king and a ruler over you” (2:30).

As will become clear as we carefully read this beautifully composed speech, Benjamin’s words separate into seven sections, as do many of the Psalms, and as does the Gospel of Matthew. Some scholars have referred to this as a “menorah pattern,” echoing the seven-branched configuration of the menorah in the Temple. And in this connection, we recall that Benjamin’s speech and Mosiah’s coronation was held surrounding the temple.

Further Reading

Corbin Volluz, “A Study in Seven: Hebrew Numerology in the Book of

Mormon,” BYU Studies Quarterly 53, no. 2 (2014): 57–83.

For the most detailed discussion of the many chiastic levels and structures in

Benjamin’s Speech, see John W. Welch, “Parallelism and Chiasmus in Benjamin’s

Speech,” in King Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom,” ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 315–410. On this first section in particular, see pages 329–336. Each subsequent section is also displayed and discussed in detail in this book chapter.

Mosiah 2:28–30 — King Benjamin Declares Mosiah to be His Successor In Mosiah 2:29–30, King Benjamin stated, “I say unto you that I have caused that ye should assemble yourselves together, that I might declare unto you that I can no longer be your teacher, nor your king; For even at this time … I should declare unto you this day, that my son Mosiah is a king and a ruler over you.”

Mosiah 1–3 393

That is an official proclamation announcing the new king. At this point, there may have been some kind of investiture, where Mosiah would come up and perhaps be given the brass plates, or the Sword of Laban. After some interruption, King Benjamin resumes in verse 31 with the words, “And now, my brethren.”

In most successions from one king to another, what happens? The king dies and his sons fight over who is going to be the next king. It is very unusual for a king to appoint a son while the king is still alive. Now, there will be a co-regency for the next three years, with Benjamin and his son working together. At that point, King Benjamin will die, but in the meantime, he has provided for a smooth transition from himself to Mosiah, and Mosiah will successfully reign for thirty-three years without war or disruption, as far as we know.

Further Reading

Stephen D. Ricks, “Kingship, Coronation, and Covenant in Mosiah 1–6,” in King

Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom,” ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 233–276.

Mosiah 2:31–41 — How Is the Next Section of Benjamin’s Speech Organized? In this second part of his speech, Benjamin promises his people temporal blessings that will come from obedience (2:31), condemns willful rebellion against God (2:32–33), stresses the accountability of the people (2:34–36), once again condemns willful rebellion against God (2:37–39), and finally promises his people eternal blessings that come from obedience (2:40–41). This section acts as a coda following the installation of Mosiah as the new king. Its central section holds the people accountable, insisting upon their obedience and loyalty to the new king, who stands as an intermediary between the people and their Heavenly King.

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “Parallelism and Chiasmus in Benjamin’s Speech,” in King

Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom”, ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 315–410.

Mosiah 2:32–33 — What Does the Term “Listeth to Obey” Mean? Why does King Benjamin believe that the Atonement is necessary? There are many answers to that question, but among them is the simple fact that we are sinful. He clearly talks about mankind’s sinful nature and that if we list to obey—or lean towards—the evil spirit, we are likely to fall into the state of rebellion against God that he advises us so much against. We are in a state of nothingness from which the Lord alone can elevate us. We are dust, we are created as and from the dust. If we are going to be exalted and rise above this mortal state, then the Atonement will be necessary to make that possible. 394 John W. Welch Notes

We are dependent on it. The unifying power of the At-one-ment holds this world together, and King Benjamin talks about the many ways we depend upon God.

Mosiah 2:40–41 — King Benjamin Calls upon All of His People to Choose Happiness In Mosiah 2:40, King Benjamin says: “O, all ye old men, and also ye young men, and you little children.” In Israelite culture, for some legal purposes, the world was grouped into old men, young men and children. With a life expectancy of roughly about forty, these three categories roughly break down into 10, 20, and 30 years of age. King Benjamin wants the elderly, the young adults, and the youth to consider the blessed and happy state of all those who keep the commandments of God.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Can the Book of Mormon Strengthen Marriages

and Families? (Jacob 3:7),” KnoWhy 302 (April 19, 2017).

Mosiah 3

Mosiah 3:2–5 — King Benjamin Was Visited by an Angel and Quotes His Words Section 3 of Benjamin’s Speech runs from Mosiah 3:2–10. These verses seem to be the very words that an angel of the Lord had spoken to Benjamin one night about the coming of Christ. The text does not say how many days or nights beforehand this visitation had occurred. The angel had awakened Benjamin, presumably at night, “And he said unto me: Awake; and I awoke, and behold he stood before me” (3:2).

The first words that the angel spoke to Benjamin were “For the Lord hath heard thy prayers, and hath judged of thy righteousness, and hath sent me to declare unto thee that thou mayest rejoice; and that thou mayest declare unto thy people, that they may also be filled with joy” (3:4). Above all, Benjamin wants all people to know that the Atonement is filled with joy. In the world, there is misery and sorrow, but the one thing that makes this life bearable and something we can enjoy to the fullest is the knowledge of the Atonement.

These teachings come from the angel. Whether they are all of the angel’s precise words is not known, but Benjamin has learned and reports the true essence of these things from the angel. Humans don’t receive messages like this one very often, so when such information is conveyed, we ought to take special note, with heed and diligence, listening carefully to what is said. Notice that the messenger from the Lord said, “Awake!” and Benjamin awoke. And the angel said again, “Awake and hear!” (3:3).

Mosiah 1–3 395

Wakefulness is an important thing. With it, King Benjamin was able to hear and understand all of the teachings about the Atonement that were then delivered to him.

It is possible that Benjamin timed his gathering to coincide with the season of Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement. In Jerusalem, people wanted their High Priest to be fully conscious of everything, as he prepared to perform the most important sacrifices of the year on the Day of Atonement. To keep him focused and not to have any debilitating thoughts, the High Priest was kept awake the night before. Interestingly, Benjamin had been praying and was awakened, so he could understand all of these teachings about the Atonement that he then delivered to his people.

Mosiah 3:5 — The Christ Will Be Recognized by His Miracles Chapter 3 is the doctrinal heart of Benjamin’s Speech. It’s all about the Atonement. The first thing to recognize is the atoning Savior Himself. The angel assures Benjamin that people will know this Redeemer when he comes. He will look like a man and will dwell in a tabernacle of clay, but he will come with powers beyond anything normally seen: “working mighty miracles, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases” (3:5).

Among the Dead Sea Scrolls—and this is discussed in this connection in the book, Isaiah

in the Book of Mormon, composed and edited by me and Donald Parry—there is a text, 4Q 251, that was unknown until just a few years ago. This Jewish text, written in the 1st Century BC, says: “When the Messiah comes, he will heal the sick, make the blind see, raise [or resurrect] the dead, and to the poor announce glad tidings.” And another fragment (4Q 541) from that same cave reads as follows: “They will utter many words against him and an abundance of lies.” So this was an expectation among some Jews, and here you have the Nephites also knowing this around 124 BC. So that we might recognize the power of the coming Lord, a number of things are given to let people identify this person. When Jesus came working all of these miracles, it’s not just that he was doing amazing things, but he does them so that people will know and identify who has come. Of course, the people of the Book of Mormon will also have some of these things happen in their presence, when Jesus appears after the resurrection and says, “Have ye any that are lame, or blind, or halt, or maimed, or leprous, or that are withered, or that are deaf, or that are afflicted in any manner? Bring them hither and I will heal them” (3 Nephi 17:7). He has raised himself from the dead, and others will be raised from the dead. So all of these signs which Benjamin told the people will be a confirmation to them in their land, as well as to all people, that they might be convinced that Jesus was the Christ, the Eternal God, and how to embrace His Atonement. 396 John W. Welch Notes

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Christ Perform Miracles? (Mosiah 3:5),” KnoWhy 508 (March 28, 2019).

Mosiah 3:7–11 — President John Taylor on the Atonement of the Savior

John Taylor wrote the book Mediation and the Atonement when he was President of the Church. It was one of his main contributions as president. He wanted the Saints to understand the Atonement, and his book is a classic. For inclusion in The Encyclopedia of

Mormonism, Elder Jeffrey R. Holland wrote the article on Atonement, but Elder Holland humbly told us as the editors, “I can’t do any better than just to quote John Taylor.”

Here is one of President Taylor’s comments:

The Savior thus becomes master of the situation—the debt is paid, the

redemption made, the covenant fulfilled, justice satisfied, the will of God done,

and all power is now given into the hands of the Son of God—the power of

resurrection, the power of redemption, the power of salvation …. He becomes

the author of eternal life and exaltation. He is the Redeemer, the Resurrector, the

Savior of man and the world. (p. 171)

And here is another comment, from a different chapter:

… in some mysterious, incomprehensible way, Jesus assumed the responsibility

which naturally would have devolved upon Adam; but which could only be

accomplished through the mediation of Himself, and by taking upon Himself

their sorrows, assuming their responsibilities, and bearing their transgressions or

sins. In a manner to us incomprehensible and inexplicable, he bore the weight of the

sins of the whole world; not only of Adam, but of his posterity; and in doing that,

opened the kingdom of heaven, not only to all believers and all who obeyed the,

law of God, but to more than one-half of the human family who die before they

come to years of maturity, as well as to the heathen, who, having died without

law, will, through His mediation, be resurrected without law, and be judged

without law, and thus participate, according to their capacity, works and worth,

in the blessings of His atonement. (p. 148–149; emphasis added)

As President Taylor undoubtedly knew, King Benjamin said many of the same things: “Believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend” (4:9). We can know many things. We can understand the symbolism, we can understand the fulfillment of prophecy, we can understand that it’s real and we can feel its reality, but the eternal economy in all of this, we cannot fathom.

Mosiah 1–3 397

Mosiah 3:7 — Focusing on the Atonement of Jesus Christ In this third section of his speech, Benjamin explains that the Lord shall suffer temptations and pain of body, hunger, thirst and fatigue, even more than a man can suffer. There are limits to our physical suffering—the body will check out at a certain extreme point. But perhaps there are not such limits to spiritual suffering, for Jesus would suffer more than a mortal could suffer. The angel says that Jesus would suffer so intensely that blood cometh from every pore (3:7). Symbolically, his blood is sprinkled from his body on all the world as he is performing that Atonement, much like the high priest did on the Day of Atonement as he sprinkled the sacrificial blood on the altar and on the people.

Jesus voluntarily offered to do this in the pre-mortal realm, and he carried through with it. The most amazing part of all of this—on top of all the pain and suffering—is that at any time, even after he said “Not my will but thine be done,” he could have checked out or called down the powers of heaven to intervene on his behalf.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Did Jesus Bleed from Every Pore? (Mosiah 3:7),” KnoWhy 520 (June 13, 2019).

Mosiah 3:8 — King Benjamin Reveals to His People a Glorious Name of Jesus One of the great purposes of this whole assembly is for King Benjamin to give his people a new name “by which they may be distinguished above all the people which the Lord God hath brought out of the land of Jerusalem” (Mosiah 1:11). The name is “Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning” (3:8). This elaborate name of Jesus contains ten nouns. It describes not only Jesus personally, but His role as creator of all things from the beginning. In the ancient world, when a king was crowned, he would receive a set of coronation names or titles that accompanied his given name. For instance, Roman Emperors bore honorific and religious titles of glory, victory, and so on. Here, in this coronation setting, King Benjamin is recognizing the Savior as their heavenly king. Before the seventh section in Benamin’s speech, all of his people will enter into a covenant whereby they took upon themselves the revealed name of Christ (5:8), that never should be blotted out (5:11). Thereby they become spiritually reborn as his sons and daughters (5:7).

This expanded covenant name would be remembered and used again in the Book of Mormon. In Helaman 14, Samuel the Lamanite stood on the walls of this same city of Zarahemla and prophesied again of the coming of Christ. In Helaman 14:11–12, he says, “for this intent have I come up upon the walls of this city, that ye might hear and know of the judgments of God which do await you because of your iniquities, and also that ye 398 John W. Welch Notes

might know the conditions of repentance; and also that ye might know of the coming of [1] Jesus [2] Christ, the [3] Son of [4] God, the [5] Father of [6] heaven and of ]7] earth, the [8] Creator of [9] all things from the [10] beginning; and that ye might know of the signs of his coming, to the intent that ye might believe on his name.” Samuel’s precise recitation and invocation of this holy name, reminding the people of Zarahemla to repent, may especially have pushed his recalcitrant audience over the edge. No wonder they tried to kill him when they could have just ignored him.

Figure 5 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “Samuel’s Quotation of Benjamin.” In Charting the Book of Mormon:

Visual Aids for Personal Study and Teaching, chart 105.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Benjamin Give Multiple Names for Jesus at

the Coronation of his Son Mosiah? (Mosiah 3:8),” KnoWhy 536 (October 17, 2019).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did King Benjamin Say That His People Would

be Sons and Daughters at God’s Right Hand? (Mosiah 5:7),” KnoWhy 307 (May 1, 2017).

Mosiah 1–3 399

Mosiah 3:9 — Jesus Will Be Crucified Because People Will Say He Has a Devil Even after all that Jesus would do, some people would try to explain his miracle-working in a secular way. They will “consider him a man,” not a god. But then how can they account for his supernatural, miraculous deeds? They will “say that he hath a devil.” Under the Law of Moses, miracles were viewed with caution. Judges needed to ask, “By what power or authority was this miracle performed?” (see Mark 3:22; Matthew 21:23).

Roman law also strictly prohibited magic and spell-casting. If these things were by the power of the Devil or evil forces, ancient judges were ordered, “Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live” (Exodus 22:18). Anyone, male or female, could not use magic, miracle-working, or sign-giving to lead people to worship or follow some other god or way (Deuteronomy 13:1–4). Such conduct in Israel was seen as violating the first and greatest commandment, loving and having only the Lord as God, and the death penalty was to be enforced very seriously (Deuteronomy 13:5, 8–11). In Roman law, it was associated with treason, the most serious of all crimes. Benjamin’s prophecy explains best why Jesus was rejected and killed. More than any other single text, this passage has informed all my years of study of the trials and death of Jesus.

Mosiah 3:11 — The Atonement Will Automatically Cover Three Types of Sins Section 4 of Benjamin’s speech (3:11–27) discusses the doctrinal theology and the religious behaviors that are consistent with repentance and the transformation that comes with the Atonement.

In Section 2 of his speech, Benjamin made it clear that people must repent of their own sins and not remain and die an enemy to God (see, for example, 2:38). This will allow the Atonement to make it possible for people to “dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness” (2:41). As he turns to the legal, religious, and practical operations of the atoning blood of Christ, Benjamin now conveys additional important information that certain transgressions or human conditions will be automatically covered by the “infinite and eternal” Atonement, as Amulek will later call it (Alma 34:15). King Benjamin first tells his people that the Atonement is guaranteed to cover three things:

400 John W. Welch Notes

Many people who have lived, have not known the general will of God concerning them. They did not know the plan of God, the plan of redemption, or the plan of mercy, and how to obtain these blessings. They have done things that were wrong and they felt were wrong, but they died not knowing what they should do to reconcile with God concerning that matter. The Atonement will cover all of that as well.

In Numbers 15:27–29, the Law of Moses actually makes provisions for covering such “ignorant sins.” For instance, someone could unconsciously or accidentally contract impurity or do something while not aware that it was in violation of the Law of Moses. If so, it was considered to be an “ignorant sin.” How would such a sin be taken care of? Perhaps the person was completely unaware that it had even happened. How would then one repent of it, or know to go to the temple and make a sacrifice for it? Actually, that was one of the things that was covered under the Law of Moses on the Day of Atonement. The High Priest’s sacrifice on the Day of Atonement would cover all of the sins and transgressions that had been committed ignorantly.

We don’t think about such accidental matters as sins any longer, but in Benjamin’s day they did. Maybe we should be grateful to Jesus Christ for having taken care of all such things, so that we need not be troubled or afraid on this account.

Mosiah 3:14–15 — The Day of Atonement Was a Type of Christ’s Atonement King Benjamin then explains in Mosiah 3:14–15 that the Lord gave the people many things in the Law of Moses that were types and shadows of things to come. This was to aid them in recognizing the Messiah when He came. For example, the very Day of Atonement is a type and shadow of the Atonement of Jesus Christ in many ways. The

Mosiah 1–3 401

holy name of Jehovah (YHWH) was an important part of the Day of Atonement. It was so important that the Rabbis tell us that this sacred name could not be spoken out loud on any other day. But it needed to be spoken on the Day of Atonement, and it could only be spoken ten times, a perfect number of times. When one counts the number of times that King Benjamin’s speech contains the compound phrases “Lord God,” “Lord Omnipotent,” or “Lord God Omnipotent,” there happen to be ten of them. This bears witness to us that the Lord is perfect, and that through our following Him He “may seal [us] His” (5:15).

Further Reading

John W. Welch, “Counting to Ten,” Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 12, no. 2 (2003): 42–57, 113–114.

Mosiah 3:13–15 — How Does the History of the Nephites Differ from that of the Israelites?

We are fortunate to have in the Book of Mormon—and this is something that we do not have in the Bible—a decade by decade walk with groups like Benjamin and his people who were making the transition from following the Law of Moses up to the time when they were prepared and ready to receive Christ. In this history, we see the Lord sending holy prophets and guiding them step by step (3:13). They were given basic rules along with sublime promises under the law of Moses (3:14), as well as types and shadows (3:15) for those who would understand and not look beyond the mark.

The testimony of Christ is not a light switch that just gets turned on and off. There is a process of transition, and steps are taken to prepare these people. The Lord was heavily invested in this project. He had promised many things to Lehi and Nephi. They had done everything that he had asked them to do. Yet, at several junctures in Nephite history, it becomes perilously close to not working. The Nephites could vanish as quickly as had the Jaredites, and so, at this point, King Benjamin is giving these people a deeper understanding of the Atonement and a deeper understanding of their relationship with God so that they can be prepared and ready.

Further Reading

Terrence L. Szink and John W. Welch, “King Benjamin’s Speech in the Context of

Ancient Israelite Festivals,” in King Benjamin’s Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom,” ed. John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1998), 174–183.

Mosiah 3:18–19 — The Natural Man Is an Enemy to God King Benjamin’s speech has an overall chiastic structure. It is organized into seven sections (Figure 6).

402 John W. Welch Notes

Figure 6 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “Overview of King Benjamin’s Speech.” In Charting the Book of Mormon:

Visual Aids for Personal Study and Teaching, chart 87.

Mosiah 1–3 403

Section 4 is the middle, and the middle of that middle is this chiastic centerpiece in Mosiah 3:19 (Figure 7):

a For the natural man

b is an enemy to God, and

c has been from the fall of Adam, and

c’ will be, forever and ever, unless he

b’ yields to the enticings of the Holy Spirit, and

a’ putteth off the natural man.”

This was the second chiasm I found in the Book of Mormon, on the morning of August 16, as a missionary in Regensburg, Germany. The first was in Mosiah 5:10–12. Having found that one at the end of Benjamin’s Speech, I immediately went back looking to see if Benjamin had used chiasmus elsewhere. Indeed he had.

Figure 7 Welch, John W., and Greg Welch. “Chiasmus in Mosiah 3:18–19.” In Charting the Book of Mormon: Visual

Aids for Personal Study and Teaching, chart 130.

404 John W. Welch Notes

This passage, exhorting us to “put off the natural man and become a saint through the atonement of Christ the Lord, and become as a child, submissive, meek, humble, patient, full of love, willing to submit to all things which the Lord seeth fit to inflict upon him,” is one of the most frequently quoted passages in the Book of Mormon in General

Conference (see the LDS Scripture Citation Index). We as a people have sensed that that is the lynchpin of King Benjamin’s speech.

The structure and organization of this speech bears out that centrality. This speech has been carefully orchestrated. These words are virtually the dead center, the pivot point, of Benjamin’s entire speech. The focus of everything is right here, so we get not only Benjamin’s direct statement of its truth and importance, but we also get indirectly this structural verification. Indeed, one can count 2467 words before this perfectly central verse, and 2476 words after it. This is the logical and literary epicenter of King Benjamin’s entire speech and also of the glad tidings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Was Chiasmus Discovered in the Book of

Mormon? (Mosiah 5:11),” KnoWhy 353 (August 16, 2017).

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did King Benjamin Use Poetic Parallels So

Extensively? (Mosiah 5:11),” KnoWhy 83 (April 21, 2016).
