MOSIAH 18–24

John W. Welch Notes



Overview

These seven chapters trace the main events that followed in the immediate aftermath of the infamous execution of Abinadi. They involve four interwoven storylines about: (1) King Noah and his priests led by Amulon, (2) the priest Alma and his followers who fled from Noah, (3) the Lamanites who controled the land of Nephi and sought revenge for the capture of twenty-four of their daughters, and (4) Limhi who succeeded his father Noah as king, and the courageous Gideon who was the main military officer under Limhi.

In particular, Alma and his followers formed a covenant group that suffered in servitude under Amulon, but eventually were delivered by the Lord and safely reached Zarahemla (chapters 18, 23–24). King Noah was killed by his own priests, fulfilling the prophecy of Abinadi (chapter 19). The priests, in exile, carried off twenty-four Lamanite daughters, and the Lamanites attacked and put Limhi and his people under their domination (chapters 20–21), but Limhi, Gideon, and their people were aided by the Lord and managed to escape and find their way back to Zarahemla (chapter 22).

The style of these chapters is indirect narrative, employing 57 times the rhetorical marker “and it came to pass.” But these chapters also include eight direct quotations: Alma’s words when he was performing baptisms (Mosiah 18:8–10, 12–13), official conversations between King Limhi and Gideon (20:14–22; 22:3–8), Alma’s refusal to be made king (23:7–14), and three statements of comfort and guidance given by the voice of the Lord (24:13–14, 16–17, 23).

480 John W. Welch Notes

At the center of the book of Mosiah is the story of the prophecies, trial, and death of Abinadi at the hand of King Noah (chapters 11–17). The aftermath of that martyrdom plays out here in chapters 18–24, in sections that have counterparts previously found in the events leading up to the Abinadi section.

Thus, immediately before the central Abinadi section was the record of Noah’s father, King Zeniff (chapters 9–10), and right after the Abinadi section is found a record of events in the life of Noah’s son, King Limhi (chapters 18–22). Before chapter 9 was the account of the coming of Ammon from Zarahemla to the land of Nephi (chapters 7–8), and after chapter 20 we are told about Ammon’s teachings and how he returns with Limhi’s people from Nephi to Zarahamla (chapters 21–22). Indeed, the entire book of Mosiah can thus be diagrammed as follows:

A King Benjamin counsels with his sons, showing how much good a righteous king

can do.

B The angel of the Lord appears to Benjamin.

C Ammon goes from Zarahemla to the land of Nephi and finds Zeniff’s

grandson Limhi, whose explorers found the twenty-four Jaredite gold plates.

D The record of King Zeniff is given.

E Abinadi prophesies against King Noah and his priests answer by

quoting from Isaiah 52.

F Abinadi rehearses texts from the law (the Ten Commandments)

and the prophets (Isaiah 53).

F Abinadi interprets Isaiah 52 and explains the coming mission of

Christ.

E Noah and his priests execute Abinadi.

D The record of King Zeniff’s group continues and ends.

C Limhi’s group with Ammon and Alma’s group return from Nephi to

Zarahemla with the twenty-four gold plates.

B The angel of the Lord appears to Alma the Younger.

A King Mosiah abdicates the throne rather than passing the kingship on to one of his

four sons.

Mosiah 18–24 481

And thus, the entire book of Mosiah can be seen as one large chiastic structure, and one of its overall themes is how much trouble kingship can cause. In addition, in the midst of all this coming and going, many important doctrinal and personal lessons can be learned. In Mosiah 18–24, these spiritual lessons include the critical need for righteous political leadership, heeding the words of the prophets of God, making covenants, obeying the commandments, working together in unity and charity, and faithfully enduring burdens by trusting in the Lord.

Mosiah 18

Mosiah 18:6–17 — Priesthood Authority

A contrast is immediately seen at this point in the book of Mosiah between the improper uses of authority by King Noah and his priests, as opposed to the righteous use of priesthood authority by Alma.

Some have wondered exactly how Alma the Elder received his priesthood authority. We are not completely told. In one sense, he would have been ordained as a young man to be a priest of King Noah. Perhaps he was additionally given authority at some previous point by Abinadi; and, although completely speculative, that idea would explain why Alma was prepared and willing to defend Abinadi in court and to record and teach his words so precisely.

Alma plainly stated that he had “authority from the Almighty God” to baptize (Mosiah 18:13), so he may even have been ordained by an angel, as was Joseph Smith, or was visited by the angel of the Lord, as was King Benjamin. Whatever the case, Alma knew what needed to be done to organize a covenant community to help his people have “the Spirit of the Lord,” that God might grant to them “eternal life, through the redemption of Christ, whom he has prepared from the foundation of the world” (18:13).

Did Alma hold the Melchizedek Priesthood or the Aaronic Priesthood? Alma was clearly not from the tribe of Levi, and so he did not officiate under the Levitical line of authority. Alma the Younger was clearly aware of the importance of the great high priest Melchizedek (see Alma 13:17) and of being ordained unto the high priesthood within the holy order of the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father (Alma 13:6–9). So, it would certainly appear that Alma had received the Melchizedek priesthood in some form, although that holy order of priests was organized at that time differently than it would be when Christ would come and would ordain priesthood holders to distinct offices, particularly as he did with his twelve apostles in the Old World or his twelve 482 John W. Welch Notes

disciples in the New. Additionally, Alma worked closely with the king. He obtained permission from King Mosiah to “establish churches throughout all the land of Zarahemla,” as well as “power to ordain priests and teachers over every church” (Mosiah 25:18–19), along with jurisdiction to judge cases of covenant breaking by church members (Mosiah 26:12).

Whatever the administrative details may have been, Alma knew what needed to be done to organize the Church. Appropriate leadership, proper authority, and correctly performed ordinances produce a trust that encourages participants to honor their covenants. Alma the Elder demonstrated these characteristics.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does the Book of Mosiah Talk So Much About

Priesthood Authority? (Mosiah 23:17),” KnoWhy 101 (May 17, 2016).

Daniel C. Peterson, “Priesthood in Mosiah,” in Mosiah, Salvation Only through Christ, Book of Mormon Symposium Series, Volume 5, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate Jr. (Provo, UT: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1991), 187–210.

Mosiah 18:13 Authority to Baptize

The Nephites recognized the importance of having the authority from God in order to baptize and to act as an agent of God in creating a binding covenant relationship (Mosiah 18:10; 21:35). Mosiah 18:13 says, “And when [Alma the Elder] had said these words, the Spirit of the Lord was upon him, and he said: “Helam, I baptize thee, having authority from the Almighty God.”

Conversely, in Mosiah 21:33–34, the people of Limhi, who had been taught by Ammon, desired to be baptized, but “Ammon declined doing this thing, considering himself an unworthy servant. Therefore, they did not at that time form themselves into a church, waiting upon the Spirit of the Lord.” They were baptized later by Alma, who had received permission from King Mosiah to set up churches and ordain priests.

It was important then, as it is now, that baptism and other ordinances be performed by one having authority from God through a person holding the appropriate keys. Jesus would specifically give this power to his twelve disciples as his first organizational step in 3 Nephi 11:21–28.

In early Christianity, one finds similar expressions. Ephesians 4:5 says, “One [eternal] Lord, one [true] faith, one [authorized] baptism,” and Hebrews 5:4 says, “No man taketh this honor [of being able to administer in priesthood ordinances] on himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.” All this makes it clear that it is important to receive the

Mosiah 18–24 483

ordinance of baptism in the correct way and as administered by one holding divine authority.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Does the Book of Mormon Teach about the

Priesthood? (Mosiah 23:17),” KnoWhy 289 (March 20, 2017).

Daniel C. Peterson, “Authority in the Book of Mosiah,” The FARMS Review 18, no. 1 (2006), 149–185.

Mosiah 18:8–13 Living the Covenant

Alma’s eight baptismal covenants were:

When partaking of the sacrament, modern Latter-day Saints do well to reflect on this list of baptismal covenants. Keeping these covenants is not simply a matter of luck. Baptism sets a person into the fold of God. A fold is a group, a tight community that lives together in unity, enjoys being together, and sustains one another. Baptized saints, old and new, take upon themselves the name of Christ and are called “his people,” as in Mosiah 5. Once this name has been taken, it is indelibly, permanently a part of the being. The baptized are expected to bear one another’s burdens, mourn with those that mourn, and be a witness, serving God until death.

What can people do to change and to do a better job in keeping the covenant of baptism? Live as an example. Walk the walk. Keep the covenants consciously. The Lord can then offer blessings. To those who honor their baptismal commitments, the Lord promises to redeem them, number them with those of the first resurrection, give eternal life, and “pour out his Spirit more abundantly upon them” (Mosiah 18:12–13).

Mosiah 18:23 — 29 Alma’s Community, Called the Church of Christ Alma the Elder’s people built a strong religious community that emphasized five basic practices:

484 John W. Welch Notes

(23:27), and

How do these five practices create and build a strong sense of community?

First, Alma commanded them to keep the Sabbath day holy. Why was this listed first? When the Lord is put first in our lives, a level of outward obedience is demonstrated, and that choice keeps the covenant in memory the rest of the week.

Second, keeping the Sabbath day holy leads to community building. Meeting for worship as often as possible and spending time ministering unto each other builds a strong sense of community. Partaking of the sacrament enables covenant renewal. Sabbath-keeping also builds family love. It excludes usual play or work. The children who are taught this path of righteousness eventually find it refreshing, and that feeling magnifies itself as they become parents.

Third, thanking God every day also adds to group cohesiveness. How does it do that? For one thing, sincere thanking is a way of praising, and praising others reinforces group values and the joy of belonging.

Fourth, every act of sacrifice or obedience also builds community. Sharing substance, as well as time and positive memorable experiences contribute to a sense of mutual belonging, as does also shared worship and sharing of testimonies of principles that are loving and fair.

As a small, cohesive covenant community, it was natural for Alma’s people to embrace the principle of righteously supporting the poor. Of Limhi’s administration, Mosiah 21:17 similarly says: “Now there was a great number of women, more than there was of men; therefore king Limhi commanded that every man should impart to the support of the widows and their children, that they might not perish with hunger; and this they did because of the greatness of their number that had been slain.” This point may well shed light on the story of their escape of the people of Limhi (chapter 22). They were blessed because they had become charitable and cohesive as a group. There were many widows, orphans, and single mothers. They put effort into preparing the logistics and worked in unity to leave no one behind.

Finally, having learned from Noah’s example of bad leadership, Alma refused to be a king (Mosiah 23:7). He admonished his people to “trust no man to be a king over you”

Mosiah 18–24 485

and to “trust no one to be your teacher nor your minister, except he be a man of God, walking in his ways and keeping his commandments” (Mosiah 23:13-14). How does it build community trust and confidence when the leaders keep God’s commandments? How does it destroy trust when a leader does not walk in God’s ways? Why is trust so important in our relationships, especially in marriage and family? What does trust have to do with being loved? When I was a freshman at BYU, one wise professor of mine stated, “It is better to be trusted than to be loved.” That seemed odd to me at first, but isn’t it true that by being trusted one creates a relationship within which love can thrive.

And in the same way, leaders must be trustworthy. If there is no trust, there is nothing to bind us, politically speaking. Trust and love must be consciously built. One should work expressly at building trust.

Mosiah 19

Mosiah 19:20 — King Noah Suffered Death by Fire Abinadi had prophesied that if King Noah did not repent, Noah himself would be burned by fire. So when his priests became “angry with the king, and caused that he should suffer, even unto death by fire,” that violent end was the precise and immediate fulfillment of that prophecy (17:15–18). Ironically, but truthfully, Abinadi had prophesied that the life of King Noah would be “valued even as a garment in a hot furnace; for he shall know that I am the Lord (Mosiah 12:3).” These violent events demonstrated that Abinadi was a true prophet, and Noah, having falsely accused Abinadi, suffered the punishment he had applied incorrectly to Abinadi, as Deuteronomy 19:16–19 requires:

If a false witness rise up against any man to testify against him that which

is wrong; Then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand

before the Lord, before the priests and the judges, which shall be in those days;

And the judges shall make diligent inquisition: and, behold, if the witness be a

false witness, and hath testified falsely against his brother; Then shall ye do unto

him, as he had thought to have done unto his brother: so shalt thou put the evil

away from among you.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why was Abinadi Scourged with Faggots? (Mosiah

17:13),” KnoWhy 96 (May 10, 2016).

486 John W. Welch Notes

Mosiah 20

Mosiah 20:1 — The Daughters of the Lamanites
