In particular, according to the Talmud, this day featured the dancing of the maidens of Jerusalem. As Rabbi Shimon ben Gamliel said: “There were no greater festivals for Israel than the Fifteeth of Av and Yom Kippur. On these days the daughters of Jerusalem would go out ... and dance in the vineyards. And what would they say? ‘Young man, raise your eyes and see which you select for yourself ...’” (Talmud, Taanit 26b). Knowing the meanings associated with this festival provides interesting contexts for several events in Mosiah 20–24:

 When Lamanite daughters came particularly to “a place in Shemlon,” to sing,

dance and “make themselves merry” (Mosiah 20:1), it may have been at a

traditional place and time of celebration and matrimonial selection, as had been

the vineyards around Jerusalem.

 The priests of Noah clearly saw this as a time to select wives. One wonders if the

eligible Lamanite young men had planned to come there also to do likewise, only

to find that 24 of the girls had already been carried off (20:5).

In Jewish life, this was a great day of joy, celebrating the day when the last of the Israelites, who had come out of Egypt, finally died. Shortly after their Exodus, spies had been sent into Canaan, but the Israelites were neither prepared nor worthy and so God decreed that a generation would need to die out before their children could enter the land of promise (Numbers 13–14). The last member of that Exodus generation was said to have died on the fifteenth day in the month of Av.

Mosiah 18–24 487

 Thus, on that particular day, these Lamanite daughters may also have thought

they were celebrating the arrival of their Lamanite ancestors in their new land of

promise, as the Israelites remembered the beginning of their conquest of Canaan.

Marriage and raising strong children were important cultural contributions in

the minds of these young women.

Moreover, according to Jewish tradition, it was on that day that members of the various tribes of Israel were first allowed to fully intermarry among each other. In an important legal case toward the end of the book of Numbers, it had been generously held that daughters could inherit the tribal land of their father, so long as the father had no sons (Numbers 27), and a second case soon restrictively clarified that those daughters were allowed to marry only within their tribe. That second ruling was to prevent the inherited land from becoming owned by members of other tribes (Numbers 36). It was on a fifteenth day of Av that the establishment of this important property right for such daughters was remembered. It was a cause for great rejoicing and celebration.

 Thus, the priests, who were Nephites, could have legitimized their action,

especially since the Fifteenth of Av celebrated the right of intermarriage among

the tribes of Israel. This could rationalize their marriage as Nephites with

Lamanites.

In addition, in retaliation for the behavior in the incident involving the atrocious death of a concubine at Gibeah (Judges 19:20), the tribe of Benjamin ended up being attacked and their cities burned by the armies of the other tribes of Israel (Judges 20:48). In order to prevent the tribe of Benjamin from disappearing, the victorious Israelites captured 400 virgins from the city of Jabesh-gilead (Judges 21:12), and said to the remaining 600 Benjamites, “Go and lie in the vineyards; and see, and, behold if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin” (Judges 21:20– 21). That event was also said to have happened on the Fifteenth of Av.

 Similarly, having atrociously killed Abinadi and Noah, the priests found

themselves without wives, children, and posterity. The dancing of the Lamanite

daughters at Shemlon echoes, even if only faintly, the dancing of the daughters

of Israel at Shiloh, where the Benjamite survivors were allowed to catch the

dancing young women from other Israelite tribes, so that they could again have

wives and posterity, following their atrocious killing of the Levite’s concubine.

The situation of the priests was not much different

488 John W. Welch Notes

And finally, it was on the Fifteenth of Av that Hoshea ben Elah, the last king of the northern kingdom, re-opened the roads to Jerusalem, removing roadblocks that had been set up by Jeroboam ben Nebat, to prevent people in the north from making the thrice-yearly pilgrimage to Jerusalem in the southern kingdom of Judah.

 While the priests would not have known this on the very day when they took the

Lamanite daughters to wife, their language legacy would eventually become a

factor in the opening of the borders between the lands of Nephi and Zarahemla

(Helaman 6:6–14). This is because the Lamanite daughters are not entirely

unhappy with their situation. They now have aristocratic husbands, and shortly

afterwards, these women plead for the protection of their husbands, the priests,

when the Lamanite men were about to kill them. The Lamanites spared them

“because of their wives” (Mosiah 23:33–34).

 Eventually, the children of these women became literate, for the priests (the

Amulonites) were appointed teachers (Mosiah 24:1) and became preachers (Alma

21:4) among the Lamanites, teaching them the language of the Nephites (Mosiah

24:4). These wives would have been a major factor in the successes of Amulon

and his priests as they became influencers among the Lamanites, even in the very

land of Shemlon (Mosiah 24:1; Alma 23:12), where the young women had gone to

dance that fateful day.

Thus, although not comparable in every respect, intriguing similarities exist between the meanings of the Fifteenth of Av and the case of the twenty-four Lamanite daughters and the twenty-four priests of Noah.

Further Reading

John W. Welch, Robert F. Smith, and Gordon C. Thomasson, “Dancing Maidens

and the Fifteenth of Av,” in Reexploring the Book of Mormon: A Decade of New Research, ed. John W. Welch (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1992), 139–141.

Abraham P. Bloch, The Biblical and Historical Background of the Jewish Holy Days (New York: KTAV, 1978), 179.

Yanki Tauber, “7 Joyous Events That Happened on the 15th of Av,” online at chabad.org.

Mosiah 20:18 — Why We Should Avoid Jumping to Conclusions As King Noah was put to death, his priests fled into the wilderness (Mosiah 19:21). They were the ones who abducted twenty-four Lamanite maidens “and carried them into the wilderness” (Mosiah 20:5). The abduction of the “daughters of the Lamanites” (20:1) caused the Lamanites such anger that their sudden disappearance “led to an immediate

Mosiah 18–24 489

rupture in the treaty” that had just been established with the recently conquered Nephites (Mosiah 19:25–29). This rupture was so severe that it “brought a military reprisal against the Nephites,” with the Lamanites launching an assault on Limhi’s people in the capital city of Nephi (Mosiah 20:6–11). The Lamanites had incorrectly assumed that the people of Limhi were connected with the taking of their daughters.

The Lamanites, in attacking the city of Nephi, had jumped to a conclusion based on an unfounded assumption that turned out to be wrong. Jumping prematurely to an erroneous conclusion is a form of selfishness. It happened to Moroni, as can be seen from his letter to Pahoran in Alma 60. People seem to naturally jump to negative conclusions. It is always better to give—without being gullible—the benefit of the doubt.

In this instance, the people of Limhi and the King of the Lamanites solved their problem by talking about it. Although the text never states that there were twenty-four priests of Noah, it makes sense that there were that many (as discussed in the previous set of notes). Either because of their location or their number, Gideon connected the priests with the twenty-four missing daughters (20:18).

The Nephites also importantly showed mercy to the seriously wounded Lamanite king, even though he had attacked them (20:13). Together they all honored their previous oath (20:22), and unarmed they returned the Lamanite king to his people (20:26). While this peace treaty gave these people a chance to reconcile, unfortunately, it only temporarily solved the problem, as the rancor remained and the Lamanites again began to rule unjustly over the people of Limhi.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why did the Lamanites Break Their Treaty with King

Limhi? (Mosiah 20:18),” KnoWhy 98 (May 12, 2016).

S. Kent Brown, “Marriage and Treaty in the Book of Mormon: The Case of the

Abducted Lamanite Daughters,” in From Jerusalem to Zarahemla: Literary and Historical Studies of the Book of Mormon (Provo, UT: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1998), 100.

Mosiah 21–22

Mosiah 21:6–12 — Limhi’s People Fight the Lamanites Three Times and Fail Because the Lamanites remained angry, they hit the Nephites “on the cheek” and made them carry heavy burdens like “a dumb ass” (21:3), just as Abinadi had prophesied (Mosiah 12:2, 5). The Nephites murmured, complained, and tried to get out of bondage. 490 John W. Welch Notes

They went to war three times, and kept losing. Things became worse, with more widows and orphans each time.

There may well be a lesson here. How does one get out of any burdensome situation, including spiritual bondage? What is the wrong way? When we have a sin, what is our first reaction? The Nephites were trying to fight their way out of sin on their own. When you do that, how successful are you likely to be? Not very. It simply does not work. This is one of the world’s ways of trying to lead us away from the right path. The world will tell you, “You’re strong; you are capable; you can do it.” But don’t be fooled It didn’t work for the Nephites, and it does not work for us either.

What’s more, once the Nephites had fought and failed, what did they do next? They gave up. They thought that there was no way they could escape it. This is another wrong idea the world tells you, “You cannot help it; just don’t worry about it.” Both of these, of course, are wrong ways to get out of spiritual bondage.

Mosiah 21:13–17 — The People of Limhi Begin to Humble Themselves and to Serve Others

The people of Limhi were somewhat disgusted with themselves. They were tired. Fighting had not worked. They finally turned to the Lord: “[T]hey did cry mightily to God” (21:14). They trusted him and served him.

How did the people of Limhi serve God? They served their fellow man. They especially took care of the increased number of widows and orphans in their midst (21:17), as Exodus 22:22 required them to do. Soon they would encounter Ammon (21:23), who had with him the words of King Benjamin, which the people of Limhi embraced with enthusiasm. I imagine that when they heard Benjamin’s words, “When you are in the service of your fellow beings you are only in the service of your God” (Mosiah 2:17), they were fully prepared to enter into the covenant to “serve him and to keep his commandments” (21:32), since they had already begun to live in harmony with several of Benjamin’s words about serving one another and imparting their substance to those in need. Importantly, we also learn this lesson again in our own dispensation. When the Saints were expelled from Jackson County, Missouri, and wanted to know why this had happened, the Lord revealed the answer in Doctrine and Covenants 105:3, “But behold, they have not learned to be obedient to the things which I required at their hands, but are full of all manner of evil, and do not impart of their substance, as becometh saints, to the poor and afflicted among them.”
