MOSIAH 25–28

John W. Welch Notes



Overview

These four chapters set the stage for three very significant political and church organizational changes in the Nephite world, namely:

throne

Chief Judge.

Before this time, life had been fairly simple in the land of Zarahemla. There were only Mulekites and Nephites in the land, and by agreement “all of the people of Zarahemla were numbered among the Nephites,” and only a descendant of Nephi could be king (25:13). They had been unified under King Benjamin (1:10).

Then occurred the return, baptism, and assimilation of the people of Zeniff under the leadership of his grandson King Limhi (Mosiah 22:13; 25:18). That was shortly followed by the arrival and independence of the covenant people of Alma, who had been treated badly by Amulon and the priests of Noah. Alma’s followers formed seven bodies and were called the church of God, the church of Christ, or the people of God (18:17; 25:23). Also in the mix were some of the children of the priests of Amulon who opted to become Nephites (25:12).

With these developments, things had gotten complicated, and the Benjamite generation of unity began to unravel. The younger generation, in particular, did not understand or 498 John W. Welch Notes

feel bound by the words and covenant of Benjamin (26:1). Dissensions and transgressions occurred within Alma’s now urbanized church (26:5). Alma tried to get King Mosiah to judge cases involving crimes committed by members of his fledgling church (26:10), but Mosiah declined to take jurisdiction over any such cases (26:12).

This put Alma in a difficult position (26:13), which he took to the Lord and received prudent counsel (26:15–32). But still he had to blot out the names of some of his covenant people (26:36). This created pockets of dissidents who created disturbances and social tensions between the various religious groups.

Soon, persecutions began to arise (26:38; 27:1), and some priests and teachers began collecting payment for their services (27:5; Alma 1:3). Nehor, in particular, must have been attracting a following of believers (Alma 1:3, 7). The problems were severe enough that King Mosiah issued a proclamation with a “strict command” prohibiting persecutions and requiring “an equality among all men” (Mosiah 27:3).

Within a decade, as the people prospered, one of Alma’s own sons would come to reject his father’s church, its teachings and its baptismal ordinance from the Waters of Mormon (27:8). He and the four sons of King Mosiah began secretly working to destroy the church, contrary to the commandments of God and the order of King Mosiah (27:10).

But then, the sudden and unexpected intervention of the angel of the Lord changed this precarious course of personal destruction and national disintegration. That trajectory was halted as these five repented, were converted, and began serving as ambassadors of peace “throughout all the land of Zarahemla” (27:35), seeking to repair the damages they had caused and to bring many people “to the knowledge of their Redeemer” (27:35–37).

As a result, the four sons of Mosiah volunteered, and were given permission, to go south to the land of Nephi, where Zeniff, Noah, Limhi and Alma had been (28:8). They desired to help people on all sides to be “friendly to one another, and that there should be no more contentions in all the land” (28:2).

Mosiah himself then gathered together all the records and “all the things which he had kept” (28:20). Consolidating these records symbolized a virtual reunification of these groups. Each group of people was well-served. Using two stones that Coriantumr, the last of the Jaredites, or perhaps another Jaredite like Ether himself may have given to the Mulekites (Omni 1: 20–21), Mosiah translated the plates that had been found by the people of Limhi (28:11, 17). Mosiah also gathered “the plates of brass, and also the plates of Nephi, and all the things which he had kept and preserved” (28:11). He archived “the record of Zeniff” (headnote to Mosiah chapters 9–22), and he included the “account of Alma” (headnote to Mosiah chapters 23–24).

Mosiah 25–28 499

Mosiah then entrusted all these things to Alma the Younger and “commanded him that he should keep and preserve them, and also keep a record of the people” (28:20), and Alma was consecrated by his father to be the high priest (29:42). With the background of Mosiah 25–28 in mind, one can understand why various churches will continue to exist in the land of Zarahemla, the cities of Zarahemla, Gideon, Ammonihah, Jershon, and Antionum. For reasons that will be summarized by Mosiah in his abdication speech in Mosiah 29, the Nephites will relinquish their political right to kingship, and Alma will be appointed the first chief judge, having developed strong personal connections with insiders and outsiders, newcomers and old timers.

Mosiah 25

Mosiah 25:12 — Family in the Book of Mormon: Fictive Kinship As a part of the process that is reported in this chapter of the assembling of the Nephites and the returning groups of Zeniff and Alma, these new arrivals could choose to be numbered among the Nephites. They were baptized and organized into units within the church of God. This step of joining, assembling, renaming, numbering, and belonging created for them, as it does in the Church today, a sense of extended family, of being brothers and sisters, of working together, caring for one another, all as a result of being adopted as sons and daughters of Christ.

Notice in verse 12 that even the children of Amulon and his brethren, the priests of Noah who had captured and married the daughters of the Lamanites, were displeased at the behavior of their fathers, and did not want to be identified any longer by the name of their fathers: “Therefore they took upon themselves the name of Nephi, that they might be

called the children of Nephi and be numbered among those who were called Nephites.” This social and spiritual practice, in which people who were not closely related to each other claim to have a family connection, is known by anthropologists as “fictive kinship,” and it was common in the ancient world, especially in religious contexts.

There are several examples of it in the Old Testament. When the Israelites left Egypt, they were referred to as a “mixed multitude” (Exodus 12:38), suggesting that all emigrants were not of the tribes of Israel. These newcomers were adopted into one of the twelve tribes of Israel, even though they were not technically part of these extended family groups. Each of these tribes was named after one of the sons of Jacob or Joseph, the great patriarchs of the Old Testament, although later, Joseph’s two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, were given an inheritance with Jacob’s sons, as noted in Genesis 48:5.

500 John W. Welch Notes

This practice is evident throughout the Book of Mormon. Family was so important that those who belonged to a group that no longer had the same values, often identified themselves as Nephites. See, for example, Jacob 1:13–14, in which Jacob grouped the Nephites, Jacobites, Josephites, Zoramites, Lamanites, Lemuelites, and Ishmaelites into values-oriented tribes or fictive kinship groups: “Those who are friendly to Nephi, I shall call Nephites, or the people of Nephi.” Those who sought to destroy the people of Nephi, Jacob said, “I shall call them Lamanites.”

The importance of family relationships, whether by descendancy or adoption, is demonstrated throughout the Book of Mormon to be a primary human need fulfilled within the network of the Gospel of Jesus Christ and our always-loving Heavenly Father.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “What Does the Book of Mormon Teach about

Families? (Mosiah 25:12),” KnoWhy 382 (November 16, 2017). “For many people, family is the most important thing in life. The same can likely be said for the peoples of the Book of Mormon. Despite their sometimes-complex origins, they organized themselves into several core family relationships, just like many other societies in the ancient world.”

John L. Sorenson, “When Lehi’s Party Arrived in the Land, Did They Find Others

There?”Journal of Book of Mormon Studies 1, no. 1 (1992): 1–34.

Mosiah 26

Mosiah 26:12 — The Meaning of the Name Mosiah Both of the kings who were named Mosiah in the Book of Mormon are depicted as exemplary leaders of extraordinary practical and spiritual ability. Both were champions of justice and mercy. Considering that these individuals were anointed as kings, it may at first glance be tempting to assume that their names derive from the Hebrew word for Messiah, meaning “anointed.” However, an even better possibility is that the name comes from the Hebrew word môšiaʿ (mo-SHE-ah), meaning a “deliverer” or “savior.”

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Was Mosiah a Type of Christ? (Mosiah 26:12),” KnoWhy 104 (May 20, 2016).

John W. Welch, “What Was a ‘Mosiah’?” in Reexploring the Book of Mormon: A Decade of New Research, ed. John W. Welch (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1992), 105–107.

Mosiah 25–28 501

Mosiah 26:15–32 — Church Governance and Administration As dissensions, crimes, and transgressions occurred within Alma’s now expanded and urbanized church, Alma turned to King Mosiah (someone he scarcely knew) to judge cases involving crimes committed by members of his church (26:10). Perhaps wanting to not get in the middle of these problems about which he had little personal knowledge, Mosiah relinquished royal jurisdiction over any such cases, even though the results could possibly involve serious consequences for his subjects (26:12).

Given authority to determine who could remain a member of the church of God, Alma took the matter to the Lord and received instructions which amount to a handbook of membership and discipline within the church (26:15–32). The key elements are well worth noting and embracing: the Lord’s repeated willingness to bless his people and their leaders (26:15–19), receiving and forgiving those who hear and know the name by which they are now and will be called at the last day (26:20–28). Alma was instructed to judge church members according to the sins they have committed, allowing them to confess, for as often as they repent the Lord will forgive their trespasses against Him (26:29). The members of the church (“ye”) shall also forgive one another, but “whoseover will not repent of his sins the same shall not be numbered among my people” (26:32).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Was the Book of Mormon Used as the First Church

Administrative Handbook? (3 Nephi 27:21–22),” KnoWhy 72 (April 6, 2016).

Mosiah 27

Mosiah 27:1–3 — Unbelievers Were Making Things Difficult The Nephite church, at this time, had a problem with the believers being persecuted by the unbelievers, to the extent that the members of the church took their concerns to Alma, who discussed the problem with the king. Mosiah consulted with his priests, and then issued a strict command throughout the churches that there should be no more persecution. That was a relief, but having the king issue a proclamation did not completely stop the problem, mainly because the persecutors went underground, operating “secretly,” and thus witnesses could not be easily found to accuse and convict them (see Mosiah 27:10; compare the opposite situation in 26:9).
