502 John W. Welch Notes

Mosiah 27:8 — Alma the Younger

Alma the Younger would have learned some kind of a profession or craft fairly early in his life, as well as having been trained to write and to read. He probably had the privilege of being educated, and that raises the possibility that he was a younger child. Nephi had the privilege in Lehi’s family of keeping the records, but he was not the eldest son. This was likely typical of ancient families. What do they need the older two or three children to be doing? Working. Taking care of the animals, tilling the fields, doing the hard, manual work. A younger son could be taught by the father who could to turn a lot of work over to others. Laman and Lemuel apparently resented that. Alma is a privileged young man, very privileged. He ends up being best friends with sons of the king.

Further Reading

Matthew L. Bowen, “Alma — Young Man, Hidden Prophet,” Interpreter: A Journal of Latter-day Saint Faith and Scholarship 19 (2016): 343–353.

Brant A. Gardner, “Nephi as Scribe,” Review of Books on the Book of Mormon 23, no. 1 (2011): 45–55.

Mosiah 27:8–10 — Alma the Younger and the Sons of Mosiah Seek to Destroy the Church

We have no indication that Alma the Elder knew the extent of his son’s participation in the persecution. If he knew that, it was not recorded. In fact, it says in Mosiah 27:10, “He [Alma the Younger] did go about secretly with the sons of Mosiah seeking to destroy the church.” The main point is that the king and Alma the Elder were worried, and they were trying to do everything they possibly could to help the situation, but neither of them knew what their sons were up to. It was, therefore, up to the Lord to see that the situation was changed.

Mosiah 27:14 — The Lord Heard the Prayers of Alma the Elder and the People I like verse 14, when the angel said, “Behold, the Lord hath heard the prayers of his people.” That tells us that the believers had been praying, especially in their distress. And the angel added “and also the prayers of his servant, Alma who is thy father, for he has prayed with much faith concerning thee, that you might be brought to a knowledge of the truth.” Maybe, when Alma prayed, he said, as we sometimes we say, “Such and such is the result I want.” But I doubt that he said, “I would like it to happen this way.” However, he probably was thrilled when he could say, “My prayer is being answered.” The angel’s words indicate that the prayers of Alma the Elder were crucial to the unfolding of this event, even if he had no idea how that should happen or how it might turn out. He must have been as surprised and astonished as anyone else in this powerful blessing.

Mosiah 25–28 503

Mosiah 27:16 — The Angel Told Alma to Remember the Captivity of His Father The angel who appeared to Alma never directly told him to repent. Why is that? Well, the message about repentance is actually there in the first half of this verse; it’s just not explicitly spelled out. Alma was told to “remember the captivity” that is a consequence of disobedience. That phrase will to lead us to repentance, and we can even see that same language used by Alma in several of his own sermons in the book of Alma.

The angel of the Lord said, “Alma, go thy way, and seek to destroy the church no more, that their prayers may be answered, and this even if thou wilt of thyself be cast off.” It is not immediately clear what “cast off” meant. It may have meant that Alma would have been banished, excommunicated, or disciplined under the church rules established under Mosiah 26. Later, when recounting this experience, Alma warned his sons that if they didn’t “keep the commandments of God ye shall be cut off from his presence” (Alma 36:30, 38:1). All of this indicates the ultimate spiritual significance of what the angel was telling Alma.

In Alma 36:9 he records the angel as having said, “If thou wilt of thyself be destroyed, seek no more to destroy the church of God.” This language is even more powerful. It is possible that Alma was in some sort of physical danger, much like Sherem was in the days of Jacob. He was certainly in spiritual danger. When recounting the angel’s warning later in his life, Alma immediately explained that he “was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins” (Alma 36:12) and was “tormented with the pains of hell” (36:13). Alma actually would have preferred to “become extinct both soul and body” rather than “stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds” (36:15). Again, this suggests that the more weighty destruction that Alma faced and feared was spiritual in nature.

Mosiah 27:19–22 — Fasting and Praying as a Community We often have ward fasts and prayers to help people who are sick or have some unusual health problem. How many of you have had a ward prayer for a young man who has been losing his testimony? Have you ever of heard of that happening? I was really quite struck by when it says, “And Alma caused that the priests should assemble themselves”—these were priesthood holders in the church. And Alma basically said, “We are going to have a fast.” I do not think he said, “We are going to fast for two days and two nights.” They did fast for two days and two nights, but that was because at the end of the second day, their prayers were answered. I wonder how long they would have continued that vigil of fasting and praying.

They prayed to the Lord their God that he would “open the mouth of Alma that he might speak, and also that his limbs might receive their strength, that the eyes of the 504 John W. Welch Notes

people might be opened to see and know of the goodness and glory of God” (Mosiah 27:22). Those words are very poignant. They tell us what they were asking for in their prayers. What if the bishop were to say, “Elders, I would like you to have a special fast. I would like you to pray to help a young man in our ward who really is in need of the influence of the Spirit of God”? Maybe a bishop could say, “There is a family that is struggling.” We need to unite our priesthood power and our ward faith and pray that the Lord will bless people with these exact objectives. I would like to see that kind of thing happen. There are such needs out there.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does the Lord Require People to Live the Laws

of Tithing and Fasting? (3 Nephi 24:10),” KnoWhy 305 (April 6, 2017).

Mosiah 27:28–31 — Alma’s Use of Language

A wonderful thing about Alma was that he had the language skills to articulate what he experienced. Many of us would not have been able to do that. In these verses, he had been out cold for three days. He woke up and was able to express these eloquent parallelisms with wonderfully accurate descriptive nouns, adjectives, and verbs. It is a masterful description of how a person feels after a profound conversion.

Mosiah 27:29 — Snatched from the Dark Abyss

Alma referred to his being snatched from the darkest abyss. His beholding the “marvelous light of God” seemed to happen rapidly and very dramatically. That

happens to us some of the time, but not always. In a talk titled “The Spirit of

Revelation,” Elder Bednar compared the receiving of spiritual light to two physical experiences with light:

The first experience occurred as we entered a dark room and turned on a light

switch. Remember how in an instant a bright flood of illumination filled the

room and caused the darkness to disappear.

This was comparable to Alma’s initial experience. In contrast, Elder Bednar’s second example entails a more gradual perception of light:

The second experience took place as we watched night turn into morning. Do

you recall the slow and almost imperceptible increase in light on the horizon? In

contrast to turning on a light in a dark room, the light from the rising sun did not

immediately burst forth. Rather, gradually and steadily the intensity of the light

increased, and the darkness of night was replaced by the radiance of morning.

Eventually, the sun did dawn over the skyline. But the visual evidence of the

sun’s impending arrival was apparent hours before the sun actually appeared

Mosiah 25–28 505

over the horizon. This experience was characterized by subtle and gradual

discernment of light (Elder Bednar “The Spirit of Revelation”).

Most of us have the “sunrise” experience of conversion, which slowly brings us into the light. Note, though, that Alma, who had the instant light did not let his conversion stop at that first bright moment. He continued to seek the light.

Further Reading

David A. Bednar, “The Spirit of Revelation,” General Conference Address, April 2011, online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

Mosiah 27:24–31 — Shared Words in Alma’s Three Main Conversion Accounts Alma told or referred to his experience of being born of God on several occasions (Figures 1, 2). The three main accounts of Alma’s conversion, found in Mosiah 27, Alma 36, and Alma 38, share several words or phrases, reminding us that Alma referred to this life-changing story often and in a distinctive manner. However, the varying contexts clearly influenced the rhetorical posture of each of these accounts.

Alma’s initial account of his conversion in Mosiah 27:7–37 is youthfully spontaneous and detailed. The event had just occurred and was still very vivid in his mind. On that occasion, he used direct, antithetical parallelism to emphasize that Christ’s Atonement had miraculously changed him from his former state into a contrastingly new person.

Alma’s account to his son Helaman in Alma 36 is told about twenty-five years later. It is the longest and most elaborate. Here Alma gives this reflective account in a blessing to his first son. Alma includes historical, theological, and institutional references that would be relevant to Helaman’s upcoming service as the high priest in Zarahemla. To emphasize the pivotal moment of his calling upon of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as his Savior, Alma expresses his testimony in the form of an extended chiasm, centered on that repentant turning point in his life.

Alma’s final account in Alma 38, given to his second son, Shiblon, is a shorter text. Given at the same time as Alma 36, it tracks the first half of the chiastic structure in Alma 36. Alma’s concluding words to Shiblon then comprise a more personally applicable set of exhortations focused on the mercy and truth of Christ, counseling Shiblon to learn wisdom, to be diligent and temperate, not to boast in his wisdom or strength, and to bridle his passions so that he may be filled with love.

506 John W. Welch Notes

Figure 1 John W. Welch and Greg Welch, "Three Accounts of Alma's Conversion," in

Charting the Book of Mormon, chart 106.

Mosiah 25–28 507

Figure 2 John W. Welch and Greg Welch, "Shared Words in the Three Accounts of Alma's Conversion," in

Charting the Book of Mormon, chart 107.
