508 John W. Welch Notes

Though each of these accounts differs from the other two, all were appropriate for the contexts in which they were given. Moreover, the presence of shared words in his three main accounts is very interesting. Seven similar expressions or ideas are found in all three accounts. Eighteen are found in Mosiah 27 and Alma 36. Twelve overlap between Alma 36 and Alma 38. When compared in detail, this consistency offers circumstantial evidence of the authenticity of the Book of Mormon, since, in spite of the different settings of these accounts and the textual layers of compilation, abridgment, and translation, Alma’s unique, underlying personal voice can still be heard, identified, and appreciated.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Are there Multiple Accounts of Joseph Smith’s

and Alma’s Visions? (Alma 36:6–7),” KnoWhy 264 (January 20, 2017).

John A. Tvedtnes, “The Voice of an Angel,” in Book of Mormon Authorship Revisited: The Evidence for Ancient Origins, ed. Noel B. Reynolds (Provo, UT: FARMS, 1997), 311–321.

S. Kent Brown, “Alma’s Conversion: Reminiscences in His Sermons,” in The Book of Mormon: Alma, The Testimony of the Word, ed. Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate, Jr. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1993), 141–156.

John W. Welch, “Three Accounts of Alma’s Conversion,” in Reexploring the Book of Mormon: A Decade of New Research, ed. John W. Welch (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992), 150–153.

Mosiah 27:32 The Aftermath of Alma’s Repentance Alma experienced a powerful conversion, and he was changed; he basically did an about-face. How did that affect him personally? Is not one of the fruits of repentance the desire to want to share with other people what you have experienced? Have you had that feeling? In the vision of the tree of life, Lehi came to the tree, partook of that fruit, and then had an overwhelming desire to share it with his family.

If we retain a bright remembrance of our conversion, or conversions—we may have many in our lifetimes—we can also retain the desire to share the truths of the gospel. In these chapters there are many lessons that will help us as we move forward. Alma’s case is a wonderful example of a lifetime of growth.

It is one thing to talk about the principle of repentance and the effects of the Atonement, but Alma experienced those on a very powerful level. He became an expert in those things, and was able to teach very effectively because it was personal and real, and he

Mosiah 25–28 509

knew how to communicate that. He, like Paul, had an unusual experience. Not everyone has that kind of a wake-up call. But because of it, Alma also could act as a much stronger teacher and an example of repentance and conversion, followed by enduring faithfulness.

We love, remember, and talk about the conversion of Alma the Younger, probably because it is so much of an archetype. It is an ideal representation of the full repentance process in its most powerful form. We all have parts of that going on in our own lives and in our own ongoing conversions. When Paul was teaching, he had the same kind of fire and could speak from the same type of first-hand experience. No matter how dramatic one’s initial spiritual transformation is, conversion really is a lifetime process. It was that way for both Alma and Paul, and it is that way for us. We must all endure to the end.

Mosiah 27:32 — Comparing Alma’s Experience with That of Paul Concerning the conversions of Paul and Alma, it may be instructive to compare the similarities and differences between these two magnificent missionaries. As for their backgrounds, both men were raised in a religious setting. Yet, unlike Alma, Paul wasn’t opposed to his father’s teachings. Paul was a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee, and seems to have been very much in agreement with his father who apparently had enough money to send Paul to Jerusalem (a long trip) to go away from home to study. Paul must have had family support to be able to do that. So, Paul didn’t have the same type of family conflict.

Both were persecuting believers. Was there a difference, though, between the kinds of things that Paul was doing and the kind of things that Alma was doing? Paul was convinced in his heart that he was doing the right thing. He was totally committed to what he was doing, whereas Alma, having been taught by his father, probably knew on some level that he was going against the truth.

Jesus said to Paul, “Why persecutest thou me?” That may have been a shock to Paul because he thought he was doing absolutely the right thing. Yet, when the angel said to Alma, “Why are you doing this? Will you of yourself be destroyed?” it was because the destruction for Alma was far more serious than for Paul. Paul had done some serious things, but he was not quite sinning against the same degree of knowledge. So Alma’s situation was a little different there as well.

Paul lost his vision, whereas Alma, who was going around saying all the wrong things, lost his speech as well as his ability to move. That is the kind of justice that we see so often in the ancient world. It is called talionic justice, where the “punishment fits the crime.” Paul could still walk around although he could not see. His friends helped him. He had to be led, but he was never really unconscious. In contrast, how did Alma get 510 John W. Welch Notes

from where they were when this happened? His friends, the four sons of Mosiah, had to carry Alma to his father.

Alma the Elder heard about what had happened and he liked it. He rejoiced immediately. He said, “I know the Lord’s hand is in this,” but he did not know yet how it was going to turn out. He had faith that if the Lord was in charge, at least now his son would have a chance. However, Alma the Younger could have turned away from this, and could have died. Looking back upon his story, we know the outcome. But Alma the Elder and those with him had to exercise a great deal of faith.

Paul, on the other hand, simply said to the Lord, “What will you have me do?” There was not the same complexity. Paul asked, “Who are you Lord?” and received the reply, “I am Jesus Christ whom thou persecutest.” He asked next, “Well, what would you have me do?” He immediately becomes a willing servant.

The columns on the far right and left sides of Figure 3 show the verses of these six accounts—three from Paul and three from Alma—in which each element either appears or is absent. Down the very middle are found elements shared by both Paul and Alma, and off center are words or experiences unique to either Paul or Alma. In sum, the personalized differences significantly offset and highlight the individual experiences in the two conversions.

Further Reading

Rex E. Lee, “Paul and Alma and Harold B. Lee: What Prophets and Common

Sense Can Teach Us about Learning from Our Mistakes,” Brigham Young University Devotional and Fireside Speeches, (Provo, Utah: BYU Press, 1993/94), 13–17.

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Are there Multiple Accounts of Joseph Smith's

and Alma's Visions? (Alma 36:6–7),” KnoWhy 264 (January 20, 2017).

Jasmin Gimenez, “How Paul’s conversion can strengthen your faith in Joseph

Smith’s accounts of the First Vision,” Book of Mormon Central Blog, July 30, 2019, online at bookofmormoncentral.org.

Mosiah 27:32, 33, 35 — The Fruits of Repentance

What did King Benjamin say we have to do to retain a remission of our sins? We have to give to the poor (Mosiah 4:26), and Amulek taught that too. If we want an answer to our prayers, if you want God to give to us, we have to give to others. Did Alma and the sons of Mosiah do that? They did, in a remarkable fashion. They taught and they suffered persecution, no doubt in part to show the sincerity and completeness of their earlier wickedness and damage to the church.

Mosiah 25–28 511

Figure 3 John W. Welch and John F. Hall, "Comparing Conversions—Paul and Alma," in

Charting the New Testament, chart 15-17.
