ALMA5–7

John W. Welch Notes



Alma 5

Alma 5:1 — The Historical Setting

If you count the years between King Benjamin’s speech in Mosiah 2–6 and Alma’s speech in Alma 5, there were 42 years, which makes the year of the speech, not so coincidentally, to be the sixth Sabbatical year after Mosiah had become king, then ruled for 33 years (Mosiah 29:46), and Alma then spoke at the beginning of the 9th year of the reign of judges (Alma 4:11, 20). The ancient Israelites had not only the seven-day week, but they had a seven-year cycle for agricultural purposes and also for covenant renewal. At the end of Deuteronomy in 31:10–11, one of the last things Moses said to the children of Israel was that once every seven years they needed to gather all the men, women, and children, in a Feast of the Tabernacles, “in which thou shalt read this law before all Israel in their hearing.” So, the ninth year of the judges was year 42 from Benjamin’s Speech, which itself may have been given during a sabbatical or jubilee year. Thus, Alma and his people would have been observing a covenant renewal, hearing the law and reflecting again on how they could best be keeping their obligations as God’s covenant people. And so, Alma’s great speech was most likely given on a special occasion.

Appropriately, Alma gave this in Zarahemla, the same place where Benjamin had given his covenant speech as well. Many of the themes found in Benjamin’s speech are right here in Alma 5 too. The few themes that are not here have been superseded by the fact that they have a new regime of government, and Alma is speaking as the High Priest, not as the Chief Judge, let alone as a king. The setting of Alma 5 also must have included the seating of the new Chief Judge, Nephihah. We do not hear his inaugural speech. He 544 John W. Welch Notes

must have accepted the responsibility, and the voice of the people would have sustained that action, and thus some ceremonies were probably involved. But all that we hear of that occasion are the words of Alma. After all, it is Alma’s book that we have, and this is Alma’s record of his own words. Covenant renewal was on his mind, and there had been no more powerful, prophetic, and governmental manifesto in Nephite history than Benjamin’s speech. It is alluded to here as the basis of the Nephites’ understanding of their covenant obligations, their theology, and their understanding of themselves, individually and as a people.

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), 3: “Because the Book of Mormon tells us the original setting and purpose of this speech, we can confidently understand and interpret its words in context. It is not a philosophical discourse. It is not an esoteric or abstract treatise. It was delivered as ecclesiastic instruction from the highest priesthood leader of the Church. It was aimed at unifying and regulating the whole body of the Church by inspiring and enabling the righteousness and worthiness of each individual member. It is through that lens that Alma 5 can most authentically and effectively be read and applied today.”

Szink, Terrence L., and John W. Welch. “King Benjamin's Speech in the Context

of Ancient Israelite Festivals.” In King Benjamin's Speech: “That Ye May Learn Wisdom”, edited by John W. Welch and Stephen D. Ricks, 147–223. Provo, UT: Foundation for Ancient Research and Mormon Studies, 1998.

Alma 5:1 — The Wisdom of Reading the Law

Reading the law is a good policy. In America and in the world generally, we send people to Congress, Parliament, and other governing institutions, and they enact many laws— so many that we have whole law libraries, and we sometimes have trouble figuring out what the laws are. One thing that would help law enforcement and civil obedience would be if there were better general understandings of the law among all people. I suppose nobody may want to listen to the Internal Revenue Code read out loud once every seven years, but there are other parts of the law that are generally applicable and universally important. At least the Constitution, the Bill of Rights, and a few other things would be nice to read or hear read every seven years. It would become a kind of ritual, a renewal, a recommitment, and people would know the law. If you do not know the law, you have less chance of keeping it all the time. The Nephites were wise enough to read and renew the covenant character of their law. They tell us that they were strict in observing the Law of Moses, and doing this was part of the Law of Moses.

ALMA 5–7 545

Alma 5:1 — Renewing Their Covenants

Once every seven years, besides reading the law, Israelites would renew their covenants. After they heard the Law of Moses, they would then “choose ye this day” as they did when Joshua had all of Israel together for their covenant renewal at the end of Joshua’s life (Joshua 24:15). Indeed, we will see those same words, “choose ye this day,” seven years later, in the eighteenth year of the reign of judges, which is the fiftieth year from Benjamin’s covenant, in Alma 30:8, where those very covenant words were quoted.

Other indications of covenant renewal are found in places where Alma drew on Benjamin’s speech in this covenant connection. As the names were recorded in the book of Numbers, Benjamin recorded the names of his covenant people in Mosiah 6:1. The names of Alma’s covenant people were likewise recorded in the official’s book of life (Alma 5:58). What did Benjamin say would happen if they were wicked? Their names would be blotted out (Mosiah 5:11). The same idea appears in Alma 5:57. Alma then assures his people that “if a ravenous wolf comes in” the Good Shepherd will protect the flock (Alma 5:59–60). Benjamin had also talked about his people being in the flock and knowing the voice of the master to whom they belong, and if you do not enter into the covenant and keep the covenant, you will be driven out (Mosiah 5:14). This is Benjamin’s and Alma’s way of reminding people of the importance of being faithful and of remembering the name (Alma 5:38).

Alma 5:1 — Delivering the Word of God to Several Different Audiences “Now it came to pass that Alma began to deliver the word of God unto the people first in Zarahemla and thence throughout all the land.” Alma did not give this same speech everywhere he went, but he delivered the word of God at each location. He referred to his obligation to cry repentance and preach the coming of Christ as a duty under the holy order of the Son of God—in other words, a priesthood responsibility. He went on to speak for this same purpose in in Gideon (6:7), in Melek (8:3), and probably elsewhere as well.

As he spoke in Zarahemla in Alma 5, he was speaking to a somewhat ambivalent audience. There was a dilemma there, even an “awful dilemma” (Alma 7:3). There were some people who were righteous and very good, and some people who were not. In Gideon, however, he was speaking to a very righteous audience. Then the next place he went to was Ammonihah. So there was a wide range of people and audiences to whom he spoke. While the bottom-line message to each was very similar, the way he delivered it, how he talked, and what points he emphasized in each case were very different. As he delivered the word of God throughout all the land, he adapted his teachings and testimony to various needs and circumstances while he kept the core message the same. 546 John W. Welch Notes

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), 2: “For at least twenty-five years, Alma spoke to countless people, teaching the doctrines of Christ and preaching repentance. He spoke encouragingly about the Atonement of Christ to the righteous people in Gideon. He called the wicked people in Ammonihah to repentance and deliverance,and in a last-ditch effort to turn them away from their Nehorite ways, Alma spoke to them urgently about spiritual death, probation, and the plan of redemption, followed by his testimony about the high priesthood after the holy order of the Son of God.”

Alma 5:2, 21–23 — The Condition of the People of Zarahemla. By the time Alma spoke to his people in chapter 5, the people of Zarahemla had strayed quite a bit, as evidenced by Alma’s later speech to the people of Gideon. In Alma 7:3–5 he compared the righteousness of the people of Gideon to “the awful dilemma that our brethren were in at Zarahemla.” In Alma 4, he spoke of contentions, pride, and wickedness entering into the church, and in chapter 5, he told the people of Zarahemla to repent.

In verse 21, he said, “Ye cannot be saved, except your garments are washed white,” so presumably, not all their garments were white yet. In verse 23, he called at least some of them murderers, and said they were guilty of all manner of wickedness.

It seems as though there were a lot of people sitting on the fence in Zarahemla. The population was not as cohesive as it had been 42 years earlier under Benjamin, and Alma sought to get back to that kind of unity, to find some way to get people all back together again.

Alma 5:3–59 — Alma’s Greatest Public Speech

I have called Alma 5 Alma’s greatest public speech. Do you think that is an apt description of this talk after reading it several times? What makes it great? What struck you about it?

He called everybody to repentance. He called them to examine their activities and how they lived, but what was great about the way he called them to do that? He makes us think about our lives. He did not just say, “Here is the list,” he really brought the listeners into the process.

He asks a lot of questions, but only answers some of them. Why does he not answer all of them? Remember that they had created this new system of equality. The people were

ALMA 5–7 547

equally accountable and responsible. Do you think Alma is making people accountable and responsible by these questions that he leaves open-ended?

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), 2: “Alma tried to do all he could to reclaim his people from straying from the covenant path. Alma 5 records what is, for many reasons, Alma’s greatest public speech. That’s quite a statement; this is a prophet who taught and prophesied and preached repentance for somewhere between two and three decades.” (See chapter 1, “Introducing Alma’s Greatest Speech.”)

Book of Mormon Central “Why Did Alma Ask Church Members Fifty Probing

Questions?”KnoWhy 112 (June 1, 2016).

Alma 5:3–59 — Was Alma’s Speech Spontaneous or Prepared in Advance? think Alma prepared his speech in advance. At the very least, if he did not, he would have caused it to be written down afterwards. It is possible he had scribes recording his words since he was the presiding high priest, just as King Benjamin had his speech recorded. Alma was also the current record keeper, so he knew the value and the importance of keeping records. There will not be in the Book of Mormon another speaker like Alma.

We have—as we encounter, Alma 5, Alma 7, Alma 9, 12, 13 to Alma 30, 32, 33—the words of Alma speaking 21 chapters of original material. This is impressive, and maybe his lawyering and recordkeeping combined to help him. He was very, very conscientious as a record keeper, and I think he wrote these speeches himself. I do not think he had a ghostwriter doing it. We do not know how much of this was said to him by the spirit. He may have had an outline. He may have had some ideas. He may have also given talks like this in smaller settings. Then he unleashed a lot of questions.

I think he sensed that the people of Zarahemla were a very tricky audience to work with. He knew that they were in a dilemma (Alma 7:3), and so he certainly came prepared. One of the things about teaching with the spirit, is that we tend to over-prepare, but we know that the Lord is not going to prompt us to use everything that we have prepared. Alma may have had a hundred questions, and then these are the fifty that he ended up using. Fifty may be just a coincidental number. He is keeping the large plates—the small plates are full—and every year he is putting some kind of a record in as to what he did. If he was writing on metal, you know he would have wanted to inscribe very carefully. By that time, he had probably polished it to have the speech the way he would have 548 John W. Welch Notes

wanted it to go down for eternity. It is interesting to think about how that all might have come about.

It is also interesting that Mormon chose to include this speech in Alma’s own words. It does not appear that he abridged Alma’s inaugural speech as High Priest. Like King Benjamin’s speech, Alma 5 is a jewel. It stands the tests of time.

Alma 5:3–59 — Teaching with the Spirit

One of the most important things we try to do in the Church, no matter where we are called to serve, is to teach with the Spirit. Do you think that Alma spoke with the Spirit on this occasion? What was it about his sermon that conveyed that Spirit effectively? Did you learn anything about how to speak with the Spirit from the way in which Alma delivered his message? For one thing, he told his audience that he was speaking under the influence of the Spirit. In Alma 5:50–61, Alma said “the spirit sayeth unto me.” That may have been something he was feeling right then, as inspiration. He was certainly open to that. Or perhaps the Spirit told him those things while he was preparing this speech. When King Benjamin reported what the angel had said to him, he stated that sometime prior to his speech an angel had awoken him from his sleep, and then he delivered that message as he had received it (Mosiah 3:2).

Alma 5:3–12 — Prologue

Alma began by reviewing past blessings. The past is a good way to teach with the spirit since it built on their common traditions and blessings from God. Using the past as his springboard, he taught simple principles and progressed to more complicated ones. He walked them through a problem and gave a solution, and showed where choices would inevitably lead one way or another. It is logically constructed, guided by and leading to the influence of the spirit.

Alma 5:5–59 —Alma’s Questions

Alma asked fifty questions in this speech, split into 8 main groups of questions (see Figures 1, 2, 3, 4). To determine the number of questions in Alma’s speech, you cannot simply count the question marks, because sometimes there are compound questions, and because the questions marks were inserted later by the typesetter of the Book of Mormon. When the Book of Mormon was translated, Oliver

Cowdery, and whoever happened to be the scribe on some of the later parts, wrote word for word, without punctuation. The original manuscripts of the Book of Mormon had no periods, no commas, no question marks, no dashes, and hardly any capital letters; it was just a steady stream of words. One of the young men working in Grandin’s print shop

ALMA 5–7 549

550 John W. Welch Notes

ALMA 5–7 551

552 John W. Welch Notes

Figure 1, 2, 3, 4 John W. Welch and Greg Welch, "50 Questions of Alma 5," in

Charting the Book of Mormon, charts 62-65.
