ALMA 5–7 553

punctuated the Book of Mormon, so the number of question marks is not a reliable way to count the questions.

Punctuation marks are an invention of the middle ages. No ancient manuscript has any punctuation, so for example, when you look at the Dead Sea Scrolls, you would notice that they are just a steady stream of words, and the older ones do not even put spaces between the words. When we speak, we just speak in a steady line, and if you know where the words break, you can follow it. But we do not stop between each word when we speak, and so the very early writings do not even break between the words. That is enough to say that we have a little bit of flexibility in counting how many questions there are.

Why do you think he asked so many questions? How do you answer each of these questions? How can you apply his questions to your daily life?

• What questions does he ask about remembering God’s acts for his people? (5:6-9)

• What questions does he ask about knowing the essentials of the Gospel? (5:10-11)

• What questions does he ask about being personally converted? (5:14-15)

• What questions does he ask about imagining the judgment day? (5:15-24)

• What questions does he ask about assessing one’s spiritual condition? (5:26-30)

• What questions does he ask about identifying with one fold or another? (5:39)

• What questions does he ask about obtaining spiritual knowledge? (5:45)

• What questions does he ask about refusing to repent? (5:53-59)

Alma 5:5–59 — Alma Asks Questions to Share His Message Effectively Remember that one of the things that everyone had to do during the Feast of Tabernacle season was to confess, so these questions that Alma was asking may have had something to do with helping people to be introspective, to repent, to recognize what they needed to do as a part of preparing themselves for the covenant to be renewed. This was so that the Day of Atonement could be celebrated properly, so that the blood of the sacrifice would purify and cleanse everyone and wash their garments clean. Are those all phrases in Alma 5? You bet. So, in Alma 5, again we are going to another level of why it is a great speech. It taps into all of the really fundamental concepts of ancient Israelite religion, the revealed law that they were living (and supposed to be) keeping. Indeed, it taps into the Law of Moses as revealed by Moses.

Moreover, Alma’s questions were drawn directly from his experiences. He knew what he was talking about. Another way that we teach with the Spirit is when we talk about things that we “know whereof we speak.” When he asked “have you had his image on your countenance?” or when he asked about being born of God, he had experience in 554 John W. Welch Notes

these areas. He asked about being born again, and undoubtedly as people heard him asking those questions, they knew and accepted what he was saying because they knew his story. They had probably heard it many times and they knew how sincere he was about these things.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central “Why Did Alma Ask Church Members Fifty Probing

Questions?”KnoWhy 112 (June 1, 2016)

Alma 5:5–59 — If One Deletes All the Questions, What Remains of This Speech? In a way this is a humorous question, but it helps readers to focus on what Alma affirmatively declared, proclaimed, or testified of in this great speech. What is left are words of testimony. He did not leave people wondering.

I marked in my Book of Mormon, highlighting the things that Alma testified of. You might want to do that. For example, he certainly declared, not in a questioning mode, when he said, “I, Alma, having been consecrated by my father Alma to be a high priest over the church of God, he having power and authority from God” (5:3). He declared that unequivocally. He did not say, “Who has any authority around here?” Then, in verse 4, he said, “Behold I say unto you, they were delivered out of the hands of the people of King Noah by the mercy and power of God.” He testified of that.

So, it is important to imagine hearing these words aloud. They were meant to be listened to. If you don’t hear them as strong assertions or as drawn out questions, it is easy to click past all these questions and declarations without really letting them sink in. But imagine the inflections, the intonations, and listen for the cadence of this great speech.

Alma 5:5–59 — Strategic Pauses

Was there a strategic pause after these questions? When he said, “Can you imagine yourselves that ye hear the voice of God saying unto you in that day, come unto me ye blessed?” (Alma 5:16), did he just let that hang for a few seconds? Or, “Do you imagine to yourself that you can lie unto God in that day? And say Lord, our works have been works of righteousness upon the face of the earth?” (17). Did he then let that sink in just a little?

There are some very poignant moments of silence in scripture. For example, when the voice of God was heard from heaven and Christ descended at the temple at Bountiful, everyone awaited profoundly silent. Just imagine how that silence would be; nobody dared to say anything. They were frozen with anticipation and wonder at what had happened. Silence can be very powerful. Sometimes, conveying the spirit requires not talking as much and letting people ponder.

ALMA 5–7 555

There are other techniques Alma used. For example, many of Alma’s testimony statements began with the word behold. Look at verse 13, “And behold, he preached the word unto your fathers and a mighty change was also wrought in their hearts and therefore they were saved.” That is a clear statement of testimony. This is not hypothetical. When Alma said he was bearing down in testimony, he certainly was.

Further Reading

Jon D. Green, “The Paradox of Silence in the Arts and Religion,” BYU Studies Quarterly 35, no. 3 (1995–1996): 94–131.

Alma 5:6–9 —Remembering God’s Acts for His People The first five questions asked the audience if they could remember God’s great acts for his people, their heritage, and God’s deliverance. I like the way Alma asked these questions in a kind of lawyerly way, with some nice qualifiers. He didn’t only ask if they had remembered; he asked if they had “sufficiently remembered.”

Have we remembered enough? Have we remembered sufficiently the captivity, or the problems that Joseph Smith faced, or that our ancestors were plagued with as they came to settle this valley?

In verse 9, he asked, “Were the bands of death broken, and the chains of hell which encircled your fathers about, were they loosed?” Do you think God acted in their lives? Do we even know enough about our ancestors, about our heritage, to answer that question?

Each of the first three questions begins with the phrase, “Have you sufficiently retained in remembrance….” In Hebrew, the word for remember is zkhr, and it does not just mean to remember in the sense of recalling. It means to remember in the sense of obeying. When your mother said, “Remember what I have taught you,” she wasn’t asking if you could pass a recall test. When she said “Remember it,” she meant, “Do what I have taught you.” And that is what we see in the Book of Mormon. The word remember does not just mean to think about it, but to do it.

In the fourth question, Alma asked, “Were your fathers destroyed?” They were not. They were delivered from captivity. Perhaps Alma’s people were worried about being destroyed; Zarahemla was not impervious to attack. Just a few years before this speech there had been a bloody civil war. The Lamanites were just now beginning to put pressure on the Nephites again. Perhaps Alma sought to put his people’s minds at peace so that they knew that they could rely on God.
