556 John W. Welch Notes

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Does Abinadi Use the Phrase ‘the Bands of

Death’? (Mosiah 15:8),” KnoWhy 93 (May 5, 2016).

Louis Midgley, “The Ways of Remembrance,” in Rediscovering the Book of Mormon: Insights You May Have Missed Before, ed. John L. Sorenson and Melvin J. Thorne (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1991), 168–176.

Louis Midgley, “‘O Man, Remember, and Perish Not’ (Mosiah 4:30),” in Reexploring the Book of Mormon: A Decade of New Research, ed. John W. Welch (Salt Lake City and Provo, UT: Deseret Book and FARMS, 1992), 127–129.

Alma 5:10–11 —Knowing the Essential Logic of the Gospel In verses 10 to 11, Alma asked seven more questions. He took his audience through them—again, in kind of a lawyerly way—in an ordered step by step process of understanding some of the most basic principles of the gospel.

“What was the cause of your fathers being loosed?” (5:10). He was asking about the conditions, about the cause and effect of spiritual blessings. We need to think about that too. Part of the essential logic of the gospel is that there are consequences. Because of that, we can rely on certain outcomes, and we can therefore have hope. Alma did not stop and explain here, but he was not just asking his people to think on what conditions those others were saved. Of course, he wants us to be thinking and asking ourselves, on what conditions will I be saved?

Does God require us to hope for things that are without foundation? No. True faith is believing in things that are true, and we have a reason for the hope that is in us (1 Peter 3:15). And that understanding is the next thing that we learn from thinking about these conditions. On what grounds did they have hope for salvation? That God will come into their lives, and will cause them to be loosed from the bands of death and of hell. That happens when Satan is driven out of our lives. That is the next step in Alma’s instructions.

In question nine, Alma asked, “Did not my father Alma believe in the words which were delivered from the mouth of Abinadi?” (5:11). They were expected to believe the words of the prophet. Not only to believe the words—the next question was, “Was Abinadi not a holy prophet?” We also must not only believe that he was a prophet and believe in his words, but we also must believe in his holy calling as an authorized messenger and agent of God who would deliver those blessings.

ALMA 5–7 557

Question number eleven, the sixth question in this set, is, “Did Abinadi not speak the words of God?” (5:11). No one in that audience was going to doubt that Abinadi spoke the words of God; they saw his prophecies fulfilled, thus defining him as a true prophet. They would have known the law about prophets in Deuteronomy 18:21 asks how one may know a true prophet from a false one, “And if thou say in thine heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord hath not spoken?” The key for knowing is then provided, “When a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou shalt not be afraid of him” (Deut. 18:22).

In Alma’s audience on this solemn occasion were still some of the people who followed Alma’s father as they fled from King Noah. In this audience also were people who had come from the city of Nephi with Limhi. They and everyone there knew these stories, and all of them would have to agree that Abinadi was a true prophet.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “How Does Prophecy Shape the Book of Mormon’s

Content and Structure? (Words of Mormon 1:4),” KnoWhy 498 (January 15, 2019).

Alma 5:14–15 — Being Personally Converted

The next five questions dealt with being personally converted. We each have to be personally converted; this is where the importance of every single person embracing the gospel comes into play. These are the questions that I am sure hit many of you as they did me. First in this set Alma asked, “Have you been spiritually born of God?” Second, “Have you received his image in your countenance?” and third, “Have you experienced this mighty change in your heart?” (5:14). Benjamin also mentioned a mighty change in the heart, in Mosiah 5:2 when the people fell down and said, “We have experienced this mighty change of heart.” All these questions were asked so that Alma can then testify of the things that he wants them to know and to believe. He wants to get us thinking, and believing, and changing!

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), 19: “Of the life-altering questions posed by Alma, those touching on three specific topics seem particularly connected: repentance, conversion, and a mighty change of heart. As we ponder, … we are led to ask questions of our own: Which comes first in this mighty trifecta?”

558 John W. Welch Notes

Alma 5:15–24 — Imagining the Day of Judgement The eleven questions that start in verse 15 and go to verse 24, ask, “Can you imagine the judgment day?” Do we often imagine what it will be like when we stand before God to be accounted, to be judged according to the deeds that we have done in this mortal body? Do we think about being accountable?

Think about the 19th question, “Can you imagine yourself that you hear the voice of the Lord saying unto you, in that day: Come unto me ye blessed, for behold your works have been works of righteousness upon the face of the earth?” (5:16). Can you imagine that? Can you think of that? Do you think of hearing, “Well done, thou good and faithful servant?” Does that come to your mind as you hear those questions?

Getting the people to think about judgment day and to realize “I am going to be held accountable” is a very powerful spiritual motivator. On the Feast of Tabernacles, the Israelites celebrated God’s kingship. The king eventually was the judge, and on the Feast of Tabernacles—supposing that is when this occurred—the people would have come expecting to give an accounting of how they had done. In effect, they would have expected to go through a fiery furnace of judgment before God, so that they could repent and renew their covenants. They would have been able to walk out of that important hearing-and-renewal of the law reconciled with God and placed where they could progress. This theme of judgment, then, is a powerful one in the context of what is happening here.

As I read these verses, I really like remembering that Alma was a judge by career. For eight years he had served as the chief judge of the Nephite court system. We do not know how many cases he tried, but probably quite a few. I am sure as he sat on the bench looking down on these people, he probably heard them making up excuses and pleading for mercy and saying, “Oh I really did not do it,” and Alma was likely thinking, “There was not a one of them that I could not see through.” We do not fool the judge, and we are not going to fool God. When Alma thought about himself as a judge, and the position of God at the judgement, he was likely thinking: “On that judgment day, do you think you are going to be able to fool him any better than any of these people have fooled me?” We are getting the voice of a person who has been there. It would have made sense to them, and it resonates with us.

Was Alma actually alluding here to his own conversion experience? I think so. He did not say explicitly, “You’d better believe, because this is what happened to me,” but he knew, and he could speak with conviction because he had been there, and he had experienced the things that he was teaching. As I read verse 21, I imagine being brought before the tribunal of God. Perhaps that was one of the things that happened to Alma

ALMA 5–7 559

during his three days of stunned silence. He said of that experience that he feared that he was going to become banished and extinct. His soul was filled with guilt and remorse, racked with eternal torment. He had a perfect recollection of his guilt. I suppose he had told that story of his own conversion enough times that his audience would have felt and said, “Alma knows what he is talking about and I ought to really take this to heart.”

Often, when we hear Alma 5 mentioned, we just think of one verse, “Have you received his image in your countenance?” (5:19). But Alma did not let them off so easily. It’s not just a matter of receiving. There will also be things testifying against them, and against us. Did that hit you? He asked, “What will these things that you have done, what will they testify of? Will they not testify that ye are murderers, yea, and also that ye are guilty of all manner of wickedness?” (5:22–23). To whom was he talking here? There may have been people in his audience who had committed murders, but nobody had been there to witness it, and so nobody could convict them. If a judge could not prove that someone had committed murder, because it was done in secret, they sometimes thought they could get away with it.

But more than that, Alma once referred to himself as having murdered many people (Alma 36:14), meaning that he had seriously damaged them spiritually. However, whether literally or spiritually, Alma said that no one was going to get away with it. He was addressing the most crucial, the most wicked of all crimes—murder. He did not let his audience off easily.

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), chapter 7 “Standing before God at the Judgment Day.”

Alma 5:16–20 — Teaching to Envision Personally

He asked “can you imagine yourselves . . .” in three different situations:

“can you imagine to yourselves that ye hear the voice of the Lord, saying unto you, in that day: Come unto me ye blessed” (v. 16)

“Or do ye imagine to yourselves that ye can lie unto the Lord in that day, and say— Lord, our works have been righteous works upon the face of the earth” (v. 17)

“Or otherwise, can ye imagine yourselves brought before the tribunal of God with your souls filled with guilt and remorse, having a remembrance of all your guilt” (v. 18) 560 John W. Welch Notes

He paints a picture of the sinner at the last day, before the tribunal of God, and beholding their own countenances. What makes these words so impressive is that there is a visual dimension to them all. He is saying “Can you visualize this?” It is very concrete. We speak with the spirit when we are not so abstract but are very specific.

Alma 5:26–30 — Inviting Us to Assess Our Spiritual Condition and Repent In these verses, Alma called his people to repentance. They needed to be stripped of pride, stripped of envy. The main physical manifestation of pride in this world was costly apparent, and so that needed to be stripped off. However, this admonition was also figurative, because if you also need to rid yourself of the emotions of pride and envy.

In verse 30, Alma asked, “Is there one among you that doth make a mock of his brother, or that heapeth upon him persecutions?” This was and is a real problem. We must be very careful never to belittle anyone. How hard that is! We live in a world where most of the elementary school students do a lot of teasing, if not bullying, and our children grow up with it. We have to strip ourselves of this, and we have to be really careful as parents and in our families to be sure that we do not ever tear anyone down.

Why is mocking or belittling so problematic? Have you ever been mocked? Been laughed at? I remember my professor Robert K. Thomas once saying, “The reason that mocking and laughter is so pernicious is because there is no answer for it.” When so attacked, you cannot rationally reply. And of course, you cannot laugh or even mock back. That just makes matters worse. Maybe we can laugh at ourselves, and deflect the mocking a little bit, but laughter is something that you cannot respond to, it stops the conversation, and people who mock know that. Once the damage is done, there is no way to recover from it, so we must be really careful. It can be so devastating. People feel belittled or mocked, even over something small or silly, and they leave the Church over that. They feel like they are not valued. There is no way they can redeem their self-esteem, let alone themselves, except, of course, with the help of the Savior.

These words and questions of Alma bring to our hearts and minds a lot of things for us to think about—tthings that are sad, things that show us the way things should not be, but also other things that help us to be strong and that help us to know that we are on the right path. That is the spirit of Alma here!

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), 75: “Having received Christ’s image in our countenance, and having been delivered from captivity and bondage, we want nothing more than to be received by

ALMA 5–7 561

Him, to go and be where He is. The Lord has made that possible through His infinite Atonement. But it is up to us to take advantage of His ultimate sacrifice by repenting.”

Alma 5:26 — Can We Sing the Song of Redeeming Love? He asked us whether we can sing the song of redeeming love. I want to have some singing. I do not know what part Alma sang in the Zarahemla Tabernacle Choir, but I think he knew what it meant to sing as his soul sang with joy and goodness, I am sure, on many occasions.

A sister who led a Young Women’s choir for a long time said, “The way you praise God is how you live.” She would tell the girls that all the time, “If you want to be able to sing this so they know that you truly have a testimony, you sing your testimony. You sing your conversion. The way you sing is how you live.” That is a great message. Do you think Alma would have agreed with it? What makes you believe that? He lived the life. He walked the walk. He exuded this kind of enthusiasm and the dedication that shows that he lived what he testified. It is also a part of the Young Women’s theme, that we testify of him at all times and in all places. Well how do we do that? By the way we live.

When Alma described his conversion to Helaman in Alma 36:22, singing came up again. When he feared that he was going to be destroyed, he said, “I saw, even as our father Lehi saw, God sitting upon his throne, surrounded with numberless concourses of angels, in the attitude of singing and praising their God; yea, and my soul did long to be there.” He wanted to be in the choir! I think that was part of the song of redeeming love that he was referring to in Alma 5.

Further Reading

LeGrand L. Baker and Stephen D. Ricks, “Alma 5: The Song of Redeeming Love,” in Who Shall Ascend into the Hill of the Lord?: The Psalms in Israel’s Temple Worship in the Old Testament and in the Book of Mormon, 2nd ed. (Salt Lake City, UT: Eborn Books, 2011), 520–537.

Alma 5:39 — Identifying with a “Fold”

Whereas mocking tends to drive people away, the gospel brings people together. As Alma said, “ye are of his fold.” Having a flock, a community that believes in Jesus Christ, the shepherd to be followed, matters. It strengthens us. We do not make it alone. We have to work together, and the Good Shepherd will protect his fold.

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), 61: “since Alma taught that there are ultimately only two flocks, it stands to 562 John W. Welch Notes

reason that there are only two shepherds. The doctrine of the Two Ways, which can be found repeatedly throughout the Book of Mormon, constantly invites all people to choose to belong to the flock of the Good Shepherd.”

Alma 5:45–47 — How We Obtain Spiritual Knowledge The next step is that you must obtain spiritual knowledge. In this passage Alma testified, “Do you not suppose that I know of these things myself? And how do you suppose that I know of their surety?” Interesting that Alma uses this word surety here. “To know of a surety.” When he first experienced his conversion, he knew! He said, “I have been born of God. I know.” And in Alma 36 later said, “For ye ought to know as I do know” (Alma 36:30), but that was not all that Alma ever learned.

The Holy Ghost reinforced and taught Alma more, as he fasted and prayed many days, kept the commandments, served, and lived righteously. There came a greater level of knowledge. He gained an assurance, a surety, and he knew at more than just the experiential level of having been called to repentance.

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), chapter 8 “Receiving Personal Revelation.”

Alma 5:53–59 — Refusing to Repent

Alma knew what would have happened if he had not repented, but now he knew with an even greater assurance than before. He was, at this time, bearing a very powerful testimony of the truthfulness of his knowledge as a prophet of God, as one who had received a very, very powerful conviction of the truthfulness.

Alma 5:5–59 — Application of the Speech

Put yourself in the audience listening to Alma’s speech in Alma 5. How would the speech have affected you if you were

• One of the 3,500 recent converts who had just joined the church (3:4)?

• A soldier who had been seriously wounded in the battle against Amlici?

• A widow of a soldier who had fought for Amlici and against Alma?

• An old-time faithful member of the church of Alma the Elder?

• A Mulekite friendly toward Alma but who still felt politically excluded?

• A member of the church who was still leaning toward the teachings of Nehor?

• A faithful father and mother with a rebellious teenage son?

• A senior citizen who had entered the covenant following Benjamin’s speech?

ALMA 5–7 563

Alma was addressing all of these people. So, try to put yourself in the audience here. Think, first of all, “What if I am just a recent convert? I have just joined the church; that battle with Amlici was pretty bloody and I have decided to turn over a new leaf in my life; I have been pretty bad in the past and I am now a member in this church, and I listen to Alma. How do I react?” How would you react as you hear what he is saying? Is there anything there that you would really resonate with as a recent convert?

Would someone who had just recently joined the group have been overwhelmed with the questions that he was asking? He certainly does unload a lot on people here. But does he also reassure them? Does he speak of anything that they might have recently experienced, in which they would say, “Yes, there is hope. There is goodness here.”

Throughout all these chapters there comes out loud and clear the importance of repentance and cleansing oneself, preparing oneself, and I think Alma, by all the questions and everything else, is saying that. So, he is giving great hope to the recent convert. He is speaking pretty harshly and very directly to longer time members. He is getting after them, and I think the new convert may have been saying to himself, “Hey, I have repented. I have cleansed myself. I am here,” and I think that gives a new convert great hope, especially if they have just recently been baptized.

I do not know about you, but I remember coming home right after being baptized. It was a Saturday night, and I was eight years old. I felt a wonderful feeling of being perfectly cleansed, and I remember the thought, “All I have to do is hang on for about 80 years and I am okay.” Well, that’s easier said than done, but that freshness does give us all as new converts optimism. On a couple of occasions, such as in verses 7 and 13, Alma talks exactly about that mighty change that has happened. It is an echo to Mosiah chapter 5, in which Benjamin talked about the mighty change that had happened in those people and the covenant, and being sealed unto God and unto the promise of eternal life (Mosiah 5:15).

Further Reading

Ed J. Pinegar and John W. Welch, Experiencing a Mighty Change of Heart: Alma’s

Guide to a Deep, Lasting Conversion (American Fork, UT: Covenant Communications, 2020), 129: “Alma asks us, as he asked his audience in Zarahemla, a sobering question: could we say, if we were called to die at this time—right now—that we have sufficiently prepared, that our ‘garments have been cleansed and made white through the blood of Christ, who will come to redeem his people from their sins?’ (Alma 5:27).”
