564 John W. Welch Notes

Alma 6

Alma 6:4 —Alma Re-established the Church in Zarahemla Alma the Elder established a covenant community around 140 BC at the Waters of Mormon in the land of Nephi (Mosiah 18:17–18). When his group rejoined the Nephites in Zarahemla after 120 BC, King Mosiah “granted unto Alma that he might establish churches throughout all the land of Zaramehla; and gave him power to ordain priests and teachers over every church” (Mosiah 25:19). Soon “there were seven churches in the land of Zarahemla” (Mosiah 25:23). By about 83 BC, however, Alma the Younger had to once again “establish the order of the church in the city of Zarahemla” (Alma 6:4). Initially, “many of the rising generation” in the land of Zarahemla had forgotten or “could not understand the words of king Benjamin” and several of them would not be baptized (Mosiah 26:1, 4). Dissensions arose “among the brethren,” and some people, eventually including Alma the Younger and the sons of Mosiah, “deceived many with their flattering words” (Mosiah 26:6; 27:8). Some dissenters were excommunicated (Mosiah 26:36), and the unbelievers began persecuting members of the church (Mosiah 27:1).

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Alma Need to ‘Establish the Order of the

Church’ in Zarahemla Again? (Alma 6:4),” KnoWhy 113 (June 2, 2016).

Alma 6:7–8 — The City of Gideon

Gideon, the city that Alma visited next, was named after the great Limhite warrior that was killed by Nehor (Alma 6:7); “There having been a city built, which was called the city of Gideon, which was in the valley that was called Gideon, being called after the

man who was slain by the hand of Nehor with the sword.”

It was a city where the people had kept themselves clean and unspotted from the world. In Alma’s speech to the people of Gideon, he made no reference to Nehor’s preaching and death. One might think that Alma would have made something of a political speech out of this, reminding them that he had executed their hero. However, that was not Alma’s purpose or “errand from the Lord” (Jacob 1:17).

Alma 7

Alma 7:1–27 —Joy in Speaking to the People of Gideon In verse 4, Alma used the phrase “exceedingly great joy,” and again in verse 26, “my soul doth exceedingly rejoice.” The words joy and rejoicing are modified by exceedingly.

ALMA 5–7 565

What a relief! He finally had an audience of people who were righteous and good. They had waited a long time, as he explained, “having had much business that I could not come unto you.”

In Alma 5, Alma’s focus of attention was calling the people to repentance and enabling a mighty change of heart. In Alma 7, the focus was on rejoicing. Maybe he knew the people in Zarahemla all too well, but here in Gideon, in Alma 7, he was talking to some people who have never heard him speak before. He was glad to finally be able to come and speak to them in his own voice. I suppose he had sent some other people— messengers and others—but now he is finally there himself. What an experience that would have been for them finally to hear Alma speaking to them in person.

When our Church leaders speak to a smaller group, for example, at a Stake Conference, they tailor their comments to the group at hand. When Elder Oaks spoke in our Stake Conference a few years ago, he expressed great personal joy in being able to talk to us. We could tell he cared for who we are, and we could sense what he felt we needed. We get that same feeling from Alma as he begins speaking to the Gideonites. He calls them his “beloved brethren” and he says, “Seeing that I have been committed to come to you.” It is very gracious. Imagine how they might have felt. They probably did not get General Authorities visiting very often.

Alma 7:1–27 — A Different Speech for the People of Gideon In Alma 5, there were 50 questions. How many questions can you count in Alma 7? There is not one! What a shift in terms of voice register. We have a completely different style here. If biblical scholars who specialize in hypotheses about authorship were to analyze these two texts, I wonder if they would tell us that they were written by two different people. But authorship attribution is not that easy. When people generally are talking to different audiences they communicate in different ways. In Alma 5, Alma was bearing down on the people and he did not want to answer the questions he posed because he wanted them to answer those questions. In Alma 7, he just laid out the doctrine. He could open up and give them the straight teachings.

Alma 7:4 — A Righteous People

In Verse 4, Alma remarked, “I trust according to the spirit that I shall have joy over you.” He is full of trust, faith, and confidence in Gideon. There were four core things in verse 6 that he firmly and positively believed about these people:

• I trust that ye are not in a state of so much unbelief as were your brethren;

• I trust that ye are not lifted up in the pride of your hearts; yea,

566 John W. Welch Notes

• I trust that ye have not set your hearts upon riches and the vain things of the

world; yea,

• I trust that you do not worship idols, but that ye do worship the true and the

living God.

This sincere statement of trust likely engendered a relationship of confidence between Alma and this audience, so that these people realized that he knew and cared about them. When we hear speakers address us in this generous fashion, even if we know that we are not all one hundred percent worthy of those compliments, we want to believe these good things about ourselves. As Alma expressed his confidence in them before he began his discourse, when we talk to our children or grandchildren or people we minister to, we would do well to express that same confidence. We could say such things as “I trust that you are doing these things,” or “I trust that you have read your scriptures this week and have come to this class prepared.”

Alma 7:7–13 — What Does Alma Teach about the Atonement? The setting of this speech was clearly a sacred one. The written part of the sermon is very short and concise, but it is very unlikely that Alma would have gone there to teach for only fifteen minutes, which is about as long as it takes to read Alma 7 out loud. Mormon explains that more was involved on this occasion. The record says, “Having taught the people of Gideon many things that cannot be written, having established the order of the church according as he had done before in the Land of Zarahemla . . .” (Alma 8:1). The words “many things that cannot be written” may indicate that the Lord restrained him from writing or recording these great things that were said or done with these faithful people.

Alma’s speech or sermon on this occasion contained a classic statement of the coming of Christ and of the Atonement. He testified that Christ would come to earth, but we should notice that he did not know whether Jesus would come to these people or not (Alma 7:8). He had apparently received no revelation about whether Christ would come to this land or not. He knew that the Savior would be born in (or near) Jerusalem to a person named Mary, and that he was the Son of God. But apparently he did not know everything about how or whether Christ would get to his land, and if he did, how he would appear. Perhaps he knew more than he told the people on this occasion, but we don’t do the text any favors by reading things back into the text that haven’t yet been learned. When Jesus finally did appear in 3 Nephi 11, it was more amazing and wondrous than they had, or ever could have, expected.

After talking in verse 10 about the miraculous birth of Jesus who would come as the Son of God, Alma said, “And the Son of God shall go forth suffering pains and afflictions and

ALMA 5–7 567

temptations of every kind” (7:11). Here, Alma appears to be drawing on Isaiah 53, which Abinadi had quoted when speaking to the priests of Noah: “He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him” (Isaiah 53:2); “He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter” (Isaiah 53:7); and “Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows” (Isaiah 53:4). Alma would have connected these words with the people of Gideon, because their parents and grandparents were among the people of Noah and his son Limhi, just as Alma was the son of Alma the Elder, who had been converted by Abinadi. So, it is fitting that Alma would have emphasized the suffering dimension of the Atonement in speaking to these people.

Alma said that the Son of God would do this so that, “the word might be fulfilled which saith: ‘He will take upon him the pains and the sicknesses of his people’” (Alma 7:11). If these words are an exact quotation, as they appear to be, we do not have the prophecy from which it was quoted. Or these words about Jesus taking upon him our pains and sicknesses may be Alma’s paraphrase of either Isaiah 53 or of some parts of King Benjamin. But, in either event, here Alma intensifies this prophetic information in two very important ways. First, Alma mentions pains, afflictions, and temptations of every kind. That is a stronger statement of the expansive reach of the Atonement than we can find anywhere else in scripture. And second, Alma says that all that will be accomplished in order for the prophetic word of God to be fulfilled.

In this regard, our minds rightly turn to the words found in Luke 22:44, which says that Jesus was in “an agony.” The English word “an” here is a bit puzzling. What does it mean to be in an agony? He certainly was in agony, in unimaginable pain and affliction. However, in the Greek, Luke was actually saying that He was in an agon, which means a battle, a conflict, or a contest. In the Garden of Gethsemane, Christ fought and won the final battle, the ultimate conflict, between the Son of God and the Son of Darkness. And what was at stake was our eternal existence. He took up this battle; he took on death, and He won, so that He loosed the bands of death. Without having defeated the forces of death, He could not loosen us from those bands.

In addition, Alma says, “And he will take upon him their infirmities.” And indeed, Christ has already taken our infirmities upon Himself, so that all we have to do is have enough faith to come to Him and draw upon the reservoir of credit that He has already put in the bank for us. If we can do what is right and if we will ask—and Alma gives plenty of instruction here that we must and should ask and pray for these things of which we stand in need—they will be granted to us.

It is a wonderful blessing that He has done this for us. Not only has He absorbed all of those infirmities, but He learned something in that process. In Hebrews 5 it says that the 568 John W. Welch Notes

Son of God will learn obedience by the things that He suffers. But in Alma 7 we learn something unique to scripture, namely that He will also learn something in this extreme struggle as well: that His bowels may be filled with mercy. He had need to be filled up with mercy. Being full of mercy and empathy, there is no room for criticism or judgment on His part. You do not have to fear, that when you come to Christ, that He will be judgmental or critical. He will not turn you away or be disappointed that you have done such a thing or had such a problem, because He is full of mercy. There is no room there for anything else but loving kindness. He has learned mercy because He was somehow vicariously able to experience all of our infirmities, which gives Him a power, a real force, and a connectivity, that he otherwise would not have had.

And what does this word succor mean? To succor is to strengthen, but the root of the word “-cor,” also means “to run.” A courier is a runner. And the prefix “suc-” comes from the preposition “sub,” meaning from beneath or below, as in the word “support,” meaning “to carry or bear (port) from beneath (sub).” “To succor,” therefore, means run to a person to give strength and help from a foundation below. Having descended below all things, the Savior now is so full of mercy that He knows how to run to us when we are in our moment of need and to bear us up. He won’t hold back. He will rush to our side. What a wonderful way of seeing and expressing the openness of the Atonement. Alma is the only one in scripture who emphasizes this aspect of Christ’s sustaining power. And Alma himself, in his own conversion, has had first-hand experience with Christ’s succoring power. His words in Alma 7:11–12, therefore, should be understood as Alma’s autobiographical testimony that this is what the Savior will do and how He is able to do these things. Because of all of this, Alma can truly say, “Now the spirit knoweth all things” (7:13). Christ experienced it all and has been filled with the knowledge of all things. Thus, Alma personally testifies, “that he might take upon Him the sins of his people, that He might blot out their transgressions according to the power of His deliverance. And now, behold, this is the testimony which is in me” (7:13). This is a humble, understated testimony here, but most certainly a clear and true one.

In 2009, President Eyring said in General Conference that it is perfectly clear and assuring that our Heavenly Father and Savior live and that they love all humanity and that “the very opportunity for us to face adversity and affliction is part of the evidence of their infinite love.” It is interesting that God gave us the gift of living in mortality, so we could be prepared to receive the greatest of all the gifts of God which is eternal life in the heavenly kingdom of God, as Alma repeatedly mentions (7:14, 16, 19, 21). As President Eyring continued:

ALMA 5–7 569

In this education we experience misery and happiness, sickness and health, the

sadness from sin and the joy of forgiveness. That forgiveness can come only

through the infinite Atonement of the Savior, which He worked out through pain

we could not bear and which we can only faintly comprehend.

It will comfort us when we must wait in distress for the Savior’s promised relief

that He knows, from experience, how to heal and help us. The Book of Mormon

gives us the certain assurance of His power to comfort. And faith in that power

will give us patience as we pray and work and wait for help. He could have

known how to succor us simply by revelation, but He chose to learn by His own

personal experience.

And then he goes on and quotes Alma 7:11–13. I think that is very powerful. It means Christ could have received this knowledge of suffering by revelation, because we know we can know things by the spirit. However, he chose to suffer. To me this is the Savior going the second mile. Alma emphasized that Jesus would know all this, not only by the Spirit, but also “according to the flesh” (7:12, 13). To make that choice, Jesus wanted to know exactly how it would feel, not just an impression of the spirit, what it would be like, and how we too, in a mortal state, would feel.

Further Reading

Henry B. Eyring, “Adversity,” General Conference April 2009, online at churchofjesuschrist.org.

Alma 7:14–15 — Alma Invites the People to be Baptized In these verses, Alma encourages these people to come and be baptized unto repentance, that they can be washed of their sins, that they can witness to God that they will keep his commandments and basically enter into the entire baptismal covenant that his father Alma had instituted at the Waters of Mormon.

They are probably going to be baptized in a river or natural body of water. We don’t know where this could have taken place, but anywhere in the Western Hemisphere in Alma’s day, there could have been danger in these waters. These converts could have encountered alligators, water moccasins, slippery banks, or river currents. I doubt that many of these people could swim. Lakes and springs were thought, in most ancient civilizations, to be openings into the underworld. I remember being in a small boat on the Usumacinta River in southern Mexico looking at huge alligators on the sandy beach as we went by, and I sat very still in the middle of the boat and hoped that it didn’t spring a leak! Going down into the water might well have been fearsome to these people, and so being baptized was a serious matter.

570 John W. Welch Notes

In the ancient Near Eastern world, in fact, if you were challenged as an accuser or as a witness in court, and there were conflicting testimonies or a lack of decisive evidence, so that the judges couldn’t really tell who was right or wrong, the river ordeal was the way in which Babylonian law resolved the matter. In such a case, one of the people—the one who seemed to be the weakest as a witness—would be required to submit to the river ordeal which consisted of being taken out in the middle of the river and thrown in. If the person was able to get to shore, this was a sign that the gods had favored you and your testimony would then be believed. But if you were a false witness telling a lie, you would be swallowed up and swept away by the wild river.

The people in Gideon were surely still of mixed faithfulness. Undergoing baptism would show and strengthen their spiritual determination and would be a strong testimony, witnessing to God, that they were telling the truth as they said that they wanted to enter into a covenant and be true and faithful in keeping the commandments. But at the same time in that world, once you were baptized, it made sense, symbolically and legalistically, that you owed your allegiance to God, who had sustained you through this test. That allegiance would be owed to the church which Alma was establishing, regardless of the consequences. And in Alma’s world, being a member of the church was not a casual matter. Besides alligators and the wildness of the river, persecutions of believers was intense in places like Ammonihah. I don’t think we should downplay the word “fear,” when Alma tells these people to “come and fear not, and lay aside every sin, . . . which doth bind you down to destruction” (7:15).

Alma 7:21–24 — The Spirit Cannot Dwell in Unholy Temples This statement in Alma 7:21 reminds me of the great qualities that King Benjamin talked about in Mosiah 3:19, in saying that “the natural man is an enemy to God, has been since the Fall of Adam, and will be forever and ever until he yields to the enticing of the Holy Spirit and becometh a saint through the atonement.” The natural conditions of wickedness include “filthiness” which cannot be received into the kingdom of God. Being pure and clean would not have been a common daily occurrence for most of these people, who did not have bathtubs or showers in their homes.

Some of the things that Benjamin lists in Mosiah 3:19 are repeated here by Alma in this passage: humble, submissive, gentle, patient, long-suffering and being easy to be entreated (7:23). It is interesting to me that patience is included here. Patience is included in Alma 9:26 where Alma talked about the characteristics of the Savior. We don’t often think of how patient God is with us, as He puts up with us despite all that we do. What in your mind makes patience such a Godly virtue?

ALMA 5–7 571

Alma 7:27 — Alma Pronounces a Concluding Blessing on the People In the ancient Israelite sacrificial system, there were different kinds of sacrifices. Atoning sacrifices reconciled and brought man and God back together where there had been a separation between them because of sin or impurity. The words, sin, guilt, transgression, and peace, are present in Alma 7. Those words represent the full panoply of all of the types of sacrifices in the Law of Moses, under which there were sin offerings, guilt offerings, atoning sacrifices, and peace offerings. Alma, as the High Priest, who had probably just performed the special sacrifices on the Day of Atonement during the season connected with the Feast of Tabernacles, would have been especially sensitive of the great power and purposes of living the laws of sacrifice and obedience. As the High Priest, Alma had particular duties to keep the temple pure and holy, to cleanse it on the Day of Atonement, so that it could symbolize to the people the complete workings of the Law of Moses, welcoming Jesus as the one who fulfills all of these forms of sacrificial offerings and of atoning reconciliation for us.

In Verse 27, Alma concludes with a blessing efficaciously echoing the peace offering, and what a blessing it is: “May the peace of God rest upon you, and upon your houses and lands, and upon your flocks and herds, and all that you possess, your women and your children, according to your faith and good works, from this time forth and forever.” Perhaps you have been present in situations where you’ve had an apostolic blessing pronounced upon an audience—how encouraging and faith building that is. Here, in Alma 7:27, we have the prophet and high priest Alma pronouncing a blessing in Gideon upon these wonderful people, who are just as wonderful and blessed as you are.
