Alma 30–31 677

Attributes of the Opponent

Origin of the accuser From among the people Unstated From outside

(“satan”)

Zarahemla

“a man” Yes, Jacob 7:1 Yes, Alma 1:2 Yes, Alma 30:6

Name stated? 7:1, up front 1:15, at very end 30:12, after intro

Called anti-Christ? No No

Yes

Sources of power Speech, flattering with Alma 1:3-5, Physical Logic, practical, politics

words strength, popular and theology, the Devil

support

Number and Had just begun to Had a following who Was a lone, itinerant

organization of his declare among the believed on his word as sophist, finding success

followers people leading away the word of God in Zarahemla, but not

many hearts

in Jershon or Gideon

Impact of preaching Lead away hearts, no Many believed, gave Lead away hearts,

actions mentioned money many committed sin

and whoredoms

Declared that he Yes

Yes

Yes

opposed the ruling

establishment?

Arguments and Beliefs of the Opponent

Basic theology Theist, traditionalist Theist, universalist Atheist

Religious tenets Pro law of Moses All law was irrelevant Opposed law of Moses

Political stance Reactionary, royalist Populist Radical

View on priests They should keep law They should be paid They oppress the poor

Complexity and Only three closely Developed one Extensive practical,

amount of argument related points aimed at alternative doctrine of political, theological,

Jacob redemption and and religious

universal salvation arguments

Decried foolishness of No No

Yes

leaders and among the

people

Can anyone know the No Probably No

future?

Proceedings

Interrogated? Asked about his belief No (he pleads for About God’s existence

in Christ himself)

Accepted scriptures? Yes, says he does, 7:10, Unclear, selectively at Rejected as foolish,

bases his three best, “redeemed” used Deut 24:16 against

accusations on “end,” redefined word Alma

provisions in Deut. of God

Denial of Christ Evasive No

Clear

Counterclaims? No, accepted the No, but argued in his Yes, accused leaders

outcome own defense and advanced claims

678 John W. Welch Notes

Requested a sign? Yes

No

Yes

Was warned? Indirectly No

Yes

Was the sign-giver Yes, for fear of Not applicable No, better one soul be

hesitant? tempting God

lost

Reason for sign To confirm revelation Not applicable To confirm the

by the Holy Ghost

existence of God

What Divine sign was Smitten to the earth, None Struck dumb, but could

given? but could still speak

still write and walk

Role of devil Impersonal, deceived Not mentioned Personal, visited and

by his power

taught by devil

Verdict and Aftermath

Was there a judicial No

Yes No

verdict?

Confession Sincere, complete Involuntary. caused Incomplete

Penalty Divine justice Creative definition, Judicial decision,

capital punishment ostracism

Died? Yes, but naturally Yes, taken immediately Yes, but in another city,

despite being and publicly executed trampled in an

nourished for many

unstated way

days

Cause of death Non-human causes, Human, legal causes, Accidental, not related

from effects of the sign probably stoning, to the sign given

hanging

Announcement of Public confession by Ignominious death, Result heralded by

Confession Sherem, near death was caused to confess, officials

hill top

Reaction of people Fell to earth, love Priestcrafts continue End of this problem,

restored

many converted, go to

Antionum

underground

Precedential value of Legitimized Nephite Gave original Held that speech acts

the holding Christianization of the jurisdiction to Chief were still punishable

law of Moses Judge under the new under the law of

reign of judges Mosiah

Historical Law of Moses was Nehor’s followers Public criticism

consequences strictly observed in probably join with curtailed. Dissidents go

next generations King-men and go to underground, secret

war combinations

Place in the record At the end of Jacob’s At beginning of Alma’s Middle of book about

book, validating his life record, setting stage Alma and Helaman, a work and teaching for upcoming problems crucial turning point
