Alma 32–35 685

28

ALMA 32–35

John W. Welch Notes



Alma 32–33 Alma’s Words to the Zoramite Poor

Alma 32 is often read and thought of as a unit, in and of itself a single composition. In fact, the report of Alma’s words on that occasion embrace both chapters 32 and 33. No break was intended between these two chapters. And then Amulek continues speaking to the poor Zoramites, standing as a second witness to what Alma has said. So, clearly, these chapters should be read together. And, in fact, in the first edition of the Book of Mormon, all of six chapters, Alma 30–35, were treated together as one long chapter, Chapter XVI (pp. 304–323).

Obviously, it is helpful for readers today to have all of this material broken into smaller chapters, but one should not forget that all of these six chapters together embrace what happened in the seventeenth year of the reign of the judges (about 74 BC). That year was marked by the splitting off of the Zoramites, by the problems created by Korihor that were narrowly averted, followed by Korihor’s demise among the Zoramites, and then confronted by the great doctrinal teachings of Alma and his strong contingent of companions trying to reconvert the Zoramites and to prevent them from entering into a dreaded alliance with the Lamanites. In spite of the brilliant words of both Alma and Amulek, that effort failed, and the Zoramite leaders went on to become the commanders of the armies that will be at war against the Nephites for the remaining years of the book of Alma.

Alma’s words in Alma 32–33 teach the following five main points:

mistreatment, and being cast out by others (32:6–16),

686 John W. Welch

closet (33:2–11),

healing, not perishing, through the redemption of the Son of God that atones for

their sins (33:12–21), and

Amulek’s second witness recapitulates and enhances these same points in the opposite order:

7), and how faith in Christ’s infinite atonement affords repentance and salvation

(34:8–16),

26), as well as not turning away the needy (34:2–29),

(34:38), even if you are afflicted and cast out (34:39–41).

The intertextual dynamic of these two mutually reinforcing texts is marvelously and deeply impressive. Vast treatises could be written on the content and messages of these three chapters alone. Their axioms deal with the conditions of spirituality, the problems of evil and suffering, and responses to social injustice and poverty. Their instructions chart out the steps of nurturing faith, obtaining knowledge, worshipping, praying, and bringing forth the fruits of repentance. By planting their “word,” one understands the Atonement of the Son of God and the essence of the plan of salvation and redemption. Of all that could be said, only a relative few thoughts will be included in these notes, which I hope will be found helpful as sidebars to the words of Alma and Amulek themselves. Nothing replaces those words, just as the words of Alma and Amulek do not replace “the Word” which must ultimately be planted in our hearts as readers of these three chapters.

Alma 32:4 — Testimony Is a Process

Alma taught the poor Zoramites who “were poor in heart, because of their poverty as to the things of the world.” (Alma 32:4). The people had been kicked out of the synagogues with their Rameumptoms, and even had to leave the City of Antionum. They flocked to the hill Onidah, where Alma could talk to them safely and openly.

Alma 32–35 687

The teaching of Alma and Amulek was quite different from what normal Protestant and Catholic teachings and prevailing views were like in the world at the time of the Restoration. They did not offer a revival-type event characterized by instant salvation. Instead, they taught these poor Zoramites that gaining a testimony is a developmental process. Faith will grow in stages if the seed is planted, nourished, protected, and attended to. He assured them that even once a person has gained a sure knowledge of a principle, that is not the end of the process. They have to go on by helping others. Thus, here, and in many other ways, the Book of Mormon stood out as something rather different from what contemporary Christians were used to.

Alma 32:7–8 — Lowly in Heart

What might it mean to be “lowly in heart” (32:8)? These poor Zoramite people were certainly economically disadvantaged, and were already in a humble condition as measured by wordly wealth. However, Alma seems to make a distinction between being humble and being “lowly in heart.” These people had been forced to be humble, and yet Alma assured them, “I behold that ye are lowly in heart; and if so, blessed are ye” (32:8). The poor Zoramites were bereft spiritually at first, but they were not hard-hearted; and hard-heartedness may be the opposite of being lowly in heart. Alma encouraged them by saying, “Blessed are the lowly in heart,” that is, “You will be blessed if you are humble enough to go through this process of spiritual refinement and growth.”

Alma 32:12–16 — Compelled to Be Humble, Compelled to Know Being compelled to humility is one of Alma’s opening themes. Can anyone be humble without having been compelled to be humble? Are we not all compelled in one way or another? Alma commented, “Do ye not suppose that they are more blessed who truly humble themselves because of the word?” (Alma 32:14). He may have been referring to when we humble ourselves from an internal, self-motivated reason rather than because of some external matter. True humility comes through a personal choice, a willingness to respond to lacks and afflictions in a spiritually positive way.

The next phrase, being “compelled to know” (Alma 32:16), is closely related. Can we be compelled to know something? Again, the idea is, we are blessed if we are willing to accept the truth without having it absolutely proved or socially imposed upon us by prevailing ideologies. Alma may have been telling these people that they would be better off if they could have faith in the first place, because Alma himself knew that it was not a good thing to be compelled to know by an angel and trials, troubles, and afflictions.

Alma 32:12 — Learning Wisdom

Alma wanted the humble Zoramites to “learn wisdom.” But how does one obtain this wisdom? It is one thing to gain “knowledge”; it is another to gain “wisdom.” 688 John W. Welch

While a common definition says that wisdom is about what you do with what you know, Alma says that this is not just a matter of practical efficiencies. He said that it was necessary for these people to learn wisdom, and that doing so was necessary for their salvation. What might this mean? Well, if we are going to be judged according to what we have learned by how we act, think, talk, and what we do, we must strive to learn wisdom and to be counted wise in the eyes of our eternal judge, and not in the eyes of the world. That kind of wisdom may be gained only by the blessings of the Holy Ghost. Alma’s words to the receptive Zoramites told them that it was necessary to have the Spirit of the Holy Ghost and to learn to obtain wisdom through that means.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Why Did Nephi Work So Hard to Preserve the Wisdom

He Had Received? (1 Nephi 6:5–6),” KnoWhy 262 (January 16, 2017).

Alma 32:13 — Finding Mercy

“He that findeth mercy shall be saved” (Alma 32:13). How is one supposed to find mercy? We may feel lost. We may feel that God has abandoned us or has left us bereft in some way. Certainly, the poor Zoramites felt that way. Alma promised them and us that we can find mercy through faith and repentance. Repentance is a process, and through that process we will figure out what it would take to find mercy.

Are we surprised when we find mercy? C. S. Lewis’ book Surprised by Joy is a classic example of being surprised by an overwhelming feeling, in his case, of the joy that accompanies mercy. When we are feeling down, feeling low, suddenly joy may wash over us. It comes unexpectedly from somewhere, and when we stop and notice it, we actually find mercy. Mercy was there. It is not just that we receive mercy, or that God gives it to us, but we have to find it. It is there to be discovered and found. But it can also be overlooked. God will force no person to heaven. He also will not compel anyone to find and to enjoy joy.

Further Reading

C.S. Lewis, Surprised by Joy: The Shape of My Early Life (New York, NY: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1955).

Alma 32:19–20 — Forgiving Transgressors

Alma did not directly tell the poor Zoramites that they had to forgive the rich Zoramites who had expelled them, but in reality, they were going to have to have a spirit of forgiveness in their hearts if they wanted to be forgiven of their own failings. Alma alluded to this when he preached, “How much more cursed is he that knoweth the will of God and doeth it not?” (32:19). The hitch is that we are going to be punished or cursed if we know the will of God and do not do it.

Alma 32–35 689

Alma next said, “Now of this thing ye must judge.” The word must is interesting. Judging between the two choices is not optional. We cannot avoid this either/or judgment. “Behold,” he says, “I say unto you that it is on the one hand even as it is on the other,” meaning that we will unavoidably reap the attendant consequences of our actions (or inactions), whether we opt for the one hand or the other hand. Choosing not to act is itself a choice.

The balanced sense of reciprocity of justice was a common biblical idea, and examples of this include the rule that if we want mercy, we have to give mercy; if we want forgiveness, we have to be forgiving; if we want to be given blessings, we have to bless and give to the poor; and if we are the poor, we must give to each other.

Alma 32:21 — Alma’s Discourse on Faith

In this verse, Alma declares his famous statement, “If ye have faith ye hope for things which are not seen, which are true” (Alma 32:21). This is a classic consequentialist definition of faith. Alma’s view of faith is active (not substantive). If you have faith, you actively hope. Faith propels us to do the things that move us in the direction of that hoped-for and true, but yet unseen, goal. This is not a definition of what faith is, but what faith does. If you have faith, you necessarily hope.

Alma goes on to say: “[God] desires that, in the first place, ye should believe even on his word” (32:22). In a few verses we will learn what “the word” is (33:22). Of course, it has to do with believing in Christ and the plan of salvation. Thus, the first step or principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ and in His Church is faith, specifically in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Further Reading

Book of Mormon Central, “Acquiring Spiritual Knowledge: Act in Faith (1 Nephi 2:16),” KnoWhy 260 (January 11, 2017).

Alma 32:23 — God Imparts His Word to All Who Come to Him Elder Jeffrey R. Holland has used this particular verse several times to speak of the equal access that all people have—men, women, and children, of all statures, of all status in society or cultures, the rich and the poor, of every nation, tongue and people—to the truth. Alma happened to be talking to the poor people when he said this. They felt like disenfranchised citizens in their own city. After having built the place, they had been kicked out of the synagogue, and it was here that Alma’s comment emphasized that God speaks to all people, and not just those who happen to be standing on the Rameumptom. God universally reveals His Spirit to all people who seek Him.
