Alma 36–38 719

think is the greatest chiastic composition ever written. I was also blessed by finding the wonderful woman to whom I have been married now for fifty-one fabulous years. Life’s blessings don’t get much better than that.

Second, I want to thank and celebrate the many people who have independently refined and reformatted the layout and typesetting of the distinct chiastic structure in Alma 36. In several of my various publications involving Alma 36, I have modified my presentation from time to time, depending on the purposes and typesetting options available in different book or journal settings. In my 1989 report on Chiasmus in Alma 36, I replicate seven different layouts that had been published, to that date, by myself

and others. Here is a standard chart (Figure 2), following number 132, that is often used to highlight the basic inversion and central turning point in Alma 36:

Since then, in the last twenty years, there have been several other proposals advanced, as careful examiners continue to analyze and appreciate the skill with which Alma tells his conversion story here in Alma 36. The best and most detailed recent studies have been published by Noel Reynolds and Stephen Ehat.

Further Reading and References

John W. Welch, “Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon,” BYU Studies 10 no. 1

(Autumn, 1969): 83; reprinted in John W. Welch, “Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon,” in Chiasmus in Antiquity (Hildesheim: Gerstenberg, 1981), 206; reprinted also in Lawrence J. Trudeau, ed., Nineteenth-Century Literature Criticism, vol. 321 (Farmington Hills, MI: Gale, 2016), 211.

John W. Welch, A Study Relating Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon to Chiasmus in the Old Testament, Ugaritic Epics, Homer, and Selected Greek and Latin Authors (M.A. Thesis, Brigham Young University, 1970), 129.

John W. Welch, “Chiasmus in the Book of Mormon: Or the Book of Mormon

Does It Again,” New Era, February 1972, 9.

John W. Welch, “Chiasmus in Alma 36” (FARMS Report, 1989), 43 pp. plus Appendix 1, “Table of Words Appearing Only a Single Time in Alma 36, First Half and Second Half,” and Appendix 2, “Table of Words Appearing More than Once in Alma 36, First Half and Second Half.”

John W. Welch, “A Masterpiece: Alma 36,” reworked in John L. Sorenson and Melvin Thorne, eds., Rediscovering the Book of Mormon (Provo, UT; FARMS, 1991), 114– 131.

720 John W. Welch Notes

Stephen Kent Ehat, “Brief Introduction to Chiasmus in Alma 36,” video (2016), 11 minutes.

Stephen Kent Ehat, “Words, Phrases, and Ideas in Macro-Chiasms,” in Chiasmus: The State of the Art, ed. John W. Welch and Donald W. Parry (Provo, UT: BYU Studies and Book of Mormon Central, 2020), 335–339.

Noel B. Reynolds, “Rethinking Alma 36,” in Give Ear to My Words: Test and Context of Alma 36–42, ed. Kerry M. Hull et al. (Provo, UT: Religious Studies Center and Deseret Book, 2019), 451–472.

Alma 36 — Chiasmus in the Full Text of Alma 36

In Alma 36 and 38, Alma tells his conversion story twice. Once to Helaman, which is an outstanding example of Hebrew poetic form. For present purposes, as I go through Alma 36, the lines have been numbered in order to coordinate with the similar elements included in Alma’s second telling, to Shiblon in Alma 38, discussed much further below.

Because the web allows for unlimited space, here you have the complete text of Alma 36, so you can see the development of this structure in its full context. As seen here, it is obvious that not everything is identically reversed, and some sections are longer or shorter than are their matches. There are reasons for these differences, which you can ponder quite productively. For example, this is because certain things—such as the pain and wickedness in the first half, and the joy, successful preaching, and mighty deliverance in the second half—call for great attention in those places respectively. Also, as the articles by Ehat and Reynolds have shown, these longer subsections often have their own internal well-ordered structures. And overall, accommodating these apparent infelicities, the first half of Alma 36 and the second half of Alma 36 are very closely balanced in total words, in individual word pairs, and in several other minute respects, as is tabulated in Appendices 1 and 2 in my 1989 Report.

Alma said to Helaman and wrote in his record:

1) My son, give ear to my words;

2) for I swear unto you, that inasmuch as ye shall keep the commandments of God ye shall

prosper in the land.

3) I would that ye should do as I have done,

4) in remembering the captivity of our fathers; for they were in bondage, and none could

deliver them except it was the God of Abraham, and the

5) God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and he surely did deliver them in their afflictions.

6) And now, O my son Helaman, behold, thou art in thy youth, and therefore, I beseech of

thee that thou wilt hear my words and learn of me;

7) for I do know that whosoever shall put their trust in God

Alma 36–38 721

8) shall be supported in their trials, and their troubles, and their afflictions, and shall

be lifted up at the last day.

9) And I would not that ye think that I know of myself—not of the temporal but of

the spiritual, not of the carnal mind but of God.

10) Now, behold, I say unto you, if I had not been born of God I should not have

known these things;

11) but God has, by the mouth of his holy angel, made these things known

unto me, not of any worthiness of myself;

12) For I went about with the sons of Mosiah, seeking to destroy the church

of God; but behold, God sent his holy angel to stop us by the way.

13) And behold, he spake unto us, as it were the voice of thunder, and the

whole earth did tremble beneath our feet; and we all fell to the earth, for the fear of the Lord came upon us. But behold, the voice said unto me: Arise. And I arose and stood up, and beheld the angel. And he said unto me: If thou wilt of thyself be destroyed, seek no more to destroy the church of God. And it came to pass that I fell to the earth; and it was for the space of three days and three nights that I could not open my mouth, neither had I the use of my limbs. And the angel spake more things unto me, which were heard by my brethren, but I did not hear them; for when I heard the words—If thou wilt be destroyed of thyself, seek no more to destroy the church of God—I was struck with such great fear and amazement lest perhaps I should be destroyed, that I fell to the earth and I did hear no more.

14) But I was racked with eternal torment, for my soul was harrowed up

to the greatest degree and racked with all my sins. Yea, I did remember all my sins and iniquities, for which I was tormented with the pains of hell; yea, I saw that I had rebelled against my God, and that I had not kept his holy commandments. Yea, and I had murdered many of his children, or rather led them away unto destruction; yea, and in fine so great had been my iniquities, that the very thought of coming into the presence of my God did rack my soul with inexpressible horror. Oh, thought I, that I could be banished and become extinct both soul and body, that I might not be brought to stand in the presence of my God, to be judged of my deeds. And now for three days and for three nights was I racked, even with the pains of a damned soul.

15) And it came to pass that as I was thus racked with torment, while I

was harrowed up by the memory of my many sins,

16) behold I remembered also to have heard my father prophesy

unto the people

17) concerning the coming of one Jesus Christ, a Son of God,

18) to atone for the sins of the world.
