RETURN TO SCARBORO—JOURNEY SOUTH—VISIT TO A. P. ROCKWOOD IN PRISON—INCIDENT OF PRISON LIFE—JOURNEY TO CONNECTICUT—BAPTIZE MY FATHER'S HOUSEHOLD.

On the 28th of April we left the island in an open sail-boat and made our way to Owl's Head, and then walked twenty miles. The following day we walked forty miles and suffered some with weary limbs and blistered feet, but we felt that it was for the gospel's sake and did not choose to complain. The next day a walk of thirty miles brought us to Scarboro, where we spent the night at Father Carter's.

On the 8th of May I parted with Mrs. Woodruff and Father Carter and family, and in company with Milton Holmes walked thirty-three miles towards Portsmouth, which city we reached the following day and spent several hours there, visiting the navy yard. We then walked to Georgetown, formerly New Rowley, and spent the night with Father Nathaniel Holmes.

On the 11th of May I visited Charleston and Bunker Hill monument, and also spent several hours in the city of Boston, which then contained a population of one hundred thousand. I ascended to the cupola of the court-house, from which I had a fine view of the city. I visited several of the Saints in the city, and walked over the long bridge to Cambridge and Cambridgeport.

I visited the jail there in order to have an interview with Brother A. P. Rockwood, who had been cast into prison on the plea of debt, in order to trouble and distress him, because he was a "Mormon." This was the first time we had ever met. The jailor permitted me to enter the room where he was. It was the first time in my life I had ever entered a prison. The jailor turned the key upon us and locked us both in.

I found Brother Rockwood strong in the faith of the gospel. He had the Bible, Book of Mormon, Voice of Warning, and Evening and Morning Star as his companions, which he read daily.

We conversed together for three hours in this solitary abode. He informed me of many things which had transpired while he was confined there as a prisoner. Among other things, he mentioned that the jail had taken fire a few days previous to my visit. He said it looked a little like a dark hour. The fire was roaring over his head, while uproar and confusion were upon every hand. Fire engines were rapidly playing around the building, with water pouring into every room. The people were hallooing in the streets. Prisoners were begging for mercy's sake to be let out, or they would be consumed in the fire. One was struggling in the agonies of death, while others were cursing and swearing. Brother Rockwood said he felt composed in the midst of it until the fire was extinguished.

At eight o'clock the jailor unlocked the prison door to let me out, and I gave the parting hand to the prisoner of hope.

We had spent a pleasant time together, and he rejoiced at my visit; and who would not, to meet with a friend in a lonely prison? I left him in good spirits, and wended my way back to Boston.

I spent several days in Boston, holding meetings with the Saints there, and then walked to Providence, Rhode Island, preaching by the way.

I there took steamer and arrived in New York on the 18th of May, where I met with Elder Orson Pratt and his family, and Elijah Fordham and near one hundred Saints who had been baptized in the city of New York.

I spent three days in New York visiting the Saints and holding meetings. Several new converts were baptized while I was there.

Leaving New York, I traveled through New Jersey, and returned to Farmington, Connecticut, the residence of my father. I arrived at his house on the 12th of June.

It was with peculiar sensations that I walked over my native land, where I spent my youth, and cast my eyes over the Farmington meadows and the hills and dales where I had roamed in my boyhood with my father, stepmother, brothers and half-sister.

On my arrival at my father's home I had the happy privilege of once more taking my parents and sisters by the hand, also my uncle, Ozem Woodruff, who was among the number I had baptized the year before.

After spending an hour in conversation, we sat down around our father's table and supped together and were refreshed. Then we bowed upon our knees together in the family circle and offered up the gratitude of our hearts to God for preserving our lives and reuniting us.

I spent the next eighteen days in Farmington and Avon, visiting my father's household, my uncles, aunts, cousins, neighbors and friends, preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ unto them and striving to bring them into the kingdom of God.

On the 1st of July, 1838, one of the most interesting events transpired of my whole life in the ministry.

When Father Joseph Smith gave me my patriarchal blessing, among the many wonderful things of my life, he promised me that I should bring my father's household into the kingdom of God, and I felt that if I ever obtained the blessing, the time had come for me to perform it.

By the help of God, I preached the gospel faithfully to my father's household and to all that were with him, as well as to my other relatives, and I had appointed a meeting on Sunday, the 1st of July, at my father's home.

My father was believing my testimony, as were all in his household, but upon this occasion the devil was determined to hinder the fulfillment of the promise of the patriarch unto me.

It seemed as though Lucifer, the son of the morning, had gathered together the hosts of hell and exerted his powers upon us all. Distress overwhelmed the whole household, and all were tempted to reject the work. And it seemed as though the same power would devour me. I had to take to my bed for an hour before the time of meeting. I there prayed unto the Lord with my whole soul for deliverance, for I knew the power of the devil was exercised to hinder me from accomplishing what God had promised me.

The Lord heard my prayer and answered my petition, and when the hour of meeting had come I arose from my bed, and could sing and shout for joy to think I had been delivered from the power of the evil one.

Filled with the power of God, I stood up in the midst of the congregation and preached the gospel of Jesus Christ unto the people in great plainness.

At the close of the meeting we assembled on the banks of the Farmington river, "because there was much water there," and I led six of my friends into the river and baptized them for the remission of their sins.

All of my father's household were included in this number, according to the promise of the Patriarch. They were all relatives except Dwight Webster, who was a Methodist class-leader and was boarding with my father's family.

I organized the small number of nine persons, eight of whom were my relatives, into a branch of the Church, and ordained Dwight Webster to the office of a Priest and administered the sacrament unto them.

It was truly a day of joy to my soul. My father, stepmother and sister were among the number baptized. I afterwards added a number of relatives. I felt that this day's work alone amply repaid me for all my labor in the ministry.

Who can comprehend the joy, the glory, the happiness and consolation that an Elder of Israel feels in being an instrument in the hands of God of bringing his father, mother, sister, brother, or any of the posterity of Adam through the door that enters into life and salvation? No man can, unless he has experienced these things, and possesses the testimony of Jesus Christ and the inspiration of Almighty God.
