
--- Aaron Johnson ---
[37-hyrum-smith-s-decision.txt] To the Public: We, whose names are undersigned, having seen in the Warsaw Signal, containing the proceedings of a meeting held at Carthage on the 13th instant, many statements calculated to arouse the indignation and wrath of the people against the citizens of Nauvoo, do certify that Hyrum Smith did not make any threats, nor offer any reward against the Signal or its editor in the City Council. Signed—John Taylor, Aaron Johnson, William Boles, George P. Styles, W. W. Phelps, Alanson Ripley, Orson Spencer, John P. Greene, George W. Harris, Phinehas Richards, Thomas Smith, Edward Hunter, Moses F. Clark, Levi Richards, Addison Everett, and Philip B. Lewis. Dated, Nauvoo, June 17th, 1844. [^2]
[38-hyrum-smith-at-carthage.txt] About midnight, Hyrum, Joseph, and Dr. Richards called for Orrin P. Rockwell at his lodgings, and all went up the river bank until they found Aaron Johnson's boat which they got into and started about 2 a.m. to cross the Mississippi River. Rockwell rowed the skiff which was very leaky, so that it kept Hyrum and Joseph and the doctor busy bailing out the water with their boots and shoes to prevent it from sinking.
[08-chapter-iii.txt] These kind providences, with strict economy, enabled me to make a start for Utah with the company of Aaron Johnson, in the spring of 1850, as I had desired.
[168-nuttall-leonard-john.txt] Nuttall, Leonard John, president of the Kanab Stake of Zion from 1877 to 1884, is the son of William Nuttall and Mary Langhorn, and was born in Liverpool, Lancashire, England, July 6, 1834. His early education was had at St. Brides School, Liverpool. At the age of thirteen and a half years he was bound an apprentice as a ship and boat builder. He and his parents and brother Joseph were baptized in Liverpool Oct. 8, 1850, by Apostle John Taylor, and L. John was confirmed by Elder John Lindsay Oct. 11, 1850, his elder brother William having been baptized one month earlier. The family, composed of parents and children (William, L. John and Joseph) emigrated to Utah in 1852. They sailed from Liverpool March 6, 1852, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Rockaway," which arrived at New Orleans the
[179-bent-samuel.txt] Bent, Samuel, presiding Elder at Garden Grove, Iowa, in 1846, was the son of Joel and Mary Bent, and was born July 19, 1778, at Barre, Worcester county, Mass. He joined the Congregationalists when quite young, was a deacon in that church, and a professor of religion for twenty-seven years previous to receiving the Latter-day work. He was a colonel in the Massachusetts militia; resided a few years in St. Lawrence county, New York, and was a distinguished member of the Presbyterian church in Hopkinton. His first knowledge of the latter-day work was obtained through a Book of Mormon, which was brought to Michigan by Elmira Scobie while visiting her mother. During a fit of sickness he saw a vision, in which he was shown that the fullness of the gospel would be revealed in connection with that 
[316-miller-william.txt] Miller, William, president of the Utah Stake of Zion from July, 1860, to 1868, was the son of Seth Miller and Martha Tilden and was born Feb. 8, 1814, at Avon, Livingston county, N. Y. His parents emigrated to the State of New York soon after their marriage, and were among the early settlers in northwestern New York. Pres. Miller had nine brothers and sisters who lived to raise families. The Millers were among the most prominent members of society, and were quite wealthy for those times. William's father belonged to no religious denomination, but was strictly moral and honest in his dealings with his fellowmen. His mother was a Presbyterian; her husband never interfering in her religious practices. When William Miller was in his seventeenth year, quite a religious wave passed over their pa
[40-bromley-william-michael.txt] Bromley, William Michael, president of the High Priests' quorum of Alpine Stake, Utah county, resides at American Fork. He is a son of John Bromley and Mary Oxenbold. Wm. M. was born Oct. 13, 1839, near Worcester, Eng., and baptized by Elder John Lyon in 1849. The family left for Utah in January, 1851, arriving at New Orleans after a long voyage and proceeding to St. Louis, where his parents and all but three of the family died. After working for some time he proceeded to Atchison, Kansas, where he engaged with Hooper & Williams to drive a merchant team to Salt Lake City, the company becoming stalled at Fort Bridger by reason of snow, where the goods were unloaded and the train moved on until Echo canyon was reached, where another snow blockade was encountered. He became one of a party to 
[815-watts-baldwin-harvey.txt] Watts, Baldwin Harvey, a veteran Elder of the Church and a resident of Kanosh (Millard Stake), Millard county, Utah, was born April 10, 1835, near Raymond, Hinds county, Mississippi, the son of Robert Harris Watts and Elizabeth Heath. He was baptized in the summer of 1843 by Capt. James Brown; arrived in Utah Sept. 6, 1850, after crossing the plains in Aaron Johnson's hundred. After residing in Ogden sixteen years he moved to Beaver in 1865 and in November, 1867, settled in Kanosh. In 1855 he was ordained a Seventy by Lorin Farr and called by the Church authorities on a colonization mission to the Indians in the north and thus became one of the founders of Fort Limhi. He remained in that mission until February, 1858, when Fort Limhi was vacated owing to Indian troubles. In 1874-1875 Brothe

--- Algernon Sidney Gilbert ---
[newell-k-whitney.txt] Leaving Lake Michigan he located at Painesville, Ohio, where he fell in with a merchant named Algernon Sidney Gilbert, who, recognizing his business qualifications, and feeling a friendly interest in him, took him into his store as clerk and gave him some knowledge of bookkeeping. This was about the year 1817. Several years later we hear of the prosperous mercantile firm of Gilbert & Whitney, with headquarters at Kirtland, a few miles from Painesville and not far inland from Lake Erie. Newel had steadily risen from the time he entered the merchant's employ until now he was junior partner of the firm.
[17-june-july-1834.txt] Sixty-eight of the Camp suffered from the scourge, and fourteen died. Solemnly the Prophet entered the names of the dead: John S. Carter, Eber Wilcox, Seth Hichcock, Erastus Rudd, Algernon Sidney Gilbert, Alfred Fisk, Edward Ives, Noah Johnson, Jesse B. Lawson, Robert McCord, Elial Strong, Jesse J. Smith, Warren Ingalls, and Betsy Parrish. (Several women and children had accompanied the camp.) Then he listed the following as among the most active in caring for the sick and burying the dead: John D. Parker, John Tanner, Nathan Tanner, Joseph B. Noble, Luke S. Johnson, Eleazer Miller, Joseph Young, Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young.
[17-an-experiment.txt] The journey of Zion's Camp continued toward Liberty, Clay County. When they were within five or six miles of Liberty they were met by General Atchison and other gentlemen who warned them not to go to Liberty because of the intense hostility and hatred of the people against them. Taking this advice, the camp wheeled to the left, crossing the prairie and woodland, came to Brother Algernon Sidney Gilbert's residence and camped on the bank of Rush Creek.
[25-chapter-xxi.txt] Among those who died was Algernon Sidney Gilbert, who had charge of the Lord's store-house. He was an able, useful man, and had shown much bravery in the Jackson county troubles, but now he brought his own death upon him. The Prophet called him to go with others to Kirtland and after receiving his endowments to go on a mission. Brother Gilbert had suffered much from those outside the Church and was filled with a wrong spirit toward them. He answered that he would rather die than preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. God took him at his word, the cholera came upon him and he died.
[87-whitney-newell-kimball.txt] Whitney, Newell Kimball, the second presiding Bishop of the Church, was born Feb. 5, 1795, at Marlborough, Windham county, Vermont. Records of recent appearance give April, 1635, as the time of his earliest American ancestor's departure from England for the shores of the western world. The eldest son and second child among nine, whose parents were Samuel and Susanna Whitney, he was the one destined to distinguish his family in its relationship with the Latter-day cause of Christ and to become, like Joseph of old, a savior to his father's house. The date, or even the year, of his removal from his native town, is uncertain. Like many another poor boy, with his fortune in the little pack he carried on his shoulder, he bade farewell at an early day to father, mother, brothers, sisters and the 
[02-the-problems-and-promise-of-historical-memories.txt] In lesser numbers, these people had professional skills. John Bernhisel, Willard Richards, and Frederick G. Williams were physicians, as were Warren Cowdery and Luke S. Johnsonbut Cowdery and Johnson also farmed. William W. Phelps was a newspaper editor, and Orson Hyde clerked, taught school, ran a business, and practiced law. William E. McLellin was a schoolteacher, and Lorin Farr and Eliza R. Snow tutored the Prophet's children in his home. George W. Robinson was a merchant, and Algernon Sidney Gilbert teamed with Newel K. Whitney to operate a store in Kirtland. These professional people were fewer in number than the farmers and artisans, but they left a profound impress, reaching out and touching the many.
[02-the-problems-and-promise-of-historical-memories.txt] Still, they were, in all their greatness, very human. Sometimes they quarreled, and sometimes they were annoyed one with another. In crossing the plains, Eliza R. Snow and Stephen Markham voiced strong differences (Gifford, 1975); during Zion's Camp, an erupting and quarrelsome spirit prompted the Prophet to warn that if the brethren did not repent, they would be visited with a scourgeand cholera followed, killing as many as thirteen, and some accounts say eighteen. Algernon Sidney Gilbert said he would rather die than preach the gospel to the gentiles, and the Lord soon took him at his word (HC, 1:118). But for all their failings, they were a record-keeping people. They kept journals and diaries, wrote letters, and filled the newspapers they published with anecdotes and experiences that h

--- Almon Babbitt ---
[321-lovell-john.txt] Brother Taylor explained the gospel to them telling them of Joseph Smith, the plates, the priesthood, the persecution of the Saints, etc. Soon after this Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, John Taylor, and Almon Babbitt came and stayed over Sunday, and held two or three meetings, and did missionary work in that vicinity.
[465-rollins-james-henry.txt] I will now pass on from May, 1832, to June 1st, 1834, at which time came the first Herald of the Camp of Israel. The two men, namely, Amasa Lyman and Almon Babbitt came to the Hill farm which was occupied by Sidney Gilbert. They told of the near approach of the [Zion's] Camp, and of their escape from the mob at Fishing River. In a day or two after this the Camp arrived. Joseph the Prophet and his brother William, with Dr. F. G. Williams and several others stayed at our place, but the majority of the Camp went down Bush Creek, some three-fourths of a mile from us to the farm of John Burk, where many were stricken with cholera and died. There were five [who] died at our house, namely, William Weeden, a Brother Judd, Jessie Smith, a cousin of Joseph's and Sidney Gilbert, and Phebe Murdock. Du

--- Alpheus Cutler ---
[04-chapter-three.txt] On April 18th, just eight days before the revelation was to be fulfilled, Brigham, riding with Orson Pratt and Wilford Woodruff, in the latter's carriage, set out for Far West, nearly 200 miles distant. In another carriage were John Taylor, George A. Smith and Alpheus Cutler. The fourth day out from Quincy,
[edmund-fisher.txt] After the martyrdom of the Prophet, Edmund Fisher joined the general exodus of the Church heading westward. However he stopped in Iowa. He associated himself with the loathsome apostate Alpheus Cutler who exercised "an influence against the migration to the Valley and for advocating the building of a temple, etc. At a general conference held in Salt Lake City, in 1850, Father Alpheus Cutler, as he was generally called, was excommunicated from the Church. After that he organized a church of his own.
[edmund-fisher.txt] According to the statement of Bishop Abraham A. Kimball, Alpheus Cutler changed his residence from Pottawattomie county to Manti, Fremont county, Iowa, where he organized a church and constituted himself as its leader, calling it "The true Church of Latter-day Saints," and presumed to officiate in the ordinances of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, such as baptisms, endowments, etc. He also energetically denounced plural marriage and the law of tithing, and taught his followers that Joseph Smith was a true Prophet of God, but that Brigham Young was not his successor, but an impostor and that he (Alpheus Cutler) was the true leader and held the authority to carry on the Latter-day work.
[edmund-fisher.txt] This pretended "true church" was organized with Alpheus Cutler as president, Edmund Fisher as first, and Chauncey Whiting as second counselor, and Grandfather Fisher as patriarch."
[edmund-fisher.txt] We do not find records of his excommunication but since Alpheus Cutler was cut off from the Church, it seems very likely that Edmund Fisher was also. We find no records of his later life and death. And while his redress petition mentions his family, we find no other record of them.
[36-april-1839.txt] Six men rode west from Quincy, Illinois in two carriages on April 18, 1839. Brigham Young and Orson Pratt were in the carriage with Wilford Woodruff, while John Taylor and George A. Smith rode with Alpheus Cutler. They were headed for Far West, to fulfill the prophecy of Joseph Smith made the previous summer. When Brigham and Heber had visited the Prophet in Liberty Jail, he' had spoken to them about it in word and tone which seemed to take as a matter of course that they would get their families to Illinois out of reach of the mobs; Heber would stay in Far West and supervise the moving of the Saints; Brigham would take the families out and return at the appointed time to start from the temple site for the apostles' mission to England, as had been stated in the revelation.
[36-april-1839.txt] At Clark's about midnight a conference was held where official action was taken against thirty-one apostates. They were "cut off" from the Church. Then the whole body moved to the temple site, where, after a song, the men assisted Alpheus Cutler, chief builder of the temple, to roll a large stone weighing nearly a ton into position at the southeast corner, thus recommencing the building of the temple. Then a solemn moment came when the members of the Twelve present-Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John E. Page, and John Taylor-ordained Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith apostles and made them members of the Quorum. They now had a majority. They paused to ordain Darwin Chase and Norman Shearer to the Seventy's quorum. These men had just been liberated from Richmond prison and
[37-hyrum-smith-s-decision.txt] About 7:00 p.m. the Prophet requested Reynolds Cahoon and Alpheus Cutler to stand guard at the Mansion and not admit any strangers to the house. At sundown he asked O. P. Rockwell to go with him on a short journey and Rockwell replied that he would.

--- Amasa Lyman ---
[26-chapter-xxi.txt] In their marauding expeditions they took a number of citizens prisoners. Among these was Mr. Amasa Lyman, a minister of the gospel, and an excellent citizen of Caldwell County. They kept him prisoner for a number of days, while his family was in suspense and knew not his fate. They abused him in various ways, and held frequent consultations to kill him; but at length he was set at liberty.
[27-chapter-xxii.txt] In camp we were placed under a strong guard, and were without shelter during the night, lying on the ground in the open air, in the midst of a great rain. The guards during the whole night kept up a constant tirade of mockery, and the most obscene blackguardism and abuse. They blasphemed God; mocked Jesus Christ; swore the most dreadful oaths; taunted Brother Joseph and others; demanded miracles; wanted signs, such as: "Come, Mr. Smith, show us an angel." "Give us one of your revelations." "Show us a miracle." "Come, there is one of your brethren here in camp whom we took prisoner yesterday in his own house, and knocked his brains out with his own rifle, which we found hanging over his fireplace; he lays speechless and dying; speak the word and heal him, and then we will all believe." "Or,
[31-chapter-xxvi.txt] By the decision of this mock Court some twenty or thirty of the accused were dismissed, among whom was Amasa Lyman Gibbs, Darwin Chase, Norman Shearer and myself and themselves and bail both forced to leave the State, thus forfeiting the bail bonds, while Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Lyman Wight, Caleb Baldwin and Alexander McRay (all heads of families) were committed to the jail of Clay County on the charge of treason; and Morris Phelps, Luman Gibbs, Darwin Chase, Norman Shearer and myself were committed to the jail of Richmond, Ray County, for the alleged crime of murder, said to be committed in the act of dispersing the bandit, Bogart, and his gang.
[52-chapter-xlvii.txt] April 14th.—We removed to Summit Creek—distance seven miles. Here we tarried one week, in course of which the rear camp, headed by Amasa Lyman, arrived in good condition.
[55-chapter-l.txt] We landed in St. Pedro after three days, and on the 14th day of August we arrived all safe in San Barnardino, where we were kindly received by Brother Amasa Lyman and the Saints in general, whom we found well and prosperous. We camped near Sister Rich's, and were entertained by them very hospitably.
[55-chapter-l.txt] Sunday, 22d.—Had a joyful meeting with Brother Amasa Lyman, C. C. Rich and the Church. After meeting we three of the Twelve met and appointed certain young men to study the Spanish language, with a view to a mission hereafter, and Brother Stout to teach a class in Spanish, in this place, to consist of such young men.
[18-chapter-xiv.txt] When this terrible news reached me, I was near Cincinnati, to which place I immediately repaired, and found the Apostle, Amasa Lyman, who had just arrived from Nauvoo with intelligence of the martyrdom, and with counsel and instructions to the Saints and Elders.
[23-chapter-23.txt] When this terrible news reached me, I was near Cincinnati, to which place I immediately repaired, and found the Apostle, Amasa Lyman, who had just arrived from Nauvoo with intelligence of the martyrdom, and with counsel and instructions to the Saints and Elders.

--- Amos Davies ---

--- Ann Lee ---
[07-chapter-six.txt] "I do not care who leads the Church, even though it were Ann Lee; but one thing I must know, and that is what God says about it. I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject.
[61-august-6-august-7-1844.txt] I do not care who leads the church, even though it were Ann Lee; but one thing I must know, and that is what God says about it. I have the keys and the means of obtaining the mind of God on the subject.
[14-joseph-smith-and-the-restitution-of-all-things.txt] Shortly after Joseph Smith submitted portions of the printer's copy of the manuscript of the Book of Mormon to Egbert B. Grandin for publication, newspapers in Ohio and New York printed a series of articles with an explanation of Mormonism that excluded divine intervention. In addition to stigmatizing Joseph Smith with disparaging names, critics identified him with others who had brought forth unusual religious claims. Included in this list were Mohammed, Emmanuel Swedenborg, Mother Ann Lee, Jemima Wilkinson, and various popes and Quaker leaders. As expressed in an article written by Alexander Campbell and published in the Painesville Telegraph on 8 March 1831, "Every age of the world has produced impostors and delusions." Noting that history is replete with appearances of false prophets, 
[730-richard-morgan-jun.txt] Richard, Morgan, Jun., Bishop of Parowan (Parowan Stake), Iron county, Utah, was born Sept. 22, 1845, in Merthyr Tydfil, Wales, the son of Morgan Richards and Harriet Evans. His parents having embraced the gospel as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith, Morgan was baptized when about eight years of age in his native land. With his parents and younger brother, Thomas, he came to Utah in 1854, crossing the Atlantic in the ship "Golconda" and the plains in Dr. Darwin Richardson's company, arriving in Salt Lake City Sept. 30th of that year. After the close of the general conference of the Church that fall the family proceeded to Parowan, Iron county, Utah, in company with Bishop Tarlton Lewis of that place, where they arrived on the 26th of October following. Parowan has been their place 

--- Asa Dodds ---

--- Brigham Young ---
[06-anthon-l-skanchy.txt] In the spring of 1867, at a conference held in Christiania, C. C. A. Christensen, who had arrived from Utah, was assigned to preside in Norway. I bade farewell to Aalesund and began my journey up the valley of the Roms, over Dovre mountain again, and then down Guldbrands valley until I reached the little town of Lillehammer, where we had a sister in the gospel, Ellen Buckwald, who was employed in the household of a Mr. Revers, a friend of our people. To this house the elders were invited whenever they came to the city, and were treated there in the very best manner. I had many conversations concerning the gospel with this educated man. The family did not want to part with Ellen, for she taught the children of the household "Mormonism," and used to pray, even, for Brigham Young as a leader 
[06-anthon-l-skanchy.txt] This edition was based off scans available at Archive.org (https://archive.org/details/anthonlskanchybr00skan). The Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University supplied the scans; the original book was donated to the library by Sidney Sperry; and it contained a dedication from John A. Widtsoe, reproduced above. Any minor typographical errors in the original have been silently corrected.
[05-contents.txt] CHAPTER I.—Parentage:—Childhood:—Youth:—Education:—Early Impressions:—Journey Westward:—Making a New Farm in the Wilderness of Oswego. CHAPTER II.—Thoughts on Religion:—Join the Baptist Church:—Strange Perversion of a Scripture Promise. CHAPTER III.—Reverses:—Loss of our Farm:—Strange Resolve:—Travels West:—Forest Life:—Another New Farm. CHAPTER IV.—Revisit Canaan, N. T.:—Interesting Meeting:—Marriage:—Return to my Forest Home. CHAPTER V.—Our Home:—New Sect:—Progressive Religious Views:—Unexpected Meeting:—Dialogue:—Forsake My Home:—Journey to New York:—Public Ministry:—Strange Book:—First Interview with a Latter-Day Saint. CHAPTER VI.—Interesting Meetings:—Second Interview with Hyrum Smith:—Visit to the Church in Seneca County:—Baptism, Confirmation and Ordination:—Ministry Among my Kindr
[32-chapter-xxvii.txt] EDWARD PARTRIDGE, JOHN M. BURK, HEBER C. KIMBALL, BRIGHAM YOUNG, JOHN TAYLOR, ISAAC MORLEY, THEODORE TURLEY, GEORGE W. HARRIS, JOHN MURDOCK.
[41-chapter-xxxvi.txt] Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, George A. Smith, and R. Hedlock, also arrived in New York City late in the winter, after performing a long and important journey and mission through the States of Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, and New York.
[42-chapter-xxxvii.txt] In this conference, Elders Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball and myself were appointed a publishing committee for the Church. I was also appointed editor and publisher of a monthly periodical, to be called the Millennial Star.
[43-chapter-xxxviii.txt] There were present of the Twelve Apostles: Brigham Young, H. C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, Willard Richards, George A. Smith and myself. Of other officers: High Priests, 5; Elders, 19; Priests, 15; Teachers, 11; and Deacons, 3.
[43-chapter-xxxviii.txt] Many elders were also selected and appointed to labor in the ministry in various parts. There was a variety of business transacted, and much instruction given by Brigham Young and others, after which, conference was adjourned to the 6th of October, at the same place.

--- Burr Riggs ---
[burr-riggs.txt] # Burr Riggs
[burr-riggs.txt] The following biographical sketch is adapted from the The Revelations of the Prophet Joseph Smith by Lyndon W. Cook, page 155. Burr Riggs was born 17 April 1811 at New Haven, New Haven County, Connecticut. He was the son of Gideon Riggs and Susan Pitcher and the brother of Harpin Riggs, who also became a General Authority.
[burr-riggs.txt] On February 13, 1833 "a council of High Priests assembled to investigate the proceedings of Brother Burr Riggs, who was accused of failing to magnify his calling as High Priest, and had been guilty of neglect of duty, of abusing the Elders, and of treating their admonitions with contempt. After the council had considered the case, Brother Riggs agreed to make satisfaction, but did not show much humility."
[burr-riggs.txt] Two weeks later, on February 26, "a conference of High Priests was again called in Kirtland, concerning Brother Burr Riggs, who was accused of neglecting to make satisfaction to the Church as he had agreed, and disgracing the High Priesthood by neglect of duty, and saying he did not care how soon he was cut off from the Church. He was cut off by a unanimous vote of the council."
[burr-riggs.txt] Burr Riggs died 8 June 1860.
[harpin-riggs.txt] It is known that he was born April 12 1809 at Oxford, Connecticut, the son of Gideon Riggs and Susan Pitcher. Harpin was the second of five sons and eight chilldren in the family. We know that all or most of his father's family joined the Church as most died either in Nauvoo, on the trail, or in the west. Whether they joined all at once or at different times is not known. And we know that he was the brother of Burr Riggs, a General Authority in his own right and one of the few men to ever be excommunicated from the Church twice!
[joseph-young.txt] Elder Young served a mission to New York and Massachusetts with Burr Riggs in 1835. Then, returning to Kirtland, he participated in dedication of Kirtland Temple in 1836. Later in 1836, after having received his blessings in the Temple at Kirtland, agreeable to the Prophet's instructions, he accompanied his brother Brigham to the East, to visit among their relatives and friends; they preached the gospel to them and bore testimony of the latter-day work. This mission occupied several months, and subsequently many of their relatives and friends came into the Church.
[57-young-joseph.txt] Young, Joseph, one of the First Seven Presidents of Seventies from 1835 to 1881, was the son of John Young and Nabbie Howe, and an elder brother of Pres. Brigham Young. He was born April 7, 1797, in Hopkinton, Middlesex county, Mass. His childhood and early youth were spent at home, where his kind and affectionate nature was stimulated by the tender treatment and Christian precept, characterizing his parents and their family. He imbibed at an early period of life the spirit of religion, and became an enthusiastic church member. Joining the Methodists, he soon began to preach their doctrines, and was thus engaged, when, in the early spring of 1832, his brother, the late Pres. Brigham Young, brought the glad tidings of the restored gospel of Jesus Christ, as announced by the Prophet Joseph S
