Rose Guide to the Tabernacle

The Design of the Tabernacle

N

1 cubit = 11/2 feet or 46 centimeters

W E

100 cubits (150 ft. or 46 meters)

S

courtyard

(or Holy of Holies) with Most Holy Place Holy Place with Altar of Incense,

the ark of the covenant Table of the Bread of the Presence,

Lampstand

50 cubits

(75 ft. or

Gate

23 meters)

20 cubits

Bronze Altar

10 cubits 20 cubits

Veil or curtain

Bronze Laver

Not drawn to scale

Three Parts

The Tabernacle had three main sections. Each section contained special, sacred objects. Each section was

also the place of different sacred activities.

The Courtyard

Sacred objects: The Courtyard is the main access to the Tabernacle. The wide gate is the place where

ancient Israelites would bring their sacrifices and offerings. There, the priests would receive and bless

people. Within the courtyard, the priests would offer sacrifices at the bronze altar. There was also a

bronze laver, in which the priests could cleanse themselves to be ritually clean.

The Holy Place

The Holy Place housed three important objects for the service of the Tabernacle: The golden lamp, the

table of the bread of the presence, and the altar of incense. The priests performed daily tasks inside the

Holy Place: they had to keep the lamps burning, offer incense twice a day, and bring fresh bread weekly

to the table.

The Most Holy Place

The Most Holy Place was a unique place. The ark of the covenant was in this room. God's very presence

dwelt in the Most Holy Place. Only the High Priest could enter this room once a year, protected by a

cloud of smoke from burnt incense. The most important celebration in the Jewish calendar, the Day

of Atonement, had its climax in the Most Holy Place, where the high priest offered the blood of the

sacrificed animal to God to atone for the people's sin.

© 2008 Bristol Works, Inc. Rose Publishing, Inc.

May be reproduced for classroom use only, not for sale.

20 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Guide to the Tabernacle ISBN 9781596362765. The © 2015 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies,

full-color, reproducible book on the the Tabernacle includes 8 clear plastic overlays. Learn how the but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your sacrifices, utensils, and structure of the Tabernacle show us something about God. friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts &

Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com. Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts Rose Guide to the Tabernacle

Table of the Bread of Presence

Across from the golden lampstand inside the Holy Place stood the table

of the bread of the presence (Exodus 40:22). Priests placed a special The table was made from acacia

bread on the table. God gave specific instructions for the preparation of wood overlaid with gold. Its

the bread and the arrangement of the table (Leviticus 24:5–9). dimensions were 3 feet long by

The table of the bread of the presence was another visual reminder of 1.5 feet wide by 2.25 feet high

the covenant—the formal agreement that God made with Israel. In the (92 cm x 46 cm x 69 cm). The

table was fitted with rings in

covenant, God promised to be Israel’s God and King—in other words, he each corner to hold poles for

would protect and provide for Israel; God would fight for Israel and give transportation. The poles were

them a land flowing milk and honey. Israel, on the other hand, promised also made with acacia wood

overlaid with gold. The plates

to be faithful to God, obedient to his commandments.

Bread and the making of bread are very important metaphors in the and pitchers that held the bread

and drinks were also made of

Bible. In the cultural world of the Old Testament, people sealed their pure gold.

covenants with a meal (see Genesis 14:18, 18:7, 26:30; Exodus 24:1). The

meal formalized the agreement and bound them in a close relationship.

The priests replaced the bread every week during the Sabbath day. God

dedicated the bread for the priests, the sons of Aaron. The priests ate this

bread. In eating the bread, the priests were representing the twelve tribes

of the children of Israel in a covenant meal with God. Such an action was

a commemoration of the covenant that God made with the Israelites at

Sinai (see Exodus 24:11 for an example of a meal to confirm a covenant).

In addition, the

ancient Israelites

considered bread

as life giving and

sustaining. The The Drink Offering

understood that Old Testament (Exodus 29:40–41; Numbers 28:7–10, 14–15, 24, 31)

God is the ultimate On the table in the holy place

source of bread and were the bread of the presence

all of life. The bread along with plates and pitchers.

of the presence also Priests used the pitchers for

signified God’s the drink offerings, which were

covenant provision poured out on other offerings.

and presence as In Exodus 29, after Aaron and his

Provider for and sons had been consecrated for

serving in the Tabernacle, God

among the twelve instructed them to offer a daily

tribes of Israel. sacrifice along with a

drink offering.

© 2008 Bristol Works, Inc. Rose Publishing, Inc.

May be reproduced for classroom use only, not for sale.

58 This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Guide to the Tabernacle ISBN 9781596362765. The © 2015 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies,

full-color, reproducible book on the the Tabernacle includes 8 clear plastic overlays. Learn how the but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your sacrifices, utensils, and structure of the Tabernacle show us something about God. friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts &

Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com. Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Rose Guide to the Tabernacle

Communion

Jeremiah 31:31–34 The ultimate fulfillment of all covenant meals is the Last Supper

“The time is coming,” declares the Jesus celebrated with his disciples. The Lord’s Supper is a meal

Lord, “when I will make a new that seals God’s new covenant with his people (Luke 22:19–20).

covenant with the house of Israel The only reference to the new covenant in the Old Testament is

and with the house of Judah. It will in Jeremiah 31:31–34. As God was about to punish Israel for their

not be like the covenant I made with disloyalty, he also promised to intervene in a new and powerful

their forefathers when I took them by way. God promised a new covenant—a covenant that contrasted

the hand to lead them out of Egypt, with the covenant at Sinai in at least four things: because they broke my covenant,

declares the Lord. though I was a husband to them,” 1. The Lord will write his law in the minds and hearts of “This is the covenant I will make those in the new covenant.

with the house of Israel after that 2. The Lord will be their God, and they will be his people.

time,” declares the Lord. “I will put 3. The ones in the new covenant will know the Lord.

my law in their minds and write it on 4. The Lord will forgive their wickedness.

their hearts. I will be their God, and Jesus said that his sacrifice was the fulfillment of the New

they will be my people. No longer will Covenant. “This is my blood of the covenant, which is poured

a man teach his neighbor, or a man out for many for the forgiveness of sins” (Matthew 26:28) and

his brother, saying, ‘Know the Lord,’ “This cup is the new

because they will all know me, from covenant in my blood;

the least of them to the greatest,” do this, whenever

declares the Lord. “For I will forgive you drink it, in

their wickedness and will remember remembrance of me”

their sins no more.”

(1 Corinthians 11:25).

Furthermore, Jesus

Metaphor called himself “the

bread of life”

A metaphor is a figure of speech (John 6:35) because

in which one thing or person is he is the ultimate

compared to a specific characteristic source of life, both

of another thing or person using the life in general and

linking verb “to be.”

eternal life.

Metaphors must be carefully

interpreted. When Jesus said, “I am

the Bread of Life” (John 6:32–35), Jesus

is comparing himself with a specific

characteristic of bread: it gives and

sustains life. Jesus, of course, did not

mean that he is exactly like a piece of

Daniele Crespi

bread in every sense!

© 2008 Bristol Works, Inc. Rose Publishing, Inc.

May be reproduced for classroom use only, not for sale.

This free eChart is taken from the book Rose Guide to the Tabernacle ISBN 9781596362765. The © 2015 Rose Publishing. You may print 10 copies, 59 full-color, reproducible book on the the Tabernacle includes 8 clear plastic overlays. Learn how the but do not post on the internet or send via email.Your sacrifices, utensils, and structure of the Tabernacle show us something about God. friends may sign up for Free Rose Bible eCharts &

Save $5 on your $25 order. Enter coupon code: 5EC12 at www.rose-publishing.com. Newsletters at: www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

Feasts of the Bible

Throughout the Old Testament, God commanded the

children of Israel to observe his holy days (holidays)

to remember the mighty things that he had done. This

pamphlet celebrates and explains the meaning behind

the different feasts and the symbolism that points to

Jesus as the fulfillment of the Feasts.

Pamphlet Wall Chart

Pamphlet ............ 9781890947583 ...........$3.99

Also available as a PDF, eBook, DVD-based Study, Wall

Chart, and PowerPoint®.

Life of Moses

The Life of Moses pamphlet gives you 100’s of facts

at your fingertips. Its full-color comparison charts,

pictures, maps, and time lines allow you to easily

Book PowerPoint® Wall Chart

understand Moses’ family drama; track his Exodus

journey; and uncover his personal struggles. In its

thorough overview, you learn Moses’ full story and the

symbolic meanings of his life.

Rose Guide to the Tabernacle

Pamphlet ............ 9781596364523 ...........$3.99

WINNER of the Christian Retailing

“Retailers Choice Award” for Bible Reference!

Also available as a PDF and PowerPoint®.

Rose Guide to the Tabernacle is a full-color, reproducible book on the the

Tabernacle, with clear plastic overlays showing the inside and outside of

Rose Guide to the Temple

the “tent of meeting.” The Tabernacle was the place where the Israelites

This full-color book gives a complete easy-to-

worshiped God after the Exodus. Learn how the sacrifices, utensils, and

understand overview of the history of the Temple in

even the structure of the Tabernacle were designed to show us something

Jerusalem covering the important events and people

about God. See the parallels between the Old Testament sacrifices and

from Abraham to modern day. Includes clear plastic

priests’ duties, and Jesus’ service as the perfect sacrifice and perfect high

overlays and more than 150 images, charts, diagrams,

priest. Contains illustrations, charts, and diagrams not available elsewhere.

photos, and illustrations.

Book ...........................9781596362765 ................$29.99

Book ................... 9781596364684 ...........$29.99

Also available as PDF, eBook, Pamphlet, Wall Charts, and

Also available as a PDF, eBook, Pamphlet, Wall Chart,

PowerPoint®. Quantity discounts available.

and PowerPoint®.

Sign up now to receive FREE Rose Bible eCharts at www.rose-publishing.com/echarts

www.rose-publishing.com

info@rose-publishing.com

or call (310) 353-2100

Rose Publishing, Inc., publishes full-color, easy-to-use Bible reference materials, including charts, maps, time lines and biblical reference pamphlets for pastors, Bible study leaders, new member classes & small groups.
