Página web, de Citavi 4.1 convertida a PDF 27/08/2013 11:16 a.m., es posible que haya diferencias con respecto al original.

Print Subscription | MormonTimes

Brought to you by

SEARCH CHURCH NEWS

Home Articles Features Viewpoint Callings Archives

Home > Articles > 'Opportunity is opening for me' -- Refugees learn English, job skills at Deseret Industries > Authorized News Web site of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

Thomas S. Monson 'Opportunity is opening for me' -- Refugees This Week's News Articles

Mormon Tabernacle Conference learn English, job skills at Deseret Elder Rasband breaks ground for Fort Collins

Colorado Temple

Choir Industries

Leaders on social media sites: Prophet and apostles

on Facebook, Google+ pages

Daily index Refugees learn English, job skills at Deseret Industries

Books from Benemerito: New MTC donates learning

Dedicatory prayers By Ryan McDonald

materials

First Presidency Church News staff writer

letters Published: Saturday, Aug. 24, 2013

Ohio Mormon migration: New signs mark trail of

Kirtland Camp

Humanitarian efforts

'No More Strangers' - Historic YSA conference

Missions Print | Email | Share

encompasses Southeast

Nauvoo

The tasks Farzaneh Abedini completed as a cashier at a Deseret Industries thrift store in

Sports Scriptures Murray, Utah, on a recent July afternoon were typical for people involved in her line of Church News Most Popular

Suggestions for work. She rang items up, answered questions and counted change for a steady line of 1. New stake presidents

life's challenges customers buying books, toys and other goods.

Temples

materials

Transcripts of talks But for Miss Abedini, these tasks represented more than just a job. A refugee who has 3. Leaders on social media sites: Prophet and apostles

User feedback lived in the United States since December 2011, she has aspirations of becoming a on Facebook, Google+ pages

Video pharmacy technician one day and is utilizing the DI's job training program to help her 4. New York Mormon Night includes missionaries and

World events learn English and other job skills.

Muckdogs

Contact us "I like it here," she said of the United States. "It's good for me I think. I can study here. In

Deseret News stories

LDS.org my country I couldn't."

locator Meetinghouse Miss Abedini is among many whom the DI system is helping to learn of the opportunities football

Provident Living available in the United States. More than 600 refugees — defined as people who leave 2. Utah missionary dies after being hit by car in

Subscribe to Church their country to escape war, persecution or natural disaster — received job training from Malaysia

News the DI across its 42 locations in seven states in 2012. This group makes up 3. The 15 best quotes from Martin Luther King's "I

approximately 15 percent of the total number of people Deseret Industries provided job Have a Dream" speech

training to last year.

ruling to try to avoid lawsuits

More than 30 countries and 20 languages are represented by refugees receiving these 5. Mormon apologetics group announces new name services. Where refugees come from during a given time period is often correlated with

where different world conflicts are taking place. In most cases, these people are referred MormonTimes stories

to the DI by local bishops.

missionary

"They're part of the poor and the needy the Lord has asked us to serve," said Doug 2. Police arrest 1 in robbery by 2 posing as Mormon

Roberts, development manager at the Latter-day Saint Humanitarian Center in Salt Lake missionaries

City.

Colorado Temple

Over the course of about a year, depending on the individual, refugees, or "associates" 4. Mission Daze: Ammon versus Moroni

as they are called in the workplace, learn principles such as the importance of 5. Polynesian Cultural Center musician nominated for

punctuality and tasks such as how to stock shelves and communicate with coworkers. national educator award

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Deseret Industries serves refugees from more than

30 countries who speak some 20 languages.

Each is also assigned a team of individuals that helps them adjust to life in the United States. Job coaches are in place to act as supervisors and help associates achieve job-related goals. A development specialist helps them connect with employers in the community and mentors serve as sort of case managers. These three aides meet with associates quarterly to assess their progress.

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Kah Phone from Burma sorts clothing at the LDS

Humanitarian Center in Salt Lake City.

In addition to learning job skills, associates are also able to learn English in a classroom setting. Those who work at the LDS Humanitarian Center spend half of the working day in the classroom and the other half performing job tasks. Those who work at other locations are given the opportunity to be set up with an outside organization that teaches English. Deseret Industries typically pays for this outside learning. Job coaches work to help associates learn how the things they are taught in the classroom relate to their work. For example, associates will learn about prepositions in the classroom and then practice, for example, putting items "underneath" something when on the job.

Troy Casper, a manager at the LDS Humanitarian Center, will often meet associates who have little or no English-speaking ability when they first begin working. Because his job does not entail associating with them on a daily basis, he is more able to notice an improvement in those skills after a few months' time.

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Refugees and immigrants sort clothing at the LDS

Humanitarian Center in Salt Lake City.

"To me, it just blows my mind how quickly that can happen," he said. "It's like I'm talking to a new person. I'll say that to them and they'll laugh, but to see their whole vision and their ability now to function in this society is amazing."

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Eh Gay from Burma works in the clothing section at

the LDS Humanitarian Center in Salt Lake City.

A man named Shahram, who asked that his last name not be used, is an associate working at the LDS Humanitarian Center. A refugee who came seeking religious freedom, he has been in the United States with his daughter and parents for nearly two years. He hopes to attend a university in the near future.

"Opportunity is opening for me," he said. "These people (at the center) are good people. I love these people."

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Eh Gay from Burma works in the clothing section at

the LDS Humanitarian Center in Salt Lake City.

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Kah Phone from Burma sorts

clothing at the LDS Humanitarian

Center in Salt Lake City.

Samuel Brown, a development specialist at the Murray location, said much of what makes his job meaningful is seeing how the associates value the opportunity they are given to progress in society, thanks to the Deseret Industries program.

"Typically, refugees are very consistent regarding work," he said. "They rarely miss work and they have a really good work ethic."

Having worked as a job coach since 1995, Wendy Millet said loving those she works with is at the core of why she does it.

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Jagar Gurung from Bhutan, left, Bakhshi Dastpish

from Iran, and Sahar Ahmed from Iraq look at

photographs while learning when it is appropriate and

unnecessary to call 911 in an ESL class at the

Humanitarian Center in Salt Lake City.

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Elise Harward, left, teaches English to Ganesh Sarki

from Bhutan, Anastasie Toure from Africa, Tulsi

Subba from Bhutan and We Reh from Thailand at

the LDS Humanitarian Center in Salt Lake City.

"[So many of them] appreciate so much the non-bias attitude that's here," she said, adding that many who she has helped have experienced very traumatic things in their lives. "It doesn't matter what their life was like before. We love them anyway."

Ultimately, Brother Roberts said what makes the program successful is the combination of the spiritual and practical components at play each day.

Laura Seitz, Deseret News

Jagar Gurung from Bhutan learns in an English class

on Aug. 16. English-as-a-second languages classes

are taught on site at the LDS Humanitarian Center.

"Everybody's combining together in an effort to help these people get up to speed as quickly as possible," he said. "It's a tremendous effort and takes a lot of coordination and so forth, but it's working and it's working well."

churchnews@desnews.com

Latest Church News Stories 20 Years Ago... Recent Photo Galleries

New York Mormon Night

includes missionaries and

foundation

of Kirtland Camp

Published: Saturday, Aug. 21, 1993

The Church Historical Department recently

missionaries and Muckdogs

'Opportunity is opening for

me' -- Refugees learn

periodicals, and historic coins placed in a stone

English, job skills at

box in the foundation of the Salt Lake Temple 136

Deseret Industries

years ago....

© 2013 Deseret News Publishing Company | RSS | Site Map | Contact Us | Privacy policy | Print Subscription | Archives
