Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

xvPREFACE

xvOf particular help in enlarging my understanding of the trail experience were the numerous studies by both LDS and western historians. Recent research, especially, has yielded new information about the geography of the Mormon Trail, the Mormon way stations in Iowa and Nebraska, the "down and back" companies, the early plans for eventual western settlement, and the impact of the Perpetual Emigrating Fund. New views of the handcart companies and their rescue, the flight from Nauvoo, and the sojourn at the Missouri have also enriched our knowledge of this significant period of Mormon history. All have been useful in helping me provide a context for the personal experiences related in this compilation.

xvMy deepest gratitude is for those pioneers whose writings comprise this volume. The heart of the experience is what they have chosen to tell us. Without their words, we can trace their footsteps, view their wagons, open their trunks, handle their tools, and know the cold of winter and heat of summer and many of the other inconveniences and difficulties of the trail, but we cannot fully appreciate how they functioned within these external dimensions or what emotions and responses were activated by the circumstances of their trail experience.

This is primarily a book about people, and in the interest of those who may be looking for references to their own pioneer progenitors in these accounts, I have attempted to identify all of the names mentioned. Some names eluded that search, and if there are cases of mistaken identity I take full responsibility. I have also provided biographical information on each of the writers, more readily available for some than for others. Its accuracy is based on the sources available.

xviiI cannot make claim to any preconceived notion or pattern of selection of documents beyond choosing writings of both men and women with selections spanning the entire pioneer period, from 1846 to 1869. Legibility and accessibility of the documents were certainly factors. Some accounts have been published in one or another of Kate B. Carter's series on pioneer history or in other collections, but whenever possible, I have used original documents, some of which vary from the published versions. The sheer number of reminiscences and interviews, especially by women, suggests that many were written at the urging of historians or collectors, such as Kate Carter, as well as descendants. Many more volumes could easily be compiled from the numerous extant accounts. Needless to say, it was difficult not to include all those that I had opportunity to read.

xviiOriginal spelling and punctuation have been left untouched except when it was necessary to alter them for better reading and comprehension. Brackets have been used occasionally for intended words. Words struck through were struck through in the originals. Words in angle brackets indicate words inserted above the line in the originals. When only typescripts were available, the accounts are generally rendered in common usage.

1The chapter titles, as Latter-day Saints will readily recognize, are taken from the great Mormon hymn, "Come, Come, Ye Saints," by William Clayton. Though written just two months after the first Saints departed Nauvoo and well before Clayton's 1847 trek with the vanguard pioneer company, it nonetheless encompasses the spirit of the pioneer experience and quickly became the anthem of the trail. Taught by rote from company to company throughout the pioneer years, it expressed their hopes, their determination, their steadfastness, and most of all their faith, the faith that carried the Saints to their Rocky Mountain home and enabled even those who found they would not make it all the way to declare, "All is well, all is well."

1Carol Cornwall Madsen
