Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

3INTRODUCTION: "This Tale to Tell"

4HISTORY REMEMBERS BRIGHAM YOUNG as the charismatic leader and skillful organizer of the Mormon westward migration, settling a significant portion of the Rocky Mountain region and establishing a permanent presence in the West. But Brigham Young thought of himself as a parent in that great undertaking, calling his children to "come home." "I feel like a father with a great family of children around me in a winter storm," he wrote to his friend Jesse Little in February 1847, "and I am looking with calmness, confidence and patience for the clouds to break and the sun to shine so that I can run out and plant and sow and gather in the corn and wheat and say, Children, come home, winter is approaching again. . . . I am ready to kill the fatted calf and make a joyful feast to all who will come and partake." [^1]

4To the thousands of Saints waiting at the Missouri River, throughout the states, and in countries abroad, Brigham Young was indeed the father of the Gathering. Though not yet sustained as the prophet when he wrote this letter, as president of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles he carried the burden of fulfilling Joseph Smith's vision of establishing a permanent home for the Church. Within the next two decades, he would shepherd seventy thousand Saints to the Salt Lake Valley in as ordered and safe a manner as possible. Even the ten experimental handcart companies, with misfortune befalling only two of them, brought nearly three thousand Saints to Utah. [^2]

4The "peculiar" and "distinguishing" doctrine of the Gathering spurred the faithful westward, tested their commitment to the work of the restoration, and strengthened both the temporal and spiritual foundations of the Church. More important, it created a nucleus of Saints to whom the Lord could reveal the saving ordinances of the Gospel, which, in Nauvoo, had blessed the Church with "privileges and power she otherwise could not have had," explained Thomas Ward, editor of the Millennial Star, to the waiting converts in Great Britain. [^3]

Many new members responded to their own inward call to gather, touched individually by "the spirit of gathering." But whatever its source, the call to come home reordered the lives of thousands of people, conjoining them in one of the great epics of western American history and at a pivotal point in the history of the Church.

Ironically, when Brigham Young wrote his letter to James Little, he had not yet been to the "home" to which he was calling the Saints. Its specific western location, however, really made little difference. It was not as much where it was to be as what it was to be that interested Brigham Young and his followers. Of importance to them was that it would be a place of God's choosing, not theirs, and that their prophet would know it when he saw it. In the early 1830s Joseph Smith had talked of the far west as the "region blessed by the Lord as the land of Zion," [^4] and in 1842 he had prophesied that the Church would eventually move there. [^5] When the Saints left Nauvoo, recalled apostle Erastus Snow in 1873, all they knew about their destination was that they "were seeking a country which had been pointed out by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the midst of the Rocky Mountains in the interior of the great North American continent." [^6] Thus, while the starkness of the Salt Lake Valley caused the settlers some dismay, the knowledge that the Lord had designated it as the new Zion reassured them. There, the Lord had said, they would find a haven, a refuge, a place "in which [He] designed to hide His people." [^7] There they would be safe from the destruction of the wicked, the persecutions of their enemies, and the temptations of Babylon. A decade after settling there, Brigham Young confirmed it as "a good place to make Saints" and "a good place for Saints to live; it is the place the Lord has appointed, and we shall stay here until He tells us to go somewhere else." He was not apologetic in saying, "I want hard times so that every person that does not wish to stay, for the sake of his religion, will leave." [^8] And hard times they had.

But turning back was far from Thomas Bullock's mind in July 1847 when he first gazed on the shimmering salt sea and empty sweep of land edging it. "Hurra, hurra, hurra," he was moved to exclaim, "there's my home at last." [^9] Neither the reassuring familiarity or material comforts generally associated with home provoked his cry of thanksgiving. Nor did Patty Sessions see anything familiar or comforting—or even beautiful—when she saw the Valley a few months later. Yet she also viewed the scene as a joyful homecoming: "My heart flows with gratitude to God that we have got home all safe, lost nothing, have been blessed in life and health. I rejoice all the time." [^10] Ann Agatha Pratt was another. She wrote, "My soul was filled with thankfulness to God for bringing us to a place of rest and safety—home." [^11]

7While the Saints did not ignore their desires for comfortable shelter and adequate food, productive work, and at least some of the amenities of life, the image of home that drew them west was spiritual, not temporal. The personal stories in this volume attest to that reality. They show the eager response of the Saints to answer the call to come home, and they reveal the steadfast faith that enabled them to do it. For if conversion changed the worship of these early Saints, it also altered their pattern of life, especially evident on the trail. Mormonism was nourished by a principle that persistently privileged the general welfare and community goals over individual gain and personal ambition. The millennial hope was to establish Zion and build a spiritual kingdom on earth worthy to receive its heavenly ruler. Recognizing the depth of their devotion to this collective mission is the key to understanding the Saints' willingness to undergo the personal suffering and sacrifice it entailed. Nancy Tracy articulated this commitment. An early convert, she wrote at the end of a long life that took her from New York to Ohio, Missouri, Illinois, and finally Utah to follow the Church, "My life, ever since I became a Mormon, has been made up of moving about, of persecutions, sacrifices, poverty, sickness, and death. Through all my sufferings I never doubted but felt to cling to the gospel." [^12]

7The Mormon hegira was an epoch in LDS history. It underscored Mormonism's collective purpose and gave the pioneers a religious and historical identity that distinguished them from other western travelers.

Moreover, the trek west was not only a geographic bridge between the City of Joseph and the city built by Brigham; it was also a psychic bridge, a defining and coalescing period for the Church and its members. It marked a transition from the esoteric, charismatic leadership of the revelator Joseph Smith to the pragmatic, administrative leadership of implementor Brigham Young. It served as a significant institutional rite of passage as well as a personal pilgrim's progress.

8Time has tended to telescope the trail accounts into a single story, a monolithic tale beginning with the exodus from Nauvoo and proceeding, after a brief interlude at Winter Quarters, on to the Salt Lake Valley. The voices we hear from this volume tell a much more complex and far more dramatic tale. The 1846 crossing of Iowa offered challenges different from those experienced by the handcart pioneers who crossed Iowa a decade later, and the journey beyond the Missouri little resembled the Iowa segment for many of the Saints. Though more than three times farther, it was better organized and equipped, and for many veterans of the Iowa trail, much easier. Those who went west in the 1860s found that the railroad, reaching ever farther westward, cut wagon travel by hundreds of miles. Moreover, the European emigrants added thousands of nautical miles to their journey west and tell another story altogether.

The Nauvoo exiles were distinctive in their own way. They were true refugees, forced to leave their homes, too many of them unprepared. With their destination still vague, they were wanderers, scarred by what lay behind and apprehensive of what lay before. But their primary difference was that they were the only ones of the seventy-thousand Zion-bound Saints during the pioneer period who had received the blessings of the temple. The fifty-six hundred endowed men and women, led by the nine apostles who held all the keys of the priesthood, [^13] left Nauvoo as a "kingdom of priests, and an holy nation," the Lord's covenant people (Exodus 19:6). As covenanters, they knew at the outset that their true destination was spiritual, not geographic, and they would go where the Lord led through his prophets. Their endowment was as assuring to them of God's presence and purpose in their lives as was the pillar of cloud by day and fire by night to the ancient Israelites.

9Hundreds of personal writings remain to tell the story. Company clerks and many company captains kept travel records. Others wrote for their own reasons, and while far more reminiscences than diaries have been preserved, many remembered accounts convey the same sense of immediacy as diaries. While the underlying motive for their being on the western trail suffuses the spirit of these accounts, their stories dwell on the particulars of their trail experience. Some historians have noted the similarity in men's and women's trail observations. Both, for instance, show the same concern for order in the companies and for environmental conditions. Both note the importance in selecting the right campsites, the availability of water, the difficulty of river crossings, the methods and amount of food distribution, the feed and condition of the oxen, the success of hunting trips, the nature of the terrain, and the spiritual interventions. Other historians have emphasized gendered perceptions, noting, for instance, the difference in men's and women's reaction to Indians, women's sensitivity to the personal needs of their traveling companions, women's emphasis on the web of friends and family and tasks within their company, and some women's conscious notation of the graves along the way.

9Mormon journals confirm both findings. But even more than gender differences or similarities, the readers of these narratives may find that the personality of the writers, their level of literacy and writing skills, their individual interests, their motivations for writing, and even the year in which they traveled made the primary difference in their style or content. Moreover, the age of the writers played an important role in their perception of the experience. For men, the middle years were among their most active, and they carried the burden of the physical labor of trail travel. For women these were the childbearing years, a period of physical vulnerability. The travails of pregnancy and childbirth in a wilderness and the relentless watchcare of infants, toddlers, and adventurous teenagers, with sometimes the additional care of aged parents, engendered a far different trail experience from what single, childless young men and women or older dependent adults encountered.

It is the combination of these experiences that tells the full story of the Mormon trek. Each account brings its own individuality to bear and in so doing enlarges and reifies the story for us. The personal experiences collected in this volume can show the value of such life writings to later generations. They are our heritage as Latter-day Saints.

10Besides historians, a number of playwrights, movie makers, song writers, poets, novelists, painters, and sculptors have discovered the great drama in this westward move of a whole people. Each company of emigrants was a microcosm of human character and experience waiting to be expressed in some artistic fashion. Along with the leaders and followers, there were the optimists and the grumblers, the dreamers and the pragmatists, the courageous and the fearful, the resourceful and the dependent, the strong and the weak. To this diversity may be added the range of ages and variety of family relationships, nationalities, and economic circumstances. The challenge for the artists in this human medley is to capture its recurring theme—the shared vision and faithful discipleship of its participants. Some have succeeded.

10Writing or painting the trail experience, however, is one thing. To claim a pioneer in one's pedigree is another, tantamount to claiming a pilgrim father or Revolutionary War patriot in one's ancestry. The popularity of the complementary organizations, the Sons and Daughters of Utah Pioneers, attests to the enduring pride of noble descent. From such veneration has come a library of pioneer histories, well-preserved diaries, and multitudes of reminiscences written for proud children and grandchildren. This written legacy is beyond price.

But the majority of Church members today cannot trace their lineage to these pioneers. Can the story have meaning to them? Perhaps their own spiritual separation from Babylon and the blazing of their own religious trail, not to a Zion of place but to one of heart, connects these latter-day pioneers to their nineteenth-century counterparts in ways that only those who have known this life-changing experience can truly share or understand.

The persistent and pervasive celebration of this epic event each July has tended to mythologize it, initiated by the pioneers themselves. For them the Nauvoo exodus found its prototype in the flight of ancient Israel. The fleeing Saints called themselves the Camp of Israel; their Sinai was Nauvoo; the freezing of the Mississippi, the parting of the Red Sea; their sacred books and records, the Ark of the Covenant; and the miracle of the quail among the poor camps, the appearance of the quail to the Israelites. They were the Lord's covenant people delivered from their enemies by a modern Moses and led to a promised land where they would build a temple to the God who had preserved them.

Years of commemorating the trail story have enhanced and entrenched its mythic elements. Yet they have not molded the story into the traditional mythology of invention but rather into one that has risen from "real stories that appeal to the consciousness of a people by embodying its cultural ideals or by giving expression to deep, commonly felt emotions." [^14] For many Church members, the pioneers are avatars of the highest and best of Latter-day Saint ideals. It is the reverence with which they regard these spiritual progenitors that has tended to transform them from real people to mythic figures, a transformation aided by the romanticized paintings of Frederick Piercy, the heroic murals of C. C. A. Christensen, and the works of other artists. Some years ago Wallace Stegner warned that "piety and ancestor worship are not the best foundation for the study of history." [^15] That is undoubtedly true. It is, however, the words of the pioneers themselves, more than the works of historians, that have sustained the mystique of the trail and invited such worship. Moreover, if "myths are clues to the spiritual potentialities of the human life," as Joseph Campbell has asserted, [^16] then such veneration serves an important function in affirming Mormon cultural and religious ideals. Their tales are modern-day records of how God's purposes are brought about, and their preservation, in the words of Alma, "have enlarged the memory of this people . . . and brought them to the knowledge of their God unto the salvation of their souls" (Alma 37:8).

We miss the reality of the pioneers' lives, however, if we allow the mythic elements of the trail to cloak its human dimensions. Though they were of another century, facing circumstances unfamiliar to most people today, the pioneers were not of another species, their heroism understandable only because we think of them as different from us. Their words remind us that underneath their seeming stoicism, their tenacious faith, and their persistent courage lay their all-too-human fears and sorrows, their discouragement and annoyances. The frequency of accidents and disease, of harassment and persecution, of separation and loss did not inure them to pain and suffering. They were not less fearful than we are when hunger theatens and disease decimates, nor less awed by nature's power to harm as well as to please. Nor did they mourn less because death came more often.

13In their lifetime as well as in ours, the pioneers were revered as a distinct generation, bonded by their shared experience. One company of ten made that connection permanent. Strangers at the outset, by journey's end they vowed to stay together. They built their homes and reared their families near each other, continuing the familial relationship they had developed on the trail. The faith they shared in traveling to Zion endured in their shared lives thereafter.

13In answering the call to "come home," the pioneers wrote a moving and powerful chapter in Mormon history. Theirs is a sacred story. In their own words they have shown in the most vivid of terms the power of faith and the extraordinary dimensions of the human spirit.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young to Elder Jesse C. Little, 26 February 1847, reprinted in James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965) 1:318.
