Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

131

"Fresh Courage Take": The Iowa Trail

In 1846, 4 February would have beenjust another cold, gray, midwestern winter day had it not been the day Charles Shumway chose to drive his lumbering, loaded wagons down Parley Street in Nauvoo, Illinois, to a waiting flatboat on the bank of the Mississippi River. There Charles, his family, and their wagons and livestock were ferried across the river to the friendlier shores of Iowa. Charles Shumway assured himself a place in Mormon history that winter day as he led out in the slow exodus of Mormon refugees, reluctantly leaving the City of Joseph, which had been their home for seven years. [^1]

16Never had Nauvoo been more prosperous. The previous year a steady stream of British emigrants had swelled the population with skilled craftsmen, artisans, and eager workers. Public buildings along with sturdy brick homes replaced log cabins and frame huts. The city now boasted a Seventies Hall, music and cultural halls, and even the beginnings of a university. [^2] As the Saints prospered, tithing had increased, and the temple rose steadily skyward. Ann Pitchforth, newly arrived from England in May of 1845, was thrilled with her new homeland. "We are as comfortable as can be," she wrote home to her parents. "Nauvoo is a quiet, peaceable place, & we are not in the least afraid of anything." [^3]

The death of Joseph Smith a year earlier had stunned his followers. His enemies were certain it would mark the end of Mormonism. Instead, it spurred efforts to complete the temple as a monument to their fallen leader and a symbol of the fulfillment of his mission. Nothing could have united the Saints more. "There appears to be the most union that has ever been," Zina Jacobs observed. "The faithful are determined to keep the law of God. . . . The Temple prospers." [^4]

17By the end of that year, however, their dreams of permanence would once again come to a dismaying end. Though plans had long been entertained for eventual settlement in the West, [^5] Church leaders had hoped that Nauvoo might remain intact as a "temple city" and "a corner stake of Zion." [^6] But that was not to be. The peace and calm that Ann Pitchforth enjoyed in the spring of 1845 were gone by fall.

First a few and then a flood of families sought shelter in Nauvoo when mobbers began burning Mormon homes and barns in the outlying communities. The county sheriff, J. B. Backenstos, admitted defeat in trying "to raise law and order citizens to quell the mob," and he advised Brigham Young to raise his own defense. [^7] It was becoming ever more evident that Illinois was going to be a replay of Missouri. But Brigham Young gathered resolve from the events. "The mob seem determined to drive us to our duty in gathering," Brigham Young wrote to Sheriff Backenstos, "and then drive us to carry the fulness of the gospel from among them and carry it to Israel." [^8] In the larger plan for the Church, Nauvoo was only a way station on the journey to that undefined place in the West that Joseph had envisioned as early as 1832. The time was clearly at hand to give substance to that vision. When hostilities between the Mormons and mobbers escalated to bloodshed and a general conflict seemed imminent, Church leaders agreed to remove the Saints from the City of Joseph the following spring. [^9]

At the final conference in Nauvoo in the fall of 1845, Church leaders revealed their agreement to vacate the city. Their task was to kindle the Saints' commitment to sacrifice once again their material welfare for the sake of the gospel. George Whitaker, a British convert, remembered that everyone voted to leave, [^10] but many wondered how they would be able to do it. "However much the people may seem disposed to not go," Amasa Lyman explained, "the sails are set, the wind is fair, and we are bound to weather the point, whether we will or not; for we are not at the helm." [^11] For Louisa Pratt the news fell on her ear "like the funeral knell of all departed joys." Her husband, Addison, was halfway around the world preaching the gospel in the Society Islands; like many others, she caught the vision of a new Zion in the West but without any assurance of how she was going to get there with her four young daughters. "What could I do," she thought, "with my little means and my helpless family, in launching out into the wilderness. I had no male relative to take charge of my affairs." When no immediate help was proffered, she met the challenge with her usual display of spirit: "I will show them what I can do." That feisty self-reliance carried Louisa and her daughters all the way to Salt Lake City on their own. [^12]

20Anticipating a spring exodus, Church leaders organized the Saints into twenty-five traveling companies of a hundred families each, with subdivisions of fifties and tens and a leader assigned to each division. Over the next six months, under the direction of the captains of hundred, Nauvoo became a builder's workshop. [^13] Wagon shops were set up in buildings throughout the city, and wheelwrights, carpenters, and cabinetmakers became overnight "foremen wagon makers." [^14] Untrained workers prepared timber to build the wagons, and women sewed wagon covers, quilts, tents, and clothing. The feverish industry became a study in contradiction. [^15] While such activity showed the Saints' intention of leaving, work steadily continued on the temple, a powerful symbol of permanence. But their divided efforts made sense: if they were to be materially dispossessed, at least they would not leave spiritually deprived.

20The temple was not wholly finished until May of 1846, after many of the Saints had already left Nauvoo, but they left endowed. Brigham Young had dedicated the attic story on Sunday, 30 November 1845, to enable the Saints to begin receiving the saving ordinances. [^16] On 10 December, Mary Ann Young, Vilate Kimball, and Elizabeth Ann Whitney, who had received their endowments from Joseph and Emma Smith, began administering the ordinances in the temple, joined later that day by Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball. [^17] Others were appointed to assist in the work. So anxious were the Saints to receive their endowments that some willing workers stayed each night to administer the ordinances around the clock. By the time the last endowment was given in early spring, fifty-six hundred members had received their temple blessings. For Sarah Pea Rich, those blessings made the westward trek possible. They "caused us joy and comfort in the midst of all our sorrows, and enabled us to have faith in God, knowing He would guide us and sustain us in the unknown journey that lay before us. For if it had not been for the faith and knowledge that was bestowed upon us in that Temple by the influence and help of the Spirit of the Lord, our journey would have been like one taking a leap in the dark, to start out on such a journey in the winter as it were, and in our state of poverty, it would seem like walking into the jaws of death." [^18] For some it was.

This was an undertaking of immense proportions. Approximately thirteen thousand Latter-day Saints lived in Nauvoo and its satellite communities. [^19] Hundreds more were scattered about the states. And thousands had accepted the gospel in the British Isles, waiting to join the Saints wherever the gathering place was to be. Not all would choose to go west that year, and some not at all, but to lead a people of such vast number over more than thirteen hundred miles of hazardous trails to a destination that was more a direction than a place took both enormous courage and limitless faith. Brigham Young had both. Those who followed needed a comparable faith. These men and women had every opportunity to doubt the mission he so eloquently pronounced, to reject the call to the unknown, or to question the strength of their own conviction—but most did not. "My faith is to gather with the people of God," wrote Eliza Cheney to her family in New York, "and though I might swim in wealth if I returned . . . I could not be happy there." [^20]

21Among the throngs of Americans going west, the Mormons were distinct. As one historian noted, unlike other westering people, the Saints were responding to the push of continual persecution and to the pull of a free, unsettled region that could offer a permanent gathering place. [^21] It was not material wealth they were seeking but a spiritual haven. Theirs was a whole community on the move, carrying not only individual and family possessions but also their community records and the documents, histories, minutes, and other artifacts of their sixteen-year-old religion. [^22] Even the Nauvoo temple bell went west, reclaimed from the belfry of the Methodist Church in Nauvoo, where it had been taken after the first contingent of Saints left the city. [^23]

What most set them apart from other migrants, including the emigrant Saints, however, was the spiritual endowment they had received in the temple. This became their motivation and resource when times were grim. "We go as Abraham went," Sally Randall wrote to her parents and siblings, "not knowing whither we go but the Lord will go before us, and be our front and [our] rearward." [^24] These Saints were also set apart from other westering people by their commitment to aid all who wished to gather to Zion. In the last conference of the Church before they left Nauvoo, the Saints, assembled in the temple, made a covenant with their leaders that they would "give all to help to take the poor; and every honest industrious member who wants to go." Sometimes referred to as the Nauvoo Covenant, it was invoked many times throughout the long period of emigration. [^25]

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHCThe restless mobs and false rumors of government troops poised to intercept the Saints' planned exit in the spring became worrisome. To buy time for the anxious but unprepared Saints and to show compliance with their agreement to leave, Brigham Young decided to lead out from Nauvoo with just the Twelve and their families earlier than the time agreed upon. Then, when better prepared, the rest of the Saints were to follow in the spring and summer. He found, however, that the great demand for temple ordinances delayed his departure. [^26] While he was thus occupied, some of the Saints, worried and unwilling to wait until spring, crowded the streets leading to the river, awaiting a chance to cross and expecting their leaders to follow immediately. [^27] Few had been able to acquire the extensive store of supplies itemized by Parley P. Pratt or to get proper teams and wagons to carry them. They came anyway, in whatever conveyances they had, bringing whatever provisions they had collected. Thus it was that on 4 February, Charles Shumway, not Brigham Young, crossed the Mississippi and led out in the great western exodus that would continue from Nauvoo for the next eight months. On that same day, a small band of Eastern Saints, 70 men, 68 women, and 100 children, began an odyssey of their own. Urged by Apostle Orson Pratt to "flee out of Babylon either by land or sea," as the Nauvoo Saints had been warned to do, they gathered their belongings, paid $50.00 for their passage, and sailed out of New York harbor on the four-hundred-fifty-ton chartered ship Brooklyn. Samuel Brannan presided over the company. [^28]

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHCBesides its passengers and their belongings, the ship carried a wide range of equipment essential to establishing a community somewhere yet unknown to these waterway pioneers. Flour mills, crockery, tents, farm implements, medical supplies, food, a printing press and paper, books, and even some farm animals accompanied them on the six-month-long journey. The twenty-four-thousand-mile voyage took the Brooklyn as far west as the Hawaiian Islands before circling round to Yerba Buena, the seaport that eventually became San Francisco. [^29] On 31 July, the company disembarked on land recently claimed by the United States, while the army continued the campaign against Mexico south of Monterey. By this time, the Mormon Battalion had begun its long march to California to do its part in the campaign.

Ship Brooklyn and Other Sailing PioneersHCThe Brooklyn Saints, with their extensive amount of equipment, set up a thriving settlement, doubling the population of Yerba Buena. They anticipated a meeting with the displaced Nauvoo Saints the next year. When Samuel Brannan learned the following spring that Brigham Young did not intend to settle in California, he hastened to meet him on the trail and persuade him of the advantages of a California settlement. Unsuccessful, Brannan returned to the West Coast, became a wealthy and influential man for a period, but relinquished his ties to the Church. Though some remained in California, many of the Brooklyn Saints eventually rejoined the body of the Church in Utah. [^30]

24The early departure of the Nauvoo Saints upset the carefully planned order of travel as families rushed across the Mississippi to the relative safety of Iowa. No orderly procession of white-topped wagons filed over the ice-bound Mississippi, as so many artists have depicted. All manner of vehicles lined up at the river front waiting to be ferried over on flatboats. Some were the required heavy-duty wagons, whose specifications had been carefully outlined, but others were smaller farm wagons, and many people traveled in horse-drawn carriages and buggies. Oxen, mules, cattle, and horses were all part of the flatboat cargo until the river froze over later that month. Animals sometimes bolted, upsetting the wagons and spilling their contents into the river. Thomas Grover lost two oxen and most of his belongings when someone spit in the eye of his startled ox, causing it to stumble overboard. [^31]

Many in these early companies were inadequately prepared, and families were sometimes separated as husbands went ahead as teamsters, guards, or company clerks or else stayed behind to sell their homes and property while sending their families on. Some women awaiting childbirth preferred the uncertainty of the city to the unfamiliarity of the trail. [^32] Trustees of the Church also stayed to sell the Church's property and oversee the exodus of the remaining Saints. More than two-thirds of the Saints remained in Nauvoo after the rushed winter exodus, following at intervals during the spring and summer months. Only the very poor, unable to acquire the means to leave, were still in the city by autumn, when the mobs forced their exit. [^33]

Charles Shumway and the Saints following after him collected across the river at Sugar Creek, about seven miles from Nauvoo, awaiting Church leaders, most of whom were, ironically, still in Nauvoo. In another season Sugar Creek would have been a camper's delight, and even in February, before it snowed, it was an inviting shelter in a wooded grove by the creek. Eighteen-year-old Emmeline Whitney's first view of the camp, at sunset on 27 February, reminded her of a romantic biblical painting: "It looked like pictures I have seen of the ancients pitching their tents and journeying from place to place with their cattle and their goods." [^34] Helen Mar Whitney found camp life at Sugar Creek, at the outset, a novel experience and "even a pleasant one compared with what was laying before us." Most of the campers had brought tents, and their wagons and whatever provisions they had with them made life fairly comfortable at that point. During the almost month-long wait before moving on, however, the Saints began to lose their studied cheerfulness. A heavy snowfall and dropping temperatures, leaking tents and wagon covers, and memories of warm rooms and comfortable beds began to take a toll on their goodwill. The arrival of the legendary William Pitt and his brass band was a welcome sight and lightened the mood of the disheartened exiles. "Everyone danced to amuse ourselves as well as to keep our blood in proper circulation," Helen Whitney remembered. [^35] As Wallace Stegner observed, "Music was their gift and their blessing, an expression of their oneness in the hostile wilderness." [^36]

Brigham Young's powerful presence and rousing oratory was what worked the miracle, to be repeated many times before this long journey was over. When he arrived in mid-February, he reorganized the companies and unified the travelers by creating an orderly network of communication and responsibility. The people stirred up their faith and renewed their resolve to move on with courage and hope. It took until the first of March for all available Church leaders to assemble at Sugar Creek, but then the Camp of Israel, now several thousand strong with five hundred wagons, began to roll. [^37] Their troubles were just beginning.

Journey across IowaHCAccounts of the three-hundred-mile Iowa crossing reveal why it was the most difficult part of the whole westward trek for these Nauvoo exiles. At first they followed primitive country roads uncomfortably close to the northern border of Missouri. But in the Missouri settlements, more numerous than in Iowa, they could exchange their possessions and especially their labor for supplies. As historian Stanley B. Kimball has noted, the Camp of Israel was like an industrial army marching through Iowa, its men stopping off to work as rail-splitters, cornhuskers, and handymen. [^38]

Journey across IowaHC27But their own needs were only part of their concern. Until growth of the spring prairie grass, their animals depended on the corn and other feed found only in the settlements. Orson Pratt recalled, "It became quite a difficulty to sustain our numerous cattle and horses, for it required many hundreds of bushels of grain daily to keep them from perishing." [^39] Once again the William Pitt band proved its value to the wandering Saints. Besides bolstering Mormon spirits, the band entertained settlement residents along the way and earned money needed to purchase corn and grain.

Journey across IowaHC27Nothing impeded their progress more than the weather, however. The winter departure exposed the travelers to the chilling cold of the humid climate, and spring brought heavy rain, pelting them in torrents, turning their tents and wagon covers into sieves. Spells of dry weather brought out snakes and other insects, alternately frightening and harassing the vulnerable travelers and their animals. For nearly four months this vanguard company trailed on to the Missouri (later companies would make the crossing in four weeks). For a third of those months, they faced either heavy snow or drenching rain. Some days the camp could travel no more than three miles.

Journey across IowaHCBy late April almost all of Iowa was an open prairie of tall grasses, flanked by groves of oak and hickory trees, but the heavy rainfalls softened the ground, and wagon wheels and animals sank deep into the muddy trails. The thick, deep, muddy pits required double- and even triple-teaming to get the wagons through. The riverbanks and steep bluffs adjoining them, made slippery by the spring rains, slowed travel even more. Jean Rio Baker (Pearce) described the road her wagon train followed a few years later as "a perfect succession of hills, vallies, bogs, mudholes, log bridges, quagmires, with stumps of trees, a foot above the surface of the watery mud, so that without the utmost care, the wagons would be overturned, 10 times a day." [^40]

Journey across IowaHC28Fording the swollen streams was backbreaking work as men and boys using heavy ropes pulled the teams and wagons across. If the rivers weren't too deep, women and girls tied up their skirts to wade across. Everyone stayed wet until they could dry their clothes later by campfires. All had to help. Joseph Fielding remarked on the cooperation he saw at one river crossing: "One might have taken us for two Armies encamped on either Side of the River waiting the Signal for Conflict, but how different was the Case when we saw almost the Whole Strength of the one wading through the River from one to 3 feet in depth to help their Friends." [^41]

Journey across IowaHC29The daily round of domestic tasks proved especially burdensome. Lucy Smith recalled the difficulty of preparing a meal on a blustery, freezing day. The howling wind continually threatened to put out her campfire and blow sparks on her tent, and when dinner was over, washing the dishes was no easier. "When I would wash a dish and raise it out of the water, there would be ice on it before I could get it wiped," she recalled. [^42]

Journey across IowaHC29With an eye to those who followed, company clerks kept careful records of the best campsites. Sugar Creek, Richardson's Point, the Chariton River, and Locust Creek were all favored stopping places for the first part of the journey. But Locust Creek was the setting for a historic event not shared by the others. On 15 April, William Clayton, company clerk and historian, was resting after a difficult night on guard, when he heard the news that his wife, Diantha, who had stayed in Nauvoo expecting her first child, had given birth to a son. The happy announcement warranted not only a grand celebration, again featuring William Pitt and his band (of which William Clayton was a member), but it also inspired Clayton to write that great hymn of hope, "Come, Come, Ye Saints." If any one expression could define the spirit that animated this wilderness journey, it was this hymn. It became the pioneer anthem and is known worldwide as the great hymn of the Latter-day Saints. [^43]

Journey across IowaHC29Each morning the Camps of Israel were reluctantly roused by a bugle call. "A morning in camp," Emmeline B. Wells remembered, was "not very amusing." Often when the campers awoke, they were missing horses and cattle, which sometimes took days to find, or they suffered from minor annoyances such as kettles upsetting and drenching the morning fire. Tents leaked or blew over in the night, and fresh snow greeted the travelers on many mornings. Despite such incidents, she recalled, "Somehow we always felt safe." "There was order in the camp, men stood guard at night and we slept soundly in the open air." But she also found the Iowa trek difficult to talk about even fifty years afterwards. "The wonder is," she wrote, "how we had the courage, the perseverance, the endurance to accomplish it." [^44]

Journey across IowaHCAs they pushed farther west and northward from the Missouri border, provisions gave out, settlements disappeared, and sickness spread, prompting them to establish a temporary resting place where those unable to go farther could stop, put in a crop, and regroup for later travel to the Missouri. Here the Nauvoo covenant came vividly to life. The Saints remembered their pledge to "not cease their exertions until every individual of them who desired, and was unable to gather to the Rocky Mountains by his own means, was brought to that place." [^45] This settlement was its first test. It would not only provide food and rest for those needing them then, but it would also be a way station for the thousands of Saints yet to come. When the site was chosen, about a hundred forty-five miles from Nauvoo, workers began immediately to lay out the settlement, erecting fences, building cabins, and planting crops. They called it Garden Grove.

Journey across IowaHC30George Whitaker marveled at the cooperation that built this small hamlet. When they decided on the place, he wrote, "the whole camp was then reorganized. It was concluded that we would fence in a large field of about six hundred acres and plant it in corn and vegetables. Every man was put in his proper place to work. Some worked at cutting house logs, some at building houses, some at cutting timber for rails, some at splitting rails, some at plowing, some at planting corn and vegetables, while others commenced to put up the fence, and a certain number were sent out to herd and take care of the stock. Every man went to work with a will. There were no idlers amongst us. We were all full of life and spirit. We had almost forgotten our trials and troubles of our two month's journey. . . . In about 14 or 15 days we had quite a little town built up." [^46]

Journey across IowaHCAlmost as soon as the settlement took shape, Brigham Young organized a branch of the Church with Samuel Bent as president and David Fullmer and Aaron Johnson as his counselors. They would be both the temporal and spiritual leaders of the small group who would winter there. But Garden Grove struggled to meet its lofty purpose. With families passing through daily hoping to be reprovisioned, the drain on the community's resources was heavy. Supply simply couldn't keep up with demand. And those uncontrollable plagues of pioneer life, disease and death, swept through the settlement. President Bent, an early victim, died just three months after his appointment. [^47]

Journey across IowaHC31Prospects for the nearly six hundred Saints who had settled for the winter in Garden Grove were grim. One of them, Luman Shurtliff, worried that there were "only provisions enough to last until April as prudent as we could possibly be and clothing very scant. From April to July," he feared, "we should be in suffering conditions." [^48] The generosity of their Iowa neighbors and their own resourcefulness helped them survive that first year. Ensuing years brought more fruitful crops. While Garden Grove never really prospered or grew much beyond its original dimensions, it nonetheless provided an essential resting and recruiting place for the Mormon exiles. [^49]

Journey across IowaHCAfter preparing the Garden Grove settlement, those who chose not to stay moved on in a more northwesterly direction, where they established another way station on a fork of the Grand River, about forty miles beyond Garden Grove. Well situated on the brow of a hill that opened on to grassy vales interrupted by occasional gentle slopes, the new settlement was given the biblical name of Mount Pisgah by Parley P. Pratt. Here another settlement was laid out and a branch of the Church organized to care for the Saints who would winter there. William Huntington was appointed president with Charles C. Rich and Ezra T. Benson as his counselors. Sixty-three-year-old William Huntington was a worthy but reluctant president. He wondered how in his straitened circumstances he was to care for his large family while also shepherding the Saints at Mount Pisgah. He had "much to discuss with the Lord" when he retired with his counselors to a private area beyond the town site, where they pitched a tent, dressed in their temple robes, and asked for divine help. For William Huntington, the struggle soon ceased. Like President Bent at Garden Grove, he died just three months after his appointment and was buried at Mount Pisgah.

Journey across IowaHCMount Pisgah became a travel hub for Mormons, some going on to Council Bluffs, others returning east as far as Nauvoo to gather up families, and some settling in for a season in the camp or on its outskirts. Daily, wagons were arriving in the massive spring exodus of some ten thousand Saints from Nauvoo. As Eliza R. Snow observed, "Companies were constantly arriving and others departing; while those who intended stopping till the next spring were busily engaged in making gardens, and otherwise preparing for winter—sheltering themselves in rude log huts for temporary residence." She noted that camps were strung along for several hundred miles across Iowa, both temporary and semi-permanent. [^50] Despite the facade of bustling industry, the Saints at Pisgah suffered from the inevitable appearance of disease and death that stalked frontier settlements; by late summer the "autumnal ague" held the newcomers in its grip. When Emily Partridge Young arrived in late August, the natural beauty that surrounded the town could not offset the sickly pallor and squalid look of the fledgling community. She declared it to be "the most like nowhere" of any place she had ever been. [^51] It did not remain so, however, and sheltered more than two thousand Saints during its six years of existence. By 1852 it had served its purpose and passed quietly into oblivion, except in the diaries of the people who once passed its way.

The Saints were now in Indian country. Yet, in all the time they spent at the Missouri and during their many years of travel on the overland trail, they had few serious skirmishes with the various Indian nations they encountered. They were especially welcomed by the Pottawattamies, who claimed a kinship with the Mormons in their common exile. Their chief, Pied Riche, reminded the Mormons that the Pottawattamies were also a dispossessed people, driven from their homeland in Michigan years earlier. "We must help one another," he said, "and the Great Spirit will help us both. Because one suffers and does not deserve it is no reason he shall suffer always. We may live to see it right yet. If we do not, our children will." [^52]

Mormon BattalionJourney across IowaHCThough the first vanguard of Saints did not reach the Council Bluffs area on the Missouri River until 15 June, Brigham Young still hoped to push on to the Rockies that summer. But he now planned to recruit only a company of young, healthy men who, with the Twelve, could travel rapidly to the West, establishing way stations and planting crops for the body of Saints who would follow the next spring after a much-needed rest and reprovisioning at the Missouri. He therefore sent messengers to Mount Pisgah and Garden Grove requesting as many volunteers and supplies as could be spared.

Mormon BattalionHC34But this plan, too, would be abandoned. At the same time that he began recruiting for his advance company, a U.S. Army representative, Captain James Allen, appeared in Mount Pisgah, also requesting a volunteer company of young, healthy Mormons to go west. But Allen wanted them as soldiers, not pioneers. He promised each volunteer clothing, rations, a stock of guns, and some advance payment for one year's service in the war against Mexico. The request seemed ludicrous to most Saints, who at that time felt little loyalty to their government. The notice was first given to William Huntington, Mount Pisgah's branch president, who commented that Captain Allen delivered an "address to the brethren appropriate to his foolish errand." President Huntington responded with an address of his own "by way of commendation or as the old proverb says answering a fool according to his folly." [^53] He then sent Captain Allen on to Council Bluffs to confer with Brigham Young. Sarah Rich voiced her reaction to what so many felt was a gross insensitivity to the Mormon plight. "A more cruel demand could not have been made upon us at this time of our affliction and poverty," she explained. [^54] Some even feared a plot: that after taking the best men away, the rest of the camp would be destroyed on the plains, or if the Mormons refused to cooperate, the army would attack "and put an end to Mormonism." [^55]

Mormon BattalionHCWhat few knew was that six months earlier Jesse C. Little, president of the Eastern States Mission, had been negotiating in Washington, D.C., with President Polk for financial help to relocate the Mormons in the West. While this plan of volunteer military service, which President Polk proposed, was not quite what Church leaders had hoped for, it would serve government interests and show Mormon loyalty while providing the Church much-needed revenue through the soldiers' pay. It would also be a means of transporting at least five hundred of the Saints to the West. Recognizing the benefits of the proposal as well as the hardships it would impose, Brigham Young agreed to it and promised to assist the hard-pressed families of the volunteers to go west, where they would be reunited with their men. [^56] Nevertheless, many battalion wives were left to fend for themselves while the soldiers' advance pay bought community supplies and general provisions for the forthcoming trek. Fannie Parks Taggart, for instance, had no home of her own at Council Bluffs but resourcefully exchanged her nursing services for housing, moving from place to place as she was needed. [^57]

Mormon BattalionHC35It was no easier for the volunteers to leave than for their families to see them go. Reluctant volunteer Henry Standage was typical. He was able to provide his wife and mother with a cow and three dollars, but they had neither a house nor a tent. He found housing for his widowed mother with a family willing to take her in, but his wife had to manage on her own. [^58]

Mormon BattalionHCWithin a month's time, the requested number of men answered the call to serve their country. The irony of their situation was not lost on the Saints. "It must ever remain a truth on the page of history," wrote Brigham Young, "that while the flower of Israel's camp were sustaining the wings of the American eagle, by their influence and arms in a foreign country [Mexico], their brothers, sisters, fathers, mothers, and children, were driven by mob violence from a free and independent state of the same national Republic." [^59]

Mormon BattalionHC37The volunteers were mustered in on 16 July. Before they marched away to California, the Saints treated them to a farewell ball. William Pitt was on hand to provide music for dancing. The party was so festive that no one noticed the lack of decorations or refreshments. The merriment could not hide the apprehension of families about to lose their menfolk, however. Drusilla Hendricks attended the dance with her son William. With Drusilla's husband crippled since the Haun's Mill incident, William was Drusilla's mainstay. But William wanted to go with the battalion, and Drusilla struggled to decide what to do. The next morning she watched him go about his work. "I got ready to get breakfast," she wrote, "and when I stepped up on the wagon tongue to get my flour I was asked by the same spirit that had spoken to me before, If I did not want the greatest glory and I answered with my natural voice, Yes, I did. Then how can you get it without making the greatest sacrifice, said the voice. I answered Lord, what lack I yet. Let your son go in the Battalion, said the voice. I said it is too late, they are to be marched off this morning. That spirit then left me with the heart ache. I got breakfast and called the girls and their Father to come to the tent for prayers. William came wet with dew from the grass and we sat down around the board and my husband commenced asking the blessing on our food, when Thomas Williams came shouting at the top of his voice, saying "Turn out men, Turn out, for we do not wish to press you but we lack some men yet in the Battalion." William raised his eyes and looked me in the face. I knew then that he would go as well as I know now that he has been. . . . I went to milk the cows. . . . I thought the cows would be shelter for me and I knelt down and told the Lord if He wanted my child to take him, only spare his life and let him be restored to me and to the bosom of the church. I felt it was all I could do. Then the voice that talked with me in the morning answered me saying, It shall be done unto you as it was unto Abraham when he offered Isaac on the altar. I don't know whether I milked or not for I felt the Lord had spoken to me." [^60]

37By the end of the year, more than ten thousand Latter-day Saints had reached the Missouri River, setting up camps on both sides, nearly four thousand of them settling Winter Quarters on the west side of the Missouri. Hundreds more were scattered in the camps and settlements throughout Iowa. Until forced to move back to the Iowa side of the Missouri in 1848, Winter Quarters was the headquarters of the Church at the Missouri. [^61] From 1848 to 1852, Kanesville, formerly Miller's Hollow, on the east bank of the Missouri, served as the center of Church activity at the Missouri.

After settling the Saints at the Missouri, Brigham Young once again turned his thoughts to those still in Nauvoo. Nearly a thousand Saints still remained in the city, and news of increasing hostilities prompted Young, in response to the covenant made in Nauvoo, to send a rescue team with wagons and provisions to bring them to Winter Quarters. Captain Orval M. Allen headed an eleven-man corps. They left 14 September, poorly provisioned themselves but commissioned to invite contributions along the way. They were particularly heartened when they came across the Joseph Fielding company, which included Joseph Fielding's sisters, Mary Fielding Smith and Mercy Fielding Thompson. "Sister Mary Smith met us with a how do you do, and her other hand was full of charity of the right kind," Captain Allen wrote. He was touched by her concern for the impoverished Saints backed by her contribution of fifteen dollars and sixty pounds of flour. Her sister Mercy also gave him money to purchase supplies. "We ask the Lord to bless them," Captain Allen noted in his journal.

38When the rescue party finally reached the Mississippi on 6 October, they found about three hundred of the evicted Saints scattered along its west bank in temporary campsites, unable to go further. Some of the refugees had families in various places across Iowa whom they hoped to join, but some were alone, like Louisa Norris, and dependent on generous friends. Louisa had watched her father die defending his family in the battle of Nauvoo and then found herself orphaned when her mother and infant sister died in their camp on the Mississippi. Allen's heart went out to these Saints, who were sick, hungry, ill equipped, poorly clothed, and dubious about joining the Camp of Israel at the Missouri, which they had heard was no better off than they were already. [^62] His task was thus not only to rescue them but also to revitalize their spirits. Within three days he had gathered up 151 people, about half the number waiting for help but all that he could transport. A second rescue team arrived soon after to collect the rest.

No one who kept a record of that perilous time failed to note in their recollections or diaries what Captain Allen described as a "direct manifestation of the mercy and goodness of God." As the first rescue team was preparing to leave with its band of sickly Saints on the morning of 9 October, a large flock of quail flew into the camp, startling the company. "Some fell on the Wagons, some under, and some alighted on the Breakfast tables," Captain Allen recorded. "The brethren and children ran after them and caught them alive with their hands. . . . There were so many killed that every man, woman, and child had them for their dinner." The quail returned again and again that day, circling the camp and alighting so the Saints could easily catch them, even the sick lying in their wagons. "Thus was showered down upon the poor persecuted Saints a sufficiency," Allen noted. "The brethren and Sisters praised God and glorified his name." [^63]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCThe rescue teams that returned to the Missouri were surprised to see that a new city of several hundred cabins and sod houses had sprung up in their absence, all carefully laid out in neat square blocks. The town would number eight hundred dwellings before the Saints abandoned it. The roads between them were often muddy, and most of the houses offered little more than basic shelter, but they were full of hospitality and well situated for neighborliness. No one boasted of truly comfortable quarters, but a disparity was clearly visible. Helen Mar and Horace Whitney, newlyweds when they left Nauvoo, were happy for a room of their own in a row of houses built by Helen's father, Heber C. Kimball. With a door, a window of four panes of glass, a dirt floor, and a smokey fireplace, it was similar to many other dwellings (except for the glass panes). But she was happy to lay down pieces of carpet that had weathered the Iowa journey and hang up curtains to partition the room into separate spaces for cooking and sleeping. She was pleased that her rocking chair had also managed to survive the journey intact. [^64] Some managed to build two-story and multi-roomed houses with shingled roofs and puncheon floors, but many others had to make do with leaky tents and the damp, dark, sod houses that were little more than dugouts with roofs. [^65] Bathsheba Smith reported that her husband, George A. Smith, built four cabins and a dugout for his family of five wives and several children. But Jane Richards and her sister wife, Elizabeth, whose husband Franklin was in England on Church business, shared a one-room cabin "just large enough for two little beds and a fireplace." [^66]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCIn a letter to her relatives in the East written 5 July 1847, Fanny Young Murray noted the variety. "Some are good log houses," she observed, "and others about the medium sort and many poor indeed, but better than none." The surrounding hills, she found, were "really beautiful," and she was sanguine enough about the town's appearance that she told them, "If you could sail up the river and take a peep at our place, you could say it was romantic and grand." [^67] A closer look might have yielded a different impression. Nevertheless, in its two years, Winter Quarters was a lively, friendly community where sorrow and joy, privation and plenty freely intermingled.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCThe social organization of Winter Quarters mirrored the orderliness of its physical layout. Twenty-two bishops in Winter Quarters and ninety bishops across the river in Iowa monitored the spiritual and temporal welfare of the Saints. [^68] Police chief Hosea Stout and his aides also helped the Saints maintain order and guarded the settlements against Indian thefts.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC41These stopover communities quickly developed beyond mere subsistence. School was held on both sides of the river, and socials, dances, singing schools, and parties kept the Saints entertained. They implemented a postal system primarily to keep in touch with the trustees still in Nauvoo [^69] but also to maintain close contact with the far-flung Saints waiting for another season to move westward. Industrious Saints also constructed a prosperous ferry, flour and corn mills, and stores, which sold goods purchased in Missouri. At both Winter Quarters in Nebraska Territory and Miller's Hollow, the Saints' main settlement in Iowa, they also built temporary council houses for meetings and socials. They knew, however, that their sojourn at the Missouri was only a hiatus on their journey to Zion. Amelia Slade Bennion inadvertently described their situation when she commented on her first view of the river. "The Missouri," she wrote, was "just one big river of mud, flowing out of somewhere, sluggishly past, and on to nowhere." [^70] Her sentiment was an apt metaphor for the Mormon refugees, especially during the winter of 1846. Nauvoo was somewhere, but the vast western expanse was more like nowhere as they tried to envision their new home in the West. Life between the two points was indeed sluggish for the Saints as they awaited spring and the renewals of their journey west.

With several thousand Saints residing somewhere besides Winter Quarters in settlements stretching up and down the river, no one story can tell the tale of the Mormon sojourn at the Missouri. Some things, however, the Saints had in common. If the Lord required a "tried" people, he could easily claim these exiled folk as his own. The Missouri encampment was a scene of suffering and hardship that first winter. Even the well-prepared soon exhausted their provisions as they shared their goods with the needy, and buying or trading in Missouri and Iowa settlements for supplies required something to barter. With nothing left to sell, faith was their only stock in trade. Sarah Rich made good use of it. Left without means but with the responsibility to provide for her husband's large, extended family when he returned to Nauvoo, she set out to find food for them armed with nothing but her faith. An attempt to borrow a few dollars was unsuccessful, but a prompting to call in at Sister Ezra T. Benson's cabin yielded her a welcome cup of tea and a silver dollar, which bought her "a little sugar, and a little coffee, and tea." That was not all. On her way to the store, Sarah met Brother Ezra T. Clark carrying a sack of flour and a bushel of potatoes. It was for her, he announced. Then, before she arrived home, Brother Flake, a perfect stranger whom she met on the street, gave her a quarter side of beef. Sarah's faith produced not just one but several small miracles. It proved to be her best bartering tool. [^71]

42Women used their skills as well as their faith to provide for their dependents or to help their husbands. If they had not been resourceful before, these women learned to be so now. Lucy Smith, a young plural wife of George A. Smith and a model of self-reliance, attended a school in Kanesville, then taught in the school and finally went to Bellevue, across the river in Nebraska Territory, to teach at the Pawnee Indian mission school for six months. She was proud to earn her own money to take her west. [^72]

Martha Pane Thomas, whose husband and son had gone west with Brigham Young in the first company, learned to manage alone very quickly. Having sent virtually all of the family's provisions along with her husband, Martha found that she and her remaining children "were very near in fashion with Father and Mother Eve." But Martha was a weaver. All she needed was some cotton yarn and dye, and then she could weave "all the plain and striped stuff for dresses I had a mind to." Taking two lanterns, her only tradeable possessions, she bartered for cloth and dye with a Mr. Stootesman, a storekeeper. Mr. Stootesman gave her what she needed, let her keep her lanterns, and assured her of a ready market for her dresses. She wove more than two hundred yards of cloth that season and one bolt of forty yards for wagon covers. When her husband and son came back to Winter Quarters the next year to retrieve their family, she had managed not only to provide for her children in her husband's absence but also to weave sufficient cloth to last her family for several years. [^73] They were well outfitted for the trip west.

43Sarah Allen also learned to be self-reliant. A Mormon Battalion "widow," her first year alone was discouraging. First, the arrangements her husband had made for her to draw provisions from a trading post did not materialize. Then she could find only a small shanty to live in, which offered little more protection than her wagon. Finally, her only cow, the milk supply for Sarah and her two young children, wandered off. The outlook brightened, however, when a family settled nearby and helped her build a decent cabin. They also willingly shared their provisions throughout the winter. Sarah took over her own support the next year by teaching school while preparing for her husband's return. Finally, in the spring of 1848, a group of former battalion men returned to Winter Quarters. She eagerly sought them out, only to learn that her husband had been killed by Indians in the California mountains. His friends had retrieved a small bag of gold dust marked with his blood. With the little bit of gold and four more years of hard work, Sarah was ready to travel on to the Salt Lake Valley on her own. [^74] As Helen Mar Whitney observed, "They [the women] were a nation of wonderful managers. . . . Their art availed them in their changed affairs." [^75]

The legendary Mary Fielding Smith also proved resilient in preparing to travel west. The oft-told incident in which her faith and prayers enabled her to find her lost oxen occurred during her stay in Winter Quarters. She and her brother, Joseph Fielding, her mainstay from Nauvoo to Salt Lake City, and her young son, named after his uncle, made frequent trips to St. Joseph, Missouri, to buy supplies during their stay at the Missouri. On one of these trips her oxen strayed, and neither of the Josephs was able to find any trace of them. Finding his mother deep in prayer when they returned, young Joseph learned the power of faith when his mother then went out to search and found the lost oxen. [^76] Mary Fielding Smith's experience is only the most well known of such faith-revealing instances.

44Disease was a major enemy to the Saints while they waited at the Missouri, especially the dreaded scurvy. With diets short of fruits and vegetables, these wilderness sojourners were vulnerable to this unrelenting, often fatal disease. Cholera, dysentery, and the ague also took their toll of health and lives. The Saints had few resources either to prevent or to cure them. Their diaries tell harrowing stories of their physical and emotional ravages, and statistics show their pervasiveness. In the first year, from September 1846 to September 1847, the death rate, just for Winter Quarters, according to the available records, was 82.1 per thousand. Even in frontier Utah three years later, another vulnerable period, it reached only 50 per thousand. Confirming sad diary accounts, nearly a third of these deaths were infants. [^77] This was Winter Quarters' darkest hour, but it did not demoralize the Saints. There were "many happy seasons after the mighty struggle with the destroyer was over," Helen Whitney testified. [^78]

A people who never let difficulties extinguish their pleasures, they used their council houses for dances, concerts, plays, and celebrations as well as meetings and conferences, which drew Saints from all around the vicinity. "We are indeed in the wilderness," wrote Thomas and Sarah Colburn to their family in New York, "but still our ears are saluted with the sound of mirth." [^79] Eliza Cheney also found some good times that winter. "We have good meetings and good music," she told her family, "and we are all as brisk as larks." [^80]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCUnless Mary Haskin Parker Richards was unlike her circle of family and friends in Winter Quarters, she was not immune to the discomforts of living in a tent for a year or insensitive to the illnesses that afflicted those around her. She was herself alone, her husband serving a mission in England. But she too found pleasure attending singing school, listening to William Pitt's band concerts, and "dancing almost every figure & a mixing round at a great rate" at the dances held in the council house. There were family parties and anniversaries to celebrate and time to appreciate the beauties of the countryside as she walked on the bluffs and along the riverside of her temporary home. [^81] Ann Cannon, a young orphan living with her uncle John Taylor in Winter Quarters, remembered picking strawberries, wading in the stream when helping with the family wash, and dancing every night in a large tent assembled between the houses occupied by Wilford Woodruff's and John Taylor's families. When the water running the grist mill froze, she ate boiled wheat with milk, which wasn't bad eating, she remembered, and unlike some others, she always had sufficient if not necessarily savory food. Attending Church meetings, sometimes twice a week, was a pleasure to Ann and the source, she felt, of the lifelong testimony she left to her children. [^82]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC47But underscoring the bright allegro moments as well as the sobering hardships of those who wintered at the Missouri was the loneliness felt by women left to care for themselves or families while husbands dutifully served missions, conducted trading excursions into Missouri, served in the battalion, herded livestock for months at a time, or traveled west before their families. As a result, Winter Quarters and most of the area bordering the Missouri River was permeated by single-parent families. As in Nauvoo and other close-knit settlements or towns, the women living at Winter Quarters, because of their close proximity, could visit and meet together more easily than women scattered in the various campsites away from the center of Church activity and unattached to the leading families. For the first time, polygamous wives could associate freely together, and the sister wives of Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Newel K. Whitney, and other Church leaders found solace, companionship, and assistance in these familial networks. After the heads of most of these families left in 1847 with the first pioneer company, their wives spent hours together sharing household tasks, attending the sick, socializing, and revitalizing their faith through blessing meetings. In these small, spiritual gatherings, usually but not always attended only by women, they renewed a practice they had begun in Nauvoo, exercising various gifts of the Spirit, such as prophesying, casting out evil spirits, blessing, and healing one another. Their diaries recount a great surge of spirituality accompanying these shared experiences; Eliza R. Snow and others established their unique spiritual leadership in these quiet but profoundly uplifting gatherings. [^83]

47The journals and reminiscences of those unattached to these families, however, contain few references to sisters' meetings or to the exercise of spiritual gifts, and many Saints still were unaware of the practice of polygamy. But these Saints also received spiritual manifestations, often in private and sometimes in simple but nevertheless miraculous ways. Sister Benson's kindness to Sarah Rich, the unnamed couple who befriended Sarah Allen, the comforting voices that sang to Lucy Smith in her dreams, and the cake of cornmeal that multiplied itself to satisfy the hunger of Rhoda Fullmer's six children—all of these small miracles confirmed their faith in the course they had chosen. [^84]

They gained confidence and strength from one another. Barbara Evans and the other fatherless families camped with her on Starvation Creek (their husbands were seeking teams and provisions in Missouri) remembered that though they all suffered from hunger and cold, "we did not complain," she wrote, "for we were united; we truly lived the order; we all shared alike." [^85] Sharing their misery often lessened it.

48The most significant event of the Missouri Valley hiatus was the sustaining of a new First Presidency. For more than three years the Church had been governed by the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles under the leadership of Brigham Young, president of the quorum. The time had come to reinstitute a First Presidency. Following the unanimous decision of the quorum to sustain him as president with Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as counselors, Brigham Young, upon his return from the Salt Lake Valley, called a special conference. On 27 December 1847, in the newly constructed log tabernacle, the Saints ratified the action of the Quorum of the Twelve. [^86] Following a sermon by the newly sustained president, Pitt's brass band played, and the congregation celebrated with the hosanna shout led by apostle George A. Smith: "Hosanna, Hosanna, Hosanna to God and the Lamb. Amen! Amen! Amen!" Historian B. H. Roberts wrote, "It is impossible to stand unmoved on such an occasion." When the hosanna shout is given, he noted, "it seems to fill the prairie or woodland, mountain wilderness or tabernacle, with mighty waves of sound; . . . It gives wonderful vent to religious emotions, and is followed by a feeling of reverential awe—a sense of oneness with God." [^87] One can well imagine the sounds of that shout echoing across the bluffs, reaching the ears of Saints who had not participated in that momentous meeting. Throughout the Church, the action taken in this conference was sustained: first by the annual April conference held four months later in Kanesville, [^88] then by the 18,000 Saints in Great Britain in August 1848, and finally by the nearly five thousand Saints settled in the Salt Lake Valley in October 1848.

By 1852 virtually all of the Saints had left their temporary dwellings by the Missouri River. Brigham Young had issued the call to "come home," and they had followed. Kanesville became Council Bluffs, and a site a few miles north of Winter Quarters became the Nebraska town of Florence. During most of the pioneer trail period, Florence served as a major outfitting post for Mormon travelers to the West. [^89] Except for their cemeteries, Mormon traces soon disappeared.

49Later travelers, no doubt preoccupied with their own pilgrimages to Zion, seldom mentioned Mormon origins of these town as they passed through. Sarah Birch, however, in 1853 noticed traces of "huts and dugouts" and felt "solemn and thoughtful" as she "walked upon the ground where there had been so much death and suffering." [^90] A decade later, John Lingren was also moved as he walked the paths of the once-thriving Missouri River town of Winter Quarters. "Here," he wrote, "were relics of different natures; a house that Brigham Young had lived in, a well that Heber C. Kimball had dug and the remains of the dugouts, camping places and other sacred memories of gone-by times." This eighteen-year-old Swedish convert, for whom the flight from Nauvoo, the horrendous trek across Iowa, and the sacrifices at the Missouri could have been little more than a distant story, felt the impact of that great drama played out on the soil beneath him. [^91]

49A place is hallowed, John Lingren knew, by what transpires there. If ever places were sanctified, they were Winter Quarters, Kanesville, and their neighboring settlements, where all the small incidents of individual human courage, patience, and steadfastness combined to define a people and clarify in bold relief their devotion to their mission. The Camp of Israel had survived its first wilderness test and was ready to make a new Zion in that western land beyond the Rockies.

50In the caravan of exiles that crossed the Mississippi River during those eight crucial months of 1846, the Saints were focused on leaving Nauvoo and escaping their intransigent enemies more than on their ultimate destination.

Settlement at Winter QuartersJourney across IowaHC50George Whitaker, a young convert from England, arrived in Nauvoo just a year before the Saints left. He drove a wagon for Parley P. Pratt in the Nauvoo exodus and found the association eventful and pleasing. His sister Sophia became a plural wife of John Taylor, which gave George entry into another of Mormonism's prominent families. His reminiscence shows a lively sense of detail as he describes the many tasks required to make a settlement, even temporary ones like those at Garden Grove, Mount Pisgah, and the Council Bluffs area.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCGeorge Whitaker [^92]

Journey across IowaHC51It was now getting towards the fall of the year [1845]. The war clouds began to gather around. The mob threatened and swore they would drive the Latter-day Saints from Nauvoo. The [Nauvoo] Legion was called together often, and the guards were sent out in greater numbers. They (the mob) were afraid to come to Nauvoo as they knew we were ready for them, but they began to harass our brethren in the outside settlements by burning their houses and stacks of wheat, threatening women and children, and frightening them and driving them from their homes. Their husbands and fathers had to get out of their way or they would have been killed. Hundreds of families came into Nauvoo destitute. We prepared ourselves for self defense the best we could, but the mob dared not come into Nauvoo. They were afraid some of them would get hurt. They knew they were in a bad cause. The Latter-day Saints were on the defensive to protect themselves, their wives and children and their property. Business was paralyzed, excepting the work on the Temple, which was going on very rapidly. The authorities of the Church felt determined to get the walls up and the roof put on. Hundreds of men were working on it. Some of the leading men of the state and the authorities of the Church held councils. It was agreed that the mob should cease their hostilities and that the Saints should go somewhere beyond the Rocky Mountains when the spring opened. After this treaty was made, [^93] the mob to some extent ceased their burnings and drivings in the outside settlements.

Journey across IowaHCAt the October Conference a great many people gathered together. We did not know until then what the authorities of the Church had done. We knew that some important business would be transacted. We were told that the spirit of the mob was so bitter against us that we would have to leave the confines of civilization and go beyond the Rocky Mountains into Mexican territory. It was better to leave our houses, our lands, our temple, and our beautiful city than to stay there and fight the mob, and many of us perhaps would lose our lives. They thought the life of a good man was worth fifty bad men's lives. This was put to a vote, and we all voted to leave; if they gave us anything for our property to help us out it was all right, but if they did not we would go anyway. Counsel was given to go to work and finish the temple according to the revelation given to Joseph Smith, so that we might receive our washings and anointings and the keys and powers of the Holy Priesthood, and also the Holy Anointings and Sealings that the power of God might rest upon His servants. It was also prophesied that in less than five years we would be a great deal better off than we were at that time, and many more things were told us that came to pass according to the words that had been spoken. The name of the city of Nauvoo was changed and called the city of Joseph, being called after the Prophet Joseph Smith. A great many things were done at that conference that I cannot write. Suffice it to say, the Spirit of God was with the people and the blessings of the Almighty were upon them.

52When the conference was over we went to our homes and began to prepare for the great journey before us. The thing on hand was the finishing of the temple. There was a great deal of work to be done in a little time. Meetings were called in different parts of the city to organize companies for manufacturing wagons. Men went into the woods to get out timber, and seasoned it the best way they could, while every man who could use a tool worked at some part of the business. My brother Moses went to work in the blacksmith shop making the irons and setting the tires on the wagons. I went to work on the temple. I turned all my labor in on tithing.

52The greatest portion of our summer's work was lost. The kiln of bricks which we had made we could not sell. Everybody wanted to sell their property, therefore nobody wanted to build or improve their property. The Saints in Nauvoo were as a general thing very poor. Some thousands had emigrated from England and from the Eastern States, and had spent most of their means in getting here. We lived mostly on corn meal and milk, vegetable, and sometimes a little meat and flour. Our enemies tried to starve us out by stopping everything they could from coming into Nauvoo. Money was very scarce. I never got one cent in money from the time I arrived at Nauvoo until I left. [^94]

About the last of November the temple was so far along, having the upper rooms finished, that they began to give endowments. Those [who] had paid their property tithing, that is, one tenth of the property they had brought with them, and also one-tenth of their increase or labor, had the privilege of going through the temple. Everyone seemed to be trying to work and settle up their tithing that they might have the privilege of getting their endowments in the space of about ten weeks. I paid my property tithing and also my labor tithing and got my receipts for it, and had the privilege of going through the temple and getting my endowments a few days before they closed. They were at work night and day from the time they commenced until they closed, which was about the sixth day of February, 1846.

Journey across IowaHC53About this time the Twelve Apostles and all those who had teams were making preparations to cross the Mississippi River into Iowa. I with two other young men was working at Brother Parley P. Pratt's. He came to us and said he wanted two or three young men to drive teams for him to the Rocky Mountains or wherever the Saints were going. He told us he could not give us any wages, but would give us something to eat. We all told him that we would come. He then told us to bring what bed clothes we could as he had a large family and needed all the bedding he had. He told us to be there next morning. This was rather short notice for me to start on so long a journey, but I had told him I would come and I was going to do as I had agreed.

Journey across IowaHCI went home and told the folks what I was going to do. They were a little surprised but concluded that it was a good thing for me to do as I was single and had nobody to take care of but myself. My brother Moses had got married. We were all living at my sister's. [^95] They were not prepared to go at this time and they thought it would be best for me to go as I would be a pioneer for them. I put my clothing in a large box I had brought from England. My brother gave me his temple garments as I did not have any, and also a mattress. My sister gave me some bed clothes. I left a few things with them that I had brought from England, circular saws, scythes, and spades, and also a box of clothing which my sister Harriet sent with me. I left the kiln of bricks and told my brother he was welcome to what he could make out of them. I bade them good-bye and was down at Brother Pratts in good time in the morning.

Journey across IowaHCI was the only one of the three that came. I did not know them and never saw them after. Brother Pratt had a horse team ready for me. I had never driven a team in my life before, but I thought I could drive as they did not seem to be very spirited. Brother Pratt got into the wagon to show me how to drive as he knew by this time that I was an Englishman and had never been used to handling the lines. We went around gathering up some things that we needed for our journey. He then sent me alone to get some more things. I thought I could drive as well as he could. He told me not to whip the horses and let them take their time. I got along very well until I began to think they were not going fast enough. I gave them a little whip which made them start up in a hurry, and the fist thing I knew they were on the full gallop. I thought they were going to get away with me, but I held on to them with all my might until finally I brought them to. This was one of my first lessons in driving a team. I told him I thought I had done first-rate. I did not tell him of the runaway. I got along very well after that. We were very busy in loading up our wagons. All was hurry and bustle. Brother Pratt looked at my large English box. He thought he would not be able to take it, but he finally put it into the wagon. I thought a good deal of my box and the things that were in it, but it was not long before I had to leave it behind.

Journey across IowaHCOn the 9th of February, about noon, we started. We had four wagons. We got down to the river and found it frozen over. We crossed over it with our wagons on the ice. It was full three quarters of a mile across the river. After crossing the river we camped for the night. The snow was three or four inches deep and still snowing. We set up a large tent and swept the snow away. We did not make any fire or cook any supper although it was very cold. Brother Pratt had six or seven wives and quite a number of small children. Everyone seemed to be cheerful, although complained a little of the cold. We ate some cold victuals and laid our beds down in the tent. Most of the family slept in the tent that night. We went to bed at an early hour. I did not sleep very warm as my bed was by the tent door and the wind blew in very cold. I did not say anything as I thought I would get used to it in time. We all got up about daylight next morning. Brother Pratt was up and around the first. He asked us how we had slept. I did not hear any complaints. I did not make any myself. We made a fire and got our breakfast. We all felt to rejoice and felt first-rate. Bro. Pratt had very recently built him a large and commodious brick house. It seemed as though there was something more than human nature which caused them to feel so joyful and happy to leave their comfortable homes and to go out in the dead of winter with so many young children to face the cold and the storms, and not even knowing where they were going. It seemed to me that we must be in possession of some power besides the power of man.

Journey across IowaHCI soon got acquainted with the women folks. I tried to do all I could for them and in return they were very kind to me. I was very quiet. I did not say much. They would often ask me questions. Sometimes they would think I felt bad, and would ask me how I was feeling. I always told them I felt first-rate which cheered them up and made them feel good.

Journey across IowaHC56We were late before we got a start that morning on account of the snow and the cold. The women were a long time packing up and getting their children comfortably fixed. I thought if we did not make more headway we would be a long time getting to the Rocky Mountains, but finally we made a start. We traveled slow. Sometime in the afternoon we reached the tithing office in Iowa, where there was a branch of the Church. [^96] There was plenty of corn there and we thought we would stay. We were then about four miles from Nauvoo. That was our first day's travel. We drove our teams into the yard and gave our animals something to eat as they had had but very little since we had left Nauvoo. The women and children went into a log cabin. There was already a good fire made for them and we spent the evening very comfortable. It was quite different to the evening before, which we had spent on the banks of the Mississippi River. We spent the evening in talking and chatting and looking forward to the time when we should be at the end of our journey. There was nothing said in regard to our homes and our pleasant places we had left in Nauvoo. We had given them up never to see them again. We felt we were going to a better country where we could live in peace, free from mobs and strife, where we could worship God according to our own conscience, none to molest or make us afraid.

Journey across IowaHC56We had a very good new milch cow, which gave ten quarts at milking. Brother Pratt gave her in charge of me. We lived on milk and cornmeal. We would have milk and corn dodger for breakfast and mush and milk for supper. I got to like it so well I could sooner have it than anything else. The fact was, there was very little of anything else for us.

Journey across IowaHCPresident Young and the main body of the camp had crossed the river a day or two before us. They were about four miles ahead of us camped on a little stream called Sugar Creek. He intended to stay there until the weather moderated so that we could travel with more comfort, and also to stay until the companies had gathered up that were going that winter. He was organizing them into companies for traveling, and placing over them captains of fifties and captains of ten, and also a company of men to go ahead as pioneers with axes and spades to cut down the brush and make the roads, and also a company of men to guard the camps.

Journey across IowaHCBrother Pratt and family were still at the tithing office in Iowa. Brother Pratt went often down to the camps to counsel with the Twelve. He would come back in the evening. After supper we would all sit around the room on our boxes or anything we could get for a seat and Brother Pratt would then begin to talk to us and teach us a great many good things. He told us some of his experiences in the Church, about his early history, the persecutions of the Saints in Missouri, the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, the great phenomena that was seen in the heavens in the shooting of the stars on a bitter cold night as they were camped on the banks of the Missouri River, men, women, and children, without any covering but the heavens, driven by a ruthless mob. He told us about the Exterminating Order of Governor Boggs, how they had to leave the state of Missouri—the murders and robberies that were committed, their expulsion in midwinter, their hardships and poverty. He told us of the massacre at Haun's mill, how that eighteen men and boys were shot down in cold blood and many more were wounded; how they had to be thrown into an old well with their clothes on, while those who remained had to get away fearing the mob would return and kill them. He also told us of the battle at Crooked River where David Patten was killed and other brethren. He told us how he and other brethren were taken to prison and their miraculous escape, how he traveled many days in the woods and by paths with very little food until he got to the Mississippi River. All these things were very interesting to us. I thought he was the best man I ever saw. I felt that I would like to stay with him all my life. He told about the Rocky Mountains and California and spoke of the prospects of the future, and also prophesied of the final destiny of the Latter-day Saints. We listened to what he said with great satisfaction. We felt to thank God that we had left our homes and got away from our enemies. Brother Pratt would then call upon us to take the lead in singing a hymn. We would then have prayers and retire to rest.

Journey across IowaHCAs I had nothing much to do, and only about four miles from Nauvoo, I thought I would like to see the folks before the camp moved away from Sugar Creek, as we expected to move on in a few days. I told them I would like to go over to Nauvoo and see my brother and sister before we went away. They rather got the joke on me as they thought I wanted to see someone else besides my brother and sister. That was true. I was engaged to a young lady, Evline P. Robinson. I had taken her through the temple and we had got our endowments. Her father went to the state of Maine to get some money he had there. They expected to start in May, and we had agreed to get married when we met again. We could not tell when that would be, but we hoped to meet again. This was all arranged before I left.

Journey across IowaHC59After eating breakfast one morning I started on foot for Nauvoo. I came to the river. It was still frozen over. I got over the river very well and made for my sister's about two miles distant. I found them all well. They were very glad to see me. I stayed two days as I had promised not to stay over that time. I bade them all farewell, hoping we would meet again sometime in the future. I wended my way towards the river. Upon arrival there I found the ice had broken up. I could not cross and I did not know what to do. I thought it would not do to go back home as I had stayed my full time. They would be expecting me at the camp, and the Saints were almost ready to start when I left. I wanted to go with them. I had no desire to go home. The camp of the Saints was my home. Where they went I wanted to go. I had the spirit of emigration and there was nothing in the world that would stop me excepting sickness or death. I walked up and down the banks of the river for some hours watching for a skiff or boat to cross the river. Many thoughts passed through my mind. I was sorry that I had left the camp and crossed the river. I was worried, and being a stranger I didn't know how to apply to get over. I waited for hours, until finally I saw two men some distance from me up the river. I made for them. They had a little boat and were going across the river. I asked them if they would take me. They said they would if I would pay them. I told them I had no money, and they said they could not take me. I told them my circumstances, how I had left the camp to go to Nauvoo to see my folks, and I had promised to be back in three days. I told them who I was living with, and that I expected the camp was ready to start. I told them that anything I had on or about me they could have. The most valuable things I had in my pocket were a silver penholder, which I had brought from England, and a pocket knife. They said they would take me over for the penholder. I was very much pleased with the trade. I got into the boat and we made our way to the other side. We were a long time getting across on account of the ice. I felt to thank God that I was safe across. I made the best of my way to the tithing office. It was night before I got there. I found them all well. Brother Pratt and family were pleased to see me back. I was very glad to get back. I gave them a little synopsis of my visit—how I was detained on the banks of the river through the breaking up of the ice, and how lucky I was in getting across. They laughed at me, they thought I had very little experience, and that I had a great many things to learn, as I soon began to find out.

Journey across IowaHCWhen I got back I found that Sister Mary Ann Pratt, Brother Parley's first wife, had packed up her things and gone back to Nauvoo to see her father and mother. She had said she would come back again. Brother Parley went over to get her before the camp started, but she would not come; she said she would come along in the spring with her parents. She had three little children, two girls and a boy about six months old. So far as I know her she was a very good woman. When we had started for the West she had asked that I should drive her team. Some ten years after she came to Salt Lake.

Journey across IowaHC60While we were staying at the tithing office we had overhauled our wagons and provisions and put everything in a better shape for traveling. We had three horse teams and one ox team. Brother Pratt's family consisted of seven wives and quite a number of small children; three or four under one year old. Parley was his oldest boy. He was eight years old. His mother died about the time he was born. [^97] Another family was with us by the name of Rogers, [^98] his wife and two children. They came from New York. They had money and helped to get the necessary outfit, such as horses, oxen, and wagons, and provisions for the journey. There were two teamsters besides myself, Wm. Pratt, Parley's brother, being one of them. Brother [William] Leffin[g]well, who kept the tithing office, and family concluded to pack up and go with us. It had been about three weeks since we had left Nauvoo. I had become very well acquainted with Brother Pratt and his family. I did everything I could to make them comfortable, and they thought a great deal of me. They did everything they could for me. If I had been their brother or their son they could not have done more.

Journey across IowaHCOn the first day of March 1846 we started, drove to Sugar Creek, about four miles and camped. We found that President Young and company, about fifty wagons had gone. Quite a number were there and preparing to go. Next day we caught up with Brother Young. It was very cold and had been snowing. The pioneers had gone ahead and had prepared a camping place. As there was plenty of wood and timber there they had hauled it in piles. When we got into camp about dark, there were thirty or forty large fires burning, which cheered us up very much. Each family or two or three small families would be put to one fire. Everything was arranged in the best of order. I went to make the mush. We had not traveled above six or eight miles that day. When our supper was ready and we had taken our mush and milk, we all got around the fire and talked about our day's journey and had the prospects before us. We all felt very happy and joyful. Our camp ground took up some acres of ground. We could see grouped all around the camp fires men, women and children; some were singing, some were dancing, some were playing music, everyone seemed full of life and joy. We felt as though we had been released from bondage and were free, where there was no one to make us afraid.

Journey across IowaHCAfter we were through with our conversation, Brother Pratt called upon me to start a hymn. They were all good singers and we made a very good choir of ourselves. After singing we had prayers, every family in camp doing the same, as we were all instructed to call upon the Lord morning and evening, that he would bless us with health and strength and that he would lead us and guide us to the place of our destination, and also to bless our cattle and horses that they might be strong so that they might perform the work that they had to do, which was very hard. The men put down their beds in the tent on the wet ground. The women and children slept in the wagons. We had a large family wagon fixed so that six or seven could lie cross-ways in the wagon. We all slept soundly. At day break when we got up, the whole camp was astir in making fires and getting breakfast and preparing for our day's journey. The cow was milked. We had corn dodger and milk for breakfast. After breakfast we took down our tent, put all our things into our wagons, got our teams hitched on and all ready to start. The pioneers rolled out first and went ahead so as to look out and make ready a camping place for the night. I should judge there were about one hundred wagons. It was late in the forenoon before they had all left camp. We traveled about the same distance that day as we did the day before, and camped at night in the same [unreadable]. Our progress was rather slow on account of our heavy loads and [unreadable].

Journey across IowaHCOn the fourth day we came to the Des Moines River and also a little town called Farmington. The river was from seventy-five to one hundred yards, while it was not more than two feet deep. We forded the river as there was no bridge. We all got safely across and camped a few miles from town. We traveled a few days in this way. We were making very slow progress on account of so many wagons in one company. Some were heavily loaded and had very poor teams and seemed to be in the way of others that had good teams. We had to travel in line one after another. Very often the wagons that had the poor teams would get stuck in a mud hole and would have to be helped out, as no one was allowed to pass another thus situated. Therefore it became very trying to a good many. We all needed a great deal of patience. Things did not go along as pleasantly as some had expected. It was a new thing to most of us, and we found many things to contend with. It seemed very pleasant to me. I was young and strong and always willing to put my shoulder to the wheel and help my brethren.

Journey across IowaHCThe slow traveling did not suit Brother Pratt and a number of others. They thought they would make a company and go ahead of the others. I suppose it was the counsel of President Young. I should imagine we had traveled then about forty or fifty miles. About twenty or thirty wagons started out, Brother Pratt in the lead. We soon got ahead of the main camp, but there seemed to be a serious difficulty before us. We were getting where the old settlers were not so thick and only a log house here and there. The pioneers had got some money from the camp and had been buying corn to feed our animals, and as we did not expect any grass for two or three weeks that our stock could feed on, it would not do to get out of the settled country altogether. We had but very little money with us and we thought we would stop a few days, rest our teams, as they raised little else but corn. We soon found some work in building log houses and barns. Corn was only about 15Â¢ or 20Â¢ a bushel. We could put up a log house in a day and this would buy corn enough to last us several days. Brother Pratt thought that he would overhaul the wagons to see if there was anything that he could leave behind that we did not really need, as our teams were becoming very weak and he was afraid they would give out. He soon came across my big box that I thought so much of. He told me that he could not carry it any further on account of the weakness of the teams, and that I must put my things in sacks. I could see that there was reason in this and I consented. A brother that was there said he would bring it for me, but that was the last I saw of it. Sister Elizabeth Pratt gave me a very small old trunk and I put the rest of my things in sacks. The main camp did not come up with us. I suppose they were stopping for the same purpose.

Journey across IowaHC63After staying two or three days we again started. We were now getting to the outside settlements. We had to make our own roads as there were none. We traveled in a western course as near as we could. It was now about the middle of March. We had only traveled about sixty miles. The weather was cold and very rainy. It rained almost every day. Brother Pratt and myself had to be out in the rain mostly all of the time. Fires had to be made, water had to be brought, cows had to be milked, and cooking had to be done, and the teams had to be seen to. The women could not get around much on account of the rain and mud, although they wanted to get out of their wagons and help around, but I told them I would get supper, which consisted in cooking a large kettle of mush. I was willing to do all I could for the comfort of the women and children. The other men did not feel so interested as they might have done. They kept in their wagons as much as they could to keep out of the rain. Brother Pratt was always around doing all he could and when he wanted help he always called on me. He was always in a good humor and would be singing and talking and encouraging us all he could. I always felt very cheerful, although it was very cold and disagreeable. We would go to bed in our wet clothes as there was no chance of drying them. It seemed as though the Lord was with us and His angels around about us to keep us from getting colds and from sickness, as we were all well and hearty.

Journey across IowaHCWe were traveling through a rolling country, and we had to cross little hollows and valleys. As our company was in the lead we had to pioneer and make our own roads, traveling west as near as we could. In crossing these little hollows, having had so much rain, our wagons would sink down and there we would have to stay until we were helped out. Some of the wagons would turn out of the track and try to cross at another place, but would sink down and there were times when there were as many as half a dozen stuck at once. We would then double teams and get the company across, and then get those out that were stuck in the mud.

Journey across IowaHCWe traveled in this way all through the month of March and part of the month of April. The rains were almost incessant. We could only travel a few miles a day. Our teams were weak and we made very slow progress. We would travel a few days and then would stop and rest our teams a day or two if it was a good camping place. As Brother Pratt was always busy and wanted to be doing something, he would have all hands turn out and cut down some timber and build a log house or two. He said it might be a resting place for somebody. He was thinking about those who would follow, and as there was good land there, he thought perhaps some persons who could not get any further would stay there and cultivate the land and the houses would come in very useful, and which we found out afterwards was the case.

Journey across IowaHCAt one of these camping places on a small river called the Sharidon [Chariton], Brother Pratt, Brother Rogers, and myself, thought we would have a day's shooting, as there seemed to be plenty of game in that neighborhood, such as ducks, geese, and wild turkeys. We took our guns and ammunition, crossed over the river, traveled two or three miles until we came to a small lake. There were plenty of ducks and geese on it, and we thought that this was a good place to try our skill at shooting. I had never been at the business before and I did not know much about a gun. I had learned how to load a gun and that was about all. I thought I had a nice little rifle that shot bullets and had great faith that I could kill something as we stood in great need of something of that kind. We separated and got around the lake at different points and lay down waiting for chances. There seemed to be plenty of chances and plenty of shooting, but we could not hit anything. We frightened all the game away. [unreadable] waited several hours and then concluded we had better go to camp. I had expected Brother Pratt and Rogers to get something, but I had not to do much. I was not satisfied—I did not want to go to camp without anything as they were expecting to have a feast on what we should bring home. Brother Pratt and Rogers said they would go home as they were tired. I told them I would go into the woods and get a turkey and take it to camp. They wished me success and went home. It was getting towards evening when I struck into the woods, about the time that turkeys were going to roost. I had thought but very little how I should find my way back to camp. I was very anxious to take a turkey home. I looked up in every tree as I went along. It was getting dark. I happened to see a fine turkey on the top branches of a small oak tree. It was a splendid shot. I rested my rifle on one of the low branches and taking good aim I fired away. The turkey rose as though there was nothing the matter and flew away. I thought surely there must be something the matter with my gun as it would not shoot straight. The greatest difficulty then was to find my way to the camp. I wandered about for about two hours, and as luck would have it, I came in sight of the camp fires. I came down to the river opposite the camp and called to them, and they sent over a little boat and took me over.

Journey across IowaHC66We had a small cooking stove in one of the wagons to keep the children from freezing. Brother Pratt thought they could do without this stove as the weather would soon be getting warmer and it would lighten our load a little. Our horse teams were getting very weak as we were out of the settlements and could not get any more corn, and the grass had only just begun to spring up. We had to cut down cottonwood trees for our cows and cattle to browse on, and thus they were kept alive for two or three weeks. Our horses could not stand it so well as our cattle, so what little corn we had we gave to the horses. Brother Pratt thought we had better trade our stove and a span of horses for some corn. We hitched up a span of horses to a wagon, put the stove into it (although the women were very loath to part with it) and traveled about twenty miles. We came to a farm house. They had a good farm and plenty of everything around them that they could raise on the farm. They were a long way from any market and from settlements, and only here and there a farm house. We drove up to the house and told them our business. They were pleased to see us as they had not seen anybody for a long time. They took care of our horses, and gave them all the corn they could eat. We told them that we wanted to trade the stove and horses for some cattle. They seemed to want the stove very badly as they did not have any. We had not seen a stove in any of the houses of the settlers throughout the country. They had large, open fireplaces where they could roll in logs and make large fires.

Journey across IowaHC66It was late in the afternoon when we got there. They invited us into the house and seemed very pleased to see us as they did not see strangers very often. We had supper there, which consisted of pork and dogger (corn bread), butter and milk, which was quite a feast to us. This was pretty much what they lived on all through that country. We did not see any flour bread and very few vegetables. They made us very comfortable for the night. About the middle of the night we were awakened by the family. It explained that a skunk had gotten into the house and was under the floor. I did not know what a skunk was. I thought it was some horrible beast that would kill some of us, but I soon found out what kind of animal it was. After getting the skunk out, we returned to bed and slept until morning.

Journey across IowaHCAfter breakfast we began to talk business. They did not want the horses but they very much wanted the stove. They finally concluded they would give two yoke of oxen for the horses and stove. We decided to accept the offer as we had no choice in the matter and we could not go anywhere else to trade. We yoked up our oxen and started for camp. Brother Pratt was pleased with our trade. They had been there several days; the cattle had browsed on all the cottonwood trees and they wanted to move.

Journey across IowaHC67Next morning we broke camp and moved on. Brother Pratt went ahead on foot to look out the best road. We traveled on the ridges or along the divide as much as we could as the land was much drier and our wagons went easier. My wagon made the first track following after Brother Pratt, he traveling west as near as he could. We traveled this way for a number of days, bridging small streams as we went along. The way we bridged the streams was by putting strong poles across and brush and dirt upon that. It would not take us more than two or three hours to bridge a small stream.

Journey across IowaHC67About the first of April we camped in a beautiful place. The timber was scattered and it looked to me like an English park. Everything was looking green and beautiful. The grass was three or four inches high. We thought there would be green for our stock from this time on. Brother Pratt named the place Paradise. Brother Pratt thought we had better stop there until the main camp came up, as we had not heard from them for some time. While staying at this place some of the people concluded to send some things they thought they could spare down into Missouri to trade for some cows, as we needed milk and butter. Sister Rogers sent her feather bed. Sister Pratt sent their crockery and many other things. A man was appointed to go and do the trading. Some other men, little Parley Pratt, a boy above nine years old, and myself were appointed to go with him. We were camped on the Madison River, a branch of Grand River that ran through the state of Missouri. We loaded up two wagons with such things as they thought they could spare, although we had nothing that we could really spare, but we had to get some more cows as we mostly depended on our cows for a living.

Journey across IowaHC68We started on our trip. There were no roads to the settlements. We got on the ridges or divide and made our way as we thought towards Grand River, where we expected to find some settlements. In four or five days we came to Grand River. We found some few scattered farm houses. We traded our things with the settlers and some had nothing left. We had taken things that the settlers needed, and they sold very readily, while we were well satisfied as we had about twenty cows to take back. We started back to the camp. Nothing particular happened on our way back. Sometimes we would have to go out of our way to get across the head of a creek or bridge it over.

Journey across IowaHCOne little incident I will mention. There were a great many rattlesnakes in that country, I had charge of little Parley Pratt, his father having given me particular instructions to take care of him and to bring him safely back. As we were traveling he found a large rattlesnake. He got a short stick and began to play with it. The snake curled up and began to strike at him. I happened to see him and took hold of him and pulled him away, telling him that if the snake had bitten him he would have died. He did not seem alarmed. I took him away and let the snake go. The man that had been appointed to do the trading was taken very sick. He was so sick that he had to leave his horse and ride in the wagon. A day or two after arriving at camp he died. We had been gone about ten or twelve days. The people were well satisfied with their cows. We then had plenty of milk and butter for our corn meal. We had traveled a little more than one hundred miles through mud and rain, making a new road and bridging the streams. Our horses and cattle had stood the journey very well. None of them had died although they had been very much exposed to the rains and storms and were very poor in flesh. We would tie them to trees at night and in the morning they would be up to their knees in mud; but the season had come when everything began to look fresh and green, and our animals began to do better, and it also put new life into the Saints as the weather became warmer. They felt happy and rejoiced in the Lord their God.

Journey across IowaHC69It was now getting toward the middle of April. The main body of the camp had come up and had passed along before we came back from trading. Brother Pratt was very anxious to be on his way to catch up with them. We gathered up our teams, hitched them to our wagons and started out. We traveled along on their trail about six or seven days, traveling about 50 miles and caught up with them at a place which President Young called Garden Grove. It was a beautiful place for a settlement. The Twelve held a council and decided to stay there about two weeks and make a settlement for the benefit of those who were coming who could not get any further that season.

Journey across IowaHCThe whole camp was then reorganized. It was concluded that we would fence in a large field of about six hundred acres and plant it in corn and vegetables. Every man was put in his proper place to work. Some worked at cutting house logs, some at building houses, some at cutting timber for rails, some at splitting rails, some at plowing, some at planting corn and vegetables, while others commenced to put up the fence, and a certain number were sent out to herd and take care of the stock. Every man went to work with a will. There were no idlers amongst us. We were all full of life and spirit. We had almost forgotten our trials and troubles of our two month's journey; how we had traveled through cold and snow and rain and mud, and that we had traveled only about 150 miles. When we had completed our work for the day and had finished our suppers, we would have music and dancing, singing and any other recreation that we thought proper. The weather was splendid and all was joy and happiness. In about 14 or 15 days we had quite a little town built up. We had about 600 acres of land fenced in, plowed and planted. The brethren kept coming in about every day.

Journey across IowaHCIt was now past the first of May and orders came that those who had a good outfit with provisions and teams could go west, and all those who were not provided with those necessities should stay there and reap the benefit of our labors and go when they got ready. Brother Pratt was a "go ahead" man, and he was very glad when the word came out to start. He and a small company were appointed to go ahead and look out another location as there were no settlements in that part of Iowa Territory. We got our wagons packed and everything ready to travel and soon started out taking the lead. Bro. Pratt had no horse to ride, therefore he went on foot ahead of the teams. My team was the first to follow him. Sometimes he would get into the wagon and ride for an hour or two and show me which way to go. I became so well acquainted with the country that I could travel for hours without his assistance. We always kept along the divides on the highest land when it ran in the right direction. We traveled this way for about eight days. We never traveled on Sunday. We always rested on that day. We would put on our Sunday clothes and have a meeting. We always tried to camp by a grove of trees on a Saturday night so that we could meet in the shade on Sunday. We enjoyed our meetings just as well as though we were in a fine meeting house. We had traveled about eight days through a beautiful open country with patches of timber near the small streams. We came to a place which Brother Pratt thought would be a good location for a settlement. He was half a mile ahead of my wagon. He traveled back and met us and told us there was a good location for a settlement and he would call it Mt. Pisgah. It was at the end of a divide on which we had been traveling. We camped on the side of the hill. Below us was a small stream with plenty of timber near by. We concluded to stay here until President Young and the main body of the camp came up. The main body could not travel so far in a day, as a good many of their teams would give out and they had to send back teams to get the others into camp. Brother Young would not leave any teams back, but would have them all in camp at night. A great many of their teams were overloaded, and they soon found out they would have to leave a great many things behind, as they were so overloaded they could not travel.

Journey across IowaHCBrother Pratt said we had better commence to lay the foundation for a settlement. We commenced building houses, fencing in and making gardens as though we were going to stay there. In about four days President Young and his company came up. Pisgah is about 100 miles from Garden Grove, as near as I can recollect. After we left it became quite a large settlement. Brother Pratt had a son born to him at this place and he was named Heleman. He was the first child of Sister Mary Wood Pratt. Soon after he was born Sister Pratt wanted me to come and see him. Being young and bashful, it was sometime before I could find the courage to go into the wagon and see the baby, but when I did Sister Pratt seemed very cheerful and was glad to see me. I can say that the Sisters Pratt were all very good and kind to me and did everything for me that lay in their power just the same as if I was one of their own family, and also Brother Pratt was like a father to me. Neither Brother Pratt or his wives ever gave me one cross word, and I do not know that I was ever angry or cross with them.

Journey across IowaHCPresident Young called a meeting of the brethren and spoke to them in relation to our traveling and getting over the Rocky Mountain that season. We had then been on the road about three months and had only traveled about 225 miles. President Young wanted the brethren to fit out the Twelve and make up a company large enough to travel in safety through the Indian country, cross the Rocky Mountains and form a colony that season, but the people did not see it in this light. They did not seem willing for him to go ahead without them, and he was not willing to go with such a large company, so many women and children, as he knew they were not fitted out for a journey of a thousand miles. Quite a number of the Saints could not travel any further, and so it was decided that a settlement should be made there and that it should be a resting place for the Saints until they were able to continue their journey. Brother Charles C. Rich was appointed to preside. [^99]

Journey across IowaHC72President Young and the rest of the company started out for the Missouri River which was supposed to be about 75 miles. It was now past the middle of May. We traveled about ten or twelve miles a day through a beautiful and well watered country. The streams were very much swollen on account of the great amount of rain that had fallen. It was very difficult to bridge some of the streams. It took a good deal of time and labor. One stream in particular we had to bridge several hundred yards as the river had overflowed its banks. We were three days bridging this stream with more than 100 men at work.

Journey across IowaHC72In July we arrived at Council Bluffs, overlooking the valley of the Missouri River. President Young and most of the companies camped on the bluffs. Brother Pratt and a few of his friends went down a hollow and camped by a beautiful large spring of water. Here we discovered acres of large wild strawberries. We could sit down and get our fill without moving far. This was a luxury that we had not thought of finding. [ . . . ]

Journey across IowaHCAbout this time the young lady whom I had taken through the temple at Nauvoo, arrived with her father's family. It was on Sunday. After the meeting was over, I took her to our tent and introduced her to Brother Pratt's family. I asked her where her father was camped but she could not tell me. She thought it was two or three miles from there. I know the country around there very well, so we started to find the camp. We made for the large spring where we had found so many strawberries and we found them camped right by the spring. They were very glad to see me and made me welcome. Her father's name was John Robinson. He had been a sea captain and master of a vessel. They had started from Nauvoo in May with a good outfit consisting of three wagons, six yoke of cattle, some cows and quite a number of sheep. They had lost all but about six of their sheep and they lost the remainder before they left the spring. I went back to camp in the evening.

Journey across IowaHCI will now say something about the movement of the camps. The lateness of the season, the poverty of the people and above all, the taking away of the 500 of our best men [to the Mormon Battalion], finally compelled us to abandon any further progress westward till the return of another spring. The camps therefore began to prepare for winter. We sent a small company of men down to the Missouri River to get lumber to make a flat boat to carry us across the river. Bro. [Frederick] Kesler, who was afterwards Bishop of the Sixteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, was appointed to superintend it. The camps all moved down to the river to a place which was called the Point, where some Indian agents lived who kept supplies for the Pottowatamie Indians, living about 30 miles east from there. They were the first Indians I ever saw and they seemed to be quite intelligent. They wanted to know where we were going. We told them we were going beyond the Rocky Mountains, that we were driven out from the United States and were seeking a home far away in the west. They seemed to be very friendly and thought it very strange that we could not live with the white people. We showed them the Book of Mormon and told them it was a record of their forefathers. They seemed very pleased and wanted to know more about it. Some of those Indians had been to Nauvoo and had seen Joseph Smith, who had told them a good deal about the Book of Mormon, that it was a record of their forefathers and that they were once a white people like unto us. They did not stay there many years after that as the Government took their lands and they moved to Indian Territory. (I have strayed a little from my narrative, but as I had missed this little incident I thought it was a good place to put it in.)

Journey across IowaHCWe went down to The Point, did a little trading at the store, camped on the banks of the Missouri about two weeks until the boat was completed, and then commenced to ferry across the river, which was about one quarter of a mile wide, being narrower there than in many other places. They kept the boat going night and day and still could not complete the crossing of the camps till late in the season. We had a very steep hill to go up from the river to get on the bluffs which made it very hard pulling. We traveled a few miles on the bluffs up the river and camped. As we were going to stay there a few days, I concluded to cross the river, go back and get Miss Robinson, as we had agreed before I left Nauvoo that when we met we would get married. I spoke to Brother Pratt on the subject and he told me I had better go back and bring her along.

Journey across IowaHCI took my horse and carriage, crossed the river and found them camped on the bluffs. I made my errand known to them and she was willing to go with me and share with me in anything we would have to go through. I stopped with them that night. Next morning she gathered up the few things that she had and put them into the carriage. We bade the old folks good-bye and started for the river. The boatman knew it was Brother Pratt's carriage. I told them I was on urgent business so they put me across in quick time. In going up the hill from the river we both had to get out and walk. The hill was very steep, our horses were not very strong and the carriage was very heavy. I began to fear we could not get up. I told Miss Robinson to drive and I would push behind and block the wheels, but as she was no driver that would not work. The carriage went back instead of going ahead. I got a hold of the lines and told her to block the wheels. We managed to get along by going a few yards and resting, and in this way finally got to the top of the hill. We had taken the things out of the carriage and left them half way down the hill. I had to go back and carry them up. This took me sometime and I was very nearly exhausted, but we finally got started for camp which was only about three or four miles, arriving there in safety. The Sisters Pratt were very pleased to see us and began to make preparations for our wedding. It was decided that Brother Pratt should marry us the next day. On the evening of the 27th of July, 1846, all of the family dressed in their best, and Brother Pratt performed the ceremony. Hymns were sung, a good supper was served, and we all felt happy.

Journey across IowaHC75As before stated, it was now getting too late in the season to pursue our journey to the mountains, and as we had eaten a good portion of our provisions and had to get fresh supplies, President Young thought we had better stay somewhere in the vicinity until another season. The object now was to find good winter quarters. We traveled about 16 miles further up the river and camped near a large grove of timber which place was called Cutlers Park in honor of Father [Alpheus] Cutler. We remained there some three or four weeks, plowed and fenced in several acres of land and planted it with turnips which matured before the winter set in. This was about two miles from the river. President Young was looking for a location for us to winter. He did not think this place was suitable. He decided that we should go to the bluffs. We moved down there and pitched our tents. This was sometime in September.

Journey across IowaHCThe next great question was where we could winter our stock as we had several thousand head. The prairie grass was drying up and we could not feed them on that, and the only plan that could be devised was to send them up the river about 100 miles on the river bottoms and winter them on the bushes. Men were sent up the river to look over a good place, and most of our horses and cattle were sent away, with the exception of a few that were wanted for our immediate use, and also our milch cows. Quite a number of men went to cutting hay and stacking it up. The hay was not very good as it was cut too late in the season, but it was thought it would save the lives of some of our stock. Some of the men, including myself, were appointed to take some stock about 20 miles up the river to herd. A wagon was unloaded and some provisions put in. My wife and myself with some other families fitted out in the same way with horses to ride, went up the river to herd. It was a very nice place. We found plenty of honey made by wild bees in hollow trees. We always collected the honey at night when the bees were sleepy. We had all the butter, milk and honey that we wanted to eat with our bread. It was that time of the year called Indian summer and it was very pleasant.

Journey across IowaHC76One evening I was gathering up the stock. I had strayed several miles from camp. It became dark and I lost my way. I wandered about for several hours. At last I saw a little glimmer of light. I went toward it and it proved to be the camp. I found my wife crying. She thought the Indians had taken me and that she would never see me again. The Indians on that side of the river were very bad. They would steal all they could put their hands on and if they caught a white man alone very likely they would kill him as they did in one or two instances.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC76Towards the last of October I was called to go to the main camp, or as the place was called, Winter Quarters. Although I had spent a very pleasant time herding, I was glad to go back. I took all the honey that I could collect back with me. They wanted me at Winter Quarters to help them to erect houses as they were preparing for cold weather.

I will say that before I went up to the herd, Brothers Pratt, [Orson] Hyde and [John] Taylor were called to go to England to settle some difficulty in relation to Elder [Reuben C.] Hedlock and the joint stock company. [^100] It had caused a good deal of trouble and dissatisfaction among the Saints in England. Brother [John] Van Cott was left in charge of the family.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC77When I arrived at Winter Quarters I was greatly surprised to see over 500 log houses put up, making quite a city, as when I had left to go with the herd there was not a house of any kind. The streets were laid out at right angles which formed it into squares. Brother Pratt's houses were not put up. Two or three men, including myself, went up the river, made a raft by boring holes and fastening them together by pegs. When we had secured enough, we got on to the raft and floated down the river, landing opposite the city. It took us about four days. We then hauled them to the place where we were going to build and were soon working on the houses. White cloth was used for windows as we did not have any glass. We thought the houses were very comfortable as we had been without houses for nine months.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC77It was now getting towards the last of November. We had very fine weather, but now it began to get very cold. The snow began to fall and it froze very hard at night. Brother Pratt and < 21 in his family and I was the only one to see to things out of doors. There was wood to be hauled and chopped up to keep the fires going, and many other things to do. Our provisions also were getting very scarce and little or no money to get any more. As Brother Pratt was away in England, the family had to do the best they could, and although Brother John Van Cott was left in charge, yet 21 in a family was a great many for him to see to as he had a family of his own. He was a cousin [^101] to Brother Pratt and was well provided for. He had not traveled with us through the spring and summer, but had come right along from the states with three loaded wagons, and had overtaken us at Winter Quarters. The brethren and sisters kept coming along all summer as fast as they could get teams, wagons and provisions to fit themselves out. Some came to Winter Quarters while others remained on the Iowa side of the river choosing for themselves the best location they could find. They were scattered for a good many miles up and down the river. [ . . . ]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCQuite a number went to the neighboring settlements and got work while those who were left were taken to Winter Quarters. The cold weather had now set in. It was the hardest winter that had been known for years. The ice on the river was three feet thick. Teams traveled back and forth across the river for three months.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC78When December arrived we had used up most of our provisions. We had a little corn that was not ground, and there was no mill within 100 miles. Brother Van Cott had brought with him a large coffee mill. We set a post in the ground and the mill was fastened to it and was used by the Saints to grind their corn. We had no more flour until the next spring. The corn meal was very coarse, but when we got used to it, it went very well. The greatest trouble was that we did not have enough of it. Sometimes we would have a little molasses to eat with it, sometimes a little butter and milk. It was quite hard to be out grinding corn when the thermometer was several degrees below zero. I spent most of my time through the winter hauling wood and grinding corn. President Young and those who came from Nauvoo when we did lived in about the same way as far as I could learn. We never tasted vegetables from the time we left the Mississippi River until we raised some in the valley of Salt Lake. When we became very hungry we would go down to the river and dig a few artichokes and what we did not eat raw, we brought home and cooked, and thought they were very nice. I do not know how we would have lived through the winter if the soldiers who had joined the Battalion had not sent us some money. When the Battalion got down to Ft. Leavenworth they had a certain amount of money given to them out of their pay to send to their families, which amounted to several thousand dollars. It was sent to President Young late in the fall. He thought it would be the best plan to send some competent man down to St. Louis and have him bring things that were needed for the camp. Bishop [Newel K.] Whitney, who was the first bishop in the Church, was selected for the purpose. Besides this money there was some collected from persons who had it, as they thought money would be of no use to them after leaving the frontier. Bishop Whitney went down to St. Louis and purchased a boat load of goods and provisions and returned early in the spring.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCThere was a great deal of sickness in the camp during the winter, partly on account of not having the proper food and partly from hunger and exposure. The disease of scurvy was prevalent. Hundreds died and were buried on the hill above the city. It was a time of mourning among the Saints. A great many of the middle aged and old people were taken from us. [ . . . ]

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC80Sometime in February I was sent to the herd, about 30 miles up the river on the opposite side, to get a horse and to take one up there that was almost starved. I started as early as I could and crossed the river on the ice. I had never been up there and had to find my way the best I could. I thought I could get there by dark, but my horse was so poor that I could not get him along. After traveling about 20 miles, I found that I could not get to the herd that night. It was no use traveling after dark as I did not know the place, and there was no road. I had been directed to travel along by the edge of the timber, as there was timber all up the river about a mile, while outside of that was open country. As I could not make the herd camp that night, my horse being tired out, I turned into the timber. The snow was on the ground about six inches deep. I had a buffalo robe with me. I tied my horse to a tree and selected an old dry log to camp by. There was nothing to eat for myself or horse. I gathered up some dry wood and made a fire. It was now dark. The wolves began to howl around me. I became quite alarmed. I had nothing to defend myself with, neither gun nor pistol. It was the first time I had ever been alone, and I had to make the best of it. I had read that wild animals would not approach where there was a good fire. I knew that would be the only thing that would save me. I gathered some more wood, as there was plenty all around. I got my horse, that I had tied some little distance away, tied him pretty close to the fire. I sat on the log for some hours listening to the howling of the wolves. Many thoughts passed through my mind. I did not feel afraid, although I felt very lonely. The howling of the wolves began to cease a little. I began to get sleepy. I knelt down by the side of the log, lay down on it, wrapped myself up, and in a little while I was fast asleep. I slept until an hour before daylight. I got up, found my horse all right, made up a good fire, warmed myself, saddled my horse and started out. I found I was about six miles from the herd camp. I got there about 10:00 o'clock and turned my horse loose to get something to eat as he had not had anything from the time we left Winter Quarters. I remained there that day, found the horse I wanted, started for home early the next morning, and managed to reach there about dark.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHCWe had many meetings through the winter. Our meeting house was a double log cabin that would hold from three to four hundred. We received excellent teachings from President Young and from the Twelve Apostles. Meetings were held once or twice a day on Sundays, our house being so small it would not hold nearly as many as wanted to attend. A great many quorum and council meetings were held to find out the best course to pursue in regard to our organization and travel the coming season. There were now some thousands gathered at Winter Quarters and many hundreds camped up and down the river and on the bluffs. All were anxious to know what they should do. Spring was now opening upon us. A great many of the Saints had lost part of their stock during the winter, some of it having been stolen by the Indians and some having died. This naturally broke up the arrangements of a good many who had intended to cross the plains that season, and they were compelled to get what little stock they had left and go to farming or anything else they could do and wait until they could get another outfit.

Settlement at Winter QuartersHC81A brother by the name of John Neff and family from Pennsylvania, came to Winter Quarters early in the spring. He was a miller and farmer, and had acquired considerable means. President Young thought it would be a good plan to build a grist mill on a little stream that ran on the north side of the town, as it would make work for a great many men who had nothing to do and very little to eat. The mill was needed to grind our wheat and corn that we were to take with us the ensuing summer. He wanted Brother Neff to take hold of it and build it, which he agreed to do. Accordingly, quite a number of men were wanted to go to work. There was a dam to be built across the creek to hold the water. Brother Frank Pullen and myself were appointed to superintend that work. There was also a mill race to be dug, two or three hundred yards long and from eight to twelve feet deep. Carpenters, millwrights and sawyers were employed. They had to saw all the lumber by hand or what we would call pit sawing. This work seemed to revive and stimulate people. We now had more provisions and the people felt better as the spring opened. It had been a very severe winter, such a winter as I had never experienced before and have not since, over 30 years.

81On the sixth day of April 1847, the annual conference was held. Many thousands were gathered together to know and understand what was to be done the coming season. President Young said he wanted a company of men with a good outfit to go with him as pioneers to find a location for the gathering place of the Saints. He had but very little idea of where he should go as he knew nothing about the country, but thought he would locate somewhere beyond the Rocky Mountains, and he wanted to start as soon as the company could be gotten ready. He chose a good many young and middle aged men, including all of the Twelve that were there, as the Brothers Pratt, Hyde and Taylor had not returned from England. Quite a number volunteered, and the company was made up numbering 143 men and three or four women. About the 12th of April they started on their journey.

We were looking for Brother Pratt and the brethren that were with him to return as we had heard they were coming and were not far away, and that my sisters were with them, Harriet, Sophia and Elizabeth. In a few days after the pioneers had left, Brother Pratt came home. Everybody was very pleased to see him. All our troubles, tribulations and privations which we had suffered during the long cold winter were for the time forgotten. Now life and joy rested upon us. He had been away just about nine months. He found an increase of one in his family. [^102]

The day after he got home he told me he wanted me to go and meet my sisters and to get the carriage ready and he would go with me. He had brought two young ladies from England whom he intended to make his wives. [^103] The next morning I got everything ready, and we started on our journey down the river. We traveled some 25 miles and stopped for the night. The next day we had not traveled a great distance before we met them traveling with a team. It was a very happy meeting and almost unexpected. I knew they had made their calculations to emigrate to Nauvoo in one year from the time I left England, but as we had been driven from Nauvoo and were in the wilderness and traveling to an unknown country I did not know when I should see them again. I did not know that my youngest sister [Elizabeth Whitaker] was married until I met them. She had married a young man by the name of Joseph Cain about the time they left Liverpool. Brother Pratt put his two young ladies in the carriage and drove towards home, leaving me to return with Brother Cain and my sisters. We traveled slow and got to Winter Quarters in about three days. Soon after we got to Winter Quarters my Sister Sophia was married to John Taylor. My sister Harriet and Brother Cain and his wife went to live in a dug out which one of the brethren had left. As many as could fit themselves out and could follow the pioneers were making preparation.

About this time Brother Pratt told me that it would not be convenient for him to take my wife and myself across the plains as he had many wives and children of his own and my wife was likely to be confined in a short time and would want a wagon and he would not have any to spare. He said he was very sorry to lose me as I had been of so much help to him and his family, but that circumstances had changed. He thought I would be able to get some help and would get along all right. I thanked him very kindly for his good feelings towards me and was glad to hear that he was satisfied with my labors.

I had been working on the mill dam and helping to dig the mill race for five or six weeks and was making a dollar and a quarter a day. I had taken that home to the family and it was a great help in supporting them, but now that work was all done. We gathered together what few things we had at Brother Pratt's and took them to my wife's father's who lived a short distance from us.

I now began to study what I should do. I could not see any way open for me to go that season. I did not think my sisters had any more than would take them. Brother Cain had just returned from a mission to England and he had but little or nothing. My wife's father did not make me any offer, nor give me any encouragement and my wife and myself were too independent to ask him for any help. I was young and strong and able to work, and I thought I could get along very well, although I wanted to go very much and would do or sacrifice anything to go. I had been a Pioneer from Nauvoo and I would very much like to go with the first companies, but my way did not seem to open up. I had nothing to do at this time. I wanted to be at work. I commenced to dig up some land for a garden and put in some seeds such as radishes, lettuce, peas and many other small seeds. I could not get it out of my mind but that I should go, still I could not see any way by which I could go. I had no provisions, no money to get any with, no team and no wagon. My clothes that I had brought from England were pretty much worn out, and I was not in a very good condition to go a long journey, but those things did not trouble me if I could get a chance to go.

84It was now about the first of May. I went over to my sister's and we began to talk about the journey. She said Brother Cain and herself were going to try to go, and they would like it very much if I could go with them. She knew my circumstances and knew I wanted to go. She suggested that my wife's father would probably help me some and she would help me and I should do all I could to help myself. I then began to feel I was going. My sister and her husband had some things they could part with that they had brought from England and also a little money. It was concluded to fit out a team and go to Missouri and trade those things away and get our provisions and some cows and what we needed for the journey. We got up a company consisting of five or six wagons. My wife's father sent a wagon and one of his sons. I was to go with the outfit with Brother Cain. My mother-in-law gave me $5.00 and my wife told me to get some flat irons, bake kettle, shovel and tongs.

84The company started down to Missouri about the beginning of May. We traveled down to St. Joe about 150 miles. Nothing particular transpired on our way. We would trade as we went along, if we saw anything we wanted. Sometimes we would go out of our way to farm houses to see if they had any wheat or corn for sale. So many of the brethren had been down there before us that the country had been pretty much cleaned out for grain. Brother Cain offered a saddle for sale. They said it was the very thing they wanted. Brother Cain wanted $10.00 for his saddle. They told him they would give him 60 bushels of corn for it. He soon closed the bargain and we got our corn. We also got our wheat, took it to the mill and had it ground into flour, bought two cows, did our other trading, loaded up our wagons and started back for Winter Quarters and arrived there about the first of June.

On arriving home we found my sister Harriet very sick. She had been chopping wood and had broken a blood vessel which caused her to come very near dying, but by the administration of the elders and the goodness of God, she got well very fast.

85The grist mill that we had expected to use in grinding most of our wheat did not begin to run before the first of June. It was lucky for many that they got their flour down in Missouri, or they would have been very late in starting. The mill did very good business for one run of stones. When they got it going they kept it running almost night and day.

85We now began to prepare for our journey west. We had but one wagon and two yoke of oxen. My sister Harriet traded different things for another wagon. We then wanted two yoke of oxen. Joseph Cain made out to get one ox. My wife's father saw that we had done all we could. He then furnished us with three oxen, making all together two yoke for each wagon. We had to get so many pounds of flour for each individual, 350 pounds for each person, if not, we were not allowed to go. There were men appointed to inspect each wagon to see if we had the requisite quantity. We knew that we were going into a country where we could not buy any. We had to take enough to last us fifteen months, or until we could raise it. We had to take our seed grain, farming implements, cooking utensils, and such things that we could not do without. Some would take a few chickens fastened on behind the wagons, and some would take a little pig. We had our wagons all loaded up and inspected and pronounced all right.

85On the 10th of June we left our Winter Quarters, traveled about ten miles on to a large open plain. There we remained two or three days to be organized into companies. Brothers Pratt and Taylor were with us. They took a prominent part in the organization. Before President Young had left he had appointed some of the captains of hundreds. We were organized into companies of hundreds, fifties and tens. To each of those divisions was a captain. Bishop Edward Hunter was the captain of our hundred. Brother Joseph Horn was the captain of our fifty and Brother Abraham Hoagland was the captain of our ten. [ . . . ]

86Brother John Taylor traveled with our fifty. I will say that those brethren whom I have named [the heads of families in his group of ten] traveled together all the way and settled down very near together, and have loved one another as brothers ever since.

86Eliza Partridge Lyman, the daughter of Lydia Partridge Huntington, widow of Edward Partridge and later married to William Huntington as a plural wife, did not travel with her mother's family. Both were, however, assigned to the Amasa Lyman company. Eliza, a plural wife of Amasa Lyman, left Nauvoo with his company on 9 February, one of the first groups to cross the Mississippi. Eliza occasionally saw her mother along the journey, but their families traveled apart from each other, and it was not until Lydia reached Winter Quarters, after William Huntington's death in Mount Pisgah, that mother and daughter reunited. Eliza, like many women diarists, fills her diary with the friends and family with whom she shares the vicissitudes of the Iowa trek and Winter Quarters. The woman's world she lives in and recreates in her writing is rich with companionship, domestic ties and tasks, and much patience in suffering.

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young to Elder Jesse C. Little, 26 February 1847, reprinted in James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965) 1:318.
