Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Eliza Maria Partridge Lyman [^1]

87I will go back to the time when I left Nauvoo on the 9th of Feb, [1846] and write from my private journal. It will not perhaps be very interesting to anyone but myself, but it shows more particularly how we were situated and the hardships we endured in accomplishing the journey. On Feb 9th 1846 I bade adieu to my friends in Nauvoo and in company with my Husband Amasa Lyman, Daniel P. Clark and wife [Sarah Melissa Hakes Clark], Henry Rollins, and Dionitia W. Lyman (one of my husbands wives) started westward, for some place where we might worship God according to the dictates of our own consciences.

87We went about one mile to the Mississippi river, waited about three hours, then succeeded in procuring a boat, onto which we put our horses and waggons, and as there was no prospect of Father Huntington crossing the river that night, we took my mother [Lydia Clisbee Partridge Huntington] and sisters Caroline and Lydia and Br Edward with us and crossed the river. [^2]

87When we were about midway [of the stream] we saw a boat at some distance from us, sinking, with no one near to assist them, but fortunately for them they were near a sand bar so that they were not drowned, and soon a boat reached them and took them safely to shore.

87Our boat got into the ice which hindered us about an hour but did no damage. We went to Br Sidney Tanner's where a part of us staid all night and the rest staid at Nathan Tanners [sons of Father John Tanner].

88Tuesday 10th We are all alive and well. Dionitia, Caroline and I slept in one bed and as I was very tired I did not sleep much. Br Lyman is going back over the river to visit his wife Maria. [^3] I cut and made a dress for Sister Tanner.

88Evening Br Lyman has just returned bringing his wife Maria with him. I was heartily glad to see her. I went (by invitation) with them to visit her father. Father Huntington and mother and brother Edward also came there and staid all night. Mother Tanner [^4] prepared an excellent supper for the company.

88Wednesday 11th Br Lyman went back to Nauvoo to see how the children were getting along as his wife left them while she visited us. The rest of us remained at Father T. during the day and night Br L. came back in the evening reporting all well.

88Thursday 12th Br Lyman took his wife Maria to the river and saw her safely landed on the opposite shore, then returned to us feeling very well. Mother Tanner gave us the privilege of making some mince pies, and assisted us to do so.

88Friday 13th Br Lyman went to the camp. Took me with him as far as Sidney Tanner's where I staid all day till br L- came back. Went back to Father Tanner's.

88Saturday 14th Arose in the morning and found the ground covered with snow, continued snowing all day.

88Sunday 15th The weather quite pleasant. Went to the river with br Lyman to see my sister Emily, [^5] Found her in a tent surrounded with mud. Came home in the afternoon. Wrote to Sister Maria Lyman in the evening.

Monday 16th Took breakfast with Aunt Polly Cook. [^6] Twisted some thread for Mother, [^7] Came back and finished a dress for Mother Tanner.

89Tuesday 17th Mother Tanner gave br Lyman twelve yards of factory [^8] to line his waggon cover, which I made in the morning. About two o clock we started for the camp where we arrived about sundown, prepared our tents, took some refreshment, and retired for the night, but did not sleep much on account of the horses, we not being accustomed to their noise. When we left Father Tanner's he gave us a few lbs fresh beef butter, 6 or 8 lbs some pork and some mince pies, and to Father Huntington a fine calf, which he killed for veal.

89Wednesday 18th The sun shines warm and the weather is very fine. I can set in the waggon and write with all ease without fire. Father Tanner and family came to camp and made a short visit. Albert Tanner [son of Father John Tanner] brought a load of hay and some potatoes from his father's.

89Thursday 19th Arose in the morning and found the ground covered with snow. Snowed all day which makes us very uncomfortable as the wind blows the snow in every direction and our fire is out in the storm so that we can not get warm by it. I am almost frose, so shall go into the waggon and make my bed and get into it as I can not get warm any other way.

89Friday 20th The weather is somewhat pleasanter than it was yesterday but is very cold. Our family consists of seven persons, namely Amasa Lyman and his wife Dionitia, Daniel P. Clark and wife, Henry Rollins, Albert Tanner and myself.

89Saturday 21st The sun shines warm, but the air is cold. We received a load of corn from A. Lyman's farm.

89Sunday 22nd We have had a very cold night, but the sun this morning with his genial rays warms the earth and all nature revives again. Received another load of hay from Father Tanner's.

Monday 23rd The weather cloudy and cold. Received word from Nauvoo that Sister Maria Lyman was very sick. I started about two o clock in company with br Lyman to go and see her. When we had gone about three miles our buggy broke down and left us in the mud. Fortunately a waggon came along and took us to Montrose. Found the ice running in the river so that it was impossible to cross that night, except in a skiff which br L- succeeded in doing with great difficulty, leaving me on this side w/ Sister Daniels' to stay all night.

90Tuesday 24th Br L- came back this morning, said he found his wife more comfortable than he expected, had a fine son which they call Amasa. He took dinner at Sister Daniels' then went back to Nauvoo to stay till tomorrow. I staid at Sister D's till nearly night when Albert Tanner came and took me back to camp where we arrived about dark.

90Wednesday 25th In the morning, assisted in preparing breakfast, and through the day made preparations for starting on our journey on the morrow. Br Lyman came back in the afternoon, brought a sheet iron stove to put in the tent which will make us more comfortable.

90Thursday 26th The weather cold. Br L- went to Father Tanner's and staid all night.

90Friday 27th As we are yet in camp I have concluded to go to Nauvoo and visit Sister M[aria]. Lyman. Went with Henry Rollins and Dionitia Lyman. Crossed the river on the ice. Found Sister L- quite smart but her son Marion [^9] was sick with measles. Staid with them all night.

90Saturday 28th Staid with Sister L- all day looking for Br Lyman who expected to have visited us this afternoon. About three o clock H. Rollins came and said the camp had orders to move tomorrow, consequently br L- could not come over but had sent him to bring us back, which was a great disappointment to Sister L- I then bade my friend good bye and went back to camp where we arrived about seven o clock in the evening. We were stopped by the guard in sight of our own fire, and were obliged to wait till br Lyman came and took us over the line. We found the brass band assembled around our fire making some very good music.

Sunday 1st The camp are preparing to leave, but we shall stay till tomorrow.

91Monday 2nd Left camp at 15 minutes to ten. Had in company br R[oswell]. Dana and family, Wm. Huntington Sen. and family, A Lyman and family, D[aniel].P. Clark and wife, H[enry]. Rollins, A[lbert]. M[ills]. Tanner, H[enry]. B. Jacobs, S[anford]. Jacobs and J[ohn Lowe]. Butler. Traveled on the Farmington road. Camped at 5 o'clock. Our ox team arrived at sundown.

91Tuesday 3rd Up at six o clock, traveled 10 miles. Camped three miles above Farmington. Camped before sundown.

91Wednesday 4th Staid in camp all day. Washed, ironed, baked.

91Thursday 5th Up early in the morning, and ready for a start. Br Lyman took his wife Priscilla Turley into his waggon, and she will live with us for the present. Traveled the most muddy road I ever saw. Went about 6 miles. A little before night, Uncle John Smith's waggon upset with himself, wife and daughter, did but little damage. Several teams gave out before night. We reached the prairie a little before dark, and camped in company with Br H. C. Kimball, we made no fire but ate some cold meat and bread and went to bed.

91Friday 6th Arose in the morning and made a small fire of bark and made some coffee to drink with our bread. After breakfast started again on our journey, went about seven miles, found the roads very good. Stopped about 10 o clock near Br B. Young's camp on Indian Creek and staid the rest of the day. One horse died belonging to B. Young's company. Br Lyman has brought a rabbit, J. H. Rollins 2 prairie hens, and D. P. Clark a bird, which will make us a very comfortable meal.

Saturday 7th Up in the morning before sunrise, eat breakfast and left Indian Creek at 1/2 past 8. Traveled 8 miles and camped on the farm of Dr [John] Elbert where some of the brethren are at work. Stopped at 15 minutes past 1 o clock, pitched our tents and made ourselves as happy as possible. The Boys killed some hens, rabbits, etc. The weather very warm and pleasant.

92Sunday 8th Quite unwell through the night, better this morning. Br L- and J. H. Rollins have been to the main camp, and learned from the President that we are to join them this afternoon.

92Evening: We are comfortably camped again with the main body. Have found the rest of our company, namely, Sidney and Nathan Tanner with their families.

92Monday 9th Staid in camp all day.

92Tuesday 10th Made all preparations to start. Part of the teams went on, but it soon commenced raining which hindered us from going. It rained all day and is very muddy. Two of the Pioneers, J[ohn]. Brown and Si Dayton [^10], commenced boarding with us.

92Wednesday 11th Still raining.

92Thursday 12th The ground is very muddy, we cannot step without getting over shoe top in mud. We have been obliged to move our camp to a better place about a quarter of a mile.

92Friday 13th Washing Etc.

92Saturday 14th Ironed etc. Bro Lyman and Rollins killed a mess of squirrels which were very good.

92Sunday 15th The weather fine, but the wind very high, can hardly keep our tents right side up.

92Monday 16th The sun has risen in all his splendor and the weather is very fine. Br Rollins took his team and started back to Nauvoo. Father Huntington and Nathan Tanner went away to trade horses for oxen.

92Tuesday 17th This morning br Sidney Tanner's youngest child named James Monroe died and was buried in the afternoon.

93Wednesday 18th Went over to the other camp to see my sister Emily Young. Staid most of the day. While there Br Edwin Little's corpse was brought in for burial.

93Thursday 19th The camp have mostly moved on leaving us here waiting for teams. Received a letter from Sister Maria Lyman by R[obert]. Cliff. Br N. Tanner has returned from his trading expedition having exchanged one span of horses for a yoke of old cattle, one yoke of steers, a cow, a gun, and a steel trap. Father Huntington came back having made no effectual trade.

93Friday 20th Very high winds. N. Tanner took Father H's horses and started off this morning to trade for cattle. He succeeded, and returned in the evening with 2 yoke of oxen. Our men busy fixing yokes etc. in order to be ready to start on again in the morning.

93Saturday 21st All well. Weather fine. Started at 11 o clock to pursue our journey. Traveled about three miles, when Br Young and Evan Green [^11] came up with us, from Nauvoo bound for the camp of Israel just on express they said. Traveled 9 miles this day, camped on the south fork of the Cheques [Chequest] River.

93Sunday 22nd Awoke in the morning and found it had been raining. Started at 8 o clock, traveled 18 miles and camped for the night in the edge of the woods near Fox River.

93Monday 23rd There was so much rain fell during the night that we were obliged to lay by this day. Had quite a hail storm in the afternoon. Our men took a job of splitting rails for corn, three bushels to the hundred.

93Tuesday 24th The rain continues to pour down upon us with some snow. The ground is very muddy, almost impossible to get about without getting mired.

93Wednesday 25th The ground covered with snow, continued to snow all day. Br. Lyman killed 2 ducks and one rabbit.

94Thursday 26th The sun shines and every thing seems pleasanter than on yesterday.

94Friday 27th Cold and cloudy. The boys have commenced another job of rail making for which they get corn and pork.

94Saturday 28th Weather pleasant. Boys off to work. Captain gone hunting, girls washing, and I am doing a little of every thing, and not much of any thing.

94Sunday 29th Edward Dusset [^12] and family arrived here on their way to the camp. Br Lyman and others made up a load of goods and sent them to the camp on Chariton river by Br Sidney Tanner.

94Monday 30th Weather fine. Br Lyman 33 years old to day. He has been hunting and killed 3 ducks and two squirrels.

94Tuesday 31st We had an excellent dinner of our ducks and squirrels. I started with D. P. Clark to go to Bloomfield a distance of 3 miles. Went two miles, came to Fox river, could not cross, so went back home to camp. Br S. Tanner came back in the evening.

Wednesday 1st Packed up our things and started again on our journey, Came to Fox river found the crossing very bad. I undertook to walk across on a log with br L- holding one hand and D. P. Clark the other. Unfortunately for Brother L- he stepped on a rotten limb which broke and let him fall a distance of ten or more feet into the water, but I more fortunate held fast to Br Clark and thus saved myself from falling and reached the other bank in safety. After the trouble of changing wet clothes for dry ones, and lifting wagons out of mud was got along with, we went ahead again for about a mile when Dionitia hurt her foot in the double trees of the waggon. Traveled 15 miles this day and camped for the night.

95Thursday 2nd Started early in the morning. Traveled 12 miles and came to the Chariton river took in the rest of our loading and crossed over. Went on to the bluff on the opposite side and camped for the night. Two brethren from Br Pratt's camp met us before we crossed the river, with seven yoke of oxen to help us on the rest of the way to their camp, a distance of 7 miles on the west side of the east fork of Shoal Creek. At the river we came across Henry Jacobs wagon in the mud, his wife < sick in bed on the top of the load, so near the wet cover that she could hardly raise her head, a babe in her arms but a few days old, and no other wagon near or friend to do any thing for her except her husband.

95Friday 3rd Started early. Traveled a short distance, met Bro P[arley] P. Pratt, and G[eorge]. A. Smith coming to see what had become of us. Went to their camp, for the rain was pouring down in torrents. Pitched our tents in the mud and water. It continued to rain all day. It was almost impossible to get any thing to eat as we had to cook it out doors in the rain, over shoe in mud.

95Saturday 4th Arose from our beds some time in the fore noon and found them and our clothes quite wet with the rain. After breakfast we commenced to dry our bed clothes by the fire in the rain where one side got wet while we were drying the other.

95Sunday 5th The ground a little frosen, but the sun has risen and shines pleasantly. Washed, cooked etc. as we expect to start again tomorrow.

95Monday 6th Awoke in the morning and found it raining which prevents our traveling to day. Rained all day.

Tuesday 7th We had a severe storm of rain and wind with sharp lightning. Br James Scott came to our camp this morning from a camp 3 miles ahead of us where Brs [George] Miller, [Newel K.] Whitney and [Heber C.] Kimball are. Just heard that President Young wishes us to move on as fast as possible so we expect to start again tomorrow.

Wednesday 8th Started on our journey in company with Brs P. P. Pratt, and G. A. Smith and their companies. Traveled 7 miles across a very wet prairie, the wagons settling into the turf nearly to the axle trees the most of the way. Reached Locust creek about dark, crossed over, ascended the hill, and pitched our tents in a very wet place. Found Br Kimball and the rest of the camp at this place ready to start on the morrow. We had thought that our teams must do without corn to night, but to our great satisfaction Br Kimball had some corn for us, which was a great blessing to our teams after their hard days work.

Thursday 9th Started early in the morning, and were obliged to double teams before we could get off our camping ground. Roads were very bad indeed. There were few teams that could go half a mile without help. Commenced raining about 12 o clock, and we in the midst of a large prairie with no prospect of reaching timber this day and consequently could have no fire let the weather be what it might. Continued raining very hard. Roads getting worse and worse. The best of the teams cannot move their loads without help. Br Lyman told me to drive on with the buggy till we came to a fire if we could find one, as there was no prospect of the teams getting much farther to day, and it seemed as if both the people and the teams must perish if they stopped there. We accordingly went ahead (that is Dionitia and I) some two or three miles, when we came in sight of tents not far from the road, went to them and found my Mother and family there with Father Huntington which made us feel quite at home although it was a most uncomfortable place, but we were wet and cold and glad to get any < where there was a fire. Their fire however did not do us much good as the rain continued to pour down which spoiled our chance of drying our clothes. Br Lyman came up about dark with one team, but the one with our beds and provisions was left out in the prairie with D. P. Clark and wife and Priscilla [Turley] Lyman [wife of Amasa] without fire or feed for their teams. We had to sleep as best we could which was anything but comfortable, some lying on boxes, some on chairs, and others in wet beds. I laid across a box in Father Huntington's waggon, with my head on his and Mother's bed with my feet on the front end board and my clothes wet about a quarter of a yard deep about my ankles. I do not know why I did not freese, for I had no bed and very little covering. It must be that there was not room in the wagon for the frost to get in, it was so full of folks.

Friday 10th Arose in the morning and found the mud so deep that we could not get from the wagon to the tent without getting nearly mired. Found the beds in the tent wet through. After much ado we succeeded in getting some breakfast. The brethren then took all the teams they could raise and went back to help those who were left out last night, they returned towards night with some of the families but left several to stay another night in the prairie The weather is very cold and they have no fire and very little food.

Saturday 11th The brethren have gone again to the prairie to render assistance to those who have not yet come up. Washed some of our wet clothes.

Sunday 12th Br Lyman has gone to attend a council of the twelve. Distance 5 miles. He returned towards evening almost crazy with the toothache.

Monday 13th Took all the teams in the company and part of the wagons and went 5 miles to stay while the teams went back for the rest.

Tuesday 14th The teams came up and went on past us 3 miles then came back for us, we started about 3 o clock came up with the main camp before dark Found sister Emily and babe [^13] well.

Wednesday 15th Traveled 7 miles and camped in the edge of the prairie.

Thursday 16th The most of the company have moved on and we shall remain here while our teams are being sent off to trade. N. Tanner and D.P. Clark having gone for that purpose. We expect teams from the other camp to help us along tomorrow.

98Friday 17th The teams have come for us but it is so late in the day and Br G.A. Smith is here destitute of teams, that we have concluded to stay another night. Br Lyman, Hutchinson and Driggs [^14] have gone turkey hunting, will stay all night.

98Saturday 18th Our hunters have come in bringing one turkey and 1 chicken. Started on our journey again. Traveled 8 miles and camped in the timber.

98Sunday 19th A most beautiful morning. All well except Br Lyman who is very sick with bowel complaint.

98Monday 20th April I am 26 years old to day. Br L- very sick. Received a letter from Sister Maria Lyman.

98Tuesday 21st Answered Sister L.'s letter. Br L- is not as well to day as yesterday. Suffers much pain. One of our horses very sick.

98Wednesday 22nd Br L- some better. The weather very warm.

98Thursday 23rd Brother L- same as yesterday. Dionitia taken sick.

98Friday 24th Brother L- able to dress himself and leave the wagon.

98Saturday 25th P[arley].P. Pratt and family left us and went on to Grand river.

98Sunday 26th The weather pleasant. Folks getting well.

98Monday 27th Woke in the morning and found it raining, it rained all day

98Tuesday 28th It has rained all night and is raining yet.

98Wednesday 29th The weather cloudy with some rain.

98Thursday 30th Still raining.

98Friday May 1st The weather more pleasant. Bros Tanner and Clark have just returned from their trading expedition.

99Saturday 2nd Br Johnson and family came up with us, just from Nauvoo.

99Sunday 3rd Had a severe storm of rain.

99Monday 4th A fine pleasant morning. We had designed to start on our journey again but the rain has prevented us.

99Tuesday 5th Weather extremely fine. Br Wm. Edwards very sick. The rest of our men preparing for a game of ball.

99Wednesday 6th We are again hindered from pursuing our journey by a most violent storm which visited us last night, and we have another to day, a most furious storm.

99Thursday 7th The morning cloudy, but a prospect of better weather.

99Friday 8th Weather fine. Br Edwards some better but not able to sit up. Sister Lydia 16 years old to day. We have plenty of squirrels and wild turkies here and at night we are blessed with the music of the wolves.

99Saturday 9th Started on our journey at 1/2 past 8 in the morning. At 12 stopped to feed our teams. Br Edwards very sick and so crazy that it is almost impossible to keep him in the wagon. Traveled 8 miles and camped for the night.

99Sunday 10th Traveled 9 miles.

99Monday 11th Traveled 7 miles and came up with Br Young's camp at the farm on Grand river. I staid with Sister Emily all night. The rest of our company went on 2 miles farther. Left Br Wm. Edwards at Father [James] Allred's.

99Tuesday 12th Br Lyman came back with the buggy for me. Sister Emily and babe went with us and she staid with me all night.

99Wednesday 13th The ground quite wet with last nights rain. Traveled 12 miles, and camped in the prairie and looked for a storm. Heard that br Edwards died this morning.

100Thursday 14th The looked for storm came about dark last night and a harder rain we have not had this spring, almost every thing we have is wet, but the prospect is fair for a pleasant day. Br B. Young has just arrived and camped near us. We have traveled none today.

100Friday 15th Traveled 6 miles and camped in the prairie.

100Saturday 16th Traveled 6 or 8 miles across the prairie and camped near a skirt of timber.

100Sunday 17th Staid in camp all day.

100Monday 18th Went to Grand river. Found Brs P.P. and O[rson]. Pratt encamped

100Tuesday 19th Br Lyman went in company with B. Young and others to look at the country around us. Two Indians came to our camp looking for a stray horse.

100Wednesday 20th Rainy morning. It is thought best for some of the families to stop here for the present and raise crops this coming summer. They have named the place Mt Pisgah.

100Wednesday 27th Father Huntington is moving his family to a house that he is building, and will not move any farther this year.

100Sunday 31st Attended meeting in the grove.

100Tuesday June 2nd [1846] Br Lyman has started back to meet his wife Maria and family. They are about 30 miles from here.

100Saturday 6th Br L- has returned with his family and Father John Tanner and family.

100Thursday 11th We are now ready to start on our journey again after having staid nearly a month in this place. I here leave my Mother and sisters Emily and Lydia and little brother Edward with the rest of the family excepting sister Caroline who is also Br Lyman's wife, she is going with us. Cornelia Leavitt Lyman (also one of Br Lyman's wives) has joined our family and is going west with us. Started about four o clock, traveled about four miles and camped for the night.

Friday 12th Traveled till night; then camped in the prairie, so far from wood that we could have no fire and of course not much supper.

101Saturday 13th Arose early, ate some rusk [^15] and milk and started on our journey at 6 o clock. At 12 we came to some timber made a fire and prepared breakfast. Staid till 3 then went on till night.

101Sunday 14th Weather pleasant. Br E[zra]. T. Benson took breakfast with us, on his way from Mount Pisgah to Council Bluffs. Traveled till noon, stopped near a small creek where we found an abundance of ripe strawberries. Camped in the timber < a short distance from timber.

101Monday 15th The cattle could not be found till 11 o clock. We started about 12. Traveled till 3, stopped to bait. Met with one of the Potawotomie Indians. We carried wood from this place to where we camped in the prairie.

101Tuesday 16th The morning pleasant. Traveled 16 miles. Passed an Indian village on the Nisheam Botany [Nishnabotna] River.

101Wednesday 17th Weather fine, roads very dusty. Met several Indians who were out hunting. They had venison on their horses. We camped at night on the bank of quite a river.

101Thursday 18th Some rain through the night, also plenty of mosquitoes. Br Benson met us this morning. Took a letter for me to my Mother at Pisgah. Traveled 16 miles. <<Traveled> Camped on the bank of the [West Nishnabotna] where we had plenty of mosquitoes.

101Friday 19th Traveled 8 miles. Passed a dead ox in the road.

101Saturday 20th Traveled 10 miles. Came up with the main camp 7 miles from the Missouri river. Passed another dead ox.

101Sunday 21st Had meeting in the grove.

101Monday 29th We have had quite a great deal of hard wind and some rain during the past week. Wrote to my friends at Mt Pisgah this morning. Sent it by Br Pratt.

102Tuesday 30th Br Lyman with his family of 16 persons left the camp and started for the river which the twelve expect to cross to day. Traveled about 6 miles came to some bad mudholes which they were obliged to bridge so that we did not reach the river this day, but camped for the night in the bottoms a short distance from Brs Young and Kimball.

102Wednesday July 1st The sun shines pleasantly this morning. We were much annoyed with mosquitoes during the night. Came to the river at 12 o clock were detained till almost night then crossed over ascended the hill and went to the prairie a distance of 2 miles.

102Thursday 2nd Went to Br [George] Miller's camp four miles from the river. Upset one wagon into the mud but not much damage done. Made some trouble drying and washing clothes that were wet and muddy.

102Sunday 14th My first child was born here, in a wagon. I have named him Don Carlos. I am very uncomfortably situated for a sick woman. The scorching sun shining upon the wagon through the day and the cool air at night, is almost too much of a change to be healthy.

102Wednesday 15th Br Lyman went over the river. It was about this time that the Mormon Battalion was called for.

102August 9th Since I last wrote I have been very sick with child bed fever. For many days my life seemed near its end. I am now like a skeleton so much so that those who have not been with me do not know me till told who I am. It is a fearful place to be sick with fever in a wagon with no shade over except the cover and a July sun shining every day. All the comfort I had was the pure cold water from a spring near by. But the Lord preserved my life for some purpose for which I thank Him. My babe in consequence of my sickness is very poor but as I get better I hope to see him improve. Left the spring and went up the river about 12 miles.

102Sept. 14th Wrote a letter to Mother sent by Father [Amos] Tubbs.

102Monday 21st Visited Father [Cornelius Peter] Lotts [Lott]. Had a baked goose for supper. In the evening we were alarmed with the cry that a mob was near us but it proved to be false.

103Tuesday 22nd Don Carlos 10 weeks old to day and as bright a little fellow as ever was.

103Wednesday 23rd In the evening attended the wedding of Wm Martindale and Rebecca Ann Haynes.

103Saturday 26th Removed to our Winter Quarters on the bank of the Missouri river.

103Sunday 27th Staid at home.

103Monday 28th The wind blows very hard. Several tents were blown down. Received a letter from Mother. Br Sidney Tanner moved from the Bluffs to the river bank.

103Tuesday 29th Br S. Tanner's wife Louisa died leaving a babe three months old.

103Wednesday 30th Sister Tanner buried. Father and Mother Tanner here, staid all night.

103Thursday October 1st Br Lyman and other brethren gone up the river to cut house logs.

103Saturday 3rd Br Lyman and company came home with a raft of logs the first that has been brought here.

103Sunday 4th Staid at home and tended Baby.

103Monday 5th Br Lyman and others went up the river again for more logs.

10314th Don Carlos three months old to day and weighs eleven pounds.

10315th We have taken possession of our log house today. The first house my babe was ever in. I feel extremely thankful for the privilege of sitting by a fire where the wind cannot blow in in every direction and where I can warm one side without freesing the other. Our house is minus floor and many other comforts but the walls protect us from the wind if the sod roof does not from the rain.

10325th Caroline wrote a letter to Mother. My hair has nearly all come out, what little is left I have had cut off. My head is so bare I am compelled to wear a cap.

29th Took breakfast within the walls of our house It is now about 7 months since we have eaten in a house till now.

104Nov 9th Daniel Weden Clark died this morning aged 3 weeks. He was the son of D.P. and Sarah M. Clark, and were living with us.

104Nov 14th Don Carlos weighs 13 lbs, having gained 2 lbs during the last month. He is a great comfort to me.

104Dec 6th My Baby sick and getting worse. Has cried all day but I cannot see what ails him.

10412th The baby is dead and I mourn his loss. We have done the best we knew how for him, but nothing has done any good, he continued to fail from the time he was taken sick. My sister Caroline and I sat up every night with him and tried to save him from death for we could not bear to part with him, but we were powerless. The Lord took him and I will try to be reconciled and think that all is for the best. He was my greatest comfort and nearly always in my arms. But he is gone and I cannot recall him, so I must prepare to meet him in another and I hope a happier world than this. I still have friends who are dear to me, if I had not I should wish to bid this world farewell, for it is full of disappointments and sorrow, but I believe that there is a power that watches over us and does all things right. He was buried on the west side of the Missouri on the second ridge back, the eleventh grave on the second row counting from right to left, the first row being farthest from the river. This will be no guide as the place cannot be found in a few years.

104Friday January 22nd 1847. Br Lyman has gone to visit the Brethren on the other side of the river in company with G[eorge].A. Smith and Lyman [Luman] Calkins.

104Sunday 24th I went to Nathan Tanners to take care of his wife who is sick.

104Wednesday 27th Sister Caroline attended a party at the Council house in company with D.P. Clark and wife.

105Friday 29th I visited Br Young's wife Louisa [^16] and others.

105Monday Feb 1st Br Lyman came home in good health and spirits.

105Tuesday 2nd I am not able to stay with Sister Tanner so have come home to stay awhile. Priscilla [sister wife] has gone to take care of her a day or two.

105Wednesday 3rd I am making a dress for Priscilla. Sister Caroline is writing to Mother.

105Wednesday 10th Attended a Bishop's party at the Council house in the evening in company with Bishop L. Calkins and wife. Had a very pleasant time. There were many good brothers and sisters present and also some of the twelve, who seemed to enjoy themselves very much.

105Friday 12th Dionitia has moved her bed to her brother in law's house where she will stay for the present to take care of his children, as they have been deprived of their mother by death. [^17]

105Thursday 16th Visited in the afternoon at E. K. Fuller's with sister Maria Lyman. Br L- came in the evening bringing news that J[ohn Harvey]. Tippetts and Br [Thomas] Woolsey had returned from the army (Battalion). [^18]

105March 19th After so long a time Mother and family have nearly arrived, they are on the opposite side of the river from us and so much ice in the river that they cannot come over. Mother's husband died at Pisgah so she is and the children are alone. [^19]

20th I went to the river and saw my friends on the other side but could not speak to them. Sister Caroline went across but not without danger.

106Sunday 21st The river is clear of ice on the other side and a road cut for the boat on this side, so that Mother has crossed. and I am much rejoiced to meet her again, and hope we shall never be separated again untill death.

106April 8th The wagons of the Pioneers started this afternoon They are going west to look for a location for the Latter Day Saints and have no idea where that is but trust the Lord will lead them to the place.

1069th Br Lyman started but expects to come back before leaving entirely.

106Monday 12th Brother L- returned to spend a day or two before he leaves.

106Tuesday 13th Went to the creek and washed.

106Wednesday 14th Brother Lyman has now gone with the Pioneers and we do not expect to see him again this summer. I took my turn with the rest of the girls in taking care of Sister Tinney for the rest of the month.

106May 1st Took some wool of Sister [Sarah] Summy to spin on shares. Picking, washing, carding and spinning for half. Spent a great part of the time making garden.

106Saturday 8th Sister Caroline and I walked several miles over the bottoms, hunting one of our cows, but did not find her.

106Sunday 9th Went to meeting.

106Monday 10th Spun wool and worked in the garden.

106Tuesday 11th Carded wool.

106Wednesday 12th Took our clothes to the creek and washed.

106Thursday 13th Went to Father Lott's and borrowed a little wheel to spin wool on, and spun the rest of the day.

106Friday 14th Carded and spun.

106Saturday 15th The same as yesterday.

106Sunday 16th Rainy day. Had to keep within doors.

107Wednesday 19th Visited at sister Lenora Morley's with Sister E. R. Snow and others. [^20]

107Thursday 20th Am engaged in making clothes for Sister Spicer, [^21] who is very sick.

107Friday 21st Sister Spicer died leaving two small children to the care of her sister.

107Sunday 23rd Went to meeting. Heard brs Pratt and Taylor preach.

107Monday 24th Rainy day.

107Tuesday 25th Sisters Emily and Lydia visited us in the afternoon.

107Wednesday 26th Made a cheese.

107Friday 28th Washed at the creek.

107Saturday 29th Worked in the garden.

107Sunday 30th Forenoon rainy. Went to meeting in the afternoon.

107June 1st Sister Elvira Homes' [Holmes] babe died.

107Wednesday 2nd Received an invitation from Sister Holmes to come and spend the day with her which I accepted. Visited with her the grave of her child.

107Thursday 3rd Am spinning wool for Sarah P. Rich [wife of Charles C. Rich].

107Sunday 6th Staid at home and took care of Sister Maria Lyman's babe while she went to meeting.

107Wednesday 9th Mill dam broke away.

107Saturday 19th One of the people shot by the Indians while coming from the Horn, died next day. [^22]

July 6th My brother Edward started for Missouri with br Flake. This is the first time my brother has been so far away from his Mother. He is 14 years old and over. [^23]

108October 5th Since I last wrote I have been busy at all kinds of work the time having been passed with out anything of note having occurred. D.P. Clark and wife started for St. Joseph, Missouri.

108Oct. 16th Went to the farm and dug potatoes.

10817th Went to the farm again and dug potatoes Cornelia Lyman [sister wife] started for Illinois with her uncle.

10818th 19th 20th Did housework

10821st Went and dug potatoes all day. When we came home at night we met Myron Tanner [son of John Tanner] just come from the mountains. We were much rejoiced to see him and those who were with him as they had been out long and suffered much.

10822nd Myron went with us to the field and helped us dig 18 bushels of potatoes which we brought home at night and put in the cellar.

10823rd Myron helped us again to day. We dug 23 bushels to day, making 57 bushels of potatoes that we have put in the cellar. We live mostly on vegetables, with but very little bread, corn plenty, but no grinding of account. Br Tinney very sick. [^24]

108Sunday 24th D.P. Clark and wife have returned from Mo-

10828th Thursday evening. Br A. Lyman returned from the valley of the great Salt Lake, He staid at home till Saturday, when he with others started with provisions and corn to go back and meet camp. They met them this side of the Horn.

29th Br L- and the Pioneers came home, having found the place that the Lord designs for his people to gather to.

109Monday Nov 1st Br Lyman made a dinner for some of his friends who had endured many hardships on their journey. Had a party in the evening of the neighbors who seemed to enjoy themselves well. My sister Caroline and I have been trying to build a log house for ourselves as we do not feel quite comfortable where we are. We first got possession of an old house which we pulled down and had the logs moved to a spot where we wanted it put up again. As we could not get any one to lay it up for us, we went at it ourselves and laid it up five or six logs high when some brethren came and laid it up the rest of the way and put a dirt roof on it. Then I built a fire place < till it was about as high as my head and some brother topped it out for me. We had one window of 3 panes of glass. Now we have a house, with out floor, or roof that will keep the wet out. We divided the room with a wagon cover, and let D.P. Clark and wife have one part as he had helped to build it. We had each room enough to put our beds by having the foot of the bedsteads come together and about 6 feet square from there to the fire.

109Nov 19 We have commenced house keeping in our 6 by 10 or 12 house. That is Sister Caroline and I, and we feel very comfortable to what we have sometimes.

109Sunday 28 During the last week I have made a coat for D.P. Clark and a dress for Maria Lyman. Spent the day at Mother's.

109Monday 29th Helped sister Eveline Rollins quilt.

109Tuesday 30th Washed etc.

109Dec 1st Attended a sewing party at Mrs. Elisa Hakes. [^25]

109Thursday 2nd Helped Maria Lyman wash. Had company in the afternoon.

109Friday 3rd Helped Dionitia wash. Br Lyman started over the river to attend a conference.

109Saturday 4th Called on Sister Lucy Morley [wife of Isaac Morley] who is quite sick.

109Sunday 5th Spent the day at Mother's.

109Monday 6th Washed for sister Hakes for which I got a bushel of corn to feed Mother's cow.

110Friday 10th Mother and I visited Sisters Emily and Louisa Young.

110Saturday 11th Wrote a letter for Mother Walker. [^26] Brother Lyman returned from the conference. He expects to start on a mission soon to the southern states. Ten of our Brethren arrived here to day from the Mormon Battalion.

110Thursday 16th Paulina [Eliza Phelps] Lyman [sister wife] became the mother of a fine son which she has named Oscar Morris. Mother and child comfortable.

110Friday 24th Br Lyman started on his mission south. Daniel Clark gone to the rushes.

110Sunday 26th D.P. Clark came back bringing 2 turkies.

11029th A young girl by the name of Emily Cox left her Mother's house with a seducer by the name of Long. They say they are married but she will not be likely to stay with him long.

110Lines composed by Sister E. R. Snow on hearing of the death of my babe, Don Carlos.

110———————

110Beloved Elisa, do not weep Your Baby sleeps a quiet sleep Although in dust its body lies Its spirit soars above the skies. ———————

110No more upon your throbbing breast It lays its little head to rest From all the pains of nature freed Your fond caress he does not need. ———————

111Sweet was its visit, but its stay On earth was short, 'twas called away By kindred spirits to fulfill, Its calling and Jehovah's will. ———————

111Then soothe your feelings, do not mourn Your noble offspring will return With all its loveliness again And with its friends on earth remain. ———————

111Feb 27th 1848. Ruth Adelia Lyman died. She was the daughter of Amasa and Maria Lyman.

111April 6th Went over the river to attend the general Conference.

1118th Came home again.

June 29th Since I last wrote we have been very busy in making preparations for our intended journey to the valley of the great Salt Lake, where we hope to live in peace and serving God as he commands us. Br Lyman has returned from his southern mission accompanied by quite a number of saints who will travel westward with us. Among them are John Brown, Wm Crosby, Wm Lay and Wm Bankhead. We are some better fixed for traveling than when we left Nauvoo but our outfit is very scant. Have provision enough to last a few months after we get there, but not enough to last till we can raise more. But we go trusting in the Lord who never forsakes his people. Sister Caroline [and I] have one waggon for our use to cook and eat by ourselves. We have a bedstead laid on the projection so that our bed do not have to be moved about. [^27] We have room for a chair which is a luxury for me under the circumstances. My Mother's wagon is next to mine. My sister Emily has gone on with her husband B. Young and the rest of his family, so I am leaving none of my near relatives behind which is a great satisfaction to me. We started on our journey and traveled 6 miles and camped for the night.

112July 1st After staying in camp two nights we started again for the Horn river, but were detained another night in consequence of the rain.

1122nd Crossed the Horn and waited till the 7th for Dr Willard Richards, when both camps left and went to the Platte river.

11215th Crossed the Loup Fork, and went 4 miles and camped on the Pioneer's old camping ground.

11216th Our men and teams went back and helped the Dr's company cross the Fork. Saw the first Indians here since we started.

112August 20th Platte Dealton Lyman born, at about 6 o clock on Sunday morning. This is the second son that I have had born in a wagon and I still think it is a most uncomfortable place to be sick in. He was born on the east bank of the Platte river, opposite Fort John or Laramie. The journey thus far has not been very pleasant to me, as I have been very nearly helpless all the way, but it is all right, we are going from the land of our oppressors where we hope to raise our children in the fear of the Lord and where they will never suffer by the hands of our enemies as we have done.

11221st Crossed the Platte river. The rocks in the bottom are so large that it seemed sometimes as if they would tip the wagon over. I held fast the baby and Sister Caroline held fast to me so that I was not thrown quite out of bed.

Oct 17th Reached the place of our destination in the valley of the Great Salt Lake. I have been quite as comfortable on the journey from Laramie as could be expected under the circumstances. Some of the time the weather has been very cold with rain and snow, so that I could not be comfortable any where as I had no stove in the wagon, but I and my child have been preserved through it all and I feel to give thanks to my Father in Heaven for his kind care over us. We are now at our journey's end for the present. The weather is beautiful. The country barren and desolate. I do not think our enemies need envy us this locality or ever come here to disturb us.

113Emmeline Whitney (later Wells) was one of the fortunate Saints to be able to walk over the frozen Mississippi River when she left Nauvoo late in February 1846. As a plural wife of Bishop Newel K. Whitney, she traveled in his company, which included his first wife, Elizabeth Ann, and their children (Horace, married to Helen Mar Kimball Whitney; Sarah Ann, married to Heber C. Kimball; Mary Elizabeth; Orson; John; Joshua; Don Carlos; and Mary Jane), all mentioned in Emmeline's diary. Only one of Bishop Whitney's other plural wives is noted in the diary, although he took several others shortly before leaving Nauvoo. Traveling close to Brigham Young and other Church leaders, the eighteen-year-old Emmeline seems intrigued and delighted and comments frequently on their meetings and visits. A life-long diarist, Emmeline Whitney ends her account abruptly when she reaches the site that became Garden Grove, Iowa.

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young to Elder Jesse C. Little, 26 February 1847, reprinted in James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965) 1:318.
