Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Emmeline Blanche Woodward Whitney Wells [^1]

114Friday Feb 27. 1846. Mrs. Whitney Sarah Ann and myself crossed the river to go to the encampment of the saints. Br. Lot and his wife took Mrs. W. and myself in their carriage. We crossed the river a part of the way on foot, and then went on to the encampment about 7 miles beyond; we reached the destined place about Sunset when we came in view it looked like pictures I have seen of the ancients pitching their tents and journeying from place to place with their cattle and their goods. We repaired immediately to Mr. H[eber].C. Kimballs tent took supper and slept for the first time on the ground. There was a snow storm without yet all was peace and harmony within.

114Sat. Feb. 28. This morning Mrs Whit. felt troubled about the little children and Br Kimball prophesied they should all arrive today in safety. About twelve o'clock Joshua came on his [horse], and immediately after John, with grandmother, Olive [Bishop, a plural wife] and the two little children [Don Carlos, 5; Mary Jane, 2]; Orson [16] soon followed on the colt, bringing word that his father was behind with the teams; the band [Pitt's Brass Band] then started out, together with several other carriages to escort Bishop Whitney to the en-campment he having stayed in Nauvoo so long after the rest came away: he came about five o'clock, pitched his tent, Joseph also pitched his, put up his stove, we put down the carpets and soon had a comfortable place to pass the night.

Sun. March 1. In the morning I awakened out of a sound sleep and saw Mary Elizabeth [18] was preparing breakfast and the word was be ready to go at twelve of the o'clock we took breakfast, picked up and packed off as soon as possible, I rode with Orson in his wagon, about one o'clock we took up a line of march and left Sugar Creek, travelled over a very bad muddy road, reached the encampment about four o'clock, formed a line with the wagons, pitched their tents, made their fires and soon had a place fitted and prepared to pass the night. We are all happy and contented as yet and determined to go ahead.

Mon. March 2. 1846. This morning was warm and sunny the most pleasant day we have had since we left the city we started behind the principal part of the teams. the first hill we came to a balking horse they had in the family wagon began to show his obstinacy and hindered us considerably we went on about seven miles and camped in a hollow with Br. Kimballs company Josephs teams had gone on with the company ahead of us. and he was obliged to tent with his father. Sarah and I had a bed in the wagon and slept first-rate.

Tues. March 3. This morning we arose early and Sarah Ann taking her mother in her carriage and Joseph on horse back beside them. went on to over take their teams. After breakfast Loenza Maria and I took a walk in the woods just behind the tent we found stems of strawberry leaves green and fresh I intend to keep them as a memorial of the time when we returned we found they were about starting Ann and I came up the hill which was very long on foot seated ourselves on a prostrate log and here I am at the present time scribbling. We reached the place of encampment about noon having travelled 3 miles finding almost all of the teams had gone we proceeded on our journey together with Joseph he having waited for our coming. about << > miles ride brought us to Farmington a very pretty Western town. Here we saw thirty or more loafers loitering around the Grocery's &c. Porter Rockwell on his mule rode up among them all armed and equipped which seemed to excite some of them considerably there being those there who knew him and they were overheard talking by themselves in a low tone of shooting &c. saying there would never be a better chance however nothing occurred of consequence. [^2] From the village we had a very bad road it was so dreadful muddy and crooked. Some of us walked along on the bank of the Desmoine [River] considerable distance the roads being so exceedingly bad the horses could scarcely draw their loads. It was after dark when we came in sight of the camp and a dismal looking it is the tents are all huddled in together and the horses and wagons are interspersed some are singing and laughing some are praying children crying &c. every sound may be heard from one tent to another; it is late and I must retire.

Wednesday March 4. We have stopped all day in order to recruit the teams they being nearly tired out after dragging through the mud. We have washed mended visited &c. It has been a very pleasant day.

Thursday March 5. This morn. we started at ten o'clock. I walked perhaps a mile and a half along the shore of the Desmoine river when Porter came riding on his mule and said that one of Mr Whitney['s] wagons had broke down I then went back to the wagons they were not yet up the first hill they took the load from the broken wagon and put it on another and hitched on the horses. We travelled about three miles and came to the village of Bonaparte a very pretty Western town here we forded the river; it was very bad travelling and continued to grow worse; we went about a mile farther and camped on the bank of the river where we have an excellent view of Bona. The rest of the company have gone on about two miles farther there are only the two families camped here.

Friday March 6. This morning at ten o clock we were again on the road which we found very muddy and bad until we came to the prairie there it was better. We arrived at the camp about three in the P.M. having travelled about eight miles the teams were very tired and so were some of the folks. we found they were on very damp ground by the side of a little muddy brook. After the tents were pitched Mr Whitney and Orson made a rustic bedstead of poles for Sarah.

117Saturday March 7. This morning about the time we were ready to start a man by the name of Cochann came and laid claim to a yoke of oxen belonging to Mr W. said they strayed or were stolen from him three years before to avoid trouble Mr. W. paid him his price which was thirty dollars in gold. This day we have had rather better roads we travelled about nine miles and camped in a pleasant valley by a small stream of water about three miles from the principal encampment.

117Sunday March 8. Today we have been detained in consequence of Sarah's being sick she has a fine boy her father has named this place the Valley of David in honor of the child it is situated 2 1/2 miles East of Richardson's Point, Chequest township Van Buren Co. Iowa. At evening Brigham & Heber came down from the camp with their wives, Mary Ann Young & Vilate Kimball took supper and blessed the child; it has been a lovely day, warm and beautiful.

117Monday March 9. About noon William Kimball came with an easy carriage, to convey Sarah to the camp; she started about two of the o'clock Horace [^3] and I rode in the buggy behind them, the teams followed after, all arrived in safety about four o'clock. Pitched their tents on the side hill, next to Br. Kimball; the tents here in rows like a city; it is really a houseless village. Just at dusk the band commenced playing and some of the young people collected and amused themselves by dancing.

117Tuesday March 10. This is a stormy day, a part of the camp intended to have moved on but it [is] impossible; it is very muddy without yet the tents seem to be quite dry. Tuesday night at twelve o'clock the tent hooks on one side gave way and the tent pole leaned but Orson being on guard saved it from falling. The rain is pouring down in torrents here and there it sprinkles through the tent yet we keep a good fire and are quite comfortable.

118Wednesday March 11. Today I slept till one o'clock after being up all night the rain had beat through the tent and wet my pillow and the quilts but I did not take cold Mrs. W. has been quite unwell all day Sarah gets along finely. Horace has gone to Keosauque to a concert I am sitting up again tonight.

118Thursday March 12. It has been an unpleasant day at times a slow drizzly rain and then thick clouds gloomy and dismal they are all asleep around me Sarah is not quite so well to night We continued in this place being prevented by the mud until Thursday the 19. we then proceeded on our journey Sarah had an ox wagon fixed to ride in we left about eleven o'clock we had not gone far before Sarah began to grow sick from the easy rocking of the wagon and she was no better until we arrived at the stopping place Sarah has sunk to sleep.

118Friday March 20. This day has been cold and chilly we had a stove fixed in the horse wagon and a bed for Sarah; her mother and I rode there with her we had pretty good road all day travelled about fouteen miles stopped in a mean damp place Sarah stayed in her wagon and had a fire all night.

118Saturday March 21. This morning we started at ten o'clock had a pretty decent road most of the way travelled eleven miles and camped in a pleasant place almost at the outside of the camp it has been a dark gloomy day.

Sunday March 22. This morning about nine o'clock we left the camp went about a mile and came to the [river] bottoms they were not so bad as we had anticipated after we got across the bottom we went into the wood came in sight of the camp crossed the Chariton river here the scene was indescribable some in a boat teams wading through and men dragging them up the hill with a long rope the banks were very steep and muddy and the road very bad for a mile beyond one very long steep hill where they had to double teams just at the top of the hill was the camp we came on beyond all the rest so we might be a little more retired. it is quite a pleasant situation here we all rejoice that we came over the river today for it rains very hard we have had some thunder and lightning this evening we have only travelled about five miles. This is Sarah's birthday [21].

119Monday March 23. This has been a stormy day we were obliged to tarry on account of the weather about two in the after noon we had some hail they fell as large or larger than buckshot it continued to rain through the night.

119Tuesday March 24.Today as yesterday is rainy and unpleasant very exceedingly muddy at evening Sarah thought it being so very wet and damp it would be more comfortable in her wagon so they prepared it and about four in the afternoon she left the tent

119Wednesday March 25. Last night considerable snow fell this morning was quite cold some snow has fallen during the day very muddy Mrs. Whitney has taken up her abode in the family wagon two or three doors from Sarah this evening Horace has been playing on his flute sounded very melodious at a little distance.

119Thursday March 26. This has been a pleasant day the first one we have had this week Mrs. Whitney has been quite sick all day better this evening I am with her now.

119Friday March 27. another fair day not quite as muddy as it has been Orson and George Sexton started this morning on a hunting excursion Mrs. Whitney is better has visited Sarah they are now in the tent together it is the first time Sarah has left the wagon since Tuesday she stayed in the tent until after dark took supper there and then went back rested very well all night.

119Saturday March 28. This morning I feel first-rate it is spendid the sun shines brilliantly the ground is some what frozen it is rather cool; the sick ones are all better.

119Sunday March 29. This has been another warm sunshine day we are still here nothing new except Mr [Stillman] Pond has returned from a trading excursion in the country has sold the riding colt for one yoke of oxen and another horse for another.

119Monday March 30. another fine day Sarah has been taking a ride today for the first time. Spencer has given Loenza a young squirril which she intends to tame.

119Tuesday March 31. Today has been a pleasant day nothing occurred of consequence we are still here cooking and eating.

120Wednesday Apr. 1. nothing happened worth mentioning.

120Wednesday [sic] April 2. Porter Rockwell arrived from Nauvoo having been there and returned since our departure he brought several letters but none for me We had written letters to send back I wrote one that night to send to my sister [^4] pinned it to his coat pocket said it should not be moved until he saw her we intend to pursue our journey in the morning. Brigham and his company have started on today Mrs Whitney gave them some cakes as they passed to night we are to put away everything we are not using and be ready to take an early start

Thursday [sic] Apr 3. we started about eight or nine o'clock found pretty good roads to the next camp here we came up with Brigham it was in a wet prarie or moist ground not pleasant for camping at all we got there a little after noon stopped and rested until Br. Kimball came up he having been detained to mend a wagon they then concluded it would be better to go on it looked like rain we went on They found a man who had some corn to sell gave them an order to go and get it the company sent three teams from this place we had rather bad travelling most of the way we camped by ourselves about twelve miles from where we started it was about five oclock when we stopped cold and windy night

121Friday [sic] Apr. 4. This morning Brigham passed us and went on. Three of Mr Whitneys oxen were missed sent three men on horseback after them found them about four miles off a man driving them as soon as they were found we began to get ready to start it had rained all the morning and by this time began to be very muddy Joseph had considerable trouble in starting his horse in the buggy broke a thill and cross piece it rained as if it would wet everything on earth about three miles brought us to Millers camp here we crossed a small creek and ascended a very steep hill and are safely harbored all in good spirits.

Saturday April 4. It still continues to rain they say there is no crossing the creek now it has risen so high. They have sent the cattle away to browze and men to watch them.

122Monday April 6. Br. Kimball came into our wagon and related the following circumstances On Saturday evening he went into the woods by himself offered up the signs of the Holy Priesthood and prayed to the Lord that the storm might abate and the sun shine forth in his Majesty and for the health prosperity and salvation of the Camp of Israel. About twelve o'clock the storm ceased the sky became clear and was so light we could see to pick up a pin froze a very little. At morning the sun rose brilliantly and we had one of the most pleasant days we have had since we started on our journey although the ground was wet and muddy. About eleven o'clock they called the camp together and also Elder [William] Clayton's company and [on] a dry eminence of ground and there gave them some instruction with regard to their team and [said] they should stop here until the weather and the roads would enable us to pursue our journey with more ease and pleasure taught them the necessity of union patience meekness forbearance etc. in order to make us happy. Bishops Miller and Whitney were present Miller said he had been out seven miles found the roads so bad it was impossible to pass. Elder Lorenzo Young gave a short exhortation and some remarks from Br. [Peter] Haws. They adjourned at about one o'clock had a good time the brethren felt the spirit of union and blessing instructed the Captain of each ten to call their comp. together and administer bread and wine in his own company and also in Elder Clayton and Pratts Bishop Miller had a glorious time he thinks he has never seen the brethren and sisters more cheerful gave out an appointment for the Captains of tens to come together at 6 o'clock to take into consideration the propriety of sending after corn They assembled on a high eminence about half way between the three camps it was thought proper to send for corn enough to last to Grand river as there is no corn to be bought between here and that place for less than three bits a bushel and but very little at that price. Br. Kimball concluded to send five teams Captain Clayton four teams Bishop Miller one the distance to inhabitants is twelve miles we being camped in an entire wilderness in the timber of Shoal Creek the timber being almost wholly walnut or hickory one or two Missourians came into the camp in the course of the day. The camp retired to bed pretty early rose very early on Monday morning the sixth found it had commenced raining the forest looked dark and dismal The rain poured down in torrents About seven in the morning ten wagons with four yoke of oxen each started for corn making in the whole forty yoke of oxen and twenty men we feel much for those who have gone as it is now twelve o'clock and it has not ceased raining one moment it continued raining until night when it stopped and looked like clearing away early in the evening or between seven and eight a noise was heard afar off in the air and soon after the wind commenced blowing a perfect hurricane overthrowing tents scattering fire and almost taking away our breaths the first blow lasted about twenty five minutes during which time the rain commenced pouring down in torrents wetting beds through wagon covers etc. etc. the rain continued nearly all night with considerable wind and cold too.

the morning of the 7 Tuesday found us all destitute of homes almost [illegible] only here and there a tent had stood the wind of the preceding night and now they were frozen so it was almost impossible to raise them the wind continued high through the most part of the day the ground was frozen they talked of starting in the morning to go on but the teams they sent after corn did not arrive that night.

123Wednesday morning of the 8th was pleasant but quite muddy did not seem very favorable for going across the prarie towards noon Bishop Whitney on horseback went out with some others to examine the roads came back and said it was impossible to go that day we had better stay where we were on half rations than try to go on soon after the teams they sent for corn arrived bring only [ . . . ] bushels of corn finding no more to be sold this is all the corn we can have for our teams until we get to Grand river this is hard for the poor horses and cattle to drag through the mud with scarcely anything to eat they said likewise that the roads were very bad indeed they called a council and concluded to start the next morning Towards night P. Pratts O. Pratt and Bishop Millers company came up the hill to be ready to start in the morning also G[eorge A.] Smith and Amasa Lyman.

Thursday morning the ninth was damp and looked like rain about eight o'clock we were all in our wagons one company following after another went on we found roads very muddy had not gone far before it commenced raining this made the roads worse than before we crossed some very bad sloughs and got stuck once we went on to Br Kimballs company about seven miles from where we started in the open prarie everything wet a mile and a half from any wood it was a long time before they could start fires of our families only Joseph with his family wagon and buggy and the Bishops one horse wagon are here there is five of us in one wagon and three of them in another to sleep or stay we happened to have a biscuit with us or we would have been supperless the rain runs into our wagon it has wet the bed &c. Bishop Whitneys cow happened to come along so we had some milk for the children. it is the first time we have camped in the open prarie and the first time we have been separated.

124Friday morning the tenth it still keeps on raining and has rained all night the mud is very deep Joseph took a horse and went back to see where the folks were found them in a perfect mudhole several of their teams stuck fast so it was impossible to get them out last night this is a new era the most trying time we have had Br. Kimball and some others are about starting on going to double teams and take some through to the timber about five miles and then return with the teams for the rest. Joseph went to his fathers camp several times in the course of the day and two of the Bishops wagons were brought up with one more of Josephs.

124the next morning Saturday eleventh about nine o clock William Kimball[,] Horace and some other[s] returned with teams to take on the last of their wagon[s] and also Josephs and some few more we all arrived at the camp in safety about noon or one o'clock it is a splendid camping ground the corner of a prarie skirted with wood I hope we may stay here until good travelling Br. Brigham is camped three miles farther on but is here now with Br. Kimball.

124Sunday 12. A pleasant day quite warm several men came down from Br. Brighams camp with him to hold a council here they are to dine with us people are putting on their summer clothes today it is so warm Bishop Whitney and Joseph have sent back teams after their wagons left behind and Lyman's about eleven o'clock the council sit in the open air and continued until about two o clock they then took dinner and Brigham with his men returned to his camp soon after Br Kimball called the people together and administered the sacrament giving them some counsel and &c.

124Monday 13. another beautiful day almost every one is washing Men are mending broken wagons fixing ox yokes repairing harnesses &c &c Tomorrow we are to leave this beautiful sequestered spot and go we know not whither

Tuesday Apr 14. We put out this morning about nine o'clock travelled five miles and camped on a hill above a pleasant wood near Brighams camp we have had some bad roads to day although very pleasant overhead picked whole bunches of wild flowers in the wood and fields there are two or three camps in view quite a scenery

125Wednesday April 15. We have spent this day in our camping ground [Locust Creek] Loenza and her father have received let ters from home bringing word from Nauvoo of all manner of wickedness dancing schools grog-shops and billiard tables and everyone supporting himself at the expence of his neighbor also bringing tidings that Diantha Farr had a fine son [in] consequence of which on the same evening the band gave a christening giving music first with the brass band and then with drums and violins several songs also were sung this commencing soon after dark was kept up until after twelve o'clock. [^5]

Thursday Apr 16. We have had an April shower during the night just enough to cause the grass to spring up without doing much injury to the roads we have travelled to day 6 or 7 miles of prarie and camped in the middle of it about two o'clock Brigham and the band have camped in sight of us. Eight rattlesnakes have been killed in the course of the day two oxen have been bitten and one of William Kimball's best horses there is some little grass for the horses and cattle here some one discovered a bee tree and took from it several pounds of wild honey which has been divided between the different families it is the first wild honey I have ever seen tastes considerably of wild flowers it has been almost uncomfortably warm during the whole day.

126Friday April 17. A cool cloudy morning about nine o'clock we commenced our day's journey travelled across the praire the distance of eight miles once while walking with several other girls we saw a large rattlesnake the first I had ever seen we camped in a thick forest just above a creek we arrived here about one o'clock but some of the company had gone on to another camp through mistake families were divided some here and some there. after dinner Br. Kimball thought best to go on as there was a bad place to cross he would like to be on the other side before a rain about three o'clock we left this place just across the creek some one had set the prarie on fire how we were to cross this was a question it ran like lightning through the grass making a crackling among the bushes resembling the noise of burning crackers however they put out the fire the width of a road so we could just pass through the ground was black and the white ashes flew in our faces as we crossed about a mile brought us in sight of the camp just on the border of a prarie here we joined the rest of our company and camped for the night it is rather damp wet prarie. To night we had a little black wolf here some one had taken from a hollow tree in the woods it moans piteously.

126Saturday 18. Br Kimball this morning before breakfast went on about a mile and a half and selected a new camping ground on the border of a prarie just above a creek on the other side of which is a thick wood he then returned and directed us to come here Br [John] Taylors company are camped on an opposite hill this afternoon the boys have been fishing in the creek and caught some little chub fishes such as abound in the streams of New England.

Sunday Apr. 19. A pleasant day many of the brethren went this morning to Br. Brighams camp to meeting at 4 o'clock we had a meeting by the creek to administer the sacrament preaching by Br. Kimball and Br. Taylor a warm day and night in meeting time Porter and Edwin Cutler returned from Nauvoo bringing letters for several one for me from Maria [her sister].

127Monday Apr. 20. A council has been held to day at Brighams camp in which the brethren have decided that those who are sufficiently prepared will cross the mountains while others will make a location on Grand river and there the brethren who have left their families in Nauvoo are to stop and put in a crop and then return and bring their families to it that they may have something to come to [and] not be destitute when they arrive there. They also decided that we should all be put on rations of half a pound of flour a day with other things this is I believe all I have heard at dusk Br Kimball called the company together to get corn for their horses it having come as they expected thirty five ears a piece for horses none for oxen some rain fell during the night.

127Tuesday Apr 21. another pretty day some rain in the course of it part of Kimballs company have moved on today his own teams could not they some of them being gone for corn we intend to move on in the morning. Brigham[,] Miller and several other companies have gone on today about six miles.

127Wednesday Apr 22. We are still here because some of the teams sent for corn have not yet arrived this morning two families by the name of Tracy left the company without giving any notice Br. Kimball sent after them and bought their oxen and cow yesterday I forgot to mention that I wrote several letters to Nauvoo to send by Porter today I believe Mr Whitney finished a trade with father Durphy [probably Jabez Durfee] for his oxen giving him Lot's horses tomorrow morning early we are to move on. just after dark a storm came up the wind blew thunder rolled and lightning flashed the storm continued all night.

the morning of Apr 23 found us here Br. Durphy started about seven o'clock and about ten Porter Rockwell William Reuther and Br Pond started off before Porter went he came and treated us with wine in a twin bottle about two o'clock found us ready for a start we went on without interruption until five o'clock when it began to rain slowly we saw dozens of rattlesnakes in passing along we camped about 4 miles from where we started just on the edge of a bank or cut on the other side there is a wolf's den it has rained some but not much they say there is excellent feed for cattle here we are without wood and no bread cooked at all now the seabread comes in play to night we all made a supper of sweetened water and seabread. [^6]

128Friday Apr 24. this morn. is cool and beautiful I have picked some blue violets which remind me of New England here four of Br. Kimballs best horses have strayed away and men have gone on horseback to find them Br Markham came to our camp about nine o clock bringing with him several yoke of oxen which they put before Br. Kimballs wagons and took them to the next camp it was a pleasant place the corner of a prarie after dark W. Kimball and those who went with him returned with the horses found them about eight miles off. There we passed the night the next morning pursued our journey travelled about five miles stop and let the cattle feed for about two hours and then went on five miles farther and camped for the night.

128Sunday Apr 26. We arose early and started as soon as possible considerable rain having fallen during the previous night the roads in some places were very bad about five miles brought us to the camp three miles from Grand river Brigham. Miller Taylor Pratt Amasa Lyman and several other companies had arrived here before us. This is the place where they intend to put in a crop. This afternoon I crossed the creek or river found the most beautiful spot I ever saw viewing it from the opposite bank the gound was covered with a carpet of green and interspersed with flowers which might have done honor to the Elysian bower Today Br. Brigham told them from the stand that no one should return to Nauvoo with his consent until they had done something towards helping build up this place to help those who stay and those who shall come after they made some arrangements for work making fence[s] building log houses &c &c

Friday May. 1. Robert More one of Mr. Whitneys teamsters started to go back to Nauvoo nothing has happened since we arrived here worthy of notice it has rained most of the time retarding the progress of work of all kinds.

129Sunday May 2 [3]. Meeting was held in the forenoon a few remarks by Orson Spencer afterwards by Br. Brigham he said we should not go from this place until there was something accomplished he wanted houses built for those who remained so we might take all the tents along with us a fence made around the field. [^7]

Monday May 4. Tonight when the horses and cattle were brought up one of the horses Old Bill we call him had been bitten by a rattlesnake in three or four places about his nose being the first one of Mr. Whitney creatures that had suffered by accident on the journey he applied to the Indian Tindel [?] to try his skill in relieving him he exerted every means in his power and though the wound was very badly swollen yet on Wednesday he was partially recovered so as to eat some they gave him some corn at night he appeared to be very restless getting up and laying down alternately the next morning they let him go to feed and about noon they brought word that he was dead he fell dead upon the log as he was attempting to cross on it This was Thursday the 7th. of May we greatly regret his death for he has been a great use to us he was very large and strong and always true to his place Thursday night we had a tremendous shower attended with wind awful thunder and fearful lightning. [End of Journal]

130William Huntington left a prosperous life in New York to follow the Church first to Kirtland, then to Missouri, and back to Illinois. At age sixty-two, he was once again called to leave all behind and start over in some unfamiliar region in the West. Appointed as a captain of ten, he traveled with his three plural wives and their children in Amasa Lyman's hundred. With all his responsibilities, he somehow kept a daily journal, a detailed chronicle of the hazardous trek across Iowa. The journal ends at Mount Pisgah, where he was appointed to preside, and where he died three months later. While his spelling and lack of punctuation impede the ease of reading somewhat, they do not obscure his thoughts and feelings.

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young to Elder Jesse C. Little, 26 February 1847, reprinted in James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965) 1:318.
