Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

157Lucy Meserve Smith [^1]

On the 9th of February 1846 we crossed the Mississippi and started to go, we knew not where, but [arrived at the Missouri River] after tedious traveling through snow and mud and slush for at least three months.

159After leaving Nauvoo, in crossing the Mississippi river we were obliged to roll up both our wagon covers as the wind blew so strong. The large cakes of ice were running so fast that it seemed hazardous to undertake a crossing, never the less we were compelled, to leave our comfortable homes and flee into the wilderness by order of the State authority, as a mob had control. We encountered some very severe cold weather with very strong high winds and as a matter of course our fires had to be built so the wind would blow the sparks from the tent, I cannot forget how cold I was standing in the tent preparing food and washing dishes for our big family. When I would wash a dish and raise it out of the water there would be ice on it before I could get it wiped. I could not get warm from morning till night and night till morning. I lay down in the bottom of the wagon with a thin bed under me as I must leave my bed at home as teams were scarce and to start out the 9th of February to go I knew not where. At one time we traveled through rain, mud and slush all day and when night came the mud was six inches deep and the men were completely drenched. Brother P.[Parley] P. Pratt was along with us. they came into our wagon and tried to dry his clothes as we had a little stove in our wagon. He said he would give Brother Orson [Pratt] his birthright for a comfortable place to lay down that night, as he was so tired. and nearly frozen. It was a sad night. Our teamsters had to make their beds down in the mud as there was no other alternative, the women could not get out of their wagons for days. One day the wind came up very suddenly and took off nearly every wagon cover as quick as a minute, the dishes and brooms went whizing through the camp. We named the camp ground Windy Hill. It was so cold some nights after the men would get to bed a sudden storm of snow and wind would come up, strike the camp and away would go the tents. Then the boys would get up and out in their night suits shouting and singing at the top of their voices, till they pinned the tents down again. They would get very wet, but never seemed to mind it. In the morning the bed covers would be frozen stiff and tight to the wagon cover, and across their chins.

159It was a great labor to bake a batch of bread, as the wind would take the coals away as fast as we could put them under our dutch ovens. While we were at a camping ground called Mt. Pizgah, Sister Zilpha and Nancy and babe and Sarah [Sarah Ann Libby], the mother of John H. [John Henry-born Sep. 18, 1848 in Kanesville], Hannah [Hannah Maria Libby], the mother of Charles W. [Charles Warren-born 1849-Council Bluffs], was with us [^2] and my brother David, altho his wife was back in Nauvoo. Sister Sarah traded and got a pair of bullocks and brought the rest of the sisters along. Sister Zilpah's baby died before she got to Mt. Pizgah, it was a sad meeting for us all, as we expected to see the dear little baby, but Sister Nancy's baby was as pretty as a pink. Her papa thought so.

A number of our company stopped at Garden Grove in order to raise crops, so that the companies coming after could have recruits, also a number stopped at Pizgah and sowed and furnished food for others as they came after.

160Before we got to the Bluffs Colonel [Thomas L.] Kane rode into our camp, having traveled days and nights to make known the plans at head quarters concocted to destroy our whole camp on the plains. He said their [U.S. Government] plan was that if they got a battilion of our best men the rest of us would die on the plains, and if President Young refused to give them up they would massacre the whole camp and that would put an end to Mormonism. I had this from the lips of George A. Smith. The result was that President Young was ready for Col. Allen, when he made his wants known. His answer was you shall have your Battalion if it has to be made up of our Elders. So the Elders were called out and mustered into service. I had a chance to know the truth of this affair, as my brother David Smith was called to go, and he must leave his wife to get along as best she could, and it left me to drive my ox team alone hundreds of miles and the following September 1st., I gave birth to my son Don Carlos, on the 11th of August 1846, at a place called Cutler's Park. Soon we went into Winter Quarters and Brother Amasa Lyman's folks kindly took care of my brothers wife as I was not situated to do it myself.

The next spring my brother died at San Lewis Ray [San Luis Rey], California, in 1847.

161We moved down to Winter Quarters when my babe was two weeks old. There we lived in a cloth tent untill December, then we moved into a log cabin, ten feet square, with sod roof, chimney and only the soft ground for a floor and poor worn cattle beef and corn cracked on a hand mill, for our food. Here I got scurvy, not having any vegetables to eat. I got so low I had to wean my baby and he had to be fed on that coarse cracked corn bread when he was only five months old. We had no milk for a while till we could send to the herd and then he did very well till I got better. My husband took me in his arms and held me till my bed was made nearly every day for nine weeks. I could not move an inch. Then on the 9th of February I was 30 years old. I had nothing to eat but a little corn meal gruel. I told the folks I would remember my birthday dinner when I was 30 years olde. My dear baby used to cry till It seemed as tho I would jump off my bed when it came night. I would get so nervous, but I could not even speak to him. I was so helpless I could not move myself in bed or speak out loud. One incident which happened while I was sick with scurvy, when I got so I could raise up to my elbow I took to bleeding from my throat and nose a stream the size of a knitting needle. I must have bled a quart when a strange woman came in and said, dear child, are you bleeding to death, and I said I expect I am, said she, Have you any candle wicking, they gave her a ball and she tied it around my fingers and thumbs losely, and the bleeding stopped. She said had it not stopped she would have tied it around my wrist and toes and ankles and around my neck, as she never knew this remedy to fail stopping the worst bleeding from a cut. This receipt is easy to be obtained.

161One evening a grim old man appeared at my bedside and said that we were very sick last fall but we must give it up now, but I knowing him to be an evil spirit by his having a black necktie about his neck, altho the rest of his clothing was white, I never saw any good angels with anything black about them, so I sneered at him turned my head and said I shant die. When I got better I had not a morsel in the house I could eat, as my mouth was so sore. I could not eat corn bread and I have cried hours for a morsel to put in my mouth. Then my companion would take a plate and go around among the neighbors and find some one cooking maybe a calf's pluck. [^3] He would beg a bit to keep me from starving. I would taste it and then I would say oh do feed my baby. My appetite would leave me when I would think of my dear child. My stomach was hardening from the want of food.

The next July my darling boy took sick and on the 22nd, the same day that his father and Orson Pratt came into the Valley of the great Salt Lake my only child died. [^4] I felt so overcome in my feelings. I was afraid I would loose my mind, as I had not fully recovered from my sickness the previous winter. I went away from home to nurse a sick woman untill she died, then I took care of her sick baby till his papa got married again.

The next summer I attended school at Kanesville then I assisted in the school for a while, I was sent for, to go to Bellevue to teach the Pawnee mission school. I went and taught the Indian children for six months. They, the Missionaries offered me double wages if I would stay longer as I had such good control over the old folks as well as the children, but not with standing that they treated me with great respect, yet I could not stay. They presented me with a number of pretty moccicon [moccasins], but I did not forget to send them presents when I got home. I boarded with a missionary family and ate in the same room with the indian children and they helped prepare the food for the tables. The old folks would often crowd around the stove in the morning and pick live vermin off their bodies and eat them. I must confess that it weakened my stomach so that I got thin, but my hostess discovered it and she took great pains to fix some little extra food for me which I could eat with relish, knowing she had prepared it herself. I was determined to stay six months, for I was proud to earn money to purchase my necessaries to prepare for the vallies, and then the children took such interest in their studies and they thought so much of me that it helped to while away lonesome hours. Altho I was far from home, but yet I was in the way of my duty and my heavenly father comforted me, with dreams and visions. At one time three voices sang an anthem to me. these are some of the words, Glory to God who hath made us etc., one was on my bed and the other a distance away, but their voices accorded perfectly, and Oh, how charming, and then my little son appeared to me. I tried to hug and kiss him, but I felt no substance, but I said to him why did you leave mother dear, he answered and said because I had a greater work to do some where else. I said God bless you dear and he disappeared and left me as wide awake as I am at this moment. His answer was a great consolation to me as I couldn't understand why my heart should be so keenly pierced as to be compelled to give my only child up.

I once heard Pres. Young say these providences of the Lord Almighty we cannot understand. How true this scripture is, no one knoweth the things of God but by the spirit of God. Then how necessary it is that we should so live that we can have his holy spirit always within our hearts.

164While at the Mission I dreamed an holy angel appeared to me, bowed gently offering me his hand in an invitating position. I dropped my hand into his. He said thou art blessed of the Lord and thou shall have your inheritance with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. He then stepped back, bowed gently, and a veil dropped which hid him from my view. I could not relate this dream for a long time without feeling that same heavenly influence which I felt in the presence of the angel.

164The Indian children used to contend on[e] with another to see who should comb my hair and get water in the morning, indeed they were very kind to me. They wrote me a kind little token saying I love you well as my own people. You such good lady, sorry you go to valley. Wish I go to valley with you. You teach us long time to read, write, and study geography and Atlas. I had many gentlemen from the East to visit my school. I used to exhibit the writing books, cut out hard words, ask questions on the Atlas, etc. The gentlemen declared they never saw it equalled in any white school. Then Indian agent, Mr. Miller, and the interpter, Mr. Saunsisee used to visit my school often. They took delight in hearing the children sing. I taught school five and one half days a week and Sabbath School on Sunday. When my six months was up I bade adiew to the Paunee Mission and went home. I then made preparations with the rest of the family and started for the Salt Lake Valley. Our family included a teamster, hunter and cowboy [and] numbered 19 souls. Sister Bathsheba Smith [George A. Smith's first wife] and myself did the work for fourteen with the help of Philyneas Dailey [Phineas Daley] [^5] at the wash tub and Thomas Adshead [^6] to help bake the bread.

164Sister Sarah and her baby, John Henry and Sister Hannah and her baby, Charles Warren and teamster was a separate family. Sister Sarah being quite feeble in health. Sister Hannah had to do most of the work for their portion of the family.

165We left Kanesville June 22nd., 1849, crossed the Missouri River July 11th., and crossed Elk horn the 17th., and had a cattle stampeed and it was a lot of bother to get them together again. Apostle George A. Smith, captain of 50, Elder Myron Tanner captain of ten, each ten had a captain. The first Welch Company of Saints helped to compose our fifty.

165One of the most faithful and expressive life writings is the reminiscence of Sarah DeArmon Pea Rich. The first wife of Apostle Charles C. Rich, she and her children traveled in his company from Nauvoo to Mount Pisgah where they spent the winter of 1846 and then on to the Salt Lake Valley the next year. Her sister wife, Emeline Grover Rich, also left a reminiscence of the journey, much shorter but also anecdotal and detailed. Emeline, who had no children at that time, did not travel with the Rich family. As one of Thomas Grover's seven motherless daughters, she traveled with her siblings and her father's plural wives, driving a wagon from Winter Quarters to the Valley. The family group, almost all female, depended on the women and some children to be their teamsters. The different personalities of Sarah and Emeline (as well as their different ages and responsibilities) are clearly evident in their colorfully written narratives.

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young to Elder Jesse C. Little, 26 February 1847, reprinted in James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965) 1:318.
