Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Emeline Grover Rich [^1]

166We stopped about eight years in Nauvoo - when we were again driven from our homes which we had made comfortable - just beginning to enjoy the fruits of our labor. Our family were considerably scattered by this time through necessity - but the inborn love and affection for our parent and our dear little orphaned sisters [^2] were still burning in our bosoms - like an unquenchable fire, as the love we have for our dear mother seemed to be centered on our father - who was very loving and kind to his motherless children. [^3] He was truly a handsome man - called by most people the handsomest man in Nauvoo. I always looked upon my father with admiration. In 1846 about the 10th of February he with three teams oxen and waggons left all that was near and dear to us in Nauvoo, Ill. and started on our journey into the wilderness, crossing the Mississippi river on the ice with snow clad ground for our beds, or, on which to make our beds, with nought but sky for our covering. Women and children have to walk, and that through snow, mud and rain - wet through for days and nights together - traveling as far in a day as our teams could stand to travel - from one to six miles was an average distance per day and sometimes we have waded and pulled through mud-hole-deep to our wagons and camped not more than half a mile from where we started - and here let me say (strange as it may seem) that not a word of repine or grumbling was heard in our camps, but singing praises to God for his deliverance from the midst of our enemies.

166In April we camped near the State< of Mo. Teams worn out, provisions exausted and sickly season commencing. Some of the men went into Mo. to work for provisions while our teams rested and recruited.

166In a few weeks we jogged onward until we came to a good location for a longer resting place - and so it proved to be to hundreds of the worn out Saints, We stopped at this place, (since known as Mt. Pisgah) until the following Spring or at least, some of the companies stopped and some went onward until they came to the Mo. river (now Omaha) and there stopped for winter quarters. My father had a good outfit compared with most of the saints.

166The following Spring, - in March the Saints, who remained back, (or at least those who had not succumbed to Malaria) came up to Winter quarters, rested awhile and prepared to continue their journey to the Rocky Mountains.

In the meantime it became necessary to send a company of men in advance and on ahead of the companies as pioneers - to look out the roads - build bridges construct boats on which to cross the Streams etc. My father was selected as one of the party to go. He left his family, with no boys or men folks to come on afterward with the company later on.

I will here relate an incident which happened to my father and family when crossing the Mississippi river The ice at the time had parted and broken away at a point of an Island on Sand bar - So that [he] had to drive onto a flat boat for a part of the way. They were going along nicely enough when a young fellow on the boat (for want of something better to do I suppose) spat ambier (tobacco juice) into an ox's eye he commenced to plunge and jump, breaking a hole in the bottom of the boat - the ox jumped over board and was drowned also another yoke of cattle and three cows shared the same fate The boat went down, until one end struck the point of the sandbar which left a part of the wagon above water - some of the family were in the covered wagon - My sister Eliza Ann who was about seven years old and a babe six months old. The front end of the wagon was pitched down into the water until the < stood almost on end, the water was filling up the wagon and she kept climbing for the uper part She happened to think that the little boy Thomas was somewhere in the bedding under water She immediately plunged down into the deep water, caught the babe by his dress by one hand while she used the other to help her to climb back on up where she could hold herself by one hand hold of a wagon bow < just her head out of water holding the babe so that his head was also out of water. All this time the mother was standing on the bank, looking on thinking her babe was gone - and not being able to render any assistance - until at last when some of the excitement was over some one chanced < think that some one was in the wagon when my father with his pocket-knife ripped a hole in the wagon cover and liberated the almost perished prisoners. Well now, this was a cold bath - in Feb. not a dry thread on them or in the wagon - and in the middle of this large river - help from the shore was rendered as soon as possible what was to be done? was an important question. They lost no time in getting across the river - There was no house nearby - they made a fire on the river bank, dried their clothes as quickly as posible and made themselves as comfortable as they could - and strange to say they were none the worse as far as their health was concerned than before it happened. but in goods - cattle - books etc. they suffered a great loss. My father was compelled to yoke some of his cows up with the oxen and travel on with what they had left after laying by a few days to dry bedding and clothing etc. etc. Suffice it to say there was no lives lost. My fathers family record with many other valuables went to the bottom of the Miss. River During the past four or five years several changes had transpired in my fathers family which I've omitted to write - but will mention some of them. His wife [Caroline Eliza Nickerson] in consequence of being in delicate health concluded to return to Iowa where she had relatives, stop there until the next season, when she would be in a better condition to travel. my father divided his teams and provisions in fact - gave her half of all he posessed, hired a man to drive her team to where she wished to locate - She took with her, her only living child (Persia) belonging to my father, and went back to her folks. It proved to be a final separation - he married other wives - had many children born to him of whom I know but little as I was not one of his family at these times, and was interested in my own affairs < which I shall mention later on.

Commencing with my fathers travels and that of his family across the plains, will say that my father started < early in the spring of 1847 in company with many others, (50 I think) to explore and find a road to the Great Salt Lake basin of which they had an idea existed somewhere - but road or even a trail, there was none. There was a great amt. of rain that spring which made their progress slow and also very disagreeable for their families who were left camped out on the banks of the Missouri river, where Omaha is now located. His wife Hannah [^4] was confined while living in a covered wagon - had a daughter called Hannah, I well remember the night the rain poured down in torrents, I was kneeling on her bed all night trying to keep her bed dry by scooping the water with my hands first down one side - then the other so that it would follow down the course of the cover and wagon bows instead of pouring straight through - would occasionally take off some of the bed covering and wring it then lay it on again to catch the water that we could not divert into channels down the cover or into pans basins etc. of which there were several on the bed to catch the unruly streams as they poured in, in almost torrents.

I think it was on the 14th of June <<1847> that we (a number of large companies) started on our journey across the plains - some with cow teams, some with wild steers yoked with cows - while some had good, ox teams, and there were a few horse teams, and the beauty of this was, (If I may be allowed the expression) that of the teamsters of this motley outfit - there were 9 out of 10 who were girls, women, or children. I can but laugh now, when I look back upon that picturesque scene (for be it understood that I was one of those teamsters) and at the time it was no < matter but real, reality in the full sense of the term - Some there were who was equiped with big ox whip 6 or 8 feet long who I doubt not had never seen, much less handled a whip of this kind - and knew not gee from haw perhapse had been raised tenderly and who owing to scarcity of male members in our camp had to take the whip in hand and drive their teams - walking of course as they couldn't drive their unbroke ox teams and sit in the wagon, else when they espied a spear of grass out side the road (of which there was but a faint track made by the pioneers) they would sometimes turn off and break the wagon tongue - all these things we had in our camps. But as I was going to say, it was owing to the scarcity of men in our camp in consequence of five hundred of our best men being called upon by our dear Unkle Sam. to go to (Mexico - which was all right enough of course,) and then 500 men going out as pioneers These were heavy draughts on us at that time owing to our condition.

One incident which happened while we were camped on the Platt river of a laughable nature I must here relate. (for I can tell you we had to laugh sometimes) - we drove up to our camping ground which our capt. had decided was a good place to stop (posibly because our teams had given out as was often the case) and we girls unyoked unhitched our teams < - drove them to the river to drink, a [illegible] chum of mine just my age 16 - drove her team just a head of mine - they of course were thirsty and tired - so they went out into the stream - half way across - they drank and then stood there as though they were in no hurry to come back -. The girl called to them they seemed to look happy and contented to stay where they were - Oh, dear what shall I do - I cannot wade out to them?- I looked around and espied a young man coming with his team to water them - I said wait a minute just as she was about to wade into the water See - there is a young man coming perhaps he will take have pity for you. Oh! no he is out - it isn't likely he'll wade into the river for my cattle - well I said lets wait and see. He came up to us and of course could see what was our trouble - he said Shall I fetch your cattle out ladies? - She said if it's not asking too much of you - after he had started in after them - she said to me, Who is that young man? I told her I had never met him before - She replied I am going to set my cap for him, and sure enough they were very good friends all the way on our journey ever after this occurrence, and after the journey was ended they were married and have live[d] a long happy life together.

We travel'd on through a wild Indian country meeting with no serious trouble except now and then loosing some of our cattle or sheep. Dont think we had a death in our camp on the journey. When we arrived at Fort Bridger we found a Mountaineer, Bridger by name, living with a little Squad of Indians - here we met my father and some of the Pioneers returning, after, or to meet their families, we were overjoyed to meet worn out as we were to hear them say that they had found and located a stopping place for the Saints, for we had been three months on our journey and had began to think we were pretty good teamsters, Still all were willing to surrender the ox whip to its owner whenever demanded by its owner - as they returned from their Pioneer life, and the men also had a time of rejoicing on meeting with their familys Capt. Bridger gave us but little encouragement concerning our new home he told my father that he would give him a thousand dollars for every bushel of wheat that was raised in Salt Lake Valley.

This did not in the least have a tendency to discourage us - We were also told that we had the hardest and roughest part of the journey to travel - I wondered how this could be, for I could picture nothing in my mind that could be worse than what we had passed. we had walked 2 and 22 miles per day - and driven our ox teams sometimes one yoke and sometimes two - yoked and unyoked them, and then cooked our food and attended to camp work besides And now to be told that the hardest part of our journey was just on a head - but we were still equal to the task - of course we were [illegible] over those two ranges of mountains Walked up and down with [rod?] in hand haw here and gee there until at last we reached the goal < and were made happy about the 28th of Oct 1847 By entering and locating in Salt Lake Valley.

172Now we thought - our labors at an end on this we were sadly disappointed - it was late in the season - winter approaching - no houses - canals, sheds barns etc. Scarcity of clothing, children all barefooted - Snow began to fall, we knew not how deep - it might fall - we were short of provisions - Some families were entirely out before arriving in the Valley. The Saints counselled together and considered the best method of procedure to adopt in order that none should starve Some there were, who had a sufficiency for themselves and some to spare. It was decided that the breadstuffs in all our camps should be weighed - an estimate made, to see if there was enough to allow half pound per capita - it was ascertained that by rationing ourselvs very closely we had scarcely enough to last the winter through - Say nothing about until harvest. There were poor cattle killed to eat that I do not think, if cooked all up would have made a grease spot on a silk dress. We had no milk to help out until Spring and very few had any then. We commenced our rations on half lb [two illegible words] - that did very well - but we could see that such extravagant rations would not do, we were getting low in "our meal bags" - we had to frequently divide with those less fortunate, and were entirely without bread or anything else to eat - Some perhapse, who would not ration themselves, but eat all they wanted too. Then it was that people grumbled - but it made no difference people must not starve - but many there were who boiled ox hides and lived on them for weeks together.

173Men, women and children turned out and went into the canons [canyons] to pick up wood for fire and helped to get out logs to build shantees to protect them from the stormy blasts of air ice covered region - for many of the Saints were without tents or wagons - brought through by some person who wished their services perhapse and were set down with the cold earth for a bed and the sky for covering.

173Some of the more favored in camp succeeded in getting rude log huts - thatched with grass and covered with earth, or as we usually say with dirt roof. My father was one of this class. As soon as Spring opened, and bare ground was in sight, the more energetic of the brethren began looking over the Valley for the purpose of selecting a place for a home, and farm - It was not counsel for men to take their families away from the forte - for they had made a temporary fort during the winter to protect us from the Indians - of whom there seemed to be thousands My father located a farm 10 miles north of Salt Lake City. He moved his family too, for he had no help except women and children but he worked hard, as did all his family his labors were crowned with success, he was one of a very few who raised corn and wheat to ripen the first year - he had a sufficiency for his own use and some to spare As for sickness and deaths, they were few and babes were born, children were fed and clothed in the usual way, and people prospered. I never knew of any body dying from hunger or cold.

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young to Elder Jesse C. Little, 26 February 1847, reprinted in James R. Clark, ed., Messages of the First Presidency, 3 vols. (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1965) 1:318.
