Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

173Sarah DeArmon Pea Rich [^1]

[Iowa - 1846]

The Temple was finished and dedicated unto the Lord, and the work of given endowments commenced. President Young chose many brothers and sisters to come to the temple and assist in given endowments among those chosen was Mr. Rich and my self We ware to be thare at 7 in the morning and remain untill work was done at ten or twelve o'clock at night if necessary. So we got a good girl Mary Phelps a wife of my husband to stay and take care of the children and we helped in the House of the Lord to give endowments for four months untill the house was closed and we as a people commenced to prepare ourselves to depart for the rockey mountains for by this time the Devil was mad and the lives of many of our brethern ware sought by the mob that had assassinated our brethern, Joseph and Hyrum, but many ware the blessings we had received in the House of the Lord which has caused us joy and comfort in the midst of all our sorrows and enabled us to have faith in God knowing he would guide us and sustain us in the unknown journey that lay before us, for if it had not been for the faith and knowledge that was bestowed upon us in that temple by the influence and help of the Spirit of the Lord our journey would have been like one taking a leap in the dark. To start out on such a jearney in the winter as it ware, and in our state of poverty it would seam like walking into the jaws of death but we had faith in our heavenly father and we put our trust in him feeling that we ware his chosen people and had embraced his gospel and enstead of sorrow we felt to rejoice that the day of our deliverence had come, so I set to work to prepare my self and family to be as comfortable as we could with what little means we had for we wanted to start out with the first company as president Young wanted us to start in the first company the same as him and family ware going in. We had no team of our own; all we had in that line was one horse and 2 cows but those that had means and teams came forward and offerd to assist those that ware going in the first company for there was only a few hundred familys going to start out in this company. Others were to follow on from time to time as it should be thought wisdom for them to do so. I will now mention one good brother that came forward and offerd to assist us with a waggon and team, and his young son to drive our team untill we come to a stopping place where the team and boy could be sent back. It was Brother Joel Ricks, and the boy he sent at that time was his son Thomas Ricks now president of Rexburg Idaho [^2] he being at that time only 16 or 17 years old. Other brethern allso turned out teams to help carry provisions tents and other things necessary for such a jearney. I went to work and had some cloth wove and the sisters turned out and helped me to make up clothing for my children and family and it was not long untill I could say I am reddy for a start but as I am a little a head of my story I will go back to some things that took place in the temple we are about to leave. As the gospel with all its fullness had been restord to the earth through the Prophet Joseph Smith of course all the former ordenences were restord. Allso among other things celestial marriage was restord and the ordenences there onto ware performed in the temple just eluded to. So when my husband and my self had this doctern explaind and taught to us in its true light by those that had a right to teach it we both saw the propriety of the same and believed it to be true and essential to our future glory and exaltation heare after. We accepted the same and like old Sarah of old I had in that temple given to my husband four other wives which ware sealed to him in that temple by the holy order of God by one having athority to do the same. There names ware Eliza A. Graves, Sarah J. Peck, Mary A. Phelps and Emeline W. Grover; they ware all that was seald to him at that time. So this enlarged our family to be a few more in number to prepare for the jearney west. Many may think it very strange that I would consent for my dear husband whome I loved as I did my own life and lived with him for years to take more wives. This I could not have done if I had not believed it to be right in the sight of God and believed it to be one principal of his gospel once again restored to the earth that those holding the preasthood of heaven might by obeying this order attain to a higher glory in the eternal world and by our obedience to that order we ware blessed and the Lord sustained us in the same for through obedience to that order my dear husband has left on this earth a numers posterity like the ancient Apostles and Servents of God. Now I will again return to our preparing for the moov west and when we got every thing reddy for the start teames ware reddy for us to load up and we started on the 13th of Febuary. We crossed the Mississippi river on the ice with our waggons and horses. We had 3 waggons one was drove by Mr Rich, one by brother Thomas Ricks and the 3rd by a young man that had volenteared to go with us by the name of George Stailey. We allso had a young boy given into our care by his father his mother being dead. His father wished him to go with us to the mountains and we ware to look after him the same as our own. His name was George Patton of whome I will speak more about later on. Two or three of the brethern crossed the river with us and assisted us as fare as my fatherinlaw 12 miles away from Nauvoo in iowa. In Nauvoo on this the 13th day of february I parted for the last time in this life with my dear mother Elizabeth Pea allthough we both expected at that time that her and my father [John Pea] and sister Jane [age 27] would follow on the next season but death deprived me of ever meeting my mother again in this life. [^3] Brother charles pendleton was one of the good brothers that kindly assisted us to my fatherinlaws and he returned to Nauvoo and waited for a year or too and followed on. President Young, Kimball and others had allso crossed the river with a few hundred familys and ware camped on a stream called Sugar creek. There they waited until all the companyes came together and they all became organized. Mr. Rich went back and forth to Nauvoo to help other of the brethern to start while we remaind at his fathers also to git ox-teams to hall [haul] our provision. So we had to leave our house and furniture all unsold, left stoves chairs bedsteds clock and all our furniture standing in the house not sold. So the time came for us to roal [roll] out into camp and we bid our friends goodby and started for camp. It snowd all that day and when we pitched our tent at night we had to sweep away the snow and make our beds on the coald ground for there was not room for us to sleep in our wagons. We remaind in camp a few days. I there was taken verry sick through being exposed in the storm and as my Charley was then a nursing baby it was verry hard on me to be sick but by good care and the kindness of my husband and his young wives and the administering of the brethern I was restored to health again and able to travel with the rest of the company but before we left camp my father and sister Jane rode over to see us and again bid us good by. Father [Joseph] Rich and mother [Nancy O'Neal] Rich also rode out to camp to see us and again bid us good by and left us for good at that place expecting to join us some time in the future when we would find a resting place Mr. Rich returned from Nauvoo on the 25th, fixed up the wagons and made them comfortable as he could for the jearney and at 3 o'clock that afternoon we started on our jearney. Traveled five miles and camped on lick creek a little after night. There was snow on the ground 3 inches deep and we had a coald night of it having to sweep away the snow, strech our tent and make down our beds on the coald ground. We had a lot of rag carpet which came in verry handy to lay on the ground under our beds but yet it was coald and uncomfortable for us having 3 little children one a babe at the breast. My health was not verry good but I was blessed of the Lord by my obediance in receiving the law of polygamy for as my husbands other wives ware all young girls and 3 of them ware then with me they assisted in the work and helped me with my children, a blessing which I acknowledge was from the Lord. One of them Mary A. Phelps Rich to[ok] all the care of my children at night except the baby and when the wether was bad I stayed in the wagon with my babe and my meals was handed in to me as all the cooking had to be done by a fiar built up in open air, rain, snow or shine. Meals had to be prepard in this way, and all this time those dear girls waited on me and done the work without a murmur or complaint. On the 26 of feb we started on and traveld on threw a little place called farmington. Here Mr. Rich got some coffe sugar leather and other things to help us on our jearney, then went up the desdmine [Des Moines] five miles and camped on Reeds crick. Here we found brother bishop miller and company and some of the pioneers who were apointed to travel with each company to assist to build bridges, make roads and to help us along in case of need. They ware young men or men that had volunteard to go with us some hundred miles and then return and bring their familys. Bishop Miller had here taken a contract of a setler that lived at this place of clearing ten acres of land in order to git grain and bread stuff for the jearney and it being Saturday Mr Rich stoped over Sunday and had his men help Bishop miller out with his contract. On Sunday 29th Mr Rich helped to bury brother Smiths child, one of the brother millers company. My husband and bishop miller preach the funearl sermon there being a number of setlers present who paid good attention to there preaching and in the afternoon my husband went to visit Mr. Neal, an old acquaintence from Kentucky. I was quite sick that afternoon and could not go with him. Monday March the 2nd I was much better. Mr. Rich went to a place called bonapart 2 miles away and got some horse shewing done and returned and brother youngs company came up and all stoped and rested awhil for the roads ware so muddy as the rain had melted the snow and the roads ware horrible. The mud was so deep we would only travil a few miles a day and stop and camp and sometimes would have to stay in camp several days waiting for the roads to get better; then we would start on and pass other camps waiting as we had done for the roads to git better but we had to take courige and endure the hardships before us through rain and mud. We past brother orson Spencers camp. Sister [Catherine] Spencer was verry sick and afterwards we heard she had died. She was a noble faithfull latter day Saint and was a kind mother to her beautiful children who ware left motherless by her death. She was a lady in every respect and left a beautiful family of children who kept all together and the daughters thought [though] then small managed to do the work and ware united together and became honerable sisters in the Church and the sons became honerable men and are all now living to do good. [^4] We still traviled on as fast as the wether would permit only travling a few miles a day and then perhaps stop for a day or two waiting for the rain to stop, camping and sleeping in our tent on the damp ground at night and when there was a chance the men folks would git jobs of work from the farmers as we passed along and the pay would enable us to git things most needed to make us comfortable on our jearney for we ware verry poor and needed maney things that we had to deny ourselves of, but notwithstanding all our hardships we felt cheerful knowing our reward was in the future and if we ware faithfull our lives would be preserved and that we ere long find a stoping place where we could rest and help to build up the kingdom of our God for when we imbraced His Gospel we had a claim upon His promises. We continued on our jearney all through the month of march, stoping when there was a chance to git work and our brethern would do the work while there wives and children would cook, wash, iron and then parch corn and grind it on our coffee mills and then when we had our meals we would eat the parched corn meal in milk and when milk was scarce would do as most of our milk men do now a days, put in a little water. This is how we poor mormons had to do while jearneying from civilization to find a home in the mountains where we could serve our God in peace for a season. Each company had a few cows to give us milk but often these cows had to be yeoked up and help to draw our wagons and of course they could not give us much milk. We also before starting out west got squashes and cooked them up as dry as posible and then made them out in small thin cakes and dried them in our stoves and put them in clean sacks and they too ware used in milk and oftimes when we stoped for a few days we would make them into pies by soaking them in milk, but we did not have eggs to put in them to make them nice, but we did the best we could and called them squash pies. Young ladys of today, what would you think of one of our squash pies of those days? Now we started on our jearney traveld about 4 miles and camped on fox river near the camp of father [Samuel] Bent, and a number of the high council were camped here. We again stoped while Mr. Rich and others took a job to make some shingles for a farmer near where we stoped and the next day being Sunday brother John Taylor and his family came to our tent, made us a visit. Brother Taylor held meeting, spoak of what lay before us, told us to be humble and patient and all would be right. After meeting, him and the portion of his family that was with him returned to our tent and took dinner with us and cheered us up with his lively joaks. Mr. Rich then visited the main camp to attend a council meeting. I and Sister Mary Rich went with him to visit some of our friends in that camp. We returned and the next day fixed up our things and again set out on are trip. Started, traveld up the divide between Soap creek and fox river and camped at brother orson pratts camp. We that day had traveled about 17 miles. We ware then in about 3 miles of the main camp where president Young and kimball ware camped. The next day we traveld about 12 miles over bad road stalled in the mud and had to unload one wagon. The main camp was travling just ahead of us, so we overtook them at night in camp and struck our tent and camped near by. The next day our company started on, leaving the main camp where it was crossed over the pararia [prairie], traveld 12 miles, crossed the Shariton [Chariton] River, camped on the west bank. Here we again found brother orson Pratt and brother [Charles] Shumwais company camped. Here Mr. Rich and other took a contract to clear one acre of ground. This they accomplished in one day and got 23 bushels of corn for we had to feed our teams all this time. While the brethern were doing the work the main camp came up, crossed over the river and camped on the hill a half mile from our camp. Here I will make mention that while crossing this river in a waggon our wortha brother Chariton Jacobs [^5] was born and they named him after that river. He now is a wortha man of a family and lives in Salt Lake City. We tarried here a few days, also all the camps. Brother Taylors company was camped near us and one evening brother Taylor, Mr. Rich and myself together with Sister Harriet S. Kimball visited the camp on the hill. The brethern met in council and about ten o'clock at night Mr. Rich brother Taylor and myself returned to our camp. Sister H Kimball [Vilate] remaind in her own camp as she had only come to our camp on a visit, having lived with me at the time she was married to brother Kimball. By the time we started back to camp it had commenced raining and was very dark. We missed our way and by the time we reached camp we were wet and in mud over our shoe tops, but notwithstanding our mud brother Taylor cheered us up and kept us a laughing all the way to our tent. It was a very wet desagreeable time and while here in camp Sister Mary Rich one of my husband's wives came down with the measles, also one of the young men of our company brother Bartina. We all felt verry bad for it was a bad time to git measels in our camp and I had a baby about a year old that soon after came down with the same complaint. Hear at this place the companys ware all organised for our final march into the wilderness as it then seamed to us and many of our pioneers returned to Nauvoo to prepare to bring on there familys and friends, and on April the 2nd we left the Shariton on our march towards the rockey mountains leaving all the Settlements behind, so from that [time] on we had to pick our way without aney road only as we maide it. Soon after leaving this place my little baby Charley took down with the measles and was verry sick for a weak or more but we still traveld on sleeping in our tent at night. Some times the rain would poor down and all would be damp and wet but still the Lord blessed us and our little one and Sister Mary recovered from the measels and no one seamed to take the disease from them for which we thanked the Lord for his kindness, for to have the disease spred in so large a camp while travling would truly be distressing, but the Lord is all wais mercifull to those who puts there trust in him. We still continued our jearney, could only travil a few miles a day on account of the bad roads. [F]rom Shariton river we continued our jearney west only being able to travil but a few miles every day on account of mud and the bad roads. It rained part of the time and at other times it would snow and sleet notwithstanding it was in the month of April. About the 9th of April we got to a dry Elm grove in the praira; here we found some of the companeys that was a head of us camped having passed president Youngs company on locus [Locust] creek. Here we camped in Elm grove and stayed over Sunday the 12th waiting for the rest of the companys to come up. Here the brethern met in council at brother kimballs tent and decided to go by council bluffs and stop and make a settlement on grand river. While here the boy that was with us George Patton [Patten] was taken verry sick with the mountain fever so we tarried untill Wednesday the 15th and travild on the divide, leaving the main road. Travild about eight miles and camped in a small grove and on the next day traveld on leaving part of the companys still in camp. After a hard days travil reached a branch of the medisan [Medicine] creek. Here again the company tarried and helped up the other companeys for when it was so muddy they would, the brethern that was a head, would take there teams from there waggons and go back to those behind us and double teams and help them up, for we ware then like one family in our feelings towards each other and conciquently we had to travil slow in order to help each other along. We got all together and traveld on a few miles and again camped in a body and stoped on a small stream and waited over Sunday as we did not travil on the Sabbath. Here our brethern held meeting and afterwards met in council and to find out how much provision was on hand and on the 22nd some of the companey started on while our company and some others had to stop on account of some teams of our teames being sick and the boy that was with us still was verry sick. We stopped untill fryday the 24th having lost an ox by death. We started on and traveled 16 miles and camped and on Saturday the 25th we reached a grove which they named garden grove. Here the main camp all arrived. Here it was decided that some of the companeys was to stop at this place and fence in a large field and put in a crop altho late in the season. This was a beautiful place, plenty of timber and water. Brother [Samuel] Bent was apointed to preside over this place with Daniel fullmer and Aaron Johnson his 2 councilers. Here we stoped untill the 22nd of May, stoped in our tent. Our boy George Patton still got worse and became as helpless as a babe, was out of his head and to all appearence could not live. Our beds had to be made down in the tent; one was fixed comfortable for the sick boy. All our family done all they could for him. Mr. Rich and a brother Russell Brownell took charge of him and watched with him at night. Brother brownell was travling with us to help us along. George Patton the boy was put into our charge to look after the same as one of our own children. He had by this time become unconchious. Mr. Rich and brother Brownell ware compleately worn out. Mr. Rich came to my bed and called to me and wanted to know if I could watch over the boy awhil for he must have a little rest, so I got up, went to the bedside of the sick boy while my husband and brother brownell could have a little rest. They both thought the boy could not posibly live maney hours, so I took my seat beside the poor sick boy and began to reason with myself. My reasoning was something like this. I thought to myself this poor dying boy was put into our charge to watch over the same as one of our children. Could we give up one of our own children to die without using all the faith within our reach to plead with the Lord to spare the dear one and not take it away from us? This boy had no mother living to plead with the Lord to spare his life to meet his dear father again at our hands. I said no to myself, I will not give him up as long as there is life. I will pray and ask the Lord to tell me what to do for him. I neald down while all in the tent was asleep and plead with the Lord to spare his life and to impress it upon me what to do for poor George for he was a good boy and we all loved him, so when I got up from praying I was led by my feelings to put a teaspoonfull of concicrated oil in his mouth. His tonge was drawn fare back in his mouth and was verry black and his breathing rattling and heavy and his eyes to all appearence set in his head. I did not see that he swallowed the oil so I anointed his face and head with the oil asking the Lord to bless the same, then in a little while gave him another teaspoonfull of oil asking the Lord at the same time with a humball heart to spare the boy and accept of my feeble efforts in his behalf. I felt broken hearted before the Lord and to my great joy I noticed that George had swallowed the oil. I then took couriage, got some viniger, swabbed it and with a soft swab I rubed his tounge and mouth in order to remove the black crust that was forming in his mouth and throut. I then gave him a little branda and watter; he swallowed that. I then made some tea of what we called horse mint; he also swallowed that. I then washed his face and hands in watter and soda and thus I worked with that dear boy until daylight all alone for the rest was all asleep. Having been up so much they slept verry sound, and about daylight to my great joy George opend his eyes and looked upon me as though he was astonished. I said George do you know me? He spoak in a whisper, yes. O how glad I felt. By this time Mr. Rich had waked up and enquired how the boy was, saying afterwards that he allmost feared he was gone. I said to him come and see. The boy looked at him and smiled which astonished Mr. Rich so much that he turned to me and said what has caused such a chainge. I said to him prayr and faith and hope in our father in heaven. So I told my husband what I had done and how humble I felt while praying to the Lord to spare the boys life. My husband was truley affected and told me the boys life would be spared to yet be a blessing to me in some future time, and from that time on the dear boy continued to mend slowley and got well and prooved himself to be a blessing to me and my children maney years afterwards when My husband was away from home on a mishion and me and my children ware destitute and needed help, for he grew to be a man, helped to bring his father to Salt Lake Valley, married, and settled in Payson, Utah, prospered and was blessed with plenty, raised a large family and at this time is still living and many has been the time that he would bring me loads of provision butter Eggs and grocererys when Mr. Rich would be off on mishions to forward the work of the Lord, and when George would help me he would allwais say mam, for that is what he calls me, he would say mam I owe my life to you, for your faith and prayrs saved me from death. This same boy is now brother George Patton that lives in Payson, Utah and he will give his testimony that what I write is the truth. [^6]

Journey across IowaHCWell I will now return to our travels from garden grove to our next stopping place called Mount Pisgah. We left garden grove May the 22nd. At this place snakes ware verry bad and many of our cattle and horses ware bit by them. Our horse, the only one we had of our own, was bitten by a rattle snake. Mr. Rich docturd him with sweet oil and harts horn and he recoverd. It was no uncomon thing to find snakes quoiled up under our beds when we took them up in our tent in the morning. So on the 22nd of May we took a part of our things and started for our next stopping place, having to leave a part of our things to be brought on at some other time as Brother Thomas Ricks had to return to Nauvoo from this place to help his fathers family on the next season. So that left us one waggon and team short so it took us about 7 days to reach the place we ware to stop at for the ballence of the summer and the next winter. It was only 40 miles from garden grove but we had to travil slow. We arrived in camp on the 26th of May. On reaching this place we found that father William Huntington was appointed by President Young to stop here and preside over the place and that Esra T Benson and C C Rich to be his councilers. The brethern that had went a head of us to this place and ware appointed to stop here had allready commenced to raise small log houses, so we lived in our tent and waggons untill our men could put up one log house and cover it with bark and dirt and we had a dirt floor, but our wagon boxes were taken off of the wheels and turned into bed rooms; allso our tent was used as a room. The men folk went to plowing and planting late as it was and putting up as good fences as the[y] could to keep the cattle out of the crops. So it was not long until the brethern of this place had got in about one thousand acres of ground into grain corn mostly and potatoes squashes and seads of all kinds such as we had with us and the[y] had it partly fenced then they went to work to prepare to fix up places to live in for the winter. All those that had means to go on further had done so leaving orders for all that came after was to stop at this place untill further orders from the first presidency that had went on to council bluffs on the Misouri rivers. Thare they stoped for the winter in order to prepare to start in the next spring for the Mountains. About the middle of June brother Benson started to council bluffs with the mail from pisgah and returned and about the last of June brother Benson was called to be one of the twelve apostles to fill the place of John E. Page who had apostatized, leaving the burthen [burden] of the place on father Huntington and Mr. Rich to see to affairs as best they could, for there was a great care resting upon them at that time, and about the 20th of June we were visited at this place by Cornel [James] Allen of the Army of the West. He wanted our people at this critticle time of our travels to raise five hundred men as voluntears to go to the mexican war to help fight mexico. Father Huntington and Mr. Rich sent him on to headquarters to where the first presidency was. So my dear readers you can see notwithstanding we had been driven and ware jearneying in poverty to seak a place to rest we ware followed and this cruel demand made upon us. So in a few days brother parley p. pratt was sent from headquarters by President Young and council for President Huntington and Rich to rais fifty men in this place as the heads of the Church had concented to have the five hundred men raised to fill the demands of the government from whence we ware driven, thus showing to the world that they ware loyel to the government. A more cruel demand could not have been made upon us at this the time of our affliction and poverty. The men was raised and sent and their famileys had to be looked after while they were gone. About this time the brethern president Young, Kimball and Richards, J[esse] C[arter] Little and others had concluded to come and make us a visit and see about raising the men. The[y] said what Brother Huntington and Rich had done in the matter was all right. They stayed a few days, preached to the people, gave good council, had a dance on the bare ground out doors, seamed to enjoy there visit. So the brethern left their blessing with our camp and returned to winter quarters. Their visit to us at that time was encouraging, for they left a good impreshion among the Saints which gave them new courage to persevere and prepare themselves for what was ahead of them. Along about the first of July our brethern found they must go to work and stake and rider their fence in order to secure there crops from unruley cattle. Now I expect maney of my readers will not know what stake and rider fences mean for they do not see much of that kind of work in this day, but they put up stakes cross ways on each end of there poles and then laid an other pole on top of the old fence, which made the fence some higher than it was so the cattle could not jump over the fence.

Journey across IowaHCWell now about this time sickness set in among the different parts of the camp and many were down with chills and feavers which kept our bretheren on the go all the time administeren to the sick. And Aug 5th brother Benson and Sidwell called on us on there way to the east from winter quarters. At this time brother Huntington was allso taken with chills. He was our president and it was hard to have him prostrated with sickness. Brother Benson and Mr. Rich and others met in council and prayed for and administered to him before brother Benson departed for the East, but our dear father Huntington continued to grow worse until the 19th of August when he died. Great was the sorrow of the camp at the loss of so good and kind President. All was done to save him that was in our power to do, but he was called for and had to obey the call. Thus passed away one of our most useful and noble men. Maney were the achaking hearts left to mourn his loss after he was laid to rest in that lonely spot. The burthen of looking after the Saints in that place then rested on my husband as he then was the only Counciler left in that place as Brother Benson the first councilor had been called to the apostleship. Sickness increased in the place and on the 23rd, four days later, Mr. Rich was taken with the chills; 2 of my children ware also down with chills and feaver. So my dear readers you can give a little gess how his family felt at that time to see our leading brother laid away and then his counciler on whom rested all the burthen of that place stricken down and others of the family sick and us in a fare of [far off] land. It truly was a time of sorrow. Mr. Rich lay sick about 2 weeks. During this time there ware maney death[s] amonge the people left at this place and other members of our family were taken sick and suffered much for maney necessarys which we could not git at that place being 40 miles from any settlement, altho a number of our brethern had gone into the west part of misouri to git work in order to lay in a few needful things for there familyes through the coming winter. So by the good care which Mr. Rich received from the hands of his kind family and the faith and prayrs of the brethern he was restored to health again and though verry weak he was able to attend to the affairs of the place, but about this time nearly all of our family ware taken down sick so much so that there was scarcely enough of well ones in our family to see to the sick. Mr. Rich done all he could for the sick and poor for by this time the familyes of the soldiers that had gone to Mexico were in want and maney of them sick. They were calling on my husband for help and he called on those that had means to donate and assist him in this the hour of affliction to help the sick and poor that was in this place. Sickness continued to increase and nearly every boddy was sick and many died. I think about eighty died at Mount Pisgah and among that number was father Joseph Knight, one of the first members of the Church of Latter day Saints one that assisted the Prophet Joseph Smith to means to soport his family while he was translating the book of mormon. So in this lonely spot in the graveyard at Mount pisgah in what was then called potowatama lands lies one of the noble benifactors of the prophet of Joseph who will come forth in the mourning of the first resurection to meet the prophet as well as all good Saints. Allso there lies that Noble father and president William Huntington, allso Hyrum Spencer and many brothers and sisters and dear children, also brother and Sister Judson and little daughter, all burried as it were in one grave. [^7] The little girl was burried one day and on the day following her father and mother died and there was so maney sick that they could not find well ones enough to burry them for 4 days and they ware both laid in one grave, leaving 3 small children. One died soon after and the other 2, Timothy and Mary Jane, Mr. Rich and I took them and brought them to Salt Lake. Mary Jane Judson remained with us untill she married William Hanson by whom she has raised 4 sons and 3 daughters. Timothy remain in our family about 2 years and one of his older brothers came on and lived with us one year and then him and Timothy went to California and are still thare. Well after the sickness of pisgah and so many deaths had passed over a little, our brethern had to look after there crops and secure the same to help them through the coming winter. Mr. Rich had two rooms built down on the river where we would be handy to wood for the winter and where we ware living we had to use spring watter which was suposed to be what was called mineral watter and caused so much sickness and on the river we could use river watter. It was a branch of grand river. So we with Mother Huntingtons family [^8] and a number of other familyes moved on to the river a mile or so from the Hill where we lived through the summer, but before we moved on the river Mother [Phebe Palmer] graves and her daughter Eliza Graves Rich came on as Eliza was one of my husbands wives that had to be left back in Nauvoo on account of her confinement on the 11 of february before we left Nauvoo on the 13th. So she had to be left; her and her babe ware left with her mother and came on in the fall company. She allso with her mother lived on the river and at this place Sister Sarah J. Peck Rich, another one of Mr. Richs wives, had a fine son born about the 26 of october. [^9] After this Mr. Rich was again taken sick with a feaver and was verry sick for a long time and it turned to the chills. He was sick in bed when I was confined on the 15th of December when I had a son born [John Thomas Rich]. There we were in one little small room with a bark roof and a bark floor, for the oak and other trees would peal easey and the bretheren would peal off large peaces of bark and spred them out and make floors and cover the house with the same. Brother Lorenzo Snow and family had also come on to pisgah and stoped for the winter. He lived near us and himself and family ware so kind to us in our time of sickness and administered words of comfort and cheered us up in our affliction, and at this place we had many testamoneys that the Lord had not forsaken us and that he was mind full of His people who put their trust in him. One item of which I will make mention. The poor ware coming to us all the time for help and this one circumstance I will mention showed the hand of the Lord so plain that I want to leave it for my children to read and think upon so that they may put there trust in the Lord in some future time when they may have the chance of learning for themselves, as we did at that time. Well, as I was going to relate, a poor woman, one of the wives of one of the men that had went with the mormon betalyon to mexico, came to my husband who was still sick in bed and told him she had no bread for her children to eat I by this time was able to be up and see to my little babe. This Sister was crying and told us how destitute she was. My husband turned to me and said let this Sister have some flower. This was a puzzel to me knowing we did not have 20 pounds of flower in the house and none in the place to buy and not a cent of money to buy with. So I said we have not got 20 pounds of flower in the house and none in the place to git. He looked at me and smiled and said, Sarah let her have all there is in the house and trust in the Lord to provide for us. I arose and done as I was bid but knew not how our children was to get bread. When the Sister was gone Mr. Rich said I know the Lord will open the way for us to live so do not feel uneasy for there will be a way opend for us having a loaf of bread in the house. I too began to ask the Lord to open the way for us to live and along towards evening we saw some coverd waggons coming down the hill towards the house, so the man in frunt drove up and came into the house; it proved to be the brother Sidwell that was with brother Benson that had called on us as they went east. Brother Sidwell said he wished to stop over night with us. My husband told him he could do so. He then turned to Mr Rich and said to him, the Spirit tell[s] me you are out of money and tells me to help the[e], as he was a Quaker he used the word the[e], and handed Mr Rich fifty dollars. Mr Rich turned to me, handed me the money saying, now you see the Lord has opened the way for us to git flower, for he was quite overcome with thanks in his heart. Brother Sidwell after understanding our cituation said we have bread in our waggons enough for tonight and in the morning and we passed a waggon load of flower a little way back that will reach here either tonight or in the morning. So you can be suplyed with bread stuff. So we both burst into tears to think the Lord had so blessed us for blessing the poor Sister and her little children. So when the wagon of flower arrived Mr Rich not only laid in a suply for our own family but got a lot to give out to others that were sick and poor and in want. Brother Sidwell allso bought some flower and left with us to give to the poor of that place; he allso let us have some grociryes. He was a weltha batchler, was on his way to winter quarters and there assisted others to start to the mountains. So I want my children and all that reads this when I am laid to rest in my grave to see how the Lord blessed his Saints while travling from Nauvoo to the valleys of the mountains and how he has blessed them and sustained them after the[y] reached this valley when our provision was short and we had to live on rashions and verry small at that for over two years. Well now I will return again to our pisgah home. After my husband had got means from this good brother to provid for his family and for others he commenced to git better. Brother Snow and others ware verry kind to us and assisted Mr Rich to many things. He had got brother Snow and brother York to see to the bretheren of the place and look after buisness and by the 3rd of febuary he had so much recoverd that he was able in company with brother James S. Haleman to start to winter quarters to council with the brethern about what was best to be done concearning our moove to the west, having prevous to this appointed brother Snow as his first counciler and A.M. York as 2nd counciler. Mr. Rich and brother Haleman arrived at winter quarters after 4 days drive, staid near a week, got back to pisgah on the 16th, found all well at home. Brother Snow and Mr Rich held several meetings and then he began to make preparations for our moove to winter quarters, allso to help Sister Huntington to go. At the same time we ware to go she was to go with her family. About this time brother Orson Pratt and Brother [Joseph] Horn[e] had arived on important buisness concerning organising and preparing for the jearney to the west. Before we left pisgah the brethern and sisters got up a party for our benefit; it was held in brother Orval Coxs shop. There ware about one hundred people there. Mr Rich was helped to some meanes to assist us on our jearney. We had a good time and good feelings prevail; all was sorry to part with us. We prepared for the trip and on the 12 of March we started with all our family. Allso Mother Huntington and her family as president young had sent a team and Charles Decker with the team to assist Sister Huntington with her family to winter quarters. It was coald wether and continued so nearly all the way. We traveld 15 miles and camped on the big prairiea and on the 13th we crossed the big prairiea and reached brother Ivens camp, 26 miles. Here we stoped for one day as it was so coald and on the 15th we started again, traveld 25 miles and camped within five miles of indian town [^10] and on the 16th we went to big ishnabotoney [Nishnabotna] 30 miles. 17th we traveld 17 miles and camped on Cay creek and on the 18th we traveld 18 miles and got within 4 miles of camp and on the 19th of march got to the Missouri river, found we could not cross and here we had to remain three days. It was coald and winday and virry disagreable especialy for the little babys we having 3 of them in our family, the eldest of the 3 a little over one year old, but we all felt good natured and made all hands as comfortable as posible. We finely crossed over the river in a flat boat and arived safe in winter quarters and the brethern that was there soon found us an empty house to stop in for a while. After resting Mr Rich arranged things for us so that he could return to Nauvoo and dispose of what little property we ware compelled to leave when we left Nauvoo. We found on arriving at winter quarters that the 12 and maney others ware preparing to start west for the mountains and my husband was anxious to allso go west that Spring. So on the 16th of Aprail Mr Rich left winter quarters for Nauvoo committing his family into the hands of the Lord, at the same time telling the family if they would pray for Sarah D his wife, meaning my self, that I would see that they would have enough to eat until his return as he was not able to leave enough on hand to last untill he would return and no means to buy with but on his going back at that time depended our prospect to go with the first company across the plains. He bid us good by and started for Nauvoo. At that time we had brother James Leach and wife [Isabella Daniels Leach] with us to help us along on our jearney as they had no children and could not have a fit out of their own. So it was not long before what we had in the house to eat had give out and when we went to bed at night we did not know where our brakfast was to come from. So when we got up in the mourning I called on Brother Leach to attend family prayrs; he did so. I then told Mr Richs other wives that was with us to put on the tea kettle and set the table. I then said to brother Leach, come go with me. I put on my bonnet and shall and asked Sister Leach to see to the children and I and Brother Leach would go and get somthing for brakfast. Brother Leach looked at me with astonishment knowing I had no money to buy aneything with but we started out on faith. I was directed to 2 of the brethern that I thought I could barry 2 dollars of in order to git something for my family to eat but they both were hard up and were preparing to start west and could not spare the money as they expected to be on the moove before Mr Rich would be back. So I started on. Brother Leach by this time wondered how I could be able to git aneything to take home but told me afterwards that he was praying in his heart all the time to the Lord to help Sister Rich to be able to suply her family with something for brakfast. I was by this time at the gate of Sister Esra T Benson. Said I to brother L, we will call in here. Sister [Pamelia] Benson was very glad to meet with me. After setting a few minites she said Sister Rich have you been to breakfast? I said No. Then she called to her sister, Addaline [^11] to make me a cup of tea. I by this time felt as though a cup of tea would do me good. Before I had time to tell her my buisness out she said have you anything at home to eat? I said no Sister Benson but I soon shall return home with something. She threw a silver dollar into my lap and said go to brother [Stephen] Winchesters and get some grocerys for he just got in last night with some grocerys to sell. He has been out to the settlements to work and got grocerys. By this time tears could be seen both in my eyes and brother Leachs. I thanked Sister Benson, told her I would replace the dollar as soon as my husband got back. She said I should do nothing of the kind. So we drank a cup of tea and started for Brother Winchesters. We had not gone far before we met brother E[zra] T[hompson] Clark with a sack of flower and a bushel of potatoes in his waggon enquireng where I lived, said it was for me so I sent him on to my house with instructions for the girls to hurry up brakfast and we would soon be there with some grocerys. We went and got a little shugar, a little coffee and tea. Of course a dollar would not git much but we ware so proud to get a little. We then started for home, passed brother [James M.] Flakes whome I had never seen. He was just finishing dressing a calf. Some on[e] present observed to him that there went Sister Rich. He turned and called to me and said Sister Rich send that man here and git a quarter of this calf. I did so and reached home with plenty to eat, found the family reddy to thank the Lord that they had prayed for me and that the Lord had blessed me in my efferts to git something to live on until Mr Rich would return. So my friends I write this that you me [may] see the result of trusting in the Lord in time of need. Pray unto Him with a humble heart and he will answer your prayers as he did ours at this time of need, and it is this same good father in heaven that sestained and helped His Saints to come to these valleys and provided means whereby we could live after we got here for our lott was then cast in great poverty and in all our trials the Lord has been near to answer the prayers of those who put their trust in Him. Who can doubt this work of the Latter day Saints after passing through what I have passed through for forty-five years. One thing which I omitted to menshion I will relate here and that was after we reached winter quarters and before my husband started for Nauvoo him and myself and the girl that had lived with me so long went to president Youngs office as had been preaviously arainged with president and Mr Rich and the girl, Sister Harriet Sargent, and myself, that being the day apointed by the president for us to come. We went to his office, I think it was the 12th day of April, and Sister Harriet Sargent was sealed to my husband as his wife for time and all Eternity by president Brigham Young and returned back, and afterwards he returned to Nauvoo and desposed of what property we had left, visited our friend together with my father mother and sister, left them in Quincy Illinois. He then started for our camp in the west, fell in with a company of Saints coming out to winter quarters and traveld with them. They ware men of means and had there familys with them and were verry anxious to come to the valley with the first company. So they arrainged with Mr Rich to help him out with his family so we could all come together. So when they reached winter quarters they found the companys fast preparing for a start and all went to work together and we all got fitted up for a moove west with what my husband had and what those brethern helped him too, part as a lone to be replaced again and part as a donation. We were fitted up as comfortable as we could be with waggons and teams and provision besides some cows and sheep and teamsters and some to drive the stock for all that had loose stock brought it along. The names of those 2 brethern that so kindly helped us to be able to come with the first company were Zasabel Shoemaker and Aaron Cherry. Them and us traveld together in the same company all the way to the valley.

Leonora Cannon Taylor was one of those women who resolutely and unpretentiously supported the work of the Restoration and their husbands' crucial role in that work, no matter what personal sacrifice it entailed. Quiet and unassuming despite her prominent position as wife of Apostle and later President John Taylor and faithful to the core, she left only a brief diary and some letters, but they reveal much about the personality and dogged faith of this remarkable and little known woman. Original spelling and lack of punctuation reflect her limited writing skills, but the content reveals a sensitive, caring, and observant diarist.

---
Notas:
[^1] 207 went & brought us back some delightful berrys we got our camp all in order before evening Mr. T. went to the trading Village [^22] along with the [illegible] to see the U.S. Agent he is placed here to see that the Indians are not imposed on his name is Major [Robert B.] Mitchell We saw the chief his name is McClure a half Breed a very Gentlemanly man, he informed them that the principal part [of] them were gone of[f] to a medicine dance or religious ceremony in which no one is allowed to partake exap [except] the[y] are known to be good men the[y] had been ingaged two days and Nights the[y] Mr.T. & the rest came home in the evng—- Thd 18th went with the Girls & children about two miles in the cariage to an encampment of the Brethern to get Strawberrys the[y] were more plentyfull there than any place I ever saw they gathered them by Bushels Fri John drove Nanny and the children to get Strawberrys I went to visit Sister Kimball Mr. T. was very busy at home June Sat 20th Mr. T. drove Mary Anne [daughter] & the girls to a concert at the trading Village B- and Lane went out trading, numbers of the Bretherin went down the band went with them. We had a very pleasnt time indeed.
