Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

242Ursulia Hastings Hascall [^1]

242amp of Israiel, Sept 19 1846

Dear sister, In the wilds of North America is the residence of your affectionate sister. Not unhappy and suffering, no, far from it, nor none of our family. There is nothing that would induce me to leave the company of the saints of God, unless it is the salvation of my friends and dear relative[s]. O how gladly would I rend the thick veil of darkness, traditions and sectarianism, that covers their eyes and hearts so they might understand the plainness of the gospel while they have the open bible in their hands searching out their sabbath school below. I am sure you would like to be placed in the right way if you knew certain which it was, look about you and see if your preacher tells you things as they are in the bible, exactly, not I believe so, I think so, it is my opinion, and such stuff, it is of no consequence, if he does not know a thing, we can all guess and think as well as he, when a preacher says he knows a thing, and I shall find it so, when I meet him at the bar of God, and I find it agrees with scripture, there is no room for doubt. We have meetings every sabbath in a place fitted up in the woodland about a mile from the prarie where we are camped with our waggons and tents. We have it fixed expecting to stay until spring. There is two companies on ahead of us. One is stopped 150 miles from here the other has gone on, there is about 800 waggons in this company with brother Brigham Young and brother Heber Kimball at the head, and more adding daily.

Now I will give you a history of my journey or a sketch of it, We started from Nauvoo the 30th of May. Had as good a waggon as any of them, three yoke of oxen with flour enough to last us one year, ham, Sausages, dry fish, lard, two cans hundred pounds of sugar, 16 of coffee, 10 of raisins, rice with all the other items we wish to use in cooking. I will describe our waggons and tent as well as I can. I wish I could make you know exactly how they look. The waggon is long enough for both our beds made on the flour barrels chests and other things. (Thales and I sleep at the back end, and F[rancis] and Irene at the forward end while we were traveling if we camped too late to pitch our tent.) It is painted red. It has eight bows eighteen inches apart, a hen coop on the end with four hens, we had two webs of thick drilling. We put on one cover of that, then three breadths of stout sheeting over that and then painted it, the heaviest showers and storms does not beat through only a few drops now and then. Our tent is made of drilling sixteen breadths in the shape of an umbrella. A cord three feet long on the end of every seam and a pin on that to drive into the ground. The pole in the middle that holds it up carries it three feet from the ground, then a breadth of sheeting put on the edge to let down in cool weather and fasten with loops and pins in the ground.

Now we start (every one is councilled to start as soon as ready morn or eve) saturday four oclock in the afternoon and went down to the Mississippi river [and] found a boat to convey us across. Landed safely on the other side, went three miles and camped for the night. Chained our oxen to the wagon after baiting, eat some bread and milk and piece of pie and went to bed in our wagon, never slept better. In the morning made a fire had a good cup of coffee, went eight miles, found a camp of fifty wagons and tents [and] stopped for several days waiting for others, we found some of brother Fars [Farrs] family, [^2] pitched our tent waited two days for them, and then commenced our journey in earnest. It was not many days before we bid adieu to the last house we expected to see until we had them of our own. We travelled for hours and saw nothing but the wide expanse of heaven and the waveing prairie grass not a tree or bush. Then we came to timber and water [and] camped for the night, do our cooking and washing all that wish to start the next day take wood and water enough to make our coffee for breakfast and hastepudding [^3] and milk for dinner. We always found wood and water as often as once in twenty four hours but not always at the right time. The company we were in killed several fat calves they always gave us some, we had the old fashioned soups with a light crust. We have had every thing on the way to make us more comfortable than any one could possibly expect, and in this way we travelled until we came to council bluffs on the Missouri river (you can find it on the map) There we found the camp of Israiel with its leaders (or some of them I might say) waiting for a boat to be built to carry us across the river here we camped two weeks, then the boat was ready. All crossed as fast as possible, came on twenty miles this side of the river and stopped a while, finally Brother Young the president of the church said the best way was to stay here this winter, and let those that are ahead break the way and we start early in the spring. They consented to it, went to work. cut grass and made such big stacks of hay as I never thought of, for the cattle, building log cabins for their families. Some split the logs. Francis split his. They make boards and shingles here by hand. They brought saws and almost every thing else. They brought a carding machine. I think they will need it there is seven hundred sheep in one drove that is church property, there is lots of fat cattle killed, one or two every day this six weeks. We have some every week, Francis and Thales got a lot of honey the other day equal to Daniels, [^4] the warm biscuit and honey [and] a good cup of coffee is not so mean. Do not worry about us, I think we shall get along with as little trouble as other people that live in painted houses and carpet floors. The Mexican war is no trouble to us at present. It is rather a benifit. President Polk sent two officers to our President Young for five hundred able bodied men to take [to] Santa Fee and he might have it for a location. Polk would find everything [and] pay seven dollars and a half per month to the soldiers 40 to the Capt and so on to officers, President Young started out immediately from camp to camp, soon enlisted his five hundred men, sent them on to fort Leavenworth there to receive orders from your President. They stayed there a while, received there money sent home to there families considerable of it. They do not need of it at present, and they put it into President Youngs hands for the benifit of the church. He sent one thousand dollars to St Louis to buy goods of all kinds.

We are all well and have been excepting a few days. Francis had an ill turn and so did Irene. Francelle [grand daughter] is a beautiful child. She has had the whooping cough the old fashioned way. [It] took of her flesh some, [but she is] pretty much over it, Thales stands all kinds of w[e]ather. He has had only one ill time since [we] started that was bowel complaint. For two or three days [we] did not take anything but peppermint. I do not see but he is as contented as he would be there. He would like to have one play with the boys he used to play with. He began a letter - he said it would be all mistakes and he would not write. His business is herding cattle with several other boys. He says he is a sick of it as finds [blank] he says he rather they follow him than to go back. He has a peck of filberts he picked. [ . . . ]

246When I left Nauvoo I gave fifteen cents to brother Thompson to take your letter and send it to mount Pisgah. That was the second camp. There they took the name of every man that passed through the gate, then when a letter came it was forwarded to him. I began to think if you had written it was lost but at last it was cried on the stand a letter for F[rancis]. Mr. [Stillman] Pond he went and got it, how the last came is quite remarkable. Dr [Willard] Richards was at some office where he found it paid the postage and cried it on the stand at meeting. Some families that have arrived within a few days have suffered with sickness. All sick at a time. There has been over twenty deaths since we were on the way and since. We talked [to] Brother [George B.] Wallace [who] said he had made seven coffins. [ . . . ]

246I feel as if I narrowly escaped from Babylon with a mighty effort, it is not my wish to return. The Indians are very plenty here. They are here begging every week. Sometimes [they] steal a tin cup or garment if it lies in there way. Brigham Young has made a treaty with them. They are to have our houses and all the improvements when we leave. We found one tribe that had several that had been baptised by Joseph. They would say "me mormon"

246Direct your letters to Huntsuckers postoffice Atchison County Missouri.

246U. B. H.

246there is no end to them black walnuts in abundance hundreds of bushels of grapes orchards of wild plumbs, fifty bushels in a place, you never saw anything better [to] make pies and preserves.

246Camp of Israiel, Winter quarters

Indian Territory April 1847

Dear Brother, and sister, I fear you have not received my last letter as I have not received an answer, I went to the office found a letter I thought it must be from you, but it was from Francis mother, I was disappointed. I assure you the time has now arrived that we are preparing to pursue our journey. Expect to arrive at our place of rest, before we stop again, only for repairs &c, about two hundred pioneers started two weeks ago, they calculate to get there and put in seed of various kinds long before we get there, the teams were mostly mule and horses. Francis was among the number and Thales is to be our teamster. He thinks he can manage three yoke of oxen. Irene says he is a young man, he has grown tall and stout, his flesh is hard and health good. If he only had Albert [^5] here to go hunting with him he thinks they should kill lots of prairie hens wild turkeys geese ducks and maybe a deer or buffalo, his business this winter past has been chopping the wood at the door, and the care of one cow. Our other cattle have wintered on rushes forty miles up the Missouri river with five or six hundred others. There was ten men chosen to herd them, and keep the indians from killing them, Francis was one of the ten, had 2 dollars per head. We have lived in our log cabin through the winter very comfortably. We have a brick chimney and hearth, (two thirds of the people have them made of sods and they do very well), a window with four lights of glass 10 by 12, gave eight cents a light, the furniture consists of sacks barrels chests trunks and two wild bedsteads with curtains from eaves to floor, my chest for a table, We have had plenty of provisions except vegetables, we have had beans enough and some potatoes, this spring there is abundance of wild onions and artichokes first rate, there is a store opposite of us with every necessary, English and west Indies, goods coffee sugar, salaratus all fifteen cents per pound. First best sugar house mollasses one dollar per gallon, I think we shall get along first rate, there is companies organized of hundred, and Captains of fifties and tens, we are going in brother Wallace's company of fifty. [^6] The Woodburys are going with the same company. They are twenty miles from here. Thomas has been here and staid over night. Where William is they do not know. [^7] Brother [Samuel] Aikins family are at Garden Grove some distance back, Samuel [Aikens] came on with brother Ponds family and died here away from father and mother, I suppose you have heard of deaths in brother Ponds family. The children are all dead but Elizabeth [and] Loenza, [^8] when they were on the way here they turned from the main road into a settlement where he and Samuel could earn two dollars per day with their teams. It proved to be an unhealthy place, They were all taken sick and they came away as soon as they could, but they were unable to take care of themselves on the road and suffered for the want of care, Lowell died before they arrived, the rest lived to get here and then dropped away one after another, Sister Pond has not recovered and I fear she never will, [^9] Brother Ponds health is very poor. Sister Clark died on the way here. [^10] She wore her self out with hard work I think, I never saw a female that could live and do as she did, The children came on with P[orter]. Rockwell they have the first rate families to live in. Hiram lives in the same family with Emiline. She thinks them the best people in the world. She is as happy as a queen, has everything to eat, drink [and] wear. She instructs the children has the care of their clothes and does as much or as little as she pleases. [^11] Tell mother sister Murdock is here with her family. [^12] Where brother Harris is we do not know. [^13] Sister Brimhall is well. She did not grieve much for the Prichards loss. We have now and then a newspaper from New York. Shall we believe the cracking asunder of the Union of the United States, Yes, sooner or later the Lord will avenge the blood of his martyred Prophets and persecuted Saints, Unless they repent and restore their right. Irene read President Polks message. It's as harmless as milk and water. I think he is as Eliza Smith said about my going to singing school—I should not do any hurt if I did not any good. The ship Brooklyne has landed we hear and printed a paper. [^14] I suppose Uncle Sam has received one by this time. I expect Francis will see [my] husband before we shall. [ . . . ]

Give my respects to Grandfather and mother Andrews. Tell them the mormons have built one of the best grist mills that ever was seen in the States. Although this is the indian territory when they leave it the next company will use it and so on untill all the mormons have passed along. It ground twelve bushel of corn an hour the first few hours. but they took it down to six bushels when they made a business of it. You spoke about dancing. I filled my other sheet before I thought of it but now I will tell you. The Mormons (as they are vulgarly called) do not have any guess work, in their exercises, they have a rule and the order of God, for all their movements, Thales attended dancing school this winter, they open their school with prayer and so they always do at their dancing parties or feasts. They have all the good and fat things they can procure for supper, I never saw a larger supply at any place. Each grade had a feast until they went through the camp, I went with the wives of the elders that are sent on missions, widows and soldiers wives. There is some of the smartest and best men and women here there is in the world, They dress superior to your New Salem people if they have had to winter in log cabins. I send this [letter] by a sister that is going to Boston to visit her friends. [She] returns in october. Her name is Sabra Granger. direct your letters to Francis M. Pomeroy Huntsakers Ferry Austin postoffice Atchinson County Missouri, to be forwarded to the Camp of Israel.

Your affectionate U B H

I send you a piece of my new sun bonnet the handsomest one you have seen.

The following letter is from Irene Pomeroy and written from the Salt Lake Valley. It describes the family's experiences after leaving Winter Quarters.

---
Notas:
[^1] 207 went & brought us back some delightful berrys we got our camp all in order before evening Mr. T. went to the trading Village [^22] along with the [illegible] to see the U.S. Agent he is placed here to see that the Indians are not imposed on his name is Major [Robert B.] Mitchell We saw the chief his name is McClure a half Breed a very Gentlemanly man, he informed them that the principal part [of] them were gone of[f] to a medicine dance or religious ceremony in which no one is allowed to partake exap [except] the[y] are known to be good men the[y] had been ingaged two days and Nights the[y] Mr.T. & the rest came home in the evng—- Thd 18th went with the Girls & children about two miles in the cariage to an encampment of the Brethern to get Strawberrys the[y] were more plentyfull there than any place I ever saw they gathered them by Bushels Fri John drove Nanny and the children to get Strawberrys I went to visit Sister Kimball Mr. T. was very busy at home June Sat 20th Mr. T. drove Mary Anne [daughter] & the girls to a concert at the trading Village B- and Lane went out trading, numbers of the Bretherin went down the band went with them. We had a very pleasnt time indeed.
