Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Journey across IowaHC256Jane Snyder Richards [^1]

Journey across IowaHC256Early in the winter of [18]45 it was decided by President Young that the church should move farther west the temple was still being built according to the revelation. But was not entirely finished untill spring. A portion of it was dedicated by President Young during the winter and meetings held there. Late in the spring and after Pres Young and the majority were gone it was finally dedicated. [^2] It was in Feb and March that the greater portion of the population had succeeded in crossing the Miss River crossing on the Ice in order to save ferriage. poorly fitted out and travelling but a few miles at a time. We were among the last to go. The mob harrassed and threatened and tried to arrest Brigham Young and he thought it expediant to leave.

Journey across IowaHCAmong my woman friends at Nauvoo I must mention Mrs. Julia Farnsworth, Mrs. [Sarah] Leavitt[,] Kind and motherly always ready and helpful Whenever my husband or I was sick. Mrs [Hannah] Fish Mrs Bilate [Vilate] Kimball Mrs Jeannetta Richards very intelligent and kind and respected by everybody. Mrs John Taylor. Mrs Phobe Woodruff and Mrs [Nancy] Rockwood Mrs Jeannetta Richards died just before our start from Nauvoo.

Journey across IowaHC257My Husband [Franklin D. Richards] returned to nauvoo when my baby was ten months old, about a week after Joseph Smiths death. [^3] He went to work as carpenter at once on the temple and on our house. Which as I said was completed only three months before we were oblidged to leave it. While my husband was away I spent part of my time with his parents and part of the time with my Mother [Lovise Comstock Snyder]. I had met Mr Richards parents for the first time this winter. They had just come to Nauvoo. Father Phineas Richards I found was a man of strong character firm in his religious convictions and consistent In Mother Richards [Wealthy Dewey Richards] I found a noble hearted woman. Who gave me a Daughters place in her home. and in her love. I was also very warmly attached to the Brothers and sister of my Husband.

Journey across IowaHCA few months previous to Joseph Smiths death he had recieved a revelation in reguard to Polygamy and Hyram Smith had talked of it in confidence with my husband who mentioned it to me. Though I spoke of it to no one. It seems that Joseph Smith had taken some more wives during these months. But the revelation required that he should do it without publicity at this time, as the mob spirit was already so much excited without this having been thought of at all. It was not on this account he was persecuted as it was not known untill after his death.

Journey across IowaHC258The celestial marriage or sealing were not solemnized untill it could be done in the temple although with Joseph Smith it neccessarily was done elsewhare as the temple was not then ready for use. During this winter and previous to the company starting, Mr Richards took his second wife, Elizabeth McFate. Polygamy was now made known to us for the first time and while the majority of the Church were made acquainted with the doctrine it was only practically entered into by few. In my case it came at first thought as a strange thing and I was uncertain as to the result. But was satisfied that it was a sacred revelation and that my religion required its acceptance. This wife Elizabeth was young (about 17 and pretty) and amiable very considerate and kind to me Never in our associating together was there an unkind word between us. I was in delicate health and from the time she first entered my home three or four days after her marriage she seemed only concerned to relieve me of trouble and labors. She was ready to take hold and do any-thing always asking me for direction. We lived in our two story brick home she occupying the upper portion.

Journey across IowaHCTo those in the church who knew of the doctrine. I always spoke of her as Mrs Elizabeth Richards. but even now it was not publicly talked about. I knew of other families at this time living in Polygamy. But as yet it was a new thing. I was sick some of the time and Elizabeth would be very attentive and kind and interested to do what she could for my little Daughter Wealthy. We lived happily together and indulged no evil or Jealous feelings towards each other. In the latter part of May we sold our house which we had built with shuch sacrifice denying ourselves in every way to save enough to build and now we sold it for the paltry consideration of two yoke of half broken cattle and an old wagon. Taking with us two cows one trunk of clothing but little Furniture and scanty provisions to last if Possible untill next spring. Principally bread stuffs no tea or sugar or luxuries of any kind A neighbor a Gentile Mr Cheesbro very considerately gave me one pound of tea which through sickness and great suffering was about all the subtenance I had for some time.

Journey across IowaHC259We left our home before we were ready to start on our journeying for the mob was so threatening that I dared not remain longer. We camped out on the other side of the River for six weeks and about July 1st started West. Our cattle was not broke. One yoke had been stolen from us. On the morning of starting I was alone with my little Girl in the wagon when the cattle becomeing frightened at the crack of the whip jumped up and ran over a level plain for a mile and a half at a frightful speed But as they reached a rough stumpy piece of land stopped of their own accord This start was not very assuring

Journey across IowaHC259We reached sugar creek twelve miles distant the first night and there my husband left us to go on a mission to England. I[t] was a great trial to us all. I was very feeble. We did not know how Wealthy would stand the trip Elizabeth seemed the only strong one in our family and yet she died on this trip. One teamster was Philo T. Farnsworth. [^4]

Journey across IowaHC259Before leaving us Mr Richards called us all together as a family and prayed with us and blessed us. I felt as though it was doubtful if I was living on his return. And it was a sad parting.

Journey across IowaHC259Matters grew worse Elizabeth was taken very sick with chills and fever. Wealthy was taken sick the day after her Father left and continued ill from this time untill her death the 14th of Sept In the meantime exposure and anxiety hastened my illness and I was confined in the wagon on the 23rd of the month. My baby a little son whom we named Isaac Phinese [Phineas] died an hour after his birth.

Journey across IowaHC260Our situation was pitiable my little Daughter was dangerously ill. I had no suitable food for her and nothing for myself for the past twenty four hours. The severe rain prevented our having any fuel for cooking and we could scarcely keep the dampness out of the wagon. On the third day after my confinement we started again on our journey. I was very eagar to reach Mt Pisgah where I might burry my baby. We were now on the 23 day of July only sixty miles from our starting point. I should have mentioned the devoted care that my sister [Sarah] Mrs [Benjamin Prince] Jenne gave me. She was with me in my troubles as much as it was possible for her to be as her own family of little ones required her time as well as myself.

Journey across IowaHC260On the fifth of August I reached Mt Pisgah very ill. My little Girl still very sick. Here many of our church people were waiting twelve of the Elders[,] Father Richards, Father Huntington and Father Bent and Charles C. Rich among them, came to see us and sympathized with us. The Elders gathered around our wagon, rolling the curtains up and evidently thinking that I had little chance of living. They annointed Wealthy and myself and prayed earnestly for us. Everything was done for us that kindness could suggest and my baby was buried here.

Journey across IowaHC260We seemed to get strength and improved slowely and though it was not untill Cutlers Park [^5] that I had strength even to walk. When I reached Council Bluffs one hundred miles beyond [Mt. Pisgah]. Pres Young heard of my situation and came back some fifteen miles to counsel me.

Journey across IowaHC260He was distressed to find me so ill and to see Wealthy so feeble and he then said if any one had passed through tribulation I had. and if he had known my circumstances he would not have required Mr Richards to have gone on this mission. Then he gave an order allowing our team to pass on across the ferry before the rest some two hundred waiting in turn and then I was once more with my Mother and friends.

Journey across IowaHC261Cutlers Park where Brother Brigham was stopping was three hundred miles from Nauvoo, and here was my crowning affliction. At last my little Daughter after suffering almost incredibly for weeks on the 14th of September passed from us. There was a time when I had thought she might live and then it seemed as though all I had suffered would seem but a dream. Her life being spared. Now she was taken my own life seemed only a burden. My Husband was to be away for two years and the hardships he might suffer made his return seem most uncertain. I only lived because I could not die.

Journey across IowaHC261An instance of inhumanity should be recorded while on our travels we passed a house with some farming about it. this was the last of civilized life untill we reached Cutlers Park. Just previous to this my little Daughter had asked for some potato soup and said she had not eaten anything since Papa went away (which had been eight or ten weeks.) and that would taste so good. How eagerly we welcomed the returning apetite and the potato field just in sight. My Mother went to the house and stating our circumstances asked for some potatoes for my dying child. A rough woman heard her story impatiently through and putting her arms on her shoulders marched her out of the house. saying "I wont give or sell a thing to one of you damned Mormons." And I turned in my bed and wept as I heard the Grandmother trying to comfort my little one in her disappointment.

Journey across IowaHC261While at Cutlers Park there was a great deal of sickness. My child died beside me in the wagon, I being unable to move without being lifted. At this time my two Brothers were also sick. Mrs Elizabeth Richards was very ill in the tent. Just ahead of me and I could hear her screaming in her delirium and she wanted to see me. I was carried to see her a few hours after Wealthys death. My sister Mrs Jenne lost her baby that fall also. Most of our people were sick. In fact the call for five hundred able bodied men from Council Bluffs for Mexico by the Government deprived us of about all our strength. We must have lost at least one hundred of our company by death while at winter quarters. Cutlers Park now called Florence in Nebraska was on shuch an elevation as to be too exposed for winter life. So we settled upon the flats. Near the Missouri River which were called winter quarters.

Journey across IowaHC262Elder Willard Richards had been a Physician in Boston and he was very kind and able in his treatment of me. His wife Amelia was a noble woman and was shuch a support to me, in keeping up my spirits. She was bright and cheerful and dearly loved. Mary Richards was Samuels wife and she kindly consented to remain with me and help me through my trouble.

Journey across IowaHC262During our travelling the heat increased our sufferings for there was but a thin covering of cotton cloth to our wagon which was our only protection from the sun rain and dew. The bolt of cotton cloth I brought with me. I was obliged to dispose of in exchange for the necessaries of life or to pay for services rendered me. that was intended as extra covering to the wagon.

At winter Quarters my provisions were nearly exhausted. During my illness, I could not take care of them. but in my helplesness would tell those who did services for me to help themselves to what they pleased as compensation. Now there was little that remained. Elizabeth had recovered from the illness that she previously had and needed strengthening food. We were oblidged to grind corn and live on that for awhile. It was cold and our wood exhausted. Our log House like those about us was small, about twelve by fourteen. Just large enough for two little beds and a fire place. We had no furniture worth mentioning. We would sit by the fire on the beams that extended out towards the fire place. Though we each had a rough chair. The floor was of rough boards hewn from logs. But preferable to the damp ground. I would sometimes go to my sister-in-law and say, "shall I freeze or ask you for wood," and so we lived. Often my clothe[s] would be frozen stiff about my anckles remaining so day after day that you could hear them rattle as they struck against any-thing. What was there to thaw them out Scurvy broke out in our Camp and the death rate increased.

263Elizabeth was taken ill again and at last confined to her bed. I was now arround and able to take care of her lifting her from her bed and in her chair. Untill she died. I wanted proper nourishment for her. But there was nothing left to barter for food. A nephew of Brigham Young came to see me and asked me what he could do for me. I told him what I needed. But I had nothing left but my Husbands violin and nobody wanted that. He replied he would take that. But all he had was about a gallon of wine that had been given him in exchange for goods while at Council Bluffs. That I eagerly took and Elizabeth lived on it for some time. When she talked to me of dying. I felt I could not have it so. Then I should be entirely alone. Perhaps my husband would feel that I had not done everything that I could for her. Perhaps others would think so. Though my own conscience was satisfied.

263But on the 29th of March she was taken and I was left. My brother had been to the Rushes one hundred miles distant where the cattle were left for the winter but he returned previous to Elizabeth's death and was devoted in his care. assisting and relieving me in the lifting of her and in the responsibility.

263I should have mentioned the roofs of the houses. they were made of logs laid across with flags spread over them. and earth spread over these.

263This was partial protection from the rain. But when once it was soaked through in a heavy storm. Then we were at the mercy of the rain.

About the first of april Brigham Young and several other pioneers started out to find for us a new home. We hoped now to get away so far that we should never be molested again by civilization. They found Salt Lake on the 24th of July and there decided to settle. some few remaining among whom were Mrs Lorenzo Young and one of Brigham Young's wives Ms Van Cott and her husband. [^6] Others joined them from the battalion returning from California and others from another delegation which came on from the co[a]st. [^7] They sowed some little grain and made some preparation for a permanent home Pres Young and the others returned to us in November and we had happy anticipations for the future.

264In May 1848 Pres Young again started for Salt Lake this time with the majority of the people those left behind were to be compelled pelled by the Government to vacate the winter quarters and go across the river to council Bluffs. However two hundred more wagons formed under the leadership of Dr Willard Richards and started west on the 1st of July. My Husband had now been with us six weeks. Our corrispondence had been very irregular. The first he recieved several months after he left me. containing news of the birth and death of his little son. And of the death of his little Daughter and of all the sickness it entailed. His first letter reached me in april he had left me the previous July and in that he told me that he was taking care of his Brother who was down with small pox. What could I expect but to hear next that he himself was dead from that desease.

Now we were starting well provisioned and comfortably provided with clothing. The english branch sending us generous donations of clothing and my Husband bringing me a good supply. Philo Farnsworth had been in Missouri with others working and earning enough to get the neccessary provisions for a years suply. My Husband had brought in a company of Saints from England. All being in readiness we started I soon was taken ill again. And untill we reached salt lake city on the 19th of october. I was unable to walk for three weeks. The whole party were obbliged to wait over on my account; and as before it seemed impossible I could live.

265When we reached salt lake we made the best use of our opportunity and time. Our people went into the old stockade. Our wagons brought into correls for a day or two. then we moved on to the city lot. The tops or wagon boxes were taken off the running gear. and placed on the ground. In these we lived untill we had some kind of houses built. Our house was like most of the rest built of abode [adobe]. Mr Richards sold his cloak which he brought from England for abodes [adobes] the side of the house was completed. But the roof had to be made of boards made of green lumber. Which shrunk and made a poor protec tion. This was covered with hay. But the frozen earth prevented the addition of a covering of earth.

265In february even my poor roof was destroyed as our poorly constructed chimney set it on fire On the 20th of June my son Franklin was born. when the baby was a week old the rain came through in torrents. on to my bed for three months Since april we had scarcely any bread. All through one company the scarcety of bread stuffs had been so much felt that at last Pres Young advised that every family ascertain just what amount of bread stuffs they had and report to the council. This was on the 1st of April. Then each family was counselled to make calculation of just the amount that could be used each day from now till harvest time most of them were able to ration themselves off two and 1/2 pound a day. But many like Dr Richards were limited to four oz. a day.

266I had started off well provided as I said but sickness had again laid me aside. and others suffering for food had been supplied from my store. Which easily accounts for my present difficulty. We had plenty of beef and milk but no vegetables of any discription.

266We had no furniture but what was manufactored now. and no lumber. for we as yet had no saw mill. I needed an easy chair which was made by Elder Appleton Harmount [Harmon] as my health made that necessary this was obtained in exchange for three paris of woolen stockings. The wool was carded then spun and knit by me and in that chair I rocked my boy to sleep many a time and all the rest We now commenced having traffic with the outside world though we had hoped to keep aloof from it altogether.

266The parents of Scottish convert Robert Gardner, Jr., emigrated to Canada, where they lived for several years before traveling to Nauvoo. They arrived soon after the exodus began, stayed only long enough to outfit themselves for the journey west, then crossed the river and eventually joined a group calling itself the Canada Company. Robert's relatively brief account gives a perspective on the Iowa experience from one who had not lived in Nauvoo but traveled with the Nauvoo exiles. His journal describes the need all the travelers had for trading with Missourians and the tasks men assumed in making the settlements at the Missouri habitable for the Saints.

---
Notas:
[^1] 207 went & brought us back some delightful berrys we got our camp all in order before evening Mr. T. went to the trading Village [^22] along with the [illegible] to see the U.S. Agent he is placed here to see that the Indians are not imposed on his name is Major [Robert B.] Mitchell We saw the chief his name is McClure a half Breed a very Gentlemanly man, he informed them that the principal part [of] them were gone of[f] to a medicine dance or religious ceremony in which no one is allowed to partake exap [except] the[y] are known to be good men the[y] had been ingaged two days and Nights the[y] Mr.T. & the rest came home in the evng—- Thd 18th went with the Girls & children about two miles in the cariage to an encampment of the Brethern to get Strawberrys the[y] were more plentyfull there than any place I ever saw they gathered them by Bushels Fri John drove Nanny and the children to get Strawberrys I went to visit Sister Kimball Mr. T. was very busy at home June Sat 20th Mr. T. drove Mary Anne [daughter] & the girls to a concert at the trading Village B- and Lane went out trading, numbers of the Bretherin went down the band went with them. We had a very pleasnt time indeed.
