Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

267Robert Gardner, Jr. [^1]

267We stad in Nauvoo a few days and bought our fit out for the mountains flour and partched corn meel and such things and seed as we would need on the way and after we got to our resting place. that was a good place to camp for The Saints had nerley all left that was able and there houses was standing emty in unsold we could have ether brick frame log or stone houses with chars bedsteads I dont know but by looking we might have found coock stoves for the people were driven away and what they could not sel nor take with them they had to leve for they [had] but five teems and had to lad[en] them with provisions. We had no time nor desire to stay there longer then to get our fitout.

we crosed the Mississippi river and pased Montros and went to the blufes a few miles north of Montros and camped I then went up in Iowa trying to trade my horses for oxen. I found oxen had been bought up and were hard to find I had one Canadan horse that was very bad with the heves but I was told it soon left them in the west. I came acros a man one day whom I [asked] if he had any oxen to trade me for that horse he said no but he had a fine mare he would give me for him I went to see her but rod my horse very slow lest he would begin to heve his mare was a very fine one but I had to give him 14 dolars to boot but I did not want to stay long lest Pat would begin to heve so I got on my mare and thawght I had dun it I rod about 2 miles and pased another man he asked me if I had bought that mare I said yes wasn't she a fine one he said yes but she was stone blind that took me down a notch but I did not go back for old Pat I had been fooled but there might be some more fools out on my track so I went on. Shortly I met a man with a fine team and fine bugy wel drased with every thing gay I thought he was precher or a judge or a Lawer or some smart so he stoped for he had his eyes on my mare and I got min on his horse So he bantered for a trad he said his horse had no fault but to much life, and what was the caractor of mine I told him he must be his own judge for I had jusd got her so he tock out his spectels and exemened her clos and pronounsed her good so he tock of his harnes and I tock of my sadle and we was bothe soon of the trade ground

268After this I traded that horse for one yok of oxen and bawght another yok of oxen and one cow went back to camp we then riged up our ox teems in place of horses and started west we traveled about 12 miles and camped for the night. here my son William was born in my wagon. [^2] it raned so hard all night that the water was up to our boottops around our wagons. this was in Lee County Iowa next morning we fixed up my wife [Jane McKeown] and her baby as comfortable as posable and started on for the coumpanys from Nauvoo was all a head at Bonapart next we lodid [loaded] in more flour for we had strenthned our teems. and we ware pushing on for the Missouri river, expecting to overtake the mane camp of Saints there by this time our coumpeney had got the name of the Canada Coumpaney for we traveled pritty nere to gither.

268there was: John Park, William Park, Daved Park, and famleys; James Hamilton and famley James Rilfyol and famley, Samuel Bolton and dawghter James Crage John Baroman, George Correy and famley, Andrew Correy and famley Bro Johnes and famley, my Brother William and famley, Archibald and famley, my father and mother and myself and famley, and John Smith & famley.

Iowa was a nue and thinley setled teratory and (many of) the Saints being poor not haveing teem sufisent to [t]ravle ware counseld to stop where the land was not taken up and put in crops til they could help themselvs they had seteled a place caled garden grove one called Pisco [Pisgah] and other places some of our camp began to drop of at thes places and the rest went on. we overtook what was known as Orson Hides [Hyde's] camp nere Miskete [Mosquito] Crek clos by the Missouri river.

269here I began to see some of the sufering of the Saints. the furst night we came to Hides camp, there came up a terable rain storm with terable thinder and wind next morning it was paneful to see the Saints with there tents blown down and wagon covers torn of[f] socked in the rain I went to one tent where the tent had ben and found a woman siting on the ground with a young baby both shaking with the agu. and a number of the larger children siting around her in there wet clowes all shaking with the same diseas no one able to help the rest. I asked the woman where her husband was. She said he was caled of to go to Mexico to fight for Uncle Sam that had driven us to the wilderness to endure thes suferings. I tryed to gather up her tent but I could not, it was wore out and torn to peses. they had ben driven from Nauvoo in the dead of winter in the depth of poverty traveling threw deep snow the men having to leve part of there famley by the way and travel perhaps for a weak and then leve that part and go back for the rest with the same teem til themselves and neerly every [thing] they had was wore out and many died by the way from hardship.

269We next travld on a fue miles to the man [main] camp at the liberty pol [^3] on Misketo [Mosquito] Creck where President Young and Councle was making up the rest of the 500 men of the Mormon batalun. to go to Maxaco they were soon rased and started of, leving there family in wagons and tents where they had them. for some ware without. and that in the midle of an Indain country thes things made me feel like asking O liberty, and freedom, where hast though [thou] fled for this demand was made a trap thinking we would not comply. then they could slay us as trators that was what was wanted and they ware very much disapointed when President Young rased the conmpy

the next thing was to cros the Missouri river the furst coumpanes had bilt a bot when my Bro William got his teem and wagon on the bot, one yok of wild stears jumped into the river with the yoke on and turned to come back. he jumped in caught there tales heded them round and swam them to the other side by there tails.

270we then traveled about a half a day to camping ground ner a grove of timber which was caled Cutlers park. the seson now being fur spent and so maney of our best young men gon to Mexaco President Young thawght best to go no further this faul, but find winter quarters cut hay for our stock and start on erly in the spring.

270A town site was Selected down on the river caled winter quarters Streets blocks and lotts was layed out and given out to the peple and in a fue days a town of houses was in site large stacks of hay was cut, stock taken to herd growns, a large log meeting house was bilt (and) a good grist mill was bilt to grind the corn and wheat the peple had brawght with them. houses and wood had to be provided for the famlies of them that had gon in the batalyon a meat markit was erected saveral blacksmith shops sue shops chare makers, and nerly all kind of work as if the peple was going to stay for years. men that could work had to worrk nerly night and day for many of the older men was taken with a disese caled the black leg [scurvy] and was entirly helples and many died with it here legs from the nes [knees] down would get as black as a col my father [Robert Gardner, Sr.] and oldest brother [William] and brotherinlaw [^4] brothers onley boy big anough to help him, [^5] all had it. this left the work of five famles to Archey and me

Maney a evening I have visited the familes of men that had gon in the Batalyon in time of snow storms and found them in open log houses without any chinken and it snowed as fast in side as it did out side and nothing but green catten wood to burn I would go and cut them some dry wood help them all I could. but it semed hard times but there was no one there to blame for men was so scarce. and so maney sick and dying that I have had to go and help the sexson to biry the dead yet the athoratis [authorities] keept up there meetings and now and then would have a dance to keep up the spirits of the peple.

271on account of having to stay there that winter and use up there provisons many had to go to Missouri to work and trade for provisons and seed to thake with them acros the plains for it was the intantion to start west erly in the spring, butt the Fyrst Presidents and the 12 thawght it would be best to start a small coumpney of pinaneres [pioneers] a head of the general coumpney to look out a location and try to get in some crope [crops]. So they with others started about the 5 of April this was in the spring of 47

272I will here go back to our stay in Winter quarters. my brother myself and James Cragee [James Craig] one of the pininears [pioneers] got out the timber for the grist mill I menshened. I dun the huing with the bradax while doing so I was taken with fever and ago [ague] but thawght I wouldnt give up but I had to one day I went home and went to bed and was crasey all day. when my brother and Crage came home I got them to adminester to me next morning I was well and at work by daylight and kept so till we got to the horn [Elk Horn] just menshened.

272Barbara Ewell Evans and her family found their own way to the Missouri, working their way westward with the stragglers slowly drifting out of Nauvoo. Though not quite as destitute as those forced to leave Nauvoo in the fall, the Evans family still had to stop at different points over several years before eventually reaching Winter Quarters. For Charles Smith and Barbara Evans and the others like them, traveling on their own, the leaders were always "way out in front," unseen but always present in their minds. Without the daily association with their leaders or the companionship of the other Saints, their perseverance is all the more remarkable. [^6]

---
Notas:
[^1] 207 went & brought us back some delightful berrys we got our camp all in order before evening Mr. T. went to the trading Village [^22] along with the [illegible] to see the U.S. Agent he is placed here to see that the Indians are not imposed on his name is Major [Robert B.] Mitchell We saw the chief his name is McClure a half Breed a very Gentlemanly man, he informed them that the principal part [of] them were gone of[f] to a medicine dance or religious ceremony in which no one is allowed to partake exap [except] the[y] are known to be good men the[y] had been ingaged two days and Nights the[y] Mr.T. & the rest came home in the evng—- Thd 18th went with the Girls & children about two miles in the cariage to an encampment of the Brethern to get Strawberrys the[y] were more plentyfull there than any place I ever saw they gathered them by Bushels Fri John drove Nanny and the children to get Strawberrys I went to visit Sister Kimball Mr. T. was very busy at home June Sat 20th Mr. T. drove Mary Anne [daughter] & the girls to a concert at the trading Village B- and Lane went out trading, numbers of the Bretherin went down the band went with them. We had a very pleasnt time indeed.
