Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

272Barbara Ann Ewell Evans [^1]

272My father and mother left that state [Virginia] when I was nine years old [1830] and moved to Bedford County, state of Tennessee, where we remained three years. In 1833 we moved to Ray County, Missouri. There I witnessed the falling of the stars, November 13, 1833.

272It was in my father's [Pleasant Ewell] house that I first heard the sound of the everlasting gospel, preached by Brother Jacob Foutz. The next elder I heard was David Evans. My mother [Barbara Fauber Ewell] being first to believe, she was baptized by David Evans, and the family soon followed.

273We remained in Missouri until the Saints were driven from that state. My mother and sister [Sarah Ewell Packer] were very sick when we left, and they both died shortly after our arrival in Illinois, [^2] and in the course of a few months another of my sisters [Elizabeth Hill Ewell Thornhill] died, each leaving a small child [^3] which I had charge of in connection with my father's family. This consisted of two brothers, [^4] two sisters, [^5] my father, myself and the two small babies of my sisters. I had charge of all, I was only 18 years of age at that time.

273I was baptized by Elder David Evans, and confirmed by him June 10, 1837, and I was married to him on the 23rd of November, 1841.

273I saw Joseph and Hyrum Smith after their martyrdom. It was a solemn day among the Saints. We felt like a flock of sheep without a shepherd, but the Lord had another shepherd to lead his Saints. It was Brigham Young. I was present the day he was set apart to lead the church. No Saint could dispute it for it did seem when he spoke as though it was Joseph's own voice that was addressing us. I never shall forget that day nor how the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon the people; it came so mild, yet so penetrating that every heart beat with joy to know we had a man of God to lead the Saints. Oh, what a consolation it was to know we were not forgotten.

I remained in Illinois until the exodus from that state, which was in 1846. Some of the Saints had neither teams or wagons. The brethren united together and made wagons for those that had none; by that means all had wagons, but not teams, and we were obliged to get away, as the mob was howling around, and Nauvoo was threatened. So my husband, being bishop of the Eleventh Ward, concluded to take the teams they had and move as many as they could. We made a start with what teams we had, crossed the Mississippi River, went a day's journey, and set the families down on the prairie. The next day they took the teams and brought the rest.

274Soon after the men got employment breaking prairie and doing other work. We took oxen and milk cows so in the fall all had teams and provisions for winter. I did considerable spinning in the tent, also quilted several quilts. One great blessing, we were generally well. We did not have many luxuries, still we felt thankful for what we had. We then started for Council Bluffs, but it was late in the fall, winter had set in, and we stopped on the headwaters of the Nodaway. The men cut hay and put up log huts. My husband made a sideloom, and I did considerable weaving that winter. The cattle could not live on the frostbitten hay so they commenced to die; our provisions began to get short; and we were obliged to leave in the month of February, 1847. We started for Missouri and lost our way. Our teams that were left gave out, and we had to kill and eat them to save our lives.

274My husband and two other men, Joseph Smith (of Lehi) and Shaw, [^6] went down to Missouri to get fresh teams and provisions, while they left their families camped on a small stream which was called Starvation Creek. We suffered from hunger and cold, but we did not complain, for we were united; we truly lived the order; we all shared alike. My husband came with fresh teams and provisions. I tell you it was a day of rejoicing. We had not heard from them since they left. They had had hard work to get teams. The people were so prejudiced against the Mormons, they were almost to return without anything. My husband told the people he would return and die with the rest of the people. One gentleman spoke and said, 'Can't you do something for these men; they seem to be honest?' The men began to volunteer, and he soon had all the provisions and teams he wanted.

We then made another start for Missouri. The snow had fallen to a great depth, and we could not keep on the divide. After wallowing in the snow for four or five days, camping on the prairie without fire, we arrived in Nodaway County, Missouri, March 1, 1847. My son, Joseph, was born April 7th, in a house without doors, windows, chimneys or floor. My food was corn bread ground on a hand mill; we had bran for coffee. We stayed there three years, had plenty of work, made a good outfit and started for Utah, May 15th, 1850. My baby was ten days old when we started. After the company got together, Bishop Evans was appointed captain. They were organized, and on June 15 we made a start for Utah.

275The cholera soon broke out in camp. People were stricken down on every side. There were five deaths in our company, my husband's oldest daughter, Mrs. Ira Hinckley, was one among them. That was a trying time. I had six small children, but none of them had the dreaded disease. Had it not been for that we would have had a pleasant journey. After we arrived at Laramie, we all enjoyed good health.

276In the year 1850, September 15th, we arrived at Salt Lake Valley, and lived there until February 15, 1851. We then moved to what was called Dry Creek, which was later called Lehi, and we have made our home in Lehi ever since.

276Mercy Fielding Thompson, widow of Robert Thompson, was among the late refugees from Navuoo. Her brother Joseph Fielding helped her prepare, but she needed a driver for her wagon. Charles Smith answered her call. He left his wife and young children camped near Bonaparte, Iowa, while he traveled to Winter Quarters with the Fieldings, including Mercy Thompson and her daughter, Mary Fielding Smith and her family, and Joseph Fielding and his family. In return the Fieldings offered him the use of a wagon to retrieve his family and take them to the Missouri settlements. Despite their generosity, Charles did not have enough provisions to take his family to Winter Quarters that year, and he had to leave them frequently during the next two years while he worked on a riverboat and in Missouri earning the means to continue the journey. After much difficulty, sickness, and disappointment, he and his family finally reached the Missouri in the spring of 1848.

---
Notas:
[^1] 207 went & brought us back some delightful berrys we got our camp all in order before evening Mr. T. went to the trading Village [^22] along with the [illegible] to see the U.S. Agent he is placed here to see that the Indians are not imposed on his name is Major [Robert B.] Mitchell We saw the chief his name is McClure a half Breed a very Gentlemanly man, he informed them that the principal part [of] them were gone of[f] to a medicine dance or religious ceremony in which no one is allowed to partake exap [except] the[y] are known to be good men the[y] had been ingaged two days and Nights the[y] Mr.T. & the rest came home in the evng—- Thd 18th went with the Girls & children about two miles in the cariage to an encampment of the Brethern to get Strawberrys the[y] were more plentyfull there than any place I ever saw they gathered them by Bushels Fri John drove Nanny and the children to get Strawberrys I went to visit Sister Kimball Mr. T. was very busy at home June Sat 20th Mr. T. drove Mary Anne [daughter] & the girls to a concert at the trading Village B- and Lane went out trading, numbers of the Bretherin went down the band went with them. We had a very pleasnt time indeed.
