Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

281Joseph Fielding [^1]

281Jan. 29, [18]46 Last Eve called at the Temple. Many were receiving their Endowment, and Numbers waiting to be sealed; all things dark around us. It is generally expected the County is to be put under Martial Law. Affidavits have been made at Washington by Rigdon, or William Smith and Adams, or all, that we intend to go and bring on the Indians against the Government, and the Design is to prevent our going by putting us under Martial Law and to hem us in on all Sides, and then to torment us with Writs, etc. It is hard to think of our Brethren leaving us while is going so well, especially in the Temple.

Feb. 18 For about the last 2 Weeks the Saints have been busily crossing the River Mississippi with their Waggons, etc., and having a great deal of Public Property, such as Cannons, Guns and other Weapons, and Ammunition Printing Press and other Mechanical and farming Implements, and the Church Records, etc., Seed Spring Wheat, also intending, if possible, to put it into the Ground in the Spring. These, with a suitable Supply of Provisions, at least as far possible for such an unknown Journey, have taken all the Teams that could be mustered, both Horses and Oxen. suppose they have over 200 Teams, they cross the River in Flat Boats. They have about 1 1/2 Mile to go on the Water and it is hard Work to row them across the Stream. The Wind has often been too strong for them, and they were obliged to wait. I suppose by this time they are all on the other Side.

6 Days ago I went over to see the Camp, which is 5 or 6 Miles from the River. The Camp Ground is by Sugar Creek where they have plenty of Wood and Water; a good Place for such a Purpose. On the Night of the 13th the Snow fell and covered the Ground, and the 14th was a very Rough Day, snowing all the Day long. I felt much for them. Some had Tents and some Waggon Covers, and some, neither of them. This Day is also rough, snowing all the Day from the North, but it is not very cold. When I think that Men, with some Women and Children, should be so exposed

The Camp travailed slowly, the [road] being bad and Weather rough and cold, sometimes having to put 8 or 10 yoke of Oxen to a Waggon till they came to what they called Garden Grove, about ___ Miles from Nauvoo, where they commenced ploughing and planting; and after staying there a While the greater Part of them moved on, a Distance of ___ Miles, where they arrived in time to put in other Crops, some of which came to Perfection, but some did not. They fenced in a large Field, having Grand River as a Fence on the West Side; this Place they [called] Pisgah. Both of these Places seem to have been very sickly and have proved to be the Home of many of the Saints; many of them are there mingled with the Dust, before they had time to reap the fruit of their Labours, the main Part of the Camp again moved westward till they crossed the Missouri River, about 3 miles, from which the[y] encamped and went to work at getting Hay for the winter, and in the Fall of the Year they moved on to the Bank of the River. They had been compelled to barter their Property, Horses, Harness, Beds and Cloathing, etc. to the Missourians for Provision, and made great Sacrifices. Brother Samuel Bent was left as President in Garden Grove and Brother Charles C. Rich in Pisgah, but during the Summer the former was called home, [^2] having done his Work, I believe, to the satisfaction of all the Saints. He had long been President of the High Council, and the Latter was General of the Nauvoo Legion: a Man of unblemished Caracture.

But to return to Nauvoo where I spent the Summer for want of Means to get away. I sold my House and 20 Acres of Land for 200 Dols in Trade, taking 2 Horses, a Waggon, a Coat Cloth, and a few (4 1/2 Dol) in Cash. The Land was in good Cultivation; 120 Rods of good Rail Fence; a Frame House 16 feet by 24 filled in with Bricks; a pretty Garden; a Number of Apple Trees and Peach Trees just ready to bear Fruit; and an excellent Well 21 feet deep, not 2 Miles from the Temple. I paid for the Land in its wild State 160 Dol's, built the House, etc., so that the Price of the whole would not near pay the cost One of the Horses I took for the Place I soon found to be bauky, and I only got in trade for her a small yoke of young Oxen.

The last Harvest we had in Nauvoo was uncommonly great, the Land in general bringing forth in abundance as much as 60 Bushels of Corn to the Acre. I had about 600 Bus. on 10 Acres; in short, the whole Place was as the Garden of the Lord for fruitfulness. This was, of Course, a great Blessing to the Saints, but still it made the Sacrifice appear the greater. Soon after, I sold my Place I removed my Family and goods to the House on my Sister's Farm, called Brother Hyrum's, where my Sister thought of planting some Grain, but we found it to be useless, and I did not so much as plant the smallest Garden Stuff.

284The Enemies all around were breathing out threatenings against the Saints, till at one time, as eight Men were reaping Wheat for the Members of the Church (Siros Davis), about 12 Miles from Nauvoo, a Company of about 80 armed in Carriages and on Horses came upon them, took them one by one a short Distance to the Place where one of their Friends had been killed the year before, and they supposed, of Course the Saints had killed him, and there gave each of them a severe whipping, took some of their Guns off and broke others of them. The Eight made the best of their Way to Nauvoo, and as soon as they had made the matter known, the new Citizens, (they being the Officers of the City) in union with the Saints, determined at once to endeavour to bring the Ring leaders of the Mob to Justice, and the next Day towards Evening a Posse left Nauvoo, and went to the House of Captain McCalla [^3] in the Night and took him and 2 others and a gun which they found in his House which they had taken from the Eight Men, and brought them home to Nauvoo to take their Trial. But in a few Days we were informed that the Mob had kidnapped 4 of our Brethren and one of the New Citizens, 5 in all, and that they had them in a Place called Pontusuck [Pontoosac], 14 Miles off.

The Sunday after, about 50 Horse and foot Men, armed, formed a Posse left Nauvoo in the Evening, traveled in the Night and came to Pontusuck by Day-Light in the Morning; I was one of them. The first thing we saw was a couple of Mounted Men as a Picket Guard. Some of our Party chased them for some Distance. One of them sprang through the Brush and got into the Field, but the other they pursued and overtook him. He said there were about as many of them together in the Village as there were of us. A little before we came to the Place we saw Men's Heads starting up in the Brush wood on the Side of the Road, and we could not tell how many there might be concealed. We halted, and Brother Wm. Anderson, the Captain of the Posse, called out and told them his Authority, that he had been legally authorized and sent with a Posse to apprehend such as were not subject to Law.

285We had been very private about coming to this Place, but still our Coming was expected there, and just as we got to the Village we were in loud voices commanded to halt, and we beheld a Body of Men partly concealed in the Brush. Some of the foremost of them called out to us to halt or they would instantly fire upon us; we were then within gunshot of them. Each of us had his gun cocked and ready to return the Fire if they fire, but Wm. Cutler, one of our Captains, told them our Authority, etc., and no gun was fired. Some of them were very mad and swore bitterly, and we began taking some of them Prisoners, and finally we took 14 of them, and after searching several of the Houses to find the Captives, we brought them to Nauvoo. On the Way, we were joined by a small Company who had left Nauvoo in the Morning to come to our Assistance if we should need it. We brought them [to] Nauvoo, and there was some Rejoicing in the City.

The next Day we went off in a Posse in Search of the five Captives, and that Night we Slept on the open Prairy. The Night was cold, and we had nothing to cover us, or but little. At one the next Morning we started, divided into two Companies, and searched several Houses to find, if possible, either the Captives or those that took, but the former were taken off by those that held them for fear we should find them. At the time we went to Pontusuck they had them within hearing of us, a little out of the Village, but on finding that we were there they marched them off, but we found their Stuff: a double horse Waggon containing Flour, etc. belonging to Phineas Young, who was on his way home from the Mill, and a Buggy. These we took home. The Names of the Captives were Phineas Young, and Brigham, his Son, James Standing, [Richard] Balentine, and—

286When we thus went out in a Posse it put all of them [in] fear, and we could scarcely find a Man at his home by Day or by Night. We did not return home till Saturday Eve, but our Labor was in vain. The Mob Party took every way they could to deceive us and lead us on the wrong track. As we learned afterwards, they were taken from Place to Place every Day through the woods, etc., having eight Men to guard them, who hurried through the woods, some of them being sick with Ague, but they were often told that if they faultered or stopt they would instantly shoot them. Several times they had fixt a time and Place to do it, and were on the Point of it, but were prevented through fear, through the Mercy of God. We searched for them all this week and most of the next Week, going as far as 30 or more Miles, some times going all Night, and sometimes but little to eat. Our Horses were much reduced, and we were weary. This was just in Wheat Harvest, and so were the People in fear of us that many large fields of Wheat were destroyed for want of cutting, for the[y] durst not be seen, but some of them said they would wait upon after Harvest.

After being in Captivity over 2 Weeks they all returned safely home, being let go by a fresh guard to whom they had been committed til the old ones attended a Meeting in Carthage. They were gladly received home to their Wives and Friends; indeed it was far more than we expected, ever to see them again.

287Not long after this the Mob began to collect and to threaten us with destruction; first at Goldings [Golden's] Point to the Number of 200 or 300, from whence they dispersed through fear, but soon began to gather again near Carthage where they lay encamped a number of Weeks to the No. of 900, as far as I can gather until early in September they marched into Nauvoo. My two Sisters, [Mary Fielding] Smith and [Mercy] Thompson, and myself with our Families had just got over the River (Mississippi) with all our goods except two Boat Loads before they came in Contact with the Citizens. They came and encamped on the Farm that I had just left. They took this course to avoid any ambushment that might be laid for them. From there they sent Balls into the City, but before they came near the Temple they were met and repulsed, but I shall not attempt to record the whole of Scene of outrage. The poor Saints had to flee, sick or well. They hastened to River, but the Citizens judged it not best to let men leave when they were so much needed, but the Sick, the Women and Children got over as fast as they could. I went down to the Bank of the River, and found many of the Saints in distress. Some had left their goods and were destitute of Food and Clothing. Others had left their Husbands in the Battle.

The Cannons roared tremendously on both sides for several Days, but Mob as it seems to found themselves losers and Plan was got up to prevent their own destruction. A Committee came from Quincy, professing to be Friends to both Sides, and Proposed to put a stop to the fighting on terms which the Saints thought it best to accept, as the Mob increased daily, and they, the few Saints, (I suppose not more in number than 150) were almost forsaken of the new Citizens. The Number slain of the Mob is not well known, but it is probable that 150 fell in Battle, and altho their number was so great and that of the Saints so small, the former said to be not less than 1100, yet but three of the Saints were slain, Brother [William] Anderson and his Son [Augustus Leander] and a Brother Norris; this is truly surprising.

288The terms of Peace were, of course, such as would suit the Mob, and as soon as the Saints had agreed to lay down their Arms, they had to flee, but many of their arms were taken from them. The Mob found themselves in Possession of the City, and they proceeded to capture, rob and plunder in the most fiend like and unlawful manner. They rendivouzed in the Temple. We had guarded it by Night and Day a long time, feeling unwilling to leave it in their Hands, but they now had it to themselves. They even Preached in it and cursed the Saints, but did no great Damage to it, thinking it would add to the Value of their Property. They treated the Saints with various kinds of indignity. Some they pushed over the River in haste; some they took and tried; some they baptised, etc., but in the midst of this some more humane from Quincy brout up a quantity of Clothing and Provision for the Poor as they got over the River, where the Poor Saints were in great numbers. Here also the Lord sent upon them, as it were, a Shower of Quails. They came in vast Flocks. Many came into the Houses were the Saints were, settled on the tables and the floor, and even on their Laps, so that they caught as many as they pleased. Thus the Lord was mindful of his people, and it was truly a Matter of astonishment that in all this Persecution, etc. only 3 of our Brethren lost their Lives.

288The Trustees still stayed in the City, (viz) John T. Fulmer, Alman Babbit, and Joseph L. Heywood. As soon as this unlawful Proceeding was staid, we (my Sisters and myself) started on the Way to the Camp of the Saints, having 9 Waggons, 6 of them Sister Smith's, 1 Sister Thompson's, and 2 of my own. In Sis Smith's Family 6 Men, 5 Women, besides one Sister that came with her 4 Children; Sis Thompson, one little girl; in my Family 2 Men, 2 Women and 5 Children; and we had together besides our Teams, 21 loose Cattle, as Cows, etc., 43 Sheep, but the Sheep soon began to diminish. We found it difficult to keep them in Sight; some times we have had to seek them 2 or 3 Days, which hindered in traveling by so much

288Much of the Road at the first was through the Woods and thick underbrush was on each Side of the Road, and it was difficult to drive our Cattle. Some of the Brethren lost a many on the Way, but with great care we did not lose any but a young Calf or 2. At Bonapart we bought Flour, etc., which was the last Market we found.

Soon after we left this Place, about 40 Miles on the Way, Brother E. Cliff, one of Sister Smith's Men, accidenally shot off his Thumb, and we had to send for a Doctor to take it off. Sis S. labored hard, and her Men were slothful. She might cook for and serve them, and then gather together the Cattle while they stood by the Fire, but J[ames]. Lawson was a blessing to her; he was very diligent.

289But we got on our Way as well as could be expected, Sis Smith and Sis Thompson often several Miles a Day, driving the Cattle. My Women had each a young Child, and they in general managed the Team of Horses that they road with, before we got to journeys end the Weather became cold and the Nights frosty so that the Grass was killed and as our Corn was spent our Horses began to fail one of mine became lame in her Shoulder so as to Disable [her] for Work, and it was so much the harder on the Cattle and the other horse[s] we came within 10 or 12 Miles of Garden Grove - the first Camp, passed through Pisgah the 2[nd] Camp. It is by no means a handsome or a healthy Place many of the Saints had died their and, the People there look pale and sickly much of the Corn planted there was too late to ripen we tried to buy some Corn but no one had any to sell but Brother Charles C. Rich gave Sister Smith a Bushel or 2 of green Corn and some Pumpkins of these we all shared Sister Th was very liberal

as we came within about 20 M's of the Camp we found Brethren who had settled in choice Spots for Water Wood and feed for Cattle They generally tried to discourage us from coming on they said it was sickly by the Camp that there was no Wood but what they fetched several Miles the Indians were killing the Cattle, some said 2 some 7 and the last Report was 15 in a Day. We found the fact was that many of these Men had some Property and did not wish to go to the Camp, and of course were willing to believe or raise an evil Report to justify themselves for not going to the Camp some thought we had better go and find out the Truth about it before we took our Stuff over but we felt no desire to stop short of the Camp we had seen such things before We crossed the River and came to the Camp on the [unfinished]

Brother H. C. Kimball kindly sent a young Man to drive up the Cattle and had [them] put into his own yard, it was dark before got to the Camp, the Light of the Camp of the Saints as we saw the Lights at a Distance was very interesting, it reminded us of Israel of old in the Wilderness this was not long after the Saints removed to the River there was were but a few houses nearly all were in their Tents upon about a square half Mile, we were conducted to Brother Kimball's stopped by his house for the Night and the next Day he took us to the Place reserved for us where we also pitched our Tents and the next thing was to obtain Food for our Cattle our Horses especially had become feeble, and we were too late to cut Hay, the grass was killed by the Frost, & Sis. S was advised to send them to an Island some 8 Miles off the Camp and we took them all there but one which one strad [strayed] off a short distance and was found dead in a Creek where she had got mired, and when we went to see the others we found 2 of them in the same Case one of my Sisters and one of mine so we brought them home and bought Hay for them the main part of the Oxen and Cows we sent off about 20 Miles to feed on Rushes, etc reserving 2 Yoke at home to get Logs to build our Houses by Council we put the Sheep into the general Flock the 12 engaging to furnish half the Number over the Mountains, but as soon as the winter came on and it was no longer any use to take them onto the Prairy [prairie] and they had to live on Hay and some little Corn Flock, which numbered 1400 began to die and it was found that they could not be sustained and we were advised to take them home having lost 5 there but they still kept dying, so that before the Winter was over we had but 18 left of the 43 that we started with. I had on leaving Nauvoo 1 Pair of Horses and 2 yoke of Oxen but long ere the end of the Winter 1 Horse and 2 odd Oxen had died so I had an odd Horse and 2 odd Oxen, several of Sister Thompson's Cows and Oxen died not yet ascertained how many, Sister Smith also lost 2 good Mares, 1 young Colt and it [is] supposed 1 or more Oxen besides the Sheep which belonged to us all,

I had but little Provision to begin the Winter I labored hard to get Sis Smith a House built, we drew the logs about 1 1/2 miles first built a double House each end being 16 feet by 16, put on Clapboards and then laid Sods over them to keep out both the Cold and the Rain we also built [Sister] Thompson a Room by setting up Poles in a slanting form, and then cover[ing] them with Earth, and my own House of Logs 14 feet by 16 with Clapboards and Sods on the Roof the Fall of the Year was very fine and pleasant and it was a blessing for the Saints, as it was late before we got our houses up, I was much troubled with Diarea [diarrhea] which made me very weak and my work was a Burden to me and as my Sister's Men were not the most active we seemed to move slowly. I suppose [I] earned something of my Sister S but she as well as Sister T assisted me far more than what I had any Claim on her for She had some little Money and she let it go for Corn and Hay for the Cattle and Flour, etc. the Lord Reward her for her kindness, Brother T. Cotham who lives with us labored for Wages to help to supply our Family and is now in Missouri for that Purpose, but has been sick and lame most of the time he has been off, the Saints have been sustained here better than could have been expected The whole Camp is divided into Wards 22 and one over the River over each Ward is a Bishop with 2 Councilors. The Saints are tythed and the Tything is applied to the Relief of the Poor, by this Means the Poor have been furnished with Financing etc. and I suppose the Bishops have generally been faithful in taking care of the Poor I myself was made a Councillor to Bro. Rolf of the 13[th] Ward who judged that with my Family and my 2 widow'd Sisters with whom also were 3 other Widows, if we provided for ourselves we should be free from paying another tithing. I have had a great desire to earn something, but while there was Work to do at house-building etc I had enough to do for myself and my Sisters in building our Houses and in fencing in yards for the Cattle and fetching Hay etc and when I could have labored for Provision[s], there was nothing to do, but still I always have been strong and it is a fact that I always [have] been at work. I have lived bare, with my Family my Children have worn out their Clothes and the Prospect of getting more is bad, but we have had our Health in general and I have felt no disposition to complain, but think that all has been done for the best, we have the Kingdom of God among [us] and no one can take it from us we must take it to a Place where we can establish it and execute its Laws, which could not be done in the Midst of the Gentiles, and I suppose if we could have staid in peace in Nauvoo many of the Church would have remained there weather the Kingdom had been set up or not, as to hard times it is nothing strange for I said 2 years ago that I expected things would be as hard as we could bear them, we are now just stepping over the threshold into the Kingdom, the Gate is too strait for some and they turn back, it is indeed a time of trial to the Saints, if it were not so many would go into the Kingdom that are not fit for it So I feel satisfied, and say it is all right, about the beginning of Feb-47 President Brigham Young had a remarkable Dream, one Morning, he said [he] was taken sick and the Pains of Death seized him and as he told us he died and his Spirit left the Body, his Wife watched him for a While till he returned again to Life, she said that as he was returned to [life] he exclaimed "I have been with Joseph and Hyrum it is hard to come back to life again" the next Day he dreamed that he saw and talked with Joseph, he was sitting in a large Room, sitting by the Window. Bro. Y[oung] went to him shook Hands with [him] and kissed him many times, told him how anxious the People of the Church were to see him or to hear something from him particularly with respect to sealing Power Joseph began to preach to him told him to tell the Saints to give diligent heed to the Whispers of the good Spirit, he said they might know the good Spirit for it always produced Peace, Joy and Gladness, he said, tell them to get the Spirit this he said with great feeling and earnestness, tell the People to get the Spirit and not to rest without it, and to keep it, they should have their Hearts open to any Spirit, so that they might try them if they shut their hearts against what was presented to them they would be in danger of shutting out the good Spirit. if they received whatever was presented to them they would know the true Spirit by its fruits Brother Young [asked] if he might not come to him they had had many happy Days together and why could they not again, he said he could not come to him at Present but must go back for a Season, but it was all right, it was all right. this question and answer were repeated he told him he should come to him after a While but it was all just right, he talked for some time, and finally told him that as to the Sealing Power etc they should understand all about it he said they would stand just according to their original Organization before they took their Tabernacles shew'd him how they stood in regular Order, and they stand the same again in the End, and as Bro. Young left him he seemed to pass through some thick Darkness. Bro. Y[oung] told this at several times, he said he knew it was from the Lord through Joseph. I was much pleased at this it was very seasonable.

In April a Company of about 140 with Horse and Mule Teams [left] the Camp of Winter quarters, for the Mountains A journey of 1000 or 1100 Miles, this they performed in great Peace & union there were with them of the 12, B. Young, H. C. Kimball, O. Pratt, W. Woodruff, W. Richards, G. A. Smith, A. Lyman. they took but few Women, intending to return before the next Winter they went out like Abraham of old not knowing the Place of their Location but trusted in God to direct them, they were greatly blessed on their Way and on their return to the Camp in November not one of their Company had died, they got to the Place of Location on the [24th] of [July] and commenced at once to lay out a City etc planted about 100 Acres of Grain and left Corn several feet high about the middle of August to return to their Families they reached home on the of November they had been much hindered by having 49 of their Horses and Mules taken by the Sioux Indians this laid so heavy a Burden on the rest that they tired and for [a] great distance they had to lift them some of them up when they laid down, one or two came on and sent off a Company with Horses and Provision to meet them they traveled 250 Miles and were as they said as Angels of God to them they brought along all the Horses etc they had they lost none but what were stolen, but both horses and Men [were] weary and faint but there was great Joy in the Camp on their arrival.

In June, another Company left the Camp 566 Wagons 2600 Souls P. P. Pratt and John Taylor of the 12 being at the Head, my Sister Thompson and her little girl were among them, we felt great Anxiety for this Company it was great, the Weather hot, the Loads heavy and the Country full of Indians of whom it had been reported, credibly, that they had a little before robbed the Oregon Company and caused them much trouble and Loss, so great was my Anxiety that I could scarcely sleep some of the Brethren in the Camp also had the same [trouble] as Joseph Young and others and at one time it was proposed to send off Bro. Hosea Stout with a Company as many as could be spared to be as a guard [^4] but it was overruled by the Idea that we at the Camp stood in as great [a] need of a Guard as they did, and we felt to leave them in the Hand of the Lord, daily bearing them up in prayer before him, but it was not many Weeks before we got Letters from them dated 400 Miles on the Way, which they had gone in 4 Weeks they had lost only one they had no Sickness and as little Difficulty as possibly could be, so our fears were laid aside and we praised the Lord for his Goodness and for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men we afterwards received other Letters containing the same good News all things went well with them excepting the Loss of some of Bro. J[edediah]. M. Grant's Company's Oxen, the Pioneer Company waited as long as they thought it prudent for fear of the Winter but they left the Valey before the others got in and met them Miles on this side but supposed they would get in before the Cold would become severe, so that co[n]sidering all the dealing of God with them all, we felt to give thanks to the Lord with all our Hearts, he has done all things well.

After the Return of the 12, it was determined that a number of the Elders should go out into the States and to England During the Summer we in the Camp have been diligent in cultivating the Ground, raising Corn. Buckwheat Potatoes etc, it was late in the Season before we began but the Lord greatly blest our Labors, so that we have I suppose plenty of Produce, with Hay for Man and Beast for the Winter and some to take us to the Mountains, ploughing up the Sod, fencing it in, having our Food to fetch from Missouri, the Hearding [herding] of our Cattle, and guarding the Camp from the Indians etc has kept us very strong. but I do not complain though some have done, I view all the Tribulation[s] of the Church and conclude that it is no more than might be expected in such a Conflict as is now going on between Satan and the Almighty, the World has to be redeemed out of the hands of the Wicked One and to be brought back to its proper and rightful Owner, he will not give it up without a mighty Struggle to hold it, and I expect it will cost a great amount of Labor, Pain, and even Blood to accomplish it, but the work is going on if it be slowly.

As to myself, I feel strong in the Faith, more and more so, and I have great Joy in the Lord I feel a Measure of his Spirit, I am a Subject of his Kingdom and I desire I think above all things to see and aid in the Rolling on of this great Work I still hold a Place in the Council of Fifty, [^5] and have done from its first Organisation by Joseph Smith, and have resently been chosen one of the High Council, the Quorum of High Priests have lately been called together under the Presidency of Bishop N[ewel]. K. W[h]itney for the time being in the Place of Brother George Miller, who has left us and is gone off I suppose [to] join Lyman Wite [Wight] in Texas, [^6] the Church still hoping that he will see his Error and return to the Fold he was dear to me in the Office he held, he was indeed a fine Man, and I hope to see him again in our Midst. The 70's also meet often under the Guardian Care of Joseph Young, [^7] who is a good Man. I believe the 12 are striving to act as Fathers to the Church as far as possible, but most of them have large Families to take Care of with their Sealed and adopted ones, I suppose they might lawfully claim their Support from the Tything of the People, but they do not seem to do it, their Boys as they call them [have] been farming together while they have been to the Mountains and the fruit of their Labor is their chief Support, President Brigham Young sets himself to magnify his Office and Calling, and to fill the Place of Joseph there are already I suppose near 3000 Souls in the Valey of the great Salt Lake and according to the last Reports, made by some of the Soldiers of the Saints arrived from California about a Week ago, it is likely they will suffer some for lack of Food before they can produce more, but there they are, shut in by the Mountains they cannot get out nor can any get into them, so they are in the hand of God, we hope that Game will come into the Valey in the Winter if not, they may have to kill their Cattle, I suppose they have near 3000 Head of them, Cows and Oxen no doubt Bro's P. P. Pratt and John Taylor will find it quite a Work to keep all thing[s] straight, may the Lord give them Wisdom, and let his Spirit rest upon all the People there.

The Soldiers who went to California and have returned have had a hard time of it, some had to eat their Mules, and even the rawhides, grass etc yet they have come from the Valey in less than 2 Months they have brought us (me and my Sister) [news] that my Sister Thompson has got married to Bro. James Lawson this has been done without my council or consent and is against my Mind, but I shall be sorry if she should be a Loser by it to any amount.

It is now Christmas Day the 25th of December 1847 My Family consists of myself two Women and five Children, having buried two Male Infants in the Fall Hyrum T. on the 4 of August and John on the 16 of September [^8] (i.e.) they died on those Days, they were buried in one Grave here at Winter Quarters.

My Work at Present is to get Wood for Fuel for my Family and Sister Smith's I do what I can to make my Family comfortable and if there were more Faith in them they might be so, but one has but little of the true Principle of Faith and at least questions some of the Doctrines of the Church, so that my Family are not one I feel a Need of more Wisdom, that I may act my Part aright, I wish not to lower the Priesthood, which I hold, and I am sorry to grieve my Wife my Daily prayer is that God may give me Wisdom to do right, and that he may forgive me if I err perhaps if I had perfect Peace at Home I should not be willing to leave it to go out into the World as I expect before long to be called to do, so I will try to bear it as a necessary Evil I have not heard from my Relations this long time, it seems of no use for me to write to them and I suppose they think the same on the other hand. [^9]

298We as a People have been preserved here in Peace through the last Summer, and by keeping Men on Guard constantly have not suffered from Indians to any great amount, but this has been much against the Minds of some, it is plain that nothing but the strictest Laws [must be] enforced with what some call rigor altogether considered by many in the Camp oppressive and has been a Source of much Evil and hard feeling, yet if we had not had such Laws a great Part of our Corn etc. would have been destroyed. some of the Police would at times give way to Passion, and would swear like Blackguards and this would give to those that [did] it accution [accusation?] against them I have heard them call their Brethren, who held the sacred Priesthood, damned infernal Liars etc the Office of Policeman is no desirable one if there be any rough ones, they have to deal with them, and they are likely enough to be rough too the Captain of the Police is Hosea Stout he is a Man of Experience and as I think a good Man for his Place we have also had a daily Guard of from 5 to 10 Mounted Men to be on the watch against the Indians, and to see if the Cattle went astray

1849 Feb 4th It is now more than a year since I wrote any in my Journal, while in Winter Quarters I lost three Oxen out [of] Four, and one of two Horses, almost all my Sheep once I hurt my Toe so that I could not get my Shoe on for some Weeks once I was thrown down and my Side was hurt so that I could hardly attend to my Business and once I bruised my Finger and about the Month of February I had a severe Sickness, what is called Chil[ls] and Fever, and my Life seemed in danger but through the goodness of God and the great Faithfulness of my Family I was restored to Health in a few Weeks, at one time also while there I was nearly crippled with the Skurvy, a Complaint which prevailed much among the Saints there it appeared in small dark Specks on the lower Parts of the Body, and contracting the Sinews of the Legs, so that they could not be straightened,

At the close of the last Winter I commenced repairing my Sister's Waggons etc to prepare her for her Journey to the Valey, but as I saw no possibility of going myself I bought the Improvement of five Acres of Land, and sowed it with S [spring] Wheat, but still felt a desire to go if the Way should open, and as I was a Member of the Council I was advised by Bro. H. C. Kimball to try and make a Start, I sold my Claim, borrowed some Corn and did my best for Starting, but both my Sister and myself found it very difficult to get off A great Part of our Teams was made up [of] Cows and young Oxen that had not been broke and we were obliged to fix two Waggons together for lack of Leaders and Drivers, Bro. Terry, who had [been] engaged to drive a Team to the Valey and to bring one back to take his own Family, was quite discouraged, and said it was great Folly to attempt to go as we were fixt

We left Winter Quarters on Sunday the 4th of June being about the last. Bro. Kimball's Company was waiting for us at the Elk Horn River some 25 Miles when we had got about half the distance there we received from Bro. Egan 2 Yoke of Oxen through the Influence of Brother Kimball, and we joined the Company on Tuesday Evening and the next morning the Co. started, we seemed to improve in our traveling, and our Cattle improved in their Condition untill we crossed the Platte River, we overtook Bro. B. Young's Company at the Loup-Fork, and it was an interesting Sight when to behold in the Morning a String of Oxen reaching from one Side of the River to the other about a Mile, from Brigham's Co. coming to assist us in crossing, for the Waggons sunk into the Sand, and it was hard drawing for the Cattle so we put our Cattle to our Waggons and put an extra Team to each and got through well, it was indeed an interesting Sight, you might have taken us for two Armies encamped on either Side of the River waiting the Signal for Conflict but how different was the Case when we saw almost the Whole Strength of one, wading through the River from one to 3 feet in depth to help their Friends here we stayed over Sunday as I did not keep a Journal, I cannot now give any detail of the long and laborious Journey, Brother Young's Co. went ahead, so we in all formed two Companies each Co. being organised into 50 and 10 C[ornelius]. P. Lot was our Captain of 10, and John Park of 50, Henry Herriman of the 100, with Bro. Kimball at the Head, but when the Feed began to fail we were separated into Fifties and finally into tens, as the feed for our Cattle was very short and each 10 had to do the best they could, and we could travel but short journeys Per Day and some times it was judged necessary to rest our Cattle for several Days, we crossed the Platte River about ___ Miles below Fort Laramie from which time we had but little good feed and the Road was much worse, it is wonderful to see the Buffalo and the Marks of them, for several hundred Miles the Prairie is covered with their Dung, from which one is sure there must be Thousands of them our Companies shot many of them we ate freely of the Flesh and also dried great quantities and brought [it] on to the Valey

[Over] a great Part of the Road the ground is partly covered with Salaratus or Salt-Petre which is very injurious to the Oxen as they eat it freely, owing to this many fine Oxen died in fact you cannot go far on the Road but you see the Carcase [carcass] or the Bones of Cattle, at one Place we came to large Beds of Salaratus where almost every Family gathered as much as they wished to carry I and my Family got from one to two Bushels in some Places the Road is sandy and is hard upon the Cattle especially when the Weather is hot and dry, we sometimes had to ascend Mountains of Sand, several times the Companies received fresh Cattle from the Valey which in our Situation was very acceptable we saw but few Indians, and they were quite friendly I never heard of them taking any of our Cattle

We cross[ed] the Loup Fork (but first the Elkhorn a small Stream), the Platte about a Mile across the Laramie Fork, and then the Platte again at the last Place it [is] quite narrow, we also had to ford several small [rivers] viez the Green River, the Bear River and the Weber River besides many Creeks great and Small. We found some frost in the Mornings early in September, but as we came near the Valey the Weather became warmer although the Snow lay on the Top of the Mountains, and in the Valley there had been no frost in the middle of October the last 40 or 50 Miles the Road is shocking bad, in short I wonder that so little Damage was sustained, it seems a Wonder that any Waggon can stand it, one Creek we have to cross 17 times, but after all, we came safely into the valley on the evening of the ___ of October we found our Friends well, and the whole People here seemed to rejoice, but we had [been] about four Months on the Way this was in some Measure owing to the bad Feed and the sickliness of our Cattle, we did not find as much Grain here as we expected, they had generally planted rather late, and the Crickets had destroyed a great deal of the Corn, Wheat etc, but still the Saints here seemed to be generally in good Spirits believing that the Land here will produce plenty of Grain, etc though the last Season they labored hard for a little, they believed that they would know better how to manage the land here another Year as to watering, and also by having their farming Land more compact, they hoped to avoid the Crickets I was surprised to see the Work they had done in Ploughing, Planting and Fencing, and I thought that altho we did not find the Crops of Grain as good as had been represented, yet there would be enough for all that were here, but as the Corn was planted rather late, or, that which was planted early was cut off by the Frost the Summer was too short, so that the Corn did not ripen, many of the Beans also were killed before they got ripe, and much of the Buck Wheat came out very light, so that it was evident that there would be little enough for the Inhabitants, and the Price of Produce rose high, During the Fall many were busily employed in making Adobies, and in getting Timber to build on their City Lotts, and some few got their Houses built, but fewer of them got the Roofs on, for the Winter came on and caught them in all Stages of building. I could not make Adobies on account of a sore Finger which troubled me a long time but I got Logs from the Cannion gave one fourth for sawing and so got up the Walls of my House but could not get Boards sawed for the Roof, so I spread the Tent over the House and so passed the Winter, the Tent I had borrowed for a Week or two but we were compelled to keep it at least 4 Months, the Ground being covered with Snow about 12 Weeks, this length of Winter was very unexpected, and took us by Surprise and unprepared, and in fact it has been a time of much Suffering to the Saints in the Valey about the end of January the Council caused to be ascertained the Amount of Provision, (i.e.) what we call Bread Stuf, but it was more than was feared, nearly one Pound per Head till the 9th of July, I myself and my Family seem to have lived by Faith yet we have not suffered much for lack of Food and as my Lot of Land is mostly covered with Wood, we have not wanted for Firing so that we are truly thankful, we have had health and Peace and on the 7 of January [1849] A Daughter was born to me of Mary-Ann which we call Josephine all went well with Mother and Child and it was really pleasing to notice that no one could tell by the Conduct of the two Mothers which was its Mother but we have been much exposed to Cold and sometimes to Rain, I suppose it is owing to this that my Wife Hannah has for some Weeks been much troubled with Rheumatism but we live in hope of being better off our Children have gone barefoot almost entirely, through a long and severe Winter, and many times have I been grieved to see their naked Feet in the Snow, and many a Cry have they had, I have fetched [and] took my Bread Stuff in Corn chiefly on my Shoulder 2 Miles to Mill and in the latter part of the Winter I have had Corn of my Sister Mary Smith by the Bushel, but at this time it is likely I can have no more, we have also had a few Bus. of Wheat in the same way, which I intend to return to her with Interest.

It is now the 11th of March, and the Ground is covered with Snow, and Snow is falling. There is no sign of Spring. The Cows and the Cattle are poor, and many of the Saints find it very difficult to draw their Fuel with their Oxen. The Wolves have killed some few, but not so many as last year. The Indians have killed from 12 to 20 Cows and Oxen. Near 2 Weeks ago a Company of 25 of our Brethren were sent by the President of the Church to get back, if possible, some Horses and Cattle taken by the Indians of the Eutaw Valley. They found 13 Skins, and killed four of the Indians. This was [under] the Direction of the President. They had killed 17 of our Cattle last Year, making in all, 30 head.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:444.
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:445. Israel, in this instance, referred to the Indians, or remnants of the Lamanites, descendants of the house of Israel.
[^9] When the Nauvoo Charter was revoked some months after the death of Joseph Smith, the citizens renamed Nauvoo the City of Joseph.
