Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

2

"We'll Find the Place": The Mormon Trail

Winter had not been kind to the exiled Saints scattered from Garden Grove to Winter Quarters. Too little nourishing food, too little protection from the harsh weather, and too much disease and death held the refugee camps in a tight grip of misery and discouragement. "It is a growling, grumbling, devilish, sickly time with us now," Eliza R. Snow complained. [^1] There were some who had had enough. Like Nauvoo, Winter Quarters and the difficult trail leading to it had proved to be places of sifting, a crossroads of faith in Brigham Young and in the mission of the Church. But Brother Brigham was not troubled. Those who would follow him were "under the influence of the spirit of gathering," like John Dart and his family, for whom "the counsel of church leaders had molded their lives." [^2] Brigham Young knew that only Saints with enough faith to face the hard times had the right spirit to build the new Zion. [^3]

Once again he was looking to spring to move his people on, or in words of the time, "when the grass grows and the river runs." Nauvoo had not given him that choice, but now, a year later, the Mormons could make their plans in peace for the thousand-mile overland journey that yet awaited. They could wait until the grass grew.

Trek of the Vanguard PartyHC309Well before spring reached the Missouri and brought its warm and healing touch to the itinerant campers along its banks and surrounding bluffs, Brigham Young had conferred with his fellow apostles, his scouts, and the maps of the Rocky Mountain region; by late winter plans began to emerge. [^4] An advance party would find the place to settle, plant crops, and prepare it for the Saints who would follow. Brigham Young wanted 144 men and 72 well-provisioned wagons. [^5] Every useful skill was to be represented. [^6] While many volunteers vied for a chance to be in the vanguard company of pioneers, some who were chosen felt woefully unprepared. Saddle maker and carpenter Levi Jackman worried that he had only one yoke of oxen and no wagon. His clothing was "old and scarce," and except for some breadstuffs to last the required eighteen months, he had only a few beans and a little pork "but no groceries." Nevertheless, he was willing to go, although, he wrote, "[to] where, we could not tell or what we should have to contend with. We only knew that we must go and the Lord would attend to bringing out the results." [^7] Sylvester Henry Earl, another of Brigham's advance company, was also hesitant about going. "It was hard for me to leave my little family sick among howling wolves and the roaming savages of the West," he wrote, "but the servants of the Lord said go and I felt as ever to leave all for the benefit of the Gospel or the salvation of the people." [^8] Henry Earl and Levi Jackman were exactly the kind of men Brigham Young wanted in his company.

Trek of the Vanguard PartyHC310There is no record of how many women wanted to sign on, but three had the distinction of being part of the pioneer band. Harriet Decker Young, wife of Lorenzo Dow Young, Brigham's brother, was especially eager to go. Her asthma was growing worse in the humid climate of Winter Quarters, and she believed her only relief lay in the fresh mountain air of the Rockies. Lorenzo and Harriet also brought two sons. [^9] To give Harriet female company, Brigham brought his wife Clara Decker, Harriet's daughter whom he had married in Nauvoo; and Ellen Sanders Kimball accompanied her husband Heber C. Kimball. [^10] Neither Clara nor Ellen shared Harriet's initial enthusiasm.

Trek of the Vanguard PartyHC310None of the women kept a journal. Perhaps their tasks were too demanding or they deferred to record keepers such as Thomas Bullock and William Clayton. Maybe they saw so many of the company hunched by their candles or lanterns each night writing their own private records that they felt adding another chapter to what would be a well-recorded event was needless.

Trek of the Vanguard PartyHC310Whatever the reason, their voices are silent except for a few brief sentences from Clara Young written forty years later. Clara noted that she "never felt as badly [sic] in her life as when she was actually starting on the uncertain pilgrimage." She was "relieved," however, and "really satisfied" when they finally reached their destination. The valley didn't look as dreary to her, she explained, as to the other women. "They were terribly disappointed because there were no trees, and to them there was such a sense of desolation and loneliness." [^11] Harriet confessed her disappointment to her husband. "We have traveled fifteen hundred miles over prairies, deserts and mountains, but feeble as I am I would rather go a thousand miles farther than stay in such a desolated place." [^12] Her first months in the Valley didn't do much to change Harriet's mind. Giving birth to a son just two months after arriving, she found her hopes again bitterly crushed when he died five months later. Ellen Kimball also lost a son within the first year of his life as well as twin sons born a few years later.

With the others left to winter in the Valley, the women lived in the hastily constructed fort, each occupying a room with a door and a wooden window, taken out for light during the day and nailed in at night. Within weeks, emigrants from Mississippi came into the Valley, and in September word came of the impending arrival of the second company of pioneers. For the lonely settlers, "the excitement was intense," Clara remembered. They were overjoyed to receive letters, though they arrived "without envelopes and tied with buckskin thongs wound around again and again." The news from Winter Quarters was good, and they were especially happy to learn that the company was bringing "plenty of food," including peas, "indeed a luxury." [^13]

312For the Saints, the trail west would be another test of Joseph Smith's vision of a "holy nation," which blurred the boundaries between the secular and the sacred. [^14] If the Saints were indeed a covenant people, he believed, they would be willing to be governed by spiritual laws. The law that would rule them as they journeyed westward was revealed to Brigham Young and given to the Church in January 1847. It was known as "The Word and Will of the Lord concerning the Camp of Israel in their journeyings to the West" (D&C 136:1), and it would be their constitution and guide. It outlined the preparations to be made and the organization of companies. It exhorted the Saints to righteousness and invoked the spirit of the Nauvoo covenant in admonishing them to look to the needs of others and prepare for the Saints who followed. Most important, it was a revelation from God to his people, assuring them of his continuing care and reminding the homeless Saints that they were on a holy errand. Even as they were counseled to "provide themselves with all the teams, wagons, provisions, clothing, and other necessaries for the journey" (v. 5), they were also counseled to "walk in all the ordinances of the Lord" (v. 4).

312When the wagons started rolling out of the grand encampment on the Missouri in April 1847, it was an emotional time for the Saints. So much and so many depended on the success of this pioneer band. Fanny Young Murray, Brigham's sister, was deeply moved at their leaving. "The wagons went four abreast, and you can hardly imagine their appearance. Some that were there declared it the grandest sight their eyes were ever blest with. Their wagons were all neatly prepared with everything for their comfort that could be obtained, but yet they will suffer enough." [^15]

That first band of pioneers did not suffer as much as Fanny feared. They encountered no Indian raids, no debilitating storms, no serious lack of provisions, and no deaths. They were as well prepared and carefully organized as any west-bound company could be. Iowa had been a useful training ground. Few other Mormon wagon trains have received more written attention than this pioneer band or produced so many diaries and journals. It was the quintessential trail experience which would be modified over the next twenty years by variations in the route, the makeup of the companies, and the mode of travel, but this company's one hundred and eleven days on the trail became a pattern for the companies that followed. [^16]

313The West attracted many emigrants in 1847. Besides the twenty-two hundred Mormons in the four companies to make the trek to Utah that year, forty-five hundred other westerners traveled to Oregon and California. Like the pioneer band, the three companies that followed from Winter Quarters that summer also reached the Salt Lake Valley with few of the problems that beset later groups. But even in their eagerness to be on their way, leaving brought mixed emotions. Preparing to go reminded Patty Sessions of an earlier difficult parting. "We start for the mountains or a resting place and leave Winter Quarters," she wrote on 5 June 1847. "[It is] Ten years ago today since we left our homes and friends in Maine. We are now leaving many good friends and I hope they will soon follow on to us." [^17] Mary Jane Mount Tanner, just a girl when she left Winter Quarters, remembered the sight of the "little company of wanderers as they wound slowly along the long train of ox teams creeping as it were day by day." She recalled the long wait at the rendezvous point on the Elkhorn River, a few miles west of Winter Quarters, and the "undulating prairie that stretched as far as the eye could reach, covered with grass and flowers." She knew that her mother was "thinking of all she was leaving behind, and wondering what the future held in store for her." [^18]

313All who began the long western trek were required to take a basic store of supplies and gear. Some, on their own or with the help of friends, secured these provisions and teams in time to follow after the first band of pioneers. Charles C. Rich's family was one of them. "We were fitted up as comfortable as we could be, with wagons and teams and provisions, beside some cows and sheep and teamsters, and some to drive the stock, for all that had loose stock brought it along," wrote Sarah Rich. "The names of those two brethren that so kindly helped us to be able to come along with the first company were Zesabel Shoemaker and Aaron Cherry; they and we traveled together in the same company all the way to the Valley." [^19]

314Others took a year or more to acquire the teams, wagon, provisions, tools, and gear needed for the long journey. By 1853 most of the Saints had vacated not only Winter Quarters but also Kanesville, St. Louis, and the way stations in Iowa. The town of Florence, near the site of Winter Quarters, remained as an outfitting post for the thousands of emigrants from other parts of the United States and Europe yet to make the trek. [^20]

314The trail west was a journey of discovery. The region between the Missouri and the Great Salt Lake held many surprises for the

314emigrants, especially those from Europe. From the broad, flat plains of Nebraska to the steep mountain ranges and narrow passes of Wyoming and Utah, travelers saw something of wonder on every side. The "broad, shallow, braided" Platte River was their main corridor to the West. They followed along its north bank for more than six hundred miles, some companies crossing it several times to find feed for their animals, which was often more plentiful along the southern bank. [^21] Sophia Goodridge described the wide sweep of level grasslands of the Platte Valley as "one endless sea of grass, wavy and rolling like the waves of the sea, and now and then a tree." [^22] Journal writers, like Sarah Mousley, searched for words to describe the scenes unfolding each day. "Oh how I wish mine were a painters pencil or a poets pen," she lamented. But on several occasions her pencil did justice to the view. A prairie scene caught her imagination: In the "midst of a wide spreading prairie . . . [be]decked with varied flowers a beautiful grove we thought it had been trained by a skillful hand to suit the taste of the possessor instead of being in the wild domein [sic] of nature my heart exclaimed how beautiful how wonderful thou art sweet earth." [^23]

Another scene by the Platte River moved Sarah to declare it "the beautifulest scenery my eye's ever rested upon. The bluffs on each side the wild flowers beautiful to behold the air redolent with odor the calm still waters of beautiful lakes all, all serving alike to invoke an adoration to the God [by] whose word we have left the happy scene of childhood years to repair to the mountains with the saints of light." [^24]

315As the Saints moved farther west, the topography changed dramatically. The broad prairies gave way to the unusual and magnificent geological formations with names to match their shapes: Ancient Ruins Bluff, Court House and Jail Rocks, Devil's Gate, Witches Rock, and the remarkable natural curiosity Chimney Rock. Distance seemed to evaporate as the clear air of the high country magnified these spectacular landmarks and made them seem closer to the traveler's eye than they actually were. Emigrants were surprised to find they had to travel days, not hours, to reach them after they were sighted.

Some journal writers found words to match these natural wonders. The Ancient Ruins Bluff, named "Bluff Ruins" by Willard Richards when he first saw them, reminded many travelers, particularly European emigrants, of ancient castles and fortresses. Seeing another range of bluffs farther along on the trail, British convert Hannah Tapfield King caught the romantic images they conveyed. "They are Sublime and Mysterious," she wrote. "There is beauty and order in them - and it requires no fanciful stretch of imagination to form Baronial buildings - 'keeps' - gateways, etc etc - and Georgy [her daughter] even made [out] 'The Porter' looking over the Gate!! They are very high - I should like to hear a philosophical description of them - They please and interest me more than I have language to express - There is much design in them - yet they say they are solely the work of Nature - Well I must leave them like all mysterious things." [^25]

316Of all the wonders, Chimney Rock seemed most to draw the interest of the emigrants. It was described by one early adventurer as having a pyramid or cone-shaped base giving rise to a gradually narrowing shaft, the whole formation reaching "up from the prairie in solitary grandeur, like the limbless trunk of a gigantic tree." [^26] Britisher William Clayton was reminded of a large factory chimney in England when he first saw it. [^27] Other accounts also noted its tremendous size, which reduced wagon trains to ant colonies when they were viewed from the top of its conical base. Some emigrants were challenged to climb the hundred or so feet to the top of the base, but thousands more were content to leave their names on the monument, silent witnesses to its universal fascination.

Before leaving the Platte, the westerners were treated to another geological phenomenon known to them as Scott's Bluffs. [^28] Frederick Piercy had talent enough to memorialize the scene with both brush and pen. When the Bluffs first came into view, he noticed that the shadows, which had played around the rocky formation throughout the day, were by evening "an intense blue, while the rock illuminated by the setting sun partook of its gold, making a beautiful harmony of colour. They present a very singular appearance," he wrote, "resembling ruined palaces, castellated towers, temples and monuments." [^29] Independence Rock was another noted landmark. More easily scaled than Chimney Rock, it offered a pleasant hike to its rounded summit. Names of emigrants also covered its face. From its summit, Sophia Goodridge, an 1850 pioneer, declared the view "beautiful. The Sweetwater flows southwest at the base of the rock and winds around the foot of the mountains." She could see the "Saleratus Lake to the northwest and Devil's gate to the West while mountains are to be seen on all sides." [^30]

317Wilford Woodruff and John Brown of the first band of pioneers were probably the first Mormons to climb the rock—but for prayer, not pleasure. Ahead of the rest of the company, they climbed to the rock's highest point. There, Wilford Woodruff recorded, "we offered up our prayers according to the order of the priesthood. We prayed earnestly for the blessing of God to r[est] upon President Young & his brethren the Twelve & all of the Pioneer Camp & the whole Camp of Israel & House of Israel, our wives & children, & relatives the Mormon Battalion, all the Churches Abroad . . . And that the Lord would hasten the time . . . [for] the building up of Zion in the last days. . . . And while offering up our prayers the spirit of the Lord desended [sic] upon us and we truly felt to rejoice." [^31]

John Lingren, a Scandinavian emigrant, was intrigued by the "wild weird romance about the country like some dream, some imaginary scene materialized." In the evenings, he wrote, "the sound of music in different parts of the camp seemed strangely harmonious with the almost deathlike silence of these uninhabited regions." [^32] Unlike most of the other points of scenic interest, however, the first sighting of the western mountains and Laramie Peak seemed to elicit a more cautious response from the journalists. These mountains were not just part of the scenery; they were part of the trail. "I have seen the Rocky mountains for the first time today," Martha Spence Heywood declared to her diary. "They look stupendous in the dim opaque of the horizon and but a faint line marking their existence and altitude." [^33] Though ominous at first sight, they would eventually frame the view of most interest to the pioneers—their valley home.

318While others wrote of what they saw, Ingrid Christine Holestie, an 1866 pioneer child, wrote of what she heard. Because she was sick throughout the trek, Ingrid experienced trail life from a wagon, hearing rather than seeing the activities of the wagon company as it moved westward. She noted the crying of children and babies and the sound of animals braying, snorting, and mewing. She heard the moans of women struggling over their stoves and campfires in the rain and sleet or in the pangs of birth. And she heard the songs of the camp when day had finished and night brought blessed relief. [^34] Her account reminds us that the history of the trail is as much in its sounds as in its sights.

Adding to the wonder of this hauntingly beautiful land were its native inhabitants. Sometimes they stole horses and cattle, bargained for wives from among the young girls, set off stampedes, or kidnapped lost children. Others traded buffalo robes, moccasins, and other useful items for food and trinkets. At Fort Laramie, one Indian woman took special interest in Hannah Cornaby's young daughter. She "measured her foot, and next day returned with a very tastily embroidered pair of moccasins which she placed on her feet, refusing to take anything in payment," Hannah remembered. [^35]

320Diana Eldredge's company encountered a band of Sioux Indians at Chimney Rock. "There were about 100 braves in war paint and feathers headed by a chief," she wrote. "They thought we had come to take their land away from them, but when they were finally convinced that we did not want to molest them, they seemed quite friendly. We cooked them a dinner after which the 'peace pipe' was smoked by all men in both bands. A large fire was built and the pipe was passed around the circle. As we moved on they followed us for two or three days, but they offered no opposition to us." [^36] Sara Alexander, an 1859 pioneer, was more intrigued than frightened by them. She often watched them riding their horses "as far as the eye could reach over the vast plains" and found them "picturesque and magnificent in their own environment." When she later mused on her memories of those images, she wrote, "I shall always be glad I have seen the Indians in their primitive grandeur, in their own country where they were kings and where they dominated so royally. I pity their humiliation in compelling them to become civilized. So much has to be crushed in the march of improvement and in the making of a nation" [^37]—an unusual sentiment in the nineteenth century.

320Sharing dominion of this western land were the vast herds of buffalo that roamed at will across the prairies. In small numbers they seemed harmless, but often the animals suddenly appeared as a tiny spot far off in the distance, a small dust cloud steadily looming larger until it became a black, moving, thundering mass filling the horizon. The animals bore down so rapidly on the wagon trains that the pioneers hardly had time to take cover or hold to their oxen as the immense herd rushed toward them. Diana Eldredge remembered how "they surged down upon us on their way to water." "The men of the company," she wrote, "crowded all the wagons of the train into as close a bunch as possible and all the women and children into the wagons. They crowded the cattle into a line with their heads turned from the buffalo, and then stationed themselves at the head of their oxen with whips and no other weapons. . . . As the herd crowded closer to us, pawing the earth and tossing their heads, the men kept up an incessant shout and cracking of whips. Suddenly when they were just about upon us, the herd separated and one part went on one side of our camp and the other half circled the other side of our camp. Not one head of cattle was lost, nor one person injured." [^38]

321These sudden encounters often stampeded the oxen and livestock, and many loose cattle were caught up in the thundering rush of animals. When a wagon train and buffalo herd crossed paths, there was no question which had the right of way, especially, Eliza R. Snow recalled, "when crossing their watering paths in near proximity to a river, and we were compelled to make a break in a line of wagons, and wait for two or three thousand of those uncompromising animals to pass." [^39] The travelers were delighted, however, when the hunters brought back fresh buffalo meat to divide among the camp.

321The emigrants found more than the natural wonders of the new land to discover. They also found their journey to be one of self-discovery. The western odyssey not only challenged them with new modes of daily living; it also tested the strength of their coping abilities. Men who had never seen, let alone driven, a team of oxen, for instance, had little time to learn the "science of oxology," as Horace Whitney dubbed it. [^40] British emigrant Duckworth Grimshaw stood helpless beside his newly acquired team of oxen until experienced driver John W. Young offered to instruct him on the fine points of "bullwhacking." According to Grimshaw, "he took the whip and brought it down on the ox leader then gave the nigh leader a prod in the ribs with the whip stock and this brought the cows up in good style. I thought, well they seem to understand that sort of driving, but when I tried it I found the lash around my own neck and decided [that] to become efficient in driving required practice like everything else." Christian Nielsen was also a novice teamster and struggled with his two teams. "In the beginning," he found, "it went slowly as the oxen were not acquainted with us and we not with them, as the way in which they drive them here is entirely different from the Danish way." [^41]

321Rounding up hundreds of wagons, hitching up teams, and finding a place in the line of travel overwhelmed some emigrants. Andrew Nielson would always remember the July afternoon in 1864 that he left Atchison, Kansas, with a Danish company for the West. The combination of "wild and ignorant teamsters," who couldn't speak English, captains who couldn't speak Danish, and the struggle "in getting those wild animals yoked up and hitched to the wagons" made an unforgettable scene. "For five miles all around the plains," he remembered, "you could see oxen, wagons, teamsters, and a dozen horsemen going at breakneck speed, and it was a miracle that no one was hurt, nor anything broken, but under these conditions I have seen strong men cry." [^42]

Hannah Cornaby, mercifully exempt from the frustrating struggle, found the whole process humorous. "Imagine, if you can," she wrote, "the operation of starting over one hundred ox teams, chiefly by men who had never done anything of the kind before. . . . The oxen were wild, and getting them yoked was the most laughable sight I had ever witnessed; everybody giving orders, and nobody knowing how to carry them out. If the men had not been saints, there would doubtless have been much profane language used; but the oxen, not understanding 'English,' did just as well without it. But it did seem so truly comical to witness the bewildered look of some innocent brother, who, after having labored an hour or more to get 'Bright' secured to one end of the yoke, would hold the other end aloft, trying to persuade 'Buck' to come under, only to see 'Bright' careering across the country, the yoke lashing the air, and he not even giving a hint as to when he intended to stop." [^43]

322If driving oxen tried their strength, night guarding challenged their endurance. "This was not a pleasant task," young Duckworth Grimshaw felt when his turn came round, "especially when the nights were dark and stormy." [^44] Richard Warburton felt the same. "No one knows," he wrote, "unless they have had the same experience what a trial it was to drive team all day and guard at night. The loss of sleep was something fearful." [^45] When they added hunting, wagon repairing, yoking and unyoking balky animals, and herding the livestock to their day's tasks, emigrant men discovered new dimensions to the meaning of long-suffering.

Women trudged alongside their men in long skirts and petticoats, which were never designed for the western trail. [^46] Against all odds, they tried to maintain some domestic amenities in the routine of camp life. But cooking on open fires, washing clothes and bathing in cold streams, birthing while on the move, and living without privacy were strong deterrents. Nothing daunted, Bathsheba Smith was not going to be deprived of the womanly nuances of daily living. When she left for the Valley in 1849, she arranged her wagon to be as homelike as possible. Projections from each side and a wagon cover tall enough for her to stand upright inside the wagon gave it a roominess others lacked. Across the back she laid a corded frame that served as a bedstead. She carpeted the floor and hung a looking-glass, candlestick, pin-cushion and other necessaries from the bows. She even found room to place four chairs in the center of the wagon, where, she wrote, "we and our two children sat and rode as we chose." [^47]

323Few pioneers traveled in such Cadillac comfort. Margaret Watson DeWitt, a young single woman traveling with the family of Thomas Lyons, whose wife was an invalid, "cooked every bite that was eaten by our outfit of ten" and took care of the five Lyons children. A shared tent was her bedroom, and she pointedly noted that she was obliged to walk "all the way to the valley, carrying the Lyons baby most of the way." [^48]

323Order and efficiency were the mainstay of camp life. Whatever one's habits might be, everyone had to follow the group regimen. For Louisa Palmer's company, the day began at six o'clock, "and at eight they were on their way. At noon camp was made for lunch and at night camp was made for the night by water if possible. A corral was made of the wagons. The cattle were herded if there were no Indians in the vicinity. After supper there was usually a dance; the fiddle music was furnished by the teamsters. After the dance a meeting was held which was opened by song and prayer and the subject spoken upon was about the travel for the next day. The roll was called twice each day. At nine-thirty all were supposed to be in bed." Louisa's account is as orderly as her trail days must have been. [^49]

To the tight schedule and unpredictable circumstances of their various camping places, women adapted their domestic tasks. They washed their clothes in the rivers and streams and dried them on the banks or by the campfires. They depended on buffalo chips for fuel when wood was scarce. Sarah Burbank knew just how to use them. She would dig a hole in the ground, put the skillet in the hole with a tight lid on it, and then lay the buffalo chips on the lid and ignite them. "It baked the bread just fine," she found. [^50]

324Sarah gave special care to her milk cow. A sick, lost, or dead cow was a severe blow to a family, especially one with small children. Not a drop of milk was wasted. Women put any unused milk or cream into tightly covered wooden churns and fastened them either inside or outside the wagon, where they would hang during the bumpy ride. By day's end there would be butter for supper. Bread dough, mixed in the morning, rose in the same fashion. By evening it was ready for baking in the large black kettle that most women used, or sometimes in a wayside rock oven built by previous travelers.

324While many pioneers were reduced to a diet of dried bacon and biscuits by journey's end, supplemented by berries or a little beef or buffalo meat, others seemed to have a wide range of provisions that lasted the entire journey. Caroline Hopkins Clark, an 1866 pioneer, detailed her family's well-stocked larder. "We do not get any fresh meat or potatoes," she noted, "but we get plenty of flour and bacon. We have some sugar, a little tea, molasses, soap, carbonate of soda, and a few dried apples. We brought some peas. Oatmeal, rice, tea, and sugar, which we had left from the vessel [she was a European emigrant]. We bought a skillet to bake our bread in. Sometimes we make pancakes for a change. We also make cakes in the pan, and often bran dumplings with baking powder. We use cream of tartar and soda for our bread, sometimes sour dough. At times Roland goes to the river and catches fish and sometimes John shoots birds. We get wild currants and gooseberries to make puddings. All together we get along very well." [^51]

Though Hannah King, a forty-five-year-old pioneer of 1853, thought it foolish for an expectant mother to undertake such a journey, that impending event deterred few women. Nor did it delay travel. Sarah Burbank remembered more births than deaths in her company, none of which "hindered the march as they would move on the next morning making quite a hardship for the women." [^52]

325Women developed close companionships on the trail as they assisted at times of birthing, illness, and the shared tasks of camp life. Those wives of the first company of pioneers who traveled in the next company drew support, both physical and spiritual, from one another as they journeyed west without their husbands. Eliza R. Snow, a plural wife of Brigham Young, seemed to function at the center of a web of social and family relationships in the company in which she traveled, continuing the social and spiritual gatherings and prayer meetings begun in Winter Quarters. [^53]

325Midwives such as Patty Sessions also filled a central place at the center of camp life, entering into a family circle at its most vulnerable times and linking families in their common needs.

Eliza Cheney willingly cast her lot with her sister Saints and told her family, back in the States, "I am willing to endure anything my sisters of the Church have to endure to help to build up this great and [latter-day] Kingdom that the way may be prepared for the judgment of God upon the earth." [^54]

326If learning new tasks or coping with old ones in a new setting were not exercise enough in self-discovery, dealing with simple annoyances on the trail, as well as hardships and tragedies, told the pioneers much about themselves. Dust, mud, rain, wind, and pesky mosquitoes and buffalo gnats challenged their patience. But losing an ox meant serious trouble. The teamsters kept a watchful eye on their well-being, corralling them for protection, hunting them when lost, and even blessing them when they sickened or grew sullen or tired. Peter Neilson, Sr., wrote, "[I] as well as other brethren have quietly gone between our oxen and blessed them and immediately they moved on, showing us that the Spirit of the Lord can subdue and make biddable the ox as well as man." [^55] In their dependence on their oxen, families developed strong attachments to them. When the Adolphia Young family reached the Valley, they had to sell their team to buy a house. "This made the family very sad," Rhoda Young remembered. "It was like selling a cherished member of the household." [^56]

Losing one's best ox or only milk cow was bad enough; stampedes, however, not only carried away cattle and livestock but also upset or destroyed wagons and injured or even killed people. A careless shaking of a robe in front of the corralled animals, a sudden shot, or the deliberate provoking of the animals by marauding Indians set the animals off in an instant. No one knew what startled the teams in Ole Jensen's camp one morning, just four miles along that day's travel. But suddenly "the frenzied animals broke into a wild run . . . simultaneously rushing across the Plains at utmost speed. Women and children were leaping from the flying wagons, men were applying whips or using reins in a vain attempt to check the terrified animals. Scattered and broken vehicles only added to the fright of the animals." When Ole tried to regain control of his animals, he slipped and fell beneath the wagon wheels. Somehow he managed to save the wagon but lost his life in doing so. [^57]

327Broken axles, wagon wheels, and yokes hindered travel more than birthing, sickness, or death and tried the patience of those who were ready to move on. River crossings also begged patience since all had to cross before the company could proceed. It took sheer grit to plunge into cold or muddy water when the pioneers knew that wet clothes would have to dry on their backs. Long skirts never proved more inappropriate for trail travel than at river crossings. Martha Patterson made a habit of tying her skirt over her shoulders, carrying her shoes in one hand, and driving her oxen across the river with the other. [^58] Men double-teamed their oxen to pull the wagons across streams full of quicksand. In James Bryant's company, every crossing point was tested for depth. "There was always one of the men," wrote James, "ready to ride his saddle horse into the river[;] if his horse had to swim he would return as soon as possible, but if man and horse could wade all of the way across, the company was allowed to march on through. If he had to swim we then made camp, sometimes for ten days making rafts or floats to enable every thing to be taken over to the opposite side." [^59]

One of the great fears of both young and old was getting lost or losing someone on the trail. When little Robert Olson didn't answer the dinner call, a posse immediately went back along the trail to find him. A three-day search failed to find the boy, so the wagon train moved on, his distraught parents with it. When Robert showed up in another company days later, the whole camp cheered. Roll call at least once or twice daily had untold value when the wagon teams were spread over miles of broad plains, and wooded mountain passes led to dozens of hidden dangers.

328A great scourge of the trek was cholera. Diarrhea and dysentery were close rivals, but when the Asian cholera appeared on the plains in 1849, with periodic outbreaks for several years afterwards, few wagon trains escaped devastating losses. [^60] Cholera caused a large share of the estimated six thousand deaths of Mormon emigrants during the pioneer period. It attacked European emigrants as soon as they arrived in New Orleans, following them up the Mississippi to the various staging camps. The commissary at Mormon Grove, outside Atchison, Kansas, noted that cholera attacked three hundred new emigrants and only three survived. [^61] It pursued them along the western trail where little could be done to avoid it. "You never knew when you got up in the morning whether you would live to see the sun go down or not," recalled Julia Sophia McKee. [^62] Sarah Burbank recalled the fear that swept through the camp when the captain's wife succumbed. "All the women in the camp were afraid to prepare the body for burial for fear they would catch the cholera from her," she wrote. So Sarah and another young woman washed and dressed her for burial in "her underclothes and a nightgown, . . . We sewed her up in a sheet and a quilt. That was all that could be done for her burial. This young girl and I were not afraid to take care of the body. We were only sixteen years old but brave in the case." [^63]

With no medical treatment available to stop the spread of the disease, prayer became both a remedy and a comfort. As more and more of Sophia Goodridge's company succumbed, the camp felt discouraged and helpless. "We felt like humbling ourselves before the Lord, and pray that He might turn from us the sickness and distress among us," she wrote. "We therefore met together, the speakers exhorting us to be diligent in our devotions and united. A vote was taken to that effect. They called upon the Lord in prayer that he would bless and preserve us on our journey to the Valley. We then started on our journey rejoicing." [^64] Though cholera claimed more of the company until they reached higher country, their spirits had been rejuvenated and their coping skills measurably strengthened.

329In our era of fast-moving vehicles, it is difficult to imagine anyone's being injured by an ox and wagon moving two miles an hour. But oxen were difficult to stop, and a misstep by a driver, a slip from the wagon tongue, or a fall from the wagon bed could suddenly throw a victim under a wagon's heavy wheels. Children were particularly vulnerable. They broke their arms or legs, and others died when a wagon wheel rolled over them. There were also drownings, falls over ravines, and gunshot wounds, as well as simple cuts, bruises, and snake and insect bites. Healing miracles, however, preserved the lives of many victims and gave evidence of the "efficiency of faith," as one woman observed. [^65] Eliza R. Snow acknowledged the efficiency of faith in the healing of her friend Nancy Maria Love, who fell from the tongue of her wagon which contained "sixteen hundred freight." "To all appearance," Eliza noted, "she was crushed, but on being administered to by some of the elders she revived; and after having been anointed with consecrated oil, and having the ordinance of laying on of hands repeated she soon recovered, and on the fourth day after the accident, she milked her cow, as usual." [^66]

Accidents and disease could decimate a family. Laura Swenson was only one of many children orphaned. Her father died after falling from their wagon, and her mother died a week later in premature childbirth. Rhoda Young was widowed when her husband Adolphia, a captain of ten, was stricken with cholera during their 1852 trek, and three days later her eldest son died of the same disease. Brother Rollins in Mary Dart's company lost twelve of the fifteen members of his family. William Jex lost his closest friend. They had endured a hard ocean voyage together, and an equally difficult western trek proved too much for William's friend. "He had given his life for this 'new faith,'" William wrote in a memorial to his friend, "and he had divided his inheritance with me, that I, too, might enjoy the blessings of the new world and the new faith." [^67]

The long waiting in the Valley by children for parents or parents for children coming in later wagon trains sometimes ended sadly. Isaac Hunt had sent his parents laboriously saved money to emigrate and anxiously awaited their coming. When the expected company reached the Valley, Isaac looked for his parents but without success. "What is the matter that they didn't come?" he inquired. "Yes, my boy," he was told, "they did come, but both died on the trail." [^68] The frequency of death did not diminish the anguish that it brought to those who lost loved ones, especially in leaving them in unmarked graves along the trail. "There is a feeling, a loneliness connected with burying our dead a long distance from human habitation," wrote Mary Dart after the death of her mother, brother, and sister on the plains. [^69] The trail west, observed Martha Payne Thomas, was "paved with the sons and daughters of Zion." [^70] But their writings confirm their acceptance of loss and their ability to endure "all the pinching times," as Alice Houghton Greenwood labeled them in her journal. [^71]

But all was not hardship and sorrow, and many wagon trains traveled the long journey with little difficulty. In fact, many of the diarists write of invigorated health, of good times, of adventure, and the thrill of being in a new and challenging region of the country. Each day held a new discovery, and evening brought rest and recreation. Community prayers, singing, dancing, storytelling, and games made up an evening's activities. Despite her weariness the next day, one young girl refused to miss the dancing each night. Mary Leatham particularly remembered the music in the evening gatherings around the camp fire, probably because her musician father could play many instruments and evidently brought several with him. "Come, Come, Ye Saints" found its way to many emigrant trains by way of Utah teamsters and captains, who taught the song by rote to the newcomers. [^72] Romances bloomed on the trail. "Young lovers strayed in the moonlight not far from camp, and I suppose repeated the old, old, but ever new story," remembered Mary Jane Lyttle, whose future husband courted her on the trail. Even the 24th of July was celebrated on the trail. Caroline Hopkins Clark's company of 1866 traveled only half the day on the 24th and then circled the wagons for singing, dancing, and general merriment. [^73]

A new method for bringing emigrants to Utah, begun in the 1860s, was known as the Church train. [^74] Young men were called to serve as teamsters for the well provisioned wagons going back to the Missouri or the current jumping-off place, picking up the waiting emigrants and returning to the Valley in one season. This method of travel brought nearly seventeen thousand emigrants to the Valley before 1869. It was a summer adventure for the young men, delighted to have the first opportunity to meet the young convert women.

332Nothing in the trail experience quite matched the moment of arrival. Brigham Young's words when he first gazed on the Valley are legendary: "This is the right place." [^75] But not all who followed him to the Valley were so sure it was. Sophia Goodridge deigned to write what many others may have only felt when they first viewed their new home. "It was rather a dreary homecoming," she wrote in October 1850. "It was very dry and dusty, and the wind was blowing the dust in clouds. Only a few little log and adobe houses to be seen, fenced in with rail and willow fences. A few shade trees were to be seen here and there. I thought at first: 'Have I got to spend the rest of my days here in this dreary looking place?' But I soon felt all right about it and loved my mountain home." [^76] When Ann Ham Hickenlooper, a young single woman from England, first saw the desolate scene in 1856, she "cried out to the Lord, 'where shall I find me a home?'" [^77] Eliza Lyman, who arrived in 1847, remarked, "I do not think our enemies need envy us this locality or ever come here to disturb us." [^78]

But others saw beyond the unpromising terrain and infant city and felt the joy of coming home. "After our long desert travel Salt Lake city was beautiful to us, with its streams of crystal water murmuring along the streets," Mary Dart observed. "There were not many houses but there were enough to give an air of civilization and comfort." [^79] When Hannah Cornaby reached the Valley in October 1853, she felt "more than repaid for the nine months of travel, and all the hardship [they] had endured." Hannah was delighted with the "peaceful loveliness" of the city: "The neat adobe houses with their trim gardens, the crystal streams coursing along the sidewalks, giving life to avenues of shade trees, all aglow with the lovely tints of autumn, presented a picture that is indelibly fixed upon our minds." [^80]

333Some viewed the Valley through spiritual eyes, little noting the landscape or the fledgling settlement. Despite the unending difficulties Ann Jarvis experienced in getting to the Valley, when she first "saw the valley where God's people were," she said she was willing "to endure a great deal more for the same privilege." [^81] Levi Jackman was ecstatic when he saw the Valley in July 1847. "When we finally got through it [the steep canyon]," he wrote, "it seemed like bursting from the confines of prison walls into the beauties of a world of pleasure and freedom. . . . We felt to thank the Lord . . . we had found a good country of land where we thought our enemies could never find us and where we could worship God unmolested." [^82] William Grant was similarly excited when he first viewed the Valley two decades later. "The Beautiful City of Salt Lake Burst in our View. Joy, Joy, here was to us a paradise indeed." [^83]

It was a paradise for Wilford Woodruff, too. He saw only beauty as the Valley scene rose up in full view when he emerged from Emigration Canyon. Before him lay a "rich fertile valley . . . surrounded by a perfect chain of everlasting hills," their "fresh water springs rivlets creeks & Brooks & Rivers of various sizes . . . wending there way into the great Salt Lake . . . & mountains Covered with eternal snow with there innumerable peaks like Pyramids towering towards Heaven." But his spiritual eyes saw "the land of promise held in reserve by the hand of GOD for a resting place for the Saints upon which A portion of the Zion of GOD will be built." [^84] The Saints had found their Zion, and there they would stay.

For many, this was also a time of reunion with friends and family. Mary Ellen Kimball, who arrived with the second company of 1847, like many others greeted her first view of the Valley with relief, delight, and thanksgiving. "I shall never forget the sensation it gave me to see that peaceful lake," she wrote. "It seemed that my heart jumped into my mouth, and tears in my eyes. I felt to thank my Heavenly Father that we are so near our place of destination." But she was even more heartened when she entered the Valley to see the welcome face of a beloved friend and sister wife, Ellen Sanders Kimball, who had come with the pioneer company. "How charming to walk in a house and sit down to a table once more," Mary Ellen wrote. "She told me of her travels and I told her of mine." [^85] Is it possible to imagine what these two pioneer women said to one another as they sat together in that bare little room after their thousand-mile journey?

336A poignant note in all the accounts is the new arrivals' efforts to "arrange our attire as best we could after so long a journey in expectation of meeting our friends," as one diarist wrote. They shook the outer layer of dust from their clothes, washed their faces, smoothed their hair, and cleaned up their children in anticipation. But the "neat, clean and fair appearance of the people [in the Valley]," Mary Lois Walker Morris found, was still quite a contrast to the "brown and grim" appearance of the new arrivals. Mary Lois had done her best to avoid the telltale signs of the trek. She had always washed her face each day and protected it with a bonnet, but the marks of three months of trail travel were hard to hide. [^86] In time, however, the physical traces of their long trek would fade. The memories would linger much longer, enhanced perhaps by each telling of the experience and, for some, a lasting allegiance to the company and captains that brought them west. Looking back in his trail experience, George Washington Hill was pleased with the performance of the wagon company in which he traveled, one of the first to enter the Valley. "I believe today that notwithstanding we had to suffer so much for even the commonest necessities of life," he wrote, "that the first immigration were the best satisfied and grumbled the least of any immigration that has ever come to Utah. We were all poor alike, we were all hungry alike, and we were all naked alike and we could each sympathize with the other." [^87]

336Their journey over, the pioneers discovered that a new task awaited them as they took their part in fulfilling the Prophet Joseph's vision. The long trek west had been a preparatory school in developing the tools they would need: commitment, hard work, patience, obedience, self-reliance, cooperation, endurance, and, most of all, faith. Faith had sent them on the journey west, faith had brought them to their journey's end, and faith would help them build their Zion. When the journey was hard, many others besides Charles Smith [^88] found strength in the words of the Lord to ancient Israel: "Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice." [^89] The pioneers had met the terms of the covenant. They could now enjoy its blessings.

336Levi Jackman [^90]

336Levi Jackman joined the Church in 1831 and was fifty years old when he made the journey west in Brigham Young's pioneer company. He kept a daily journal of the trek and his first winter in the Valley. He was a keen observer and wrote an unofficial account of that first historic journey to Utah. He also provides insight into the lives of those who remained in the Valley after Brigham Young and other Church leaders returned to the Missouri.

March 29, 1847. I left home in company with Liman Curtis [^91] to join the camp of pioneers to find a home for the Saints somewhere in the Rocky Mountains. I had one yoke of oxen and a wagon. Lyman had one horse. We took breadstuff to last us eighteen months, some beans, a little pork, but we had no groceries for we were not able to get them. My clothing was old and scarce. In this condition we started to go—where, we could not tell or what we should have to contend with. We only knew that we must go and the Lord would attend to bringing out the results.

337We arrived at Winter Quarters on the 31st and after finishing our arrangements we left April 3 and on the sixth we arrived at the Elk Horn where we found four teams that had started before us. We crossed the creek on a raft and waited for the remainder of the camp.

337Saturday, April 10. The main camp commenced crossing the river and finished the next day. The river was about ten rods wide. This place is in latitude 41-46 north and 1,330 miles from the mouth of Bear River where it empties into Salt Lake, according to Fremont's account. [^92]

337Monday, April 12. Brothers Brigham, Kimball and some others returned to hold a council with the remainder of the Twelve who had just returned from the East. The most of the camp of about sixty-three wagons moved on up the Platte about ten miles and awaited their return.

338Thursday, April 15. Brothers Young and Kimball and others returned to our camp on the Platte. The next day, the 16th, the camp was organized and started and went a few miles and camped; when all together the camp was seventy-three wagons and 143 men. The weather was cold—ice three-fourths of an inch thick in the mornings—no grass for our teams; had to chop down cottonwood for browse. This day we traveled about seven miles and camped. It was a cold day.

338Wednesday, April 21. Cold wind N. E. Signs of rain. About 10 a.m. we had got within a few miles of the Pawnee Indian winter quarters, [^93] and some few came out and met us and seemed very friendly. A little after noon we stopped to rest our teams opposite their camp which was on the other side of Loup Fork. The chief and about thirty others soon gathered in. They appeared friendly and wanted presents. But when we did not give them as much powder, tobacco, etc., as they wanted, they went away. Some of them stole a few things, such as bridles, etc.

338We went on about eight miles and camped. To prevent a surprise by the Indians in the night we had a hundred men on guard, fifty at a time. We had some wind and rain and cold. The Pawnees are much fairer complexioned than most other Indians. They had their heads shaved with the exception of a strip about two inches wide from a little back of their foreheads to the back of their necks that was about two inches long and stuck straight up, resembling a rooster's comb. Their dress was a breechclout and a buffalo skin or robe used as a blanket to throw over their shoulders. Some had leggings.

338Thursday, April 22. Fine day. Followed up Loup Fork and a little after noon crossed Beaver Fork, a stream about three rods wide, two and one-half feet deep. The banks were high and steep. We had to attach ropes to the tongues of the wagons and men to the ropes to help the teams up. This is in latitude 41-25. A little before sunset we reached the old Pawnee Mission Station, but it was evacuated. [^94] This is a fine situation.

Friday, April 23. We went up about seven miles and commenced making arrangements for crossing the river, which is about half a mile wide and about three feet deep in some places, with quicksand bottom. We spent the day in preparing for crossing. We had come up the Platte and Loup Fork about 130 miles through as fine a country as I ever saw for farming or grazing. The great difficulty was the lack of timber. We camped about three-fourths of a mile below the old Pawnee town. I went to see the place. It is situated on the north side of the river and on a beautiful plain which is about twenty feet above the river. The plain is about one-half mile wide. Back of that, the ground rises. The town stood on the bank of the river. It contained about 140 lodges.

339Last winter, when the Pawnees were all gone on a hunt, the Sioux Indians came and burned the town, only leaving the chief's lodge which for some reason they left unhurt. The lodges had all been built alike. The one remaining was about forty-five feet on the inside and about fifteen feet high in the center. They were built round with a row of posts about seven feet high standing nearly straight up and down. On the top of these posts were plates to support the upper part. The timbers were put on these plates running quite steep to the top, leaving a hole in the center for the smoke to go out, the fire being in the center of the lodge. From the east side an entry was made running out about twenty feet and of good width.

339The first covering to the lodge was poles running up and down. The next was small poles running round and lashed to the others. The next was long grass laying up and down. Then all was covered with turves of grass. The lodges were all made in that way. They had stables made with poles stuck in the ground, and others running around fastened with strips of rawhide or bark. The timber for all this work had to be brought a number of miles and must have cost a vast amount of hard labor. [ . . . ]

Tuesday, April 27. We left the Loup Fork and went south to strike the Platte. About 10 a.m. we came to where the old grass had been burned and the young grass began to make its appearance. Through all our journey thus far and still further, we had to feed our teams some of our breadstuff to keep them up. At this place we found the first signs of buffalo. Before we reached the Platte bottoms, the ground became so sandy that it looked like a barren desert. We stopped this night on a fine little creek, but found it difficult to find a few dry willows to make a little fire. One antelope was killed. This was the first game of any size that had been killed since we started. Just as we stopped, a gun was carelessly discharged and broke a horse's leg. This was the fourth horse that was lost since Friday. On that night a horse belonging to Brother B. Young got hung by it's halter. [ . . . ]

340Saturday, May 1. Windy and cold. About nine a.m. we saw about fifty buffalo. Our hunters went after them but got none. Soon after, we saw hundreds of them and we got five old ones and a number of calves. This day we passed through what is called a prairie dog town, which covers many acres. These rodents live in holes. We stopped a little before sunset and got in our buffalo meat, which was received with much joy. We had a fine feast that night. We camped on a creek which we called Buffalo Creek. We found some wood. Traveled that day about twelve miles. We have passed through a fine bottom country of good land for some days. The interior is too broken for cultivation.

340Sunday, May 2. Our camp this morning had the appearance of a meat market. All hands were fixing their beef [buffalo] for cooking or drying and making ropes of the hides. The ice was near one-half inch thick this morning but soon came off warm and pleasant.

340We have passed for some days a country of buffalo grass. It resembles blue grass in that it is fine and usually not more than four to six inches high. In many places the grass is fed down by the buffalo so that it has the appearance of an old pasture; only the fence is missing. We went on about three miles to good grass and camped on the bank of the Platte, a little above Grand Island and at the north of a creek that we called Bluff Creek. No wood, only willow brush.

The buffalo meat came good to us, for [Lyman] Curtis and myself had lived on cornmeal bread and water porridge for some time. If only we could get a little milk of John Brown [^95] to put into it. When he could spare it, he would give us some. I shall never forget his kindness to us.

341Monday, May 3. The camp stopped this day to do some blacksmith work and let the teams recruit a little, it being the best place of grass we had found. At the same time a company of twenty hunters went out to hunt and to see the situation of the country ahead of us. About three o'clock they returned and reported that they had discovered a large body of Indians who tried to surround them, but they made their escape. Much anxiety was felt for the hunters who had gone forth, and a company sent out for them. They all returned to safety. They killed two or three antelope and about as many buffalo calves. We saw smoke ahead and found that what little feed there was would soon be destroyed by fire, which would be hard for us.

341Tuesday, May 4 [1847]. We started on but had not gone far before we found that our fears were too true. The Indians had set fire to the old grass which was among the new and all had been burned together, excepting here and there a small spot. The sight was gloomy indeed. At this time a small company of traders was passing down on the other side of the river. One of them came over and informed us that the grass was good on the other side, but after a short consultation we concluded not to cross but continue on the north side because it would be better for our brethren who would follow us. So, after writing a few letters to send back by them, we started on. We traveled about ten miles and camped on a creek which I called Clear Creek. We found grass at this place.

Wednesday, May 5. We found the land more moist and flat than before. The wheels cut in considerably in places. Most of the grass was burned. At about half past four we had to stop because of the smoke and fire ahead, and the wind had blown a furious gale all day from the south. We camped close to the river and put our teams on a small island where there was grass. This day the camp killed one buffalo and five calves. We had plenty of beef, veal and antelope, all first-rate meat. We traveled about ten miles and camped. [ . . . ]

342Friday, May 7. We started late this morning that the teams might have a chance to fill themselves. The wind blew hard from the north and cold. The Indians have camped along the way in large bodies, and the sticks they left and a little driftwood and buffalo dung served for our fuel. The buffalo are so plentiful that it requires a strict watch to keep them and our cows from running together. We can kill all we wish but we kill only what we need to eat. We are in full view of hundreds of them all the time. This day we went about nine miles and camped near the river by a slough. [ . . . ]

342Monday, May 24. It was so cold this morning that we could not keep warm with overcoats and mittens. It snowed a little. The road was quite sandy today. A little before night we discovered a party of Indians on the other side of the river coming up on horses. When they saw that we were going to camp they hoisted the American flag. We answered it with a white one. They then commenced crossing the river. There were about forty of them. They camped on the bank. We camped near about one-half mile back from the river. Some of them came to us and were very friendly. We traveled this day sixteen and one-half miles. (Before this time, Brother William Clayton had fixed a way of measuring the road with the wagon wheel [roadometer].) [^96]

343Tuesday, May 25. The most of the Indians and squaws came to our camp this morning and wanted to trade. Some of our camp traded some cornmeal and bread and got robes, etc. Some traded horses. They were fine-looking people; good behaved and a happy company. They were dressed neat and clean and were truly gentlemen and ladies. When we started they recrossed the river and went on their way. They were a band of the Sioux. Traveled twelve and one-half miles that warm day. [ . . . ]

343Saturday, May 29. Cold, wet morning. Did not start early. For some time past some of the brethren had indulged in many things that were leading them astray, such as dancing too much and playing cards, dice, etc., and using bad language. Brother Young, seeing the situation of the camp, improved an opportunity this morning after the rain had stopped to call the camp together. He reproved them sharply for their conduct and warned them of the distress that would come to them unless they repented and reformed. After much good instruction and admonition, he called on them to know whether they would reform. They covenanted that they would. He appointed the next day for a day of fasting and prayer, and for breaking bread. After noon we traveled eight and one-half miles. It rained smartly before we camped, but stopped before sunset.

343Sunday, May 30. We attended to the duties of the day. A good spirit prevailed and many expressed their determination to do better. [ . . . ]

343Wednesday, June 2, 1847. We spent the day making arrangements for crossing the river to the south side.

343The traders had a flat boat at this place which we hired to cross our train and paid them fifteen dollars for the use of it. They were quite friendly to us. The leaves on the trees are about half grown.

Thursday, June 3. The trader fort stands in the fork between the Platte and the Laramie forks. [^97] The Platte is about twenty rods wide at this place. We commenced crossing but were hindered by rain.

344Friday, June 4. We finished crossing and I went out to the fort, which was about one and one-half miles from the Platte. The walls of the buildings are made of adobes with a door attached to the walls on the inside; one was two stories high. A row of houses also runs through the center of the fort. About forty men belong to this station. Three of our company who had been members of the Mormon Battalion, whose families were left at Pueblo, left our company to go for their families, a distance of 180 miles. We were also joined by a small company of Saints with several wagons and one cart; they had wintered at Pueblo. [^98]

344A little timber stood along the riverbank and a little on the bluffs. I saw in this place a sample of the way the Indians deposit their dead. They roll them in a blanket or buffalo robe and lash them in the forks or to a limb of a tree, high up from the ground. [ . . . ]

344Friday, June 11. Fine weather and mostly good roads. Killed plenty of antelope and some deer. By this time we had to diminish our allowance of bread and eat more meat, which came rather hard on me for fresh meat gave me the bowel complaint. This day we traveled seventeen miles and camped on the river bend. Here we overtook one of the Oregon trains that had passed us. They were crossing the river, but we went farther up to cross.

345Saturday, June 12. I was quite unwell today. We had tolerably good roads. We went eleven miles and reached the main ford. The water was so high that we could not ford it. Our men, who went ahead to prepare for our crossing, had overtaken the first Oregon train and had taken their goods over in a leather boat which we had brought with us from Winter Quarters. They received a fair reward in provisions, which we much needed. The bluffs to the south some miles off were covered in spots with pine or balsam.

345Sunday, June 13. We had a meeting as usual. Brother B[righam]. Young, H[eber]. C. Kimball and O[rson]. Pratt gave good instructions. The provisions received, as before mentioned, were divided in the camp which gave each five and one-half pounds of flour, two of meal and of bacon, all of which was needed, as our provisions were scarce. We had fed so much to our teams to keep them alive. The Lord has, thus far, blessed and preserved us.

345Monday, June 14. We made rafts of pine and fir poles that we had brought from the bluffs or mountains, on which we crossed the river with the wagons; we took the goods in the leather boats. In the afternoon we had a thundershower with heavy wind, which stopped us.

345Wednesday, June 15. We crossed what we could but the water was high and rising. The river at this place is about one-fourth mile wide and ran so swift that we had to tow or pull our raft upstream more than a mile to land at the ferry on the opposite side. The Oregon companies were coming up to us. They wanted we should take them over. We finally concluded to leave a few men with the boat and raft for a few days.

Finally two canoes were made and fastened together, which did well for a ferryboat. After everything was arranged and we had all crossed—as well as some of the other companies—we got ready to start. We were detained at this place until Saturday. We left a company at the ferry to cross the Oregon companies that were continually coming upon us, and we went on. We traveled twenty-seven and one-half miles and camped in a place without much grass. All the wood that we could get through this section of the country was dead wild sage and green bush, a small sort of brush.

346Sunday, June 20. For the want of grass for our teams we went on. We found some small patches of grass and some water in a number of places. We got to Willow Springs about noon which is a good campground for a small camp. We then rose a high hill and from the top we could see beds of snow away south on the mountains. Gravelly hills and a sandy bottom made it hard wheeling.

346Monday, June 21. Some frost this morning near the creek. We passed this morning a number of what we then called salt ponds, but which proved to be saleratus ponds. [^99] We have come south direct for about twelve miles. We reached Stillwater at Independence Rock at noon, and according to our measurement it is 174 1/2 miles from Laramie to Fort John. Some of the men went back at noon and got pails full of the saleratus which proved to be pure and good. [ . . . ]

346Sunday, June 27. The morning is pleasant but cool and frosty. The mountains a little north of us, covered with snow, look a little odd at this season of the year. The scarcity of grass compelled us to go on. We met a company from Oregon, and one old mountaineer, who gave gloomy accounts of the country around Bear River and the Salt Lake. The day was warm and the land loose and gravelly.

346Monday, June 28. Warm day, good roads, level. This afternoon we met Captain [James] Bridger of Fort Bridger. He gave us much information in regard to the Salt Lake country, which was not very favorable. We traveled about fifteen miles today and camped on the Little Sandy. It is about three rods wide and about two feet deep. [ . . . ]

Wednesday, June 30. We struck the Green River at noon; had come eight miles. It is skirted with bitter cottonwood of good size. We had to have rafts to cross on, which were made this afternoon. At this place Sam Brannan from California met us. He brought a good report from that country. [^100]

347Thursday, July 1. We commenced crossing the Green River which is about forty rods wide with a heavy current. It was a job to cross it.

347Sunday, July 4. After crossing the river we traveled three miles down the river where we camped. From here we sent five men back to meet the camp that was coming after us, to take dispatches and to guide them on. The weather was warm and quite a number of our company had been taken sick with mountain fever within a few days past. They would generally get better in two or three days.

347Wednesday, July 7. Crossed Black's Fork a number of times and camped near Fort Bridger. It consisted of three log rooms and a small yard enclosed with pickets. We came this day seventeen and one-fourth miles. On Monday last I was taken violently sick with the mountain fever. I do not know as I ever experienced such excruciating pain before in my life as I did through the night Monday. It was mostly in my back and hips. I am now getting better. There more or less are several taken sick almost every day. The stony ground that we have to travel on makes it very hard for those who have to ride in the wagons. [ . . . ]

Monday, July 12. Better roads. Crossed Deer Creek. The soil looks better. Some herbage on the hills. Found scattering flax for some days past. Brother B. Young was taken sick today where we stopped at noon. He stopped and a few wagons stopped with him. We came sixteen and one-half miles today. We began to find grass quite a plenty. My health remains quite poor so that I am hardly able to walk. It was thought best to send on a few teams and men to look out and fix the road, and the remainder, with most of the sick, to stop a day or two. Accordingly, twenty-three teams started a little after noon on Tuesday 13. We took the valley of Wells Fork and followed it down about twelve miles and camped. Our measuring wagon stayed, so we had to guess the distance.

348Wednesday, July 14. We found scattered flax of good size. The valley was fertile but very narrow and the hills on both sides were several hundred feet high. In many places it was difficult passing. A little before night we struck the Weber Fork and camped. We came about fourteen miles today.

348Thursday, July 15. We wound our way up the ravine to the top of the hill, which was very difficult to ascend, for about seven miles, and raised from four hundred to five hundred feet. We then descended another ravine, equally as bad, and camped after traveling about twelve miles. Curtis was taken sick this evening, and I was far from being well, which made things look rather gloomy. [ . . . ]

348Tuesday, July 20. We left Kenyon Creek [Canyon Creek] this morning and struck up a ravine. Our journey for a number of days has been rather gloomy. The mountains on both sides have been so high and the ravines so crooked that we could see but a short distance ahead and it looked as though we were shut up in a gulch without any chance of escape. The ground was quite rising for about five miles. We found more timber today than we had had since before we left home, but much of it had been killed by fires. After we got to the top of the hill, we had a long, steep hill to go down. [ . . . ]

Thursday, July 22. This morning a part of the camp that we had left came up with us and others had to stop on account of sickness. Our move has been slow for it took all the able-bodied men from one-half to three-fourths of the time to make the road so we went about four miles. We had to pass through a canyon that was full of timber, mostly of small maple, and the bluffs came almost together at the bottom. When we finally got through it, it seemed like bursting from the confines of prison walls into the beauties of a world of pleasure and freedom.

349We now had entered the valley and our vision could extend far and wide. We were filled with joy and rejoicing and thanksgiving. We could see to the west, about thirty miles distance, the Great Salt Lake stretched northwest to a distance unknown to us, and the valley extending far to the north and south. No timber was to be seen. We went on west about two miles and camped on a creek with plenty of grass and some brush for fire. Brother Pratt and others who went out in the morning to explore the country soon joined us. They reported that they found but little timber—only what was in the mountains.

349Friday, July 23. We went a short distance north to a small grove on a little stream and camped. Brother Pratt called the camp together and dedicated this country to the Lord. We then commenced plowing to put in a little early corn, buckwheat, potatoes, peas, beans, etc.

349The soil was good and before night we had put in seed. We felt to thank the Lord that we had been preserved on our journey; that no lives were lost; that we had found a good country of land where we thought our enemies could never find us and where we could worship God unmolested. According to our measure we are 1,040 miles from Winter Quarters.

Saturday, July 24, 1847. About noon Brother Young and company arrived and we had a time of rejoicing together without restraint. We had a meeting with much good instruction. Brother Young said that we should find a place for a permanent location. We should then have our lands set off to us and each one manage his own affairs and work for himself, etc. We had men out every day exploring the country and it was found that there was a large amount of timber in the mountains, though mostly hard to get at. The timber was mostly pine and balsam with some oak brush and ash. [ . . . ]

350July 28, Tuesday. This is my fiftieth birthday. This evening Brother Young called the camp together and the men who had been exploring made their report. They had found no place that looked so well as this place. Many of the brethren expressed their feelings and all seemed to feel that this was the place to stop. Brother Young then said that he wanted to know how the brethren felt in regard to it; but he knew that this was the place for the city, for he had seen it before (in vision), and that we were now standing on the southeast corner of the temple block. He said many other things which did us good.

350A vote was taken then on the subject and all voted that this be the place to stop. It was then advised that we build a fort to protect ourselves from the Indians. The plan was that it should be made of sun-dried brick, or adobes, enclosing forty squares of land. The wall to be ten feet high, which was to form the back side of the houses, and to have one large gate on each side of the square. I presume that a colony was never settled under so many disadvantages as this.

350The appearance of the country was truly forbidding. The face of the earth had the appearance of a barren desert. No grass, only on the streams or on low land. Nothing green on the remainder. The mountaineers said that grain would not grow here for they had tried it and every appearance went to prove the fact. All we had was in our wagons. Our tools for farming, etc., our seed, our clothing, our provisions to last till we could raise some, if that ever was. In fact, our all. Out of the reach of commerce, and one thousand miles from any settlement to the East rendered the hope of assistance out of the question, no odds what our wants might be. We must depend on God and do the best we can, feeling, however, that the mobs would not be likely to disturb us for a few years at least. So we took courage and went to work, some at farming and some on the walls of the fort.

About this time a part of the Mormon Battalion arrived, which gave us joy. It was deemed advisable to send back as many teams to Winter Quarters as could be spared to help others the next spring.

351Accordingly, as soon as they had time to recuperate a little, the ox teams started back. Curtis went with my team, which left me without any; and what was worse, I had not provisions to last me more than six or eight days. Brother Kimball advised me to stay, which I was willing to do, for to go back was like going to the land of sorrow and death. I felt sure that the Lord would preserve us in some way and that seemed to be the feeling of all of us.

351About two weeks after the ox teams started, Brothers Young and Kimball and others started back with the horse teams. Taking out so many reduced our number to a few; but we drove business to the best advantage that we could, soon expecting a company of our brethren with their families to arrive. We expected there would be about one hundred families of them from Winter Quarters, and I was anxious for their arrival as I expected my son, Ammi, was with them. [^101]

351My provisions were soon gone. Brother [Shadrach] Roundy had gone back and left his flour with me. He said that if his family was not on the way he would go on, and in this case I could use his breadstuff. So when mine was gone I used some of his. He, however, met his family and came back.

351About September 20, the camps began to arrive, but instead of one hundred families, there were about 660 wagons and many of the teams were driven by women and children, the men being either dead or in the army [Mormon Battalion]. The camp had lost many of their cattle by disease and starvation. Only two or three deaths had taken place among the people.

351About the middle of September, we had a frost which killed some of our crops. Soon afterward they were all destroyed by the cattle, the land not being fenced. Now the cattle are guarded. But we had proved that the earth would produce grain, etc.

September 30. I went out about ten miles and met Ammi in a train. Our meeting was one of joy, being in a land far from our former home and under these peculiar circumstances with no other connections within one thousand miles. I had not seen him for more than two years.

352In a few days all the camps got in, which made a large show. Up to this time I had hoped that I should have received some help from my company of ten which I had belonged to in the East, but none; and every visible prospect for a living was cut off. Some of those who came had got plenty for themselves; while others had scarcely any left. It looked like a dark day, but I consoled myself by thinking that I was in the line of my duty, and that this was the work of the Lord and He would see us safely through. So I felt to resign myself into His hands.

352We found now that our fort, which contained 160 rooms, would house only about one-fourth of the people. It being too late to make adobes the most of the people got some kind of timber for houses and enlarged the fort on the north and south, making from north to south 160 rods and forty east and west. Some of the brethren who had nothing to eat got a chance to work for some who had plenty, thus receiving board for their work, which was better than to starve.

352I went to making door and window frames out of split timber and got some provisions for it and some work on my house, firewood, etc. I moved into my house or shop the latter part of November. I lived alone.

352A high council was organized soon after the companies came in, and I had the honor of being chosen one of them. In the forepart of November, we sent a company to California to get some spring wheat and other seeds, and cows, and to make such trades as they thought best, in the name of the people. This undertaking was a very hazardous and hard enterprise—to start a journey of hundreds of miles at this late season of the year, through an untraveled mountain region, and none of them knowing the way.

353About this time more of the Battalion arrived from California. They were destitute of means of subsistence, which made our case look much worse than it did before. Winter had come on and it must be a long time before we could raise our own bread, if ever.

353A number of the Battalion started back to Winter Quarters to their families. Our main dependence for living was our cattle and many of them had been sent back. The remainder were very poor, which was rather slim picking. A few Indians came and camped near us for the winter. They lived mostly on seeds and roots and wolf meat. We found they eat the large thistle root. I went out to get some one day, but by the time I had got about a bushel the snow fell and covered the ground and I could find no more. I only regretted that I could not get enough of them; they tasted much like a parsnip. I have to eat very sparingly, and frequently do not know where the next bite is coming from; yet the Lord opens the way for my support and preservation.

353January 1848. Being without a first presidency seemed to give the people a chance to show out what was in them. It having cost the people so much to fetch provisions so far, some appeared to be disposed to make the necessities of the destitute their opportunity, and sold things, I thought, rather high. I feared that such a principle, if not checked, might prove our destruction. I went to Father John Smith, who was then the president of the place, [^102] and recommended that prices should be set by the council for labor, provisions, etc. The proposition was opposed, but it was finally carried into effect and the results were good. Some few were not pleased with the arrangements, but it changed the drift of things much for the better.

The most of the people were desirous to do right and were kind and did all they could to help the poor and the needy and to build up the kingdom of God on earth. I had expected that we had left the thieves behind, but in this I was disappointed for we found that they were in this place too. As fast as they were detected, they were dealt with according to law.

354A spirit of dissatisfaction began to show itself as to the country and against our leaders. Some wanted to go to California and were determined they would go at all hazards. The council took the subject into consideration.

354Not knowing what influence they might use in that place, and for other reasons, we passed a law that none would be permitted to go until the presidency should return next season. Yet some did start and we sent the marshal and brought them back. They, however, got permission to go from somebody, and they started on again. I must acknowledge I thought it bad policy but it was not for me to judge. It seemed to give them power over the council, and others took license from it to do a little more as they pleased. I thought that we had better have no law than to have it trampled underfoot.

354The winter has been very mild, with but little snow in the valley. Cattle have lived well by grazing. The large wolves have killed some of our oxen and cows, and the Indians near Utah Lake have driven off some stock which was truly a loss to us under our impoverished circumstances. But we hope for better times.

354Notwithstanding the dissension and covetousness that was among us, take us as a whole we enjoyed ourselves and were as happy a people as could be found in any place.

355On March 12, a company of seven men started for Winter Quarters with the mail. Ammi was one of them. It was a hard and hazardous undertaking; over one thousand miles to go at this season of the year without an inhabitant only at Bridger and Laramie; perhaps to lose their way in the mountains or on the plains, or to be killed by the Indians. But the mail must go. I felt bad for Ammi under such circumstances, but I believed the Lord would preserve them, although they might have to suffer much.

355Both did take place. They narrowly escaped death by the Indians and by freezing and starvation; yet they got through alive and were joyfully received by the presidency and all the Saints. I felt rather lonely for awhile, not having any connections within one thousand miles. Yet in the main I enjoyed myself well.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:444.
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:445. Israel, in this instance, referred to the Indians, or remnants of the Lamanites, descendants of the house of Israel.
[^9] When the Nauvoo Charter was revoked some months after the death of Joseph Smith, the citizens renamed Nauvoo the City of Joseph.
[^10] "Life of George Whitaker, A Utah Pioneer, as written by himself," 8, typescript, Utah State Historical Society.
[^11] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:468.
[^12] Reminiscences of Louisa Barnes Pratt (1879), LDS Church Archives.
[^13] Bathsheba W. Smith described the city as "one vast mechanic shop, as nearly every family was engaged in making wagons. Our parlor was used as a paint-shop for the wagons. All were making preparations to leave the ensuing winter." In Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877; reprint, Salt Lake City, 1975), 321.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535.
[^15] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535-36. See also "Life of George Whitaker," 9.
[^16] As early as May 1842, Joseph Smith had introduced the temple ordinances to several of his closest associates, and before his death as many as sixty-five men and women had received all of the temple ordinances. Frequently noting that he might not live long enough to teach the endowment ceremony in the temple, he presciently endowed these trusted followers in preparation of performing the saving ordinances to the body of the Church. For details of this selected "endowment group," see Andrew F. Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances and the 1844 Mormon Succession Question" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1982).
[^17] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:541-42. The temple was dedicated privately by Joseph Young on 30 April and publicly from 1-3 May by Orson Hyde. Thousands of Saints attended the services. Wilford Woodruff addressed three thousand Saints at the temple on 10 May.
[^18] Reminiscences of Sarah De Armon Pea Rich (1885-93), LDS Church Archives.
[^19] From a variety of sources, Susan Easton Black sets the Nauvoo population at eleven thousand in 1845, but there may well have been several thousand more throughout Hancock County and environs and in Iowa settlements along the Mississippi River. See Black, "How Large Was the Population of Nauvoo?" Brigham Young University Studies 35, no. 2 (1995): 91-94.
[^20] Eliza Cheney to Parents, Brothers and Sisters, January 1848, in Historical Letters and Sketches, 1841-1919, Eliza Jane Rawson Collection, LDS Church Archives.
[^21] Frederick A. Norwood, Strangers and Exiles: A History of Religious Refugees, 2 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1969) 2:246.
[^22] In November 1845, Willard Richards, Church historian, made a plea to the Saints to collect and bring to him any records, documents, maps, charts, books, or information of any kind relating to the Church and requested all missionaries to submit a written report of their experiences if they had not done so, all to be included in The General History of the Church. See Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:526. Eliza R. Snow preserved the minutes of the Nauvoo Relief Society, which she carried with her throughout Utah territory when she organized Relief Societies in 1867-68. These minutes were of special value to the women of the Church, containing the carefully recorded words of the Prophet Joseph Smith to them, outlining their responsibilities, position, and privileges within the Church.
[^23] The Nauvoo Temple bell was crafted in England, cast in bronze, and sent under the care of Wilford Woodruff to hang in the tower of the temple even before the temple was completed. When the Saints abandoned Nauvoo, the bell was taken down and hung in the belfry of the Methodist Church, from which it was later removed by a group of Mormons who carried it safely to Winter Quarters and from thence to the Salt Lake Valley in the first company to follow the pioneer company. It was finally installed in a campanile on Temple Square under the auspices of the Relief Society in 1942, the hundredth anniversary of that society's founding. For more information, see Mary Grant Judd, "A Monument with a Message," Relief Society Magazine 29 (January 1942): 12, and Lois Leetham Tanner, "Old Bell, Temple Bell," unpublished paper in author's possession.
[^24] Sally Randall to Parents, Brothers and Sisters, 1 June 1846, in Letters of Sally Randall, LDS Church Archives.
[^25] History of the Church 7:464-65.
[^26] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:578-79.
[^27] Helen Mar Whitney, "Our Travels Beyond the Mississippi," Woman's Exponent 12 (1 December 1883): 83. Her account is made up of her own reminiscences and the daily journal of her husband, Horace Whitney, as well as other pertinent documents and personal accounts.
[^28] Samuel Brannan, born in 1819 in Maine, was baptized into the Church sometime in the 1840s after becoming acquainted with William Smith, the Prophet's brother. Supporting William Smith's claim to succeed Joseph Smith as prophet, Brannan was disfellowshipped but later reaffiliated with the Church. In New York he published first The Prophet and later The Messenger before his appointment by Orson Pratt to lead the Brooklyn Saints to California. He died in California in 1889.
[^29] All but twelve of the original voyagers reached California, with two additional passengers born on the way.
[^30] "The Ship Brooklyn Saints," in Kate B. Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1960) 3:473-587.
[^31] Susan Easton Black describes this and other unfortunate incidents during the Iowa portion of the exodus in "Suffering and Death on the Plains of Iowa," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 431-39.
[^32] The oft-told story of nine women giving birth at Sugar Creek or one of the other temporary campsites is difficult to corroborate since there are no contemporary accounts. Eliza R. Snow is credited with being the original source, having "heard" that nine babies were born one fearful night, a statement quoted in Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom, 307. Her account is defended by Richard Bennett in "Eastward to Eden: The Nauvoo Rescue Missions," Dialogue: A Journal of Mormon Thought 19 (Winter 1986): 107. Carol Lynn Pearson argues that additional evidence suggests that the event took place not in Sugar Creek in February but instead in October 1846 among the "Poor Camp." See "'Nine Children Were Born': A Historical Problem from the Sugar Creek Episode," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 441-44.
[^33] William G. Hartley has identified these three distinct migrating periods and noted that many of those who left in the spring, as planned, made it to the Missouri before those who had left in the winter. See Hartley, "Spring Exodus from Nauvoo: Act Two in the Mormon Evacuation Drama," in Susan Easton Black and William G. Hartley, eds., Iowa Mormon Trail: Legacy of Faith and Courage (Orem, Utah: Helix Publishing, 1997), 61-84. The later groups did not have the company of Church leaders, for the most part, and traveled in collections of family groups. Many traveled independently.
[^34] Diary of Emmeline B. Wells, 27 February 1846, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^35] Helen Mar Whitney, "Our Travels Beyond the Mississippi," 83. William Purdy presents a brief history of Pitt's band in "They Marched Their Way West: The Nauvoo Brass Band," Ensign 10 (July 1980): 21-23.
[^36] Stegner, The Gathering of Zion, 81.
[^37] An accurate count of the company assembled at Sugar Creek is impossible. According to Stanley B. Kimball, a historian of the trail, there were likely about three thousand individuals and five hundred wagons, with close to ten thousand Saints left in Nauvoo and the surrounding area. Most of them would follow by the end of September. See Kimball, Historic Resource Study: Mormon Pioneer National Historic Trail (Washington, D.C.: United States Department of the Interior/National Park Service, 1991), 36-37. The term Camp of Israel was usually applied to this first group of pioneers. Eliza R. Snow perpetuated the name as well as the Israel analogy through her series of poems written on the trail entitled "Camp of Israel." See Eliza R. Snow, An Immortal (Salt Lake City: Nicholas G. Morgan, Sr. Foundation, 1957): 247-51. She also left a legacy of comfort poems memorializing the many deaths that occurred along the trail.
[^38] See Stanley B. Kimball, "Social Life on the Mormon Trail and the Meaning of the Camp of Israel: An Essay," in Black and Hartley, eds., The Iowa Mormon Trail, 85-104.
[^39] N. B. Lundwall, comp., Exodus of Modern Israel, From the Diary of Orson Pratt and Others (Salt Lake City: N. B. Lundwall, n.d.), 19.
[^40] Journal of Jean Rio Griffiths Baker Pearce, 2 May 1851, typescript, LDS Church Archives.
[^41] Diary of Joseph Fielding (December 1843-March 1859), 149, LDS Church Archives.
[^42] "Original Historical Narrative of Lucy Meserve Smith" (1888-1890), LDS Church Archives.
[^43] Details surrounding the writing of this famous hymn can be found in Paul E. Dahl, "'All is Well . . . ': The Story of 'the Hymn That Went around the World,'" Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 515-27. Dahl notes that while William Clayton wrote that Ellen Kimball (wife of Heber C. Kimball) brought him the news of his new son, having read it in a letter she received from Nauvoo, Helen Mar Kimball Whitney claims credit for breaking the news to Clayton. See ibid., 518.
[^44] "A Morning in Camp," Woman's Exponent 29 (15 July, 1 August 1900): 17-18.
[^45] In Andrew Jenson, "Church Emigration," The Contributor 13 (December 1891): 80.
[^46] "Life of George Whitaker," 19. See also Lundwall, Exodus of Modern Israel, 24.
[^47] Information on Garden Grove is taken from Leland H. Gentry, "The Mormon Way Stations: Garden Grove and Mt. Pisgah," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 445-61; and Karla Gunzenhauser, "The Settlement at Garden Grove, Iowa," The Nauvoo Journal 6 (Fall 1994): 14-44.
[^48] Autobiography of Luman Shurtliff, typescript condensation of original journal, 89, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, as quoted in Gunzenhauser, "Settlement at Garden Grove," 17.
[^49] Gentry, "Mormon Way Stations," 445-53. More information about Garden Grove can be found in the journals kept of the Iowa trek. An early study of Garden Grove is Lynn Robert Webb, "The Contributions of the Temporary Settlements of Garden Grove, Mount Pisgah, and Kanesville, Iowa, to Mormon Emigration, 1846-1852" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1954).
[^50] As quoted in Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom, 314-15. A splendid compilation of Eliza R. Snow's personal writings with detailed annotation is Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995).
[^51] Emily Partridge Young to Brigham Young, August 1846, quoted in Dean C. Jessee, "Brigham Young's Family: The Wilderness Years," in The Exodus and Beyond: Essays in Mormon History, ed. Donald Q. Cannon and Lyndon W. Cook (Salt Lake City: Hawkes Publishing, Inc., 1980), 29.
[^52] Statement appears on a monument at Mount Pisgah, Iowa.
[^53] William Huntington, "A Brief Sketch of the Travel of William Huntington and his Family in Company with the Saints Who Left Nauvoo in the Winter of 1846," 26 June 1846, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^54] Reminiscences of Sarah Pea Rich, 28.
[^55] See "Narrative of Lucy Meserve Smith."
[^56] B. H. Roberts, A Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 6 vols. (reprint, Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1965) 3:60-121. Many studies have been done on the Battalion. See John F. Yurtinus, "A Ram in the Thicket," 2 vols. (Ph.D. diss., Brigham Young University, 1975); Norma Baldwin Ricketts, The Mormon Battalion, United States Army of the West, 1846-1848 (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1996).
[^57] Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 11:386-88.
[^58] The Pioneer, January-February 1994, 14.
[^59] General Epistle from the Council of Twelve Apostles, 23 December 1847, Millennial Star 10 (15 March 1848): 82.
[^60] "Historical Sketch of James Hendricks and Drusilla Dorris Hendricks," typescript copy, 26-27, LDS Church Archives.
[^61] Kanesville, Iowa, even more than Winter Quarters, played an important role in the history of the Church while the Saints occupied land by the Missouri River. Little published material is available on Thomas L. Kane, after whom Kanesville was named. Studies currently available are Albert Zobell, Sentinel in the East: A Biography of Thomas L. Kane (Salt Lake City: Nicholas G. Morgan Sr., 1965) and Leonard J. Arrington, "'In Honorable Remembrance': Thomas L. Kane's Services to the Mormons," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 389-402. Kane's papers now reside in Special Collections of the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University.
[^62] Richard E. Bennett analyzes the rescue efforts of the "poor camps" in "Eastward to Eden: The Nauvoo Rescue Missions," Dialogue 19 (Winter 1986): 100-108.
[^63] Diary of Orval Morgan Allen, 9 October 1846, microfilm of holograph, LDS Church Archives. Thomas Bullock also details the experience in his diary and in a letter to Elder Franklin Richards published in the Millennial Star 10 (15 January 1848): 28-29 and republished in Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 8:237. Carter has collected many other accounts of this event, which are published in her various series of pioneer stories.
[^64] Helen Mar Whitney, "Scenes and Incidents at Winter Quarters," Woman's Exponent 13 (15 February 1885): 139.
[^65] For more concrete details about the layout and living conditions of Winter Quarters and vicinity, see Richard Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri: 1846-1852 (Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1987), 68-90. While population figures vary from study to study, those used here have been taken from Bennett's calculations. Bathsheba W. Smith provides a good description of the housing at Winter Quarters and some of the early activities in Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom, 322-23. Mary Haskin Parker Richards's diary is another good source. See Maurine Carr Ward, Winter Quarters: The 1846-1848 Life Writings of Mary Haskin Parker Richards (Logan, Utah: Utah State University Press, 1996).
[^66] Reminiscences of Jane Snyder Richards, holograph, LDS Church Archives.
[^67] Fanny Murray to Gould and Laura Murray, 5 July 1847, in Helen Mar Whitney Papers, LDS Church Archives.
[^68] Bennett, Mormons at the Missouri, 119.
[^69] The three trustees were John S. Fullmer, Joseph L. Heywood, and Almon W. Babbitt.
[^70] Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 2:224.
[^71] Reminiscences of Sarah Pea Rich, 32-33.
[^72] "Narrative of Lucy Meserve Smith."
[^73] "Martha Pane Jones Thomas," in Daniel Stillwell Thomas Family History (Salt Lake City: Kate Woodhouse Kirkham, 1927).
[^74] "Sarah Beriah Fiske Allen Ricks," in Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 11:135-44.
[^75] "Travels Beyond the Mississippi," Woman's Exponent 13 (1 October 1884): 105.
[^76] "Mary Fielding Smith," in Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 19:212.
[^77] Statistical accounts vary. Some historians feel that the figure of six hundred deaths most often quoted is inflated, basing their claim on existing cemetery records. The figures used in this study are taken from calculations made by professional demographers and published in an excellent study of Winter Quarters by Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, "Women in Winter Quarters," in Beecher, Eliza and Her Sisters (Salt Lake City: Aspen Press, 1991), 89-91, esp. fn. 40. Certainly the personal accounts show that the Saints themselves were devastated by the heavy death toll that seemed to touch every family.
[^78] "Scenes and Incidents at Winter Quarters," Woman's Exponent 14 (15 February 1886): 134.
[^79] Thomas and Sarah Colburn to Daniel Bown, 6 September 1846, LDS Church Archives.
[^80] Eliza Cheney to Parents, Brothers and Sisters, January 1848, LDS Church Archives.
[^81] The journal of Mary Haskin Parker Richards is often cited in the various accounts of Winter Quarters. A brief but insightful review of the journal is Maurine Carr Ward, "A Journey in the Wilderness: The Life of Mary Haskin Parker Richards at the Missouri River, 1846-1848," The Nauvoo Journal 7 (Fall 1995): 17-23. See also Ward, Winter Quarters: The 1846-1848 Life Writings of Mary Haskin Parker Richards.
[^82] Ann Cannon Woodbury in Cannon Family Historical Treasury, ed. Beatrice Cannon Evans and Janath Russell Cannon (Salt Lake City: George Cannon Family Association, 1967).
[^83] The diaries of Eliza R. Snow and Patty Sessions contain the most complete accounts of these gatherings. Helen Mar Whitney also describes such meetings in the Kimball family after Eliza R. Snow left for the West in June 1847. See Beecher, "Women in Winter Quarters," 93-97; Beecher, The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow, 112, 166-77; and Whitney, Woman's Exponent 14 (1 January 1886): 133. Patty Sessions' diary, edited by Donna Smart, will be published soon by Utah State University Press, part of a series under the general editorship of Maureen Beecher.
[^84] Journal of Rhoda Ann Marvin Fullmer, 4-5, LDS Church Archives. Rhoda provided for her family for two years before leaving for Salt Lake Valley in 1850 with the assistance of the Perpetual Emigrating Fund. She met her husband at a ferry crossing of the Platte River, where he had been assigned to work. He was able to provide the means for her and their children to continue the journey "with comfort and plenty."
[^85] Journal of Barbara Ann Ewell Evans, in Bishop David Evans and His Family (Provo, UT: J. Grant Stevenson, 1972), 49-53.
[^86] At this point, the Quorum consisted of Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt, Willard Richards, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith, Amasa Lyman, and Ezra T. Benson, who were together at the Missouri. John Taylor and Parley P. Pratt were with the Saints in Utah, and Lyman Wight was in Texas.
[^87] Roberts, Comprehensive History 3:317, fn. 19.
[^88] When the Saints moved their headquarters from Winter Quarters on the west bank of the Missouri in early 1848 to Kanesville on the east bank, they dismantled and then torched their buildings and little remained of Winter Quarters except the cemetery.
[^89] For details, see William G. Hartley, "The Great Florence Fitout of 1861," BYU Studies 24 (Summer 1984): 341-71.
[^90] "Sarah Birch Waters," in Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage 11:164.
[^91] "Autobiography of John Lingen," in Kate B. Carter, comp., Treasures of Pioneer History, 6 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1952-1957) 1:238.
[^92] "Life of George Whitaker, A Pioneer, as written by himself," typescript, Utah State Historical Society.
[^93] This was the treaty, signed 16 September 1846 by the Quincy Committee, which called for the removal of the Saints from Nauvoo and an end to hostilities.
[^94] He arrived at Nauvoo from England 27 March 1845 and left 9 February 1846.
[^95] Mary Ann, his only wedded sibling at the time, married Richard Harrison in 1836 in England.
[^96] The tithing office was probably near the Ambrosia Branch, a few miles west of Montrose.
[^97] Thankful Halsey Pratt died in giving birth to Parley 25 March 1837 in Kirtland, Ohio.
[^98] Possibly David Rogers, who was converted to the Church during Parley P. Pratt's mission to New York.
[^99] William Huntington was called to preside. Charles C. Rich was his counselor.
[^100] Reuben Hedlock, the presiding elder in London, organized an "Emigration Fund" in which English members contributed funds for stock. The members were promised that the money was being used to help poverty-stricken emigrants, but Hedlock and two partners were using the money for their own personal use. Parley P. Pratt had to remove Hedlock and straighten out the Church's financial affairs in England.
[^101] John VanCott's mother, Lovinia Pratt, was a sister of Parley's father, Jared Pratt.
[^102] Parley P. Pratt's wife Sarah Huston had given birth to Julia on 1 April, seven days before Parley arrived home.
