Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

355George Washington Hill [^1]

George Washington Hill left his home in Dallas County, Missouri, in 1846 after becoming converted to Mormonism through his associations with a Mormon girl, Cynthia Utley Stewart. After marrying, they left Dallas County with Cynthia's large family, which included her mother, her numerous siblings, and her uncle's family, determined, he wrote, to find "the Church of Christ and identify myself with [it] and to cast my lot with theirs, come weal or woe." Finding the Saints in Mount Pisgah, he moved to the Boyer River, where he settled his family for the winter. He was baptized in June 1847 and traveled with his large family in the Abraham O. Smoot company, which left Winter Quarters later that month. He was glad "to get away from that inhospitable place with life even," he wrote, "for we did not think we should have had even that if we had remained much longer."

356In June, 1846, [I] bade adieu to home and friends by the ties of nature, and launched forth into the wide world with a large family to see to and very little means to see to them with, but placing my trust in God. Like Abraham of old, I started forth to a strange land. I knew not where, but determined to find the Church of Christ and identify myself with, to cast my lot with, theirs, come weal or woe. It did not matter with me if I knew I was right; I did not care what country I got to if I was able to find the Church.

356We took our course for Warsaw [Missouri], thinking that by the time we had crossed the Osage River we should be able to learn the whereabouts of the Church. In this we were disappointed, for we could not learn anything definite about them, only that they had left Nauvoo for the wilderness. I knew that they were north of us somewhere, so I determined to steer north until we would strike their trail, and I knew that once on their trail we could follow them up so we turned our course for Boonville [Copper Co., Missouri], crossed the Missouri River at that place, still getting no tidings of the Mormons. We passed on up by the way of Keitsville [Keytesville, Chariton Co.]. Sometimes we would hear they were up in Davies County, sometimes that they were already out on the plains. Getting so many reports, and no two of them alike, we hardly knew what course to pursue.

I was musing on these different reports as we were traveling along in a big plain road when we came to where there was a dim road turned off to the right, like an old wood road that did not look like as though there had been a wagon on it for a year. But I did not want to travel the course we were going any longer, now we had got across Grand River. I felt all of a sudden as soon as we crossed the river that I wanted to go more to the right, and as soon as my eye caught sight of this old road, the spirit seemed to say, "Take that road." I turned my team into it and went right along without asking anybody where it went or how far it was to the end of it. After I had taken this road I was satisfied again with our course.

357The same evening the little one-horse wagon my mother-in-law [Ruthinda Baker Stewart] rode in broke down, every spoke in one hind wheel breaking. We now seemed to be in a fix. There was no blacksmith nor wagon shop in twenty miles of us, as I knew of, but I thought there had to be a first time to do anything, and although I had never done anything of the kind I knew we could not stop there to hunt for somebody that knew how to do such work. So away I went to a field that happened to be in about half a mile and got a rail out of the fence and went to work with a dull axe, a dull hand saw and a dull drawing knife, which was all the tools we had, filled the wheel, put on the tire and started on in one day, thinking I had done very well in my first attempt at wagon making. Although I had seen nicer jobs done, still it answered our purpose very well. I had this job to do twice that summer, but after I had performed my first feat I did not mind it for I thought I was getting to be quite a wagon maker.

357After following this old road some forty or fifty miles it brought us to Kelsey's Mills. [^2] Here we got the first correct information that we had had at all about the Mormons. We learned that they had established a resting place about eighty miles from here that they called [Mount] Pisgah. We learned also that it was the council to exc[h]ange our horses for oxen as they would travel better on grass than horses. This suited me and seemed to be good council, so we stopped here one week trading our horses for cattle.

Here were the first Mormon elders that I had ever seen. Their names were Thomas Workman and Samuel Branon. [^3] They went with me all around the country and were of good service to me, assisting me to trade. Resting here for a week was also of great benefit to my wife as her health had been very poor for some time.

358After having finished our trading, resting one week, and obtaining supplies, we resumed our journey. A few days brought us to Pisgah. This was a place that President Young had prepared for a resting place for the poor that could not prosecute the journey. It was a nice-looking place situated on Grand River (probably Soldier River now). Here I rented a log house for a short time, but I did not feel satisfied. Here I found the heads of the Church had gone on to the Missouri River. I wanted to get near to where the heads of the Church were, thinking I would get more information than I could back in the rear, and then I did not like Grand River for winter.

358Accordingly, in a few days I took James W. Stewart [his brother-in-law] with me and went on to the Missouri River. Here I found an uncle to my wife, William Stewart, with whom we stopped a day or two and then returned to Pisgah in time to be at the confinement of my wife on the twenty-second of August, 1846. My oldest son [George R.] was born at Mt. Pisgah, then Pottawattamie County in the State of Iowa.

358In about two weeks after this event I took the teams and went back to Kelsey's Mills after provisions I had bought and left there as we came out. I was gone between two and three weeks on this trip. When I returned, I found my wife and child well, as well as the rest of the family. During my absence one of my neighbors had killed two of my cows, quite a loss to me as we were where I could not replace them. I brought him up before Charles C. Rich, who was left there to preside, but was told plainly that, as I did not belong to the Church, that my testimony could not be taken against one who did belong to the Church. This seemed rather hard for me to bear, as if I could not tell the truth before being baptised. Still, I passed over it as well as I could.

359About the first of October, we hitched up and rolled out for the Missouri River and selected a place for wintering on the Booyou River on account of the joint rushes that grew there in abundance and keep green all winter; stock do well on joint rushes. Here I had my last cow stolen and had one mare and colt drowned in Booyou River. [^4]

359Here we had a very hard-winter and were very poorly prepared for it; we had a very hard time. I built a small log house with a chimney, made of sods cut out with a space. We were very poorly clad, poorly fed, poorly housed, and I think the most severe winter I ever experienced. It seemed as if the adversary was determined to leave no stone unturned that would discourage me or that would hinder me in the prosecution of the journey or the accomplishing of the purpose for which I had set out, but I had endeavored to count the cost before starting and I had determined to go through if I had to go alone and on foot with nothing, realizing that the Saviour's words were just as true when he said, "He that will not leave father and mother, houses and lands, wives and children, is not worthy of me" [Matthew 10:37], and also, "He that putteth his hand to the plow and looketh back is not worthy of me" [Luke 9:62], as when he said, "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved" [Mark 16:16]. So that the exertions of the adversary were all wasted on me; they never served to discourage me in the least. They had but one effect on me, and that was to make me weep when alone that circumstances were so hard with me and that I could not provide any better for those that were dependent on me during this winter.

We had a good many councils as to how we should provide for the journey in the spring. We had neither money nor teams and provisions suffucient for the journey, and how to obtain them was the great consideration with us. My wife's mother had an old negro woman slave she wanted the boys, some of them, to take her off to Missouri and sell her, as she had become dissatisfied and did not want to go any farther, but they refused. It was finally decided that I should do this job.

360Finally I consented to take her and do the best I could with her, so I got one of the boys to go with me as far as Council Point where I sold her to Captain Whitehead for fifty dollars in cash, two cows, two yoke of cattle and one wagon. The wagon, oxen and cows I had to go to Missouri after. I sent every cent of the money home with the boy that went with me lest I should be obliged to spend some of it for something to eat. And away I went after the cows and oxen, and this was quite a severe job, as I had two cows to drive loose and the oxen and wagon, this giving me plenty of exercise. In fact, it kept me running nearly all the time. The snow was pretty deep and the wind came howling down the Missouri Bottoms, driving the snow in my face for four of the coldest successive days that I had ever experienced.

360I finally arrived home with my cows, oxen and wagon without injury except that I had frozen my ears, but I thought I got off well at that. My wife's mother was well pleased with what I had done and promised me one of the cows, but I never realized the promise.

We remained in this place until about the middle of February when I concluded to move over into Winter Quarters and get to work preparing [for] the journey the following summer. We were now busy fitting up the pioneers. I now tried to get my oldest brother-in-law [James Wesley Stewart] to remain and bring on his mother and brothers and sisters and let me go on with the pioneers, but he absolutely refused, said he would have nothing to do with bringing that great family of children into the wilderness to starve to death, but offered to go with the pioneers himself if I would remain and bring on the family. To this I finally gave my consent and went to work and fitted my own team and wagon. In company with my wife's uncle, William Stewart, we got our team and outfit fitted up according to requirement and started them off with the pioneers about the middle of April, 1847.

361I now turned my attention to getting ready for following with the families. This involved another trip to Missouri, a distance of one hundred and twenty-five miles and back, making some two hundred and fifty miles. With ox teams that had to travel over one thousand miles with heavy loads and without roads to travel on, there was only one thing that made the venture to start from the Missouri River in 1847, and that was the health of my wife. She had taken the scurvy in the winter superinduced by our living as we did without vegetables. And as soon as the weather began to get warmer in the spring, she got worse instead of better and came very near dying. In fact, I had no hopes for her but to get on the road traveling as soon as possible, thinking a change of scenery, a change of air, and a change of water might be beneficial to her. I was determined to try it, let the consequences be what they might. I knew that we did not have money enough to get a decent outfit to go with, but I would have preferred to have started with my gun only and to have taken my chance as an Indian rather than to have remained in that inhospitable region with the scurvy taking the people off by the hundreds as it was doing.

Accordingly, I took what money we had, and taking G. R. Stewart [his brother-in-law] with me to drive one of the teams, away we went to Missouri to get an outfit which consisted of three hundred and fifty pounds of corn to each one in the family. This was to do us some eighteen months and would leave us at least one thousand miles from where we could procure fresh supplies in case we did not raise anything the next year. You may think this was a very hazardous undertaking; well, we thought so too, but the stakes were terrible we had to play.

362Shortly after my return I was baptized by Br. Benjamin S. Clapp at Winter Quarters, now Florence; this was in the fore part of June. We now hastened our departure from winter quarters, glad to get away from that inhospitable place with life even, for we did not think we should have had even that if we had remained much longer. We made our way as best we could to the Elkhorn River to the place where we could be organized for the journey. Here we had to make a raft of logs to ferry ourselves over the river. I assissted to ferry the whole of the companies, consisting of some five hundred and sixty wagons, over this river on a log raft, accomplishing this feat without accident of any note. We were here organized into A[braham]. O. Smoot's hundred, Major [Samuel] Russel's fifty, and Samuel Turnbow's ten.

I had now got fairly started on the journey. It was amusing to see us with our oxen, cows and two-year-olds all yoked up, and in some instances the yearlings, as we thought that even yearlings could pull something, following the tracks the pioneers had made through the illimitable prarie, going we knew not where, but determined to seek an asylum where Christian charity would never come, notwithstanding our destitute condition. We left, indeed, without a regret. For some five hundred miles we traveled in one body as much as possible for protection against Indians that swarmed in thousands over the plains. As soon as we had got fairly under way I was appointed hunter for the company. This increased my labors a great deal, for whenever we were in camp I was off with my gun trying to obtain meat for the fifty. And sometimes while traveling I would leave my wife, although she was hardly able to set up, to drive the team of four yoke of cattle, and take my gun and travel for miles away from the track to procure meat. In this way I have killed deer and hung them on my shoulders and carried them for as much as four miles without laying them down. And always, as soon as camp was formed in the evening, in the place of resting myself from the labors of the day, I would take my gun and go and try for meat. In this way I managed to keep meat for the family all the way and for the company the most of the time.

I well remember the day that I saw the first antelope and the first buffalo. We had just got started when the wagon G. R. Stewart was driving broke and the company had to stop and put the blacksmith shop to repair it. The Captain came to me and said we would not get started any more that day and wanted me to go hunting. There were several that wanted to go, as we expected to go a good ways. It was decided that we should go horseback; I rode a mule belonging to my wife's uncle, William Stewart. Well, when we had got a good ways out we found an antelope, and some of the boys, having heard that to raise a red handkerchief that they would come to you, accordingly Albert Dewey pulled out his ramrod and tied his handkerchief on it and went riding around on the smooth prairie trying to coax the antelope up to him, when in reality if he had seen the antelope before it saw him and had secreted himself where the antelope could not have seen him and then have hoisted something, the antelope might have come nigh enough to him to see what it was to enable him to have shot it, but as it was, his riding around on the smooth prairie in plain sight, only made the antelope run so much the faster away from him. But as he ran from Br. Dewey, he did not notice well enough where I was, for he came running by me at full speed within about one hundred and fifty yards of me. Now this was entirely too nigh me for an animal to attempt to pass me in safety. I brought up my gun and knocked him down at once.

Just at this time we saw two buffalos come over a hill some two miles away with General Charles C. Rich and Doctor Richardson [^5] in full chase after them. So I hastened and reloaded my gun and left my antelope lying where he fell and joined in the chase after the buffalos, but my mule would not run worth a cent. I continued to urge him, and it seemed like the more I urged him the farther I got behind. We had taken up a small hollow, thinking to intercept the buffalos at the crossing of this hollow, as their course was quartering towards us. Well, in about one mile running I was left at least one hundred yards behind. I had begun to think that mules were not much on the run, but as the buffalos were crossing the hollow, the foremost of the horsemen were within about one hundred yards of them and when the mule saw the buffalo come bounding down the hill he became wonderfully excited, and now it was that he showed us what a mule could do at running, and although he had fell so much behind while I was whipping and spurring him with all my might, when he saw the buffalo he let out at such a rate that I do not think we went more than two hundred yards until he brought me alongside of the horses, jumping it seemed to me as high as my head, every jump, and so stiff-legged that just as I was passing the first horseman, one stirrup broke. This bothered me considerably, but just as I was nearing Doctor Richardson he fired on the buffalo. His horse fetched a skip to one side and he lit flat on his back. Seeing the Doctor shoot and fall almost by his side excited him still the more, and he jumped so furiously that my other stirrup strap broke. This almost unhorsed me, and seeing where my stirrup fell I thought to stop and get it, but he carried me so far before I could get him stopped that I could not find it, so I straddled him and joined in the chase. But I had hindered so much time looking for my stirrup that they had both of the buffalos down before I got to them. The boys loaded their horses with the meat of the buffalo, but I preferred antelope, so I went back to where I had killed the antelope and put him on my mule and started for camp. I also killed the largest and fattest badger that I almost ever saw and carried him to camp, thinking that he was good to eat. Now we had got so far from camp that it was just midnight when we got to camp. This was my first day with buffalo and antelope and the first badger I had ever seen.

In about two or three more days' travel we got into the buffalo country where we could see them by the thousands. We would now see them all around us as far as the eye could reach, as thick as you would generally see a cow herd. We had now to guard against their stampeding our stock.

365We continued our journey in this way on the north side of Platte River until we got opposite what is now called Ofalon's [O'Fallon's] Bluffs on South Platte. Here Jedediah Grant's cattle got stampeded and he lost about sixty head. We stopped here a few days trying to find his stock. I went over to South Platte in company with A. O. Smoot, Samuel Turnbow, George B. Wallace and Peter Nebeker, hunting for the stock belonging to Br. Grant's company.

365In running the buffalo along the South Platte there was a buffalo cow, in jumping down the bank broke one of her forelegs. This crippled her, so that we concluded to drive her to camp and butcher her, but when we went into the river to drive her out she only drove at us. We continued driving until she drove us clear across the river which was about two miles wide, but when she got to the bank she refused to go up, so we threw two lariats on her and undertook to pull her up, but she was too good at holding back. I then went into the river and took my butcher knife and would prod her in the rump, thinking to make her go up that way, but it was no go. Finally, Br. Smoot took a bit of a run and jumped straddle of her, thinking to ride her up the bank, but she kicked so when I was prodding her that she was just as wet as water would make her, which made her so slick he never made any stop on her, but landed head foremost in the river. But she concluded that she had rather go up the bank alone than to be rode up, so up she went charging.

The boys now spread apart with their lariats and held her while I came up the bank and got my gun and shot her as a beef. While we were dressing her, there came the most singular looking animal that we had seen. Bro. Smoot requested me to kill it. I took my gun and just as it came to the river and commenced to drink, I shot him. When he dropped dead into the river he sank like a rock, and with all the hunting we could do we could not find him, so that we never knew what he was. He looked like a wolf with long, shaggy hair and was white, but what he was we never knew.

366While some of the boys were dressing our buffalo, the rest of us were chasing the buffalo and found a steer that had been left by the Oregon emigrants, I suppose on account of lameness, as he was quite lame. But we drove him to camp with us and brought him to the valley with us, but we got none of the lost cattle. After searching for the stampeded stock until it was considered in vain to search longer, we continued our journey.

366We arrived opposite Scott's Bluffs (now Scottsbluff) on Saturday night, and as we always laid by on Sunday to let our animals rest, some of us boys concluded to cross the river and ascent the bluffs. Accordingly several of us went over and ascended them to the top and rambled all over the top, finding some mountain sheep on the top of the bluffs. We chased them, thinking that we could make them jump off of the cliffs and kill themselves, but we found out that they could ascent or descend precipitous rocks better than we could. In fact, they would skip up and down cliffs that seemed to be almost perpendicular.

366On coming down off of these bluffs, I was coming skipping along from one projection to another. I came suddenly on Parley P. Pratt paralyzed on a cliff. While ascending this precipice, he had happened to look down, and seeing the distance so great below him, he became ex[c]ited and had stuck his fingers in a crack of the rock and held on for dear life, continuing to look below him. He could not control his nerves, but was trembling like an aspen leaf when I got to him. And seeing the condition he was in, I took him in my arms and carried him by force to a place of safety, thus saving him from falling several hundred feet and dashing himself to peices. I then remained with him until he arrived safely at the bottom of the bluffs.

367We continued our journey on the north side of the river until we came to the mouth of Laramie, for here we crossed over on the south side near old Fort John, near where Fort Laramie now stands. About five miles above here at a grove of white ash, we camped and laid by for about a week to burn tar, there being plenty of pitch pine here. We also needed rest. From here we went on to Horse Shoe, about forty miles. Here we laid by one day for the women to wash.

367We were now fairly well into the Black Hills and in full view of Laramie Peak. [^6] This was such a novel sight to me that I proposed to Captain [Samuel] Turnbow that we should go to the top of the peak and kill some mountain sheep, which were supposed to abound there. He accepted the proposal, and away we went, supposing it to be about ten or twelve miles when in reality it was about forty miles. [^7] We went about twelve miles and the peak looked just as far off as it did. We got discouraged about going to it and returned the same day as we thought when we started.

Here we came across an old buffalo bull, and Turnbow proposed that I should crawl as close to him as I could and shoot, and we would load ourselves with meat and return. So I crawled up within about three rods of him, as he was feeding away from me, but he would not turn around so as to give me a fair shot at him. So I peeled away at his flank, ranging forward. At the crack of the gun he jumped and kicked and ran; in a short distance he entered the brush out of sight. Turnbow come up laughing and we followed his track a little ways in the brush when I saw him walking along with his head down, very sick, so I shot him again. He ran off a very little ways and stopped and laid down, too sick to go farther.

368Turnbow now proposed to shoot him in the head, saying he had heard it said that a bullet would not penetrate a buffalo bull's head, and he was going to try it and see for himself. So he went up within about one rod of the old bull, as he was lying there with his tongue out, and raised his gun, when the old bull began to struggle to get up. Turnbow thought he was gone sure; he jerked off his had [hat] and ran as hard as I ever saw a man run until he got to some cottonwood trees about forty yards off before he looked behind him, thinking the old bull was right at his heels, while I was laughing almost fit to split my sides to see him run, as there was no danger, for the old bull hardly got to his feet when he fell dead, before Turnbow was half way to the trees. When he saw the old bull was dead he came back laughing, saying he was going to have his shot anyhow. So he went up about to where he was before and peeled away, the bullet going into his head just the same as any other beef.

368We now went to work and skinned a part of him and cut off about one hundred and fifty pounds of the meat. I objected to taking so much, telling him he would give out and we would have to leave it after carrying it a good way, but he declared he knew he could carry it to camp. So we strung it on a pole between us and started for camp, but he soon got tired and we would have to lay it down and rest, then we would start on again with the whole of it in place of throwing a part of it away so as to make it light enough so that we could carry it. In this way we continued carrying and resting until we got about half-way to camp when he declared he could not carry it any farther. So he proposed we should hang it up in a tree and go to camp and come after it in the morning with horses. Finally I agreed, so I climbed a tree and hung it up and we went to camp.

That night the Indians stole every horse in camp but seven head. We knew it was folly to pursue them on foot, so we gave them up and proceeded on our journey. Having had experience enough the day before in carrying on foot, we left our meat to hang and dry and did not go for it so that we had our tramp to Laramie Peak for nothing.

369In this way we traveled until we had come down out of the hills onto the Platte again. As we were coming along one evening just before camping time we saw three bears on the other side of the river near by a thicket of brush. Smoot, the captain, called to me to get ready and go with him and kill them. Accordingly I got my gun which was empty and loaded it with a double charge, as I knew it would stand it, and took my pistol - a single barrel - in case I got into a close fight, and went with him. By the time we got started there were three more boys who had got ready also and went with us. Their names were Charles Chipman, George Peacock, and Lorin Roundy.

Well, by the time we got across the river the bear had gone into the brush so that we could not see them, but we had three large dogs with us which we put on their tracks and into the brush they ran, but when they got to the bear they were so astonished they would not even bark at them. When we got pretty well up to the brush, Smoot charged right up, thinking, I suppose, to get the first shot, but when he saw the bear he was about like the dogs. He was so excited he forgot he had any gun but hollowed, "Here she is boys, come and shoot her quick" Accordingly we ran as fast as we could right up to the brush, but when we got there the brush was high enough that we could not see them on foot. Just at this time the old bear noticed Smoot on his horse and she paid no more attention to the dogs, but came from them to us with a vengeance. This excited Smoot the more, and he hollowed, "Take care, boys, run - here she comes. She is a fifteen hundreder," and turning his horse he laid whip and away he went with a vengeance.

370This so alarmed the boys that they all turned and ran as fast as they could, leaving the bear and me to settle our little difficulties as best we could. In the moment of their running by me and leaving me to fight it out alone, I thought of Daniel Boone's companions running and leaving him alone in like circumstances when attacked by a panther. But I thought I was equal to the emergency and knowing my gun and myself also, I brought my gun to my face and ran backwards from the brush to try and get far enough from the brush to give me a chance to shoot. The old bear, in the meantime was not fooling away her time, for I had not got more than twenty feet from the brush until she made her appearance. When she saw me she was filled with rage and she came for me with all the vengeance that she had in her, blow ing and whistling so that you might have heard her a half a mile at least. But there was no time to lose, so quick as thought I brought my gun on her and fired, striking her in the sticking place and coming out through her kidney, knocking her a complete somersault with her head from me.

370I immediately reloaded, turning the powder into my gun out of the powder horn while I was getting a bullet out of my mouth where I had placed them to be ready to load quick, for I expected to fight. I had not started from camp after them calculating to run from them when I saw them.

After I had killed this one, which proved to be an old she-grizzly with her teeth all worn off, I looked to see what had become of my companions. They were just turning around some large trees about fifty yards from me; when they saw the bear down and that I was master of the field they came running back about as fast as they had run away, but I was reloaded and ready for another before they got back to me.

371We then got the dogs after the young ones; the dogs would fight these. They all three turned loose on one but they could not stop him. He would travel along as fast as a man could walk with all three dogs doing their best on him. I went up to him while the dogs and he were fighting and ran my knife through him, killing him instantly. The other one fled and got across the river and almost the whole company ran after him. Of all the dogs in camp there was but one that would fight him, and he could not do much with him. Then a man by the name of Armstrong got to him and putting his gun close to the bear's head, he fired, missing him. He then turned the butt of his gun and struck the bear over the head, breaking his gun into two pieces but not hurting the bear any. This brought him to his senses. There was another fellow that ran up to the bear and did the same way and missed him. Not taking time to bring any ammunition with them and not having any more guns, they had no other res[c]ource but to throw rocks at him. Finally Mayor Russel, the captain of the fifty, hit him on the nose with a rock and knocked him down and he laid there until he ran up and cut his throat. Thus ended the first bear fight I was ever in.

371We now proceeded slowly. Our teams were getting worn out with heavy loads and no roads. We traveled slowly until we got to the Pacific Springs. Here we met the First Presidency returning from Salt Lake Valley. Here our hearts were made glad by their rehearsing to us that they had found a good country at Salt Lake Valley, counselled us on our arrival in Salt Lake Valley to weigh out our provisions and ration ourselves so as to make it hold out until time for harvest.

From here to Fort Bridger game was scarce; but little could be got while traveling. At the Springs, six miles west of Bridger, I left the wagons and went on foot and alone to Bear River to try and kill some meat to do us into the valley. I made Bear River a little after dark, and the next morning started on a hunt in the hills, hoping to kill several antelope that day, as I expected the wagons to get there that night. I soon had a very fat antelope down and another large buck came running up to see what noise that was. I blazed away at him, thinking I had him sure, but the tube and cylinder blew out of my gun and I do not suppose the bullet went half way to him. My hunt was now played out. After my leaving my wife to drive two days, I got but one antelope. Still, I thought I would not give it up, so I took another gun to try it the next day while the train was on the move.

372I started out in the morning, but I had not gone more than two or three miles before I came on a mule and mare that had been left there by the Battallion boys a couple of months before. They were as wild as if they had never seen anybody in their lives. I tried a good while to get the better of them, to catch them, but finding my efforts unavailing, I undertook to craze the mare, thinking by so doing I should get both of them. So I blazed away and down came the mare. I ran up to her and slipped a bridle on her, taking the bridle off the horse I was riding and letting it go on the prarie. The one I rode ran off with the wild mule. I gave the bridle to Br. Chipman who was with me to hold, telling him to get something and stop up the bullet hole so as to stop up the blood while I went after the one that had run away. It took me a good while to catch my horse; I was gone over an hour. In the meantime, Chipman thought the mare bled so fast that she would bleed to death anyhow, so he took the bridle off her and turned her loose. She got up and went off down by the train just as I was getting back and fell down dead. I then gave up the mule and came ahead.

372When we got over into Echo Canyon we met James W. Stewart with my oxen that I had sent out with the pioneers to help us over the mountains. This was timely help, and it enabled us to cross the mountains a great deal easier than we could otherwise have done.

372In East Canyon I came very near having an accident that would have been quite serious. My oxen refused to take the crossing straight; they crowded me onto the haw side and ran the wagon up on the bank so far they came very near upsetting my wagon. I was obliged to run around to the off side and take the wagon on my back and hold it until we could drive down into the creek. My wagon was loaded with provisions which, if it had tipped over in the creek, would almost have ruined us, but we got over safely and arrived where Salt Lake City now stands, on the eighteenth day of September, 1847.

We had now got to our journey's end. As soon as we could after we had got to our camping ground so that we could do it, we went to work and weighed out our provisions. We found that we had a little over three-fourths of a pound of corn a day to the head.

373Having accomplished all I had agreed to do, and that was to see my wife's mother to her journey's end in safety, we now separated and each went to ourselves. It had occupied my time and had caused me a great deal of hard work in taking the oversight of her family and bringing them through, but once having given my word I was determined to accomplish it and although I was as tough as men ever get to be, I was well nigh worn out. In fact, I had been judged to be forty-five years old before I got to the valley, although I was but twenty-five.

373I now went to work and got out logs and built a log house in the fort and prepared for winter. During this winter the Indians stole a great deal of our stock. They got the last I had, which set me entirely afoot. Neither was there any chance to get a new supply for work. We were all poor together. The first winter was very light; in fact, there was ploughing and sowing done all winter. In the spring of 1848 I went out on Mill Creek six miles south. Here I managed to get in about ten acres of corn, but just as my corn was up nicely, the crickets came down in swarms from the mountains and in one days' time destroyed my whole crop, and where they ate it never grew again. They would suck all the virtue out of the roots.

374I then took ten acres to attend on shares, but the nights were so cold it would not grow worth a cent and there was not any that ripened fit to eat. Still, we had to eat it, soft, mushy, half-rotten as it was.

374In the fall I got to work for Van Cott and got about twenty bushels of him, but it was all of a piece—no sound corn in it. In fact, I almost came to the conclusion that we would have to import our seed corn; it seemed that we never could get any ripe enough for seed. It rained but very little, not enough to spoil the salt in the Lake, so but what it could be got all winter, but to say that we passed the first two years in destitute circumstances does not express our situation. But I believe today that notwithstanding we had to suffer so much for even the commonest necessities of life, that the first immigration were the best satisfied and grumbled the least of any immigration that has ever come to Utah. We were all poor alike, we were all hungry alike, and we were all naked alike and we could each sympathize with the other.

374Sarah Pea Rich is a familiar traveler to the reader by now. Her reminiscence continues here with the remainder of her journey across the plains and through the Rocky Mountains. Like the other companies that came in 1847, the John Taylor company, with which Sarah traveled, experienced fewer of the difficulties of travel than later companies. They were spared the dreaded cholera and had no serious mishaps along the way. Being one of the first companies to go west in such large numbers, they were still a curiosity to the Native Americans, as the Indians were to the white travelers. Since Sarah Rich's whole reminiscence is a testimonial of her faith in the mission of the Church, this part, like the earlier section, includes a statement of her conviction that struggle and sacrifice are symbols of faith.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:444.
