Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

374Sarah DeArmon Pea Rich [^1]

[Plains—1847]

So on Monday June the 14th, [1847] we started from Winter Quarters with all our family together with our teamsters, numbering in all seventeen persons; we traveled out about 3 miles that day and camped and the next day [we] traveled on about 15 miles and overtook Brother [John] Taylor's company, and on the 16th we reached Elkhorn River and overtook the main camp crossing the river. It took a long time to cross over, so maney waggons and stock here. We had to stop a few days to organise the different companys. And heare the brethern held a council, and it was desided that a part of the company should start on, and our company was to waite untill others came up; and that night about dark Bishop [Newel K.] Whitney and Father [Alpheus] Cutler arived bringing with them Jacob Wetherby, [^2] who had started back to Winter Quarters in the mourning on buisness, in company with 2 other men and 2 wimen, and while passing through some tall grass 3 naked indians sprung up out of the grass, and Jacob and another man tried to get them to let the team pass which they had stoped; and while the[y] wore laboring with the 2 indians that had stoped the team, the 3rd indian shot Brother Wetherby, and then the 3 indians runt and disapeard. Soon after Bishop Whitney and Cutler came up and brought the wounded young man to our tent. We all [could] see that he could not live, so we fixed him a bed in our tint and done all we could to ease his pain. He suffered awfuly pain all through the night; and the next mourning, it being Sunday, about 9 o'clock, his suffering ended in death. He was conchious untill a few minits before his death; then he droped off like one going to sleep. So as the company wore nearly all gone on they had to burry Brother Wetherby that night. Our folks [the second company of pioneers] had raised a Liberty pole; and he was laid to rest with a few words from C[harles]. C. Rich, and prayr by him. He was burried just at dark as we wore in fear of Indians, and had to keep out guards all night. Here we had to waite untill the brethern would arive that had gone back to Winter Quarters to bring on the cannon and amonishion and guns that were left, for the indians wore reported to be hostile. So it was thought best that this company should bring on the Artilery thare was allso a skift or a boat fitted up on wheels, and the cannon placed on that and drawn by a strong yoak of oxins. So earley the next morning, on Monday the 21st, the big cannon was fired off; and after brakfast we again took up the line of march to overtake the companeys that had gone ahead. We traveled about 12 miles and reached the main camp; here they had to arainge to put on 2 yoak of cattle onto the cannon, and furnish a driver for the same, as we had not a driver to spare in our company; and it was desided that Mr. Rich should have charge of the cannons as there was two cannons to be taken West in case of aney attack by indians. So the boat and one cannon and the big [Temple] bell was in our company. Mr. Rich had charge of the company. After all was arainged we started in travling through this country. We had to place out strong guards at night so you can judge the feeling of wimon and children traviling through an indian country, not knowing what moment we might be attacted by the wild savages, and not verry strong in number of men, for there was more wimon and children than men in our camp. So we realised that we must be humble and prayrful and put our trust in the Lord. And it was through His mercy and kind care that saved the people on this daingerous jeorney; for we praid to the Lord in faith, and he answerd our prayrs; for He will hear those that trust in Him and obey his laws as given through his prophets. We continued our jeorney on, traveld ten or twelve miles a day untill we reached the platt river. Some times it was thought best to travil in five companyes abreast for safety. One night there was an indian arrow shot into one of our cows in our company. We now had to correll [corral] our stock at night by making a correll of our waggons, and keep a guard at night; then in the morning, at daylight the big bell would be rung for the men to drive out the stock to git what feed they could git before time for starting. The bell was so arainged over the boat and cannon, that it could be rung by pulling a roap. It soon was found not nessary to travil so maney a brest and then we would travil faster. We wore detained a good deal by having to repair bridges that the pioneers that had left ahead of us in the spring, had made for President Young and some of the Apostles and others wore gone ahead to look out a location for our final stopping place; and we now wore following up there trail in travling up the plat river. Timber sometimes was verry scarce and hard to git, but we maniage to do our cooking with what little we could gether up while in camp. One morning my husband was trying to hitch up an unruly ox, and the ox jumped over the waggon tonge and fell on my little son Joseph, and came verry near killing him. We wore all verry much frightend about but he soon got over his hurt and we travel on, but with some little fear of trouble with the indians as we were near the Pawnee agency, and had met some men from the station that had told our men that there was a war partty prowling through the country that might give us some trouble, but our companyes would generly camp clost together, and when we would stop to camp would sometimes fior off the cannon, as those indians wore verry fraid of the big gun, as they called it and as we wore frequently meeting traders they would keep us posted as to the movements of the indians, and when in camp a strong picket guard would be placed out, and by using great care and wisdom, we wore permitted through the mercies of our heavenly father to travel among the savages, tribe of indians, unmolested, alltho us nurves [nervous] wimon wore often verry much frightend for fear of an atact of the indians, and I do know it was throug the protecting hand of god that we made the long jearney across the planes from Illinois to Great Salt Lake Valley, when we wore but few in number. At one time an arrow shot into a calf, which showd to us that indians were prowling around near our camp, and several time men out garding the stock at night would see indians lurking around which would cause our men to drive the stock into our waggon correll for safty. Along about this time we passed through several indian viliages, looked over by white Agency; they seamed verry friendly, but seeing so maney waggons passing seamed a suprise to them. It truley was a daingerous trip; and had we not been convinced by the power of the Lord to know that we wore preparing to help lay the foundation for the building up of the kingdom of our heavenly father on this earth according to his holy commandment to his Prophet Joseph Smith, we never could have undertaken such a jearney. It was our faith and our knowledge that the Lord had set his hand the second time to establish his work on the earth in order to prepare a people to be worthy to receive him at his Second Coming, which we as a people know is near at hand, and that this, the work of the latter days will never stop, nor be stoped untill he makes his appearence the Second time to redeem his chosen people. The day is now near at hand, and the rising generation that will read this book will maney of them live to see that day. So my dear children and grand children and great grand children, and maney others of my young readers, let me beg of you to lay aside all folly and foolishness, and humble yourselves before the Lord, and seak a knowledge of this the work of the Lord in this the latter day, and be prepared to help in this great work for as shure as you live and read my testamony to the truth of this Latter day work; it is true, for I have seen the prophet of god; I have set under the sound of his voice; I have heard him prophecy, and live to see the fulfillment of his prophecies, and I do know for myself that he was a true Prophet; and that the work that the Lord brought forth through him and the foundation he has laid for his followers to build upon will last throughout time and all eternity; and no earthly power can hinder the same. The Heavens are preparing for the fulfillment of all the words utterd by our prophet Joseph Smith; He is allso thare to work in behalf of this work, and will be with the Savior at his coming. So the wicked may stop there efforts against this people for there works will fall to the ground to thare shame and disgrace.

380We jearneyed on up the platt river, came into the buffalow country, saw maney large heards of buffalow. Brother Lewis Robison was the first one in our company to kill a buffalow; he killed one that would weigh over a thousand pounds, now we all stoped and had a feast all through our camp. We stoped a few days to wash, iron and cook, while the men folks repaird up there waggons and let there teames rest and recrute up as we wore in good feed; and when all the companeys would all come up we would start on again. But while passing through the buffalow country we did not travel verry fast, for all the men folks seamed to want to kill a buffalow, so they would travel a few miles and camp, and go hunting, for that was new sport for them. So Mr. Rich got after a large herd—him and several of our company, the[y] wore a [on] horse-back; he killed three, the first one he wounded, it was a verry large one, and it turned upon him and came verry near killing the horse he was riding, but he shot again and killed him. So on the next day he killed two more, and they dressed them and divided out the meet in the company and the men folks fixed up scaffels out of willows and spread out the meet cut up in thin slices, and made fiars underneath, and as one side of the meet would git dry they would turn it over, and by so doing it became dry. They called it "Jerk" meet. [^3] We put it into sacks, and we had enough to last us all the jearney through, and it was the sweetest meet I ever tasted. The children grew fat on it. We allso tried out the tallow, for we needed grease in our cooking. Every other company allso suplied themselves with "jearked" meet. We wore severl days travling through the buffalow country. Some days we could see herds of thousans together, and several times the[y] would come in large herds crossing just ahead of our teams as hard as they could go, and in such large numbers that the roaring of them would frighten our teams, so that the drivers had all they could do to prevent a stampead among our cattle.

It was verry daingerous in travling throw this country, but we wore presearved from aney searious accident while on this trip. It was a grand sight to see those herds of wild animals, thousands in a gang, raicing across the prairies; for the sight of our waggons seamed to frighten them, and it caused us to fear they might attack us in there flight. Well, after we got through with the buffalows, we came into a land alive with what is called praria dogs—the [w]hole country was alive with them. They lived in holes in the ground, and would make the hills sound with there barking all night long. They are about the size of small puppys, and as cunning as they can bee. They would set near there holes by hundreds and bark and yelp untill the boys would git allmost up to them and then dodge back in there dens and stick there heads out and bark. Some of the men shot some of them and they are hansom little dogs with more fur than hair on them. If we could have caught them alive we would have tried to tame them just because they wore so small and pretty. Some of our company named that place dog town. From Mr. Rich's jeornal, he sais he believes he saw at one time ten thousand head of buffalow feeding together while passing through the buffalow country.

On the 29th of July we camped in sight of what is called Chimney Rock, and on August 1st we camped at the foot of Chimney Rock. This is a large mound with a rock sticking up in the center like a chimney about two hundred and fifty feet high here manye of our camp went to the top of the mound, and found the names of some of the pioneers that was ahead of us, for they had pass there some time before; here my husband [w]rote his name on the rock with red keal, [^4] allso my name, and the names of his other wives [^5] that was with us, and our children's names. We left and traveld on, and came in sight of Larama [Laramie] Peak. We then began to cheer up thinking we ware gitting nearer our jearney's end. For we had word from President Young and Kimball telling us to cheer up, and it would not be long before we would find a resting place. [^6]

On the 5th of August [1847] we camped on a site—Larama Fort, crossed over the river and traveld on the west side and on the tenth we struck the Black Hills: and on the 12th we camped on horse Shoe creek; found a nice coald spring of good watter; it was named by the pionears that was ahead of us and called Kimball's Springs. About this time we ware having verry warm wether, so much so that we wimon got verry much ware sun-burnd. We had sand and dust, rocks and hills to pass over, and some times ware worn out and verry tired, but not so much so as our brethern that had to walk most of the time, and drive teams, and stand guard at night. O what a time we all had crossing the plains from Nauvoo to Salt Lake City[!] When I now see those brethern and sisters come to these valleys riding in cars in the shade, and that too, in one-third shorter time than we wore coming, and when they git here have somthing nice to eat and plenty in the land, and then hear them complain of hard times, I think they ought to have at least about 2 weeks of expearence, such as the brethern and sisters had when we came; then, perhaps they would feel more thankfull and would not feel to complain, as I have heard maney do. For when we came there was no one to welcom us with potatoes, fat beefs, honey, butter and all the good things that the country could produce. No, we could have nothing of the kind, but yet we felt to thank the Lord for proticting us to where we could rest in peace. About the 25[th]. we came to the Saleratus Lake. This was a beautifull lake, as white as snow, and was pure saleratus, which we could cut out in large cakes. We gethered sacks full and brought with us to the Valley, which lasted us a long time to make bread with. Here we camped at independence rock, where we again left our names on the high rock; this was quite a plesent camping ground. From this place we traveld on passed another saleratus lake and camped on the sweet watter [Sweetwater River]; and from that [time] on maney of our cattle wore sick, and a number died which caused a delay in our travels; for our teams by this time wore verry weak. [^7] But we still mooved on a few miles a day and sometimes lay by a few days to repare waggons and wash and bake and let the teams rest. And on Monday the 30th, [we] camped between the mountains; we then traveld a few miles and camped on Sweet Watter. As we traveld along the Sweet Watter river September the 1st. we traveld over bad roads of sand, mud and rocks. So bad was the roads that we could not make much headway.

384On the 2nd of September, [1847] we met about 30 waggons of pionears that had been with President Young and company, to look out a stopping place for the Saints, among them was brother William Clayton and John Pack, they wore returning to Winter Quarters to bring on there familys. Hear it blew up coald and rained, and was verry disagreable; but we bid adieu to those brethern and traveld on, knowing we soon should meet President Young, Kimball and the rest of the Twelve. And on Sunday the 5th, [1847] we reached the pacific springs, having traveld through the South Pass. Here we met President Young and all the ballence of the Twelve and pionears. This was a time of rejoicing[!] Here the two companeys lay by 2 days to hold meeting and hold council with the brethern, and talk over what was best to be done. And on the 7th the pionears started on there return trip and our company started on our jearney towards our resting place in the Valley of the great Salt Lake. About this time my mother-in-law, my husband's mother [Nancy O'Neal Rich], was taken verry sick and about the same time her youngest daughter [Nancy Rich Porter], the wife of Brother John Porter, who was allso in Mr. Rich's company, was confined in her waggon and had a fine son. So alltogether we had to travel verry slow, and on the day we parted with the company of pionears it commenced snowing and snowed all day. This was the 7th. of September; it was a sudden chainge from the hot wether of the month of August. We traveld 9 miles and camped on the dry Sandy. Here one of our oxen died. We still continued our jearney untill the 11th., when we crossed the green river, and traveld 4 miles down the river and camped, and on Sunday the 12[th,] lay by to rest our teames and from there traveld on and camped on black fork, and from there traveld on untill the 17th. we camped on the muddy; and on the 20th we crossed bear river and for a few days severl of our company was unfortunate in braken there wagons, which would detain the [w]hole company for a while. So after fixing up the wagons we started on; and on the 27th traveld up the canyon five miles and companeys camped all together; and on the 30th cross[ed] over the big mountain and then down the canyon had a verry bad road one of our companey a brother Cheery overturned one of his waggons but not much damiage done we got all rited up again and passed over another mountain and camped.

384On the 1st of October [1847] we camped in the edge of the Valley; here mother Rich was verry sick; and on Saturday October 2nd, we traveld six miles and landed in what is now Salt Lake City; camped at a deep spring near the Old Fort. Great was our joy to think we had reached a resting place that we could call our home in the mountains.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:444.
