Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

384Harriet Decker Hanks [^1]

The following letter, written by Harriet Decker Hanks in 1914, contains a brief but detailed reminiscent account of her travels west in 1847. Harriet's mother, also named Harriet, and her sister Clara Young, were two of the three women in the first company of pioneers. Harriet Hanks traveled to Utah in the second company of Saints under Jedediah M. Grant's leadership. She was a widow, since her husband died in Iowa in March 1846. In 1848 she married Ephraim Hanks, mentioned earlier in this volume as the horseback-riding teacher of Louisa Barnes Pratt and who figures prominently in the story of the rescue of the handcart companies.

386I was born March 13th, 1826 in the State of New York, town of Phelps, married to Edwin S[obieski] Little at the age of 16 years [^2]-in the City of Nauvoo, Illinois-Residing there- until 1846-when the Saints were expelled from the the State- in 1946 [1846]. My Husband was a Nephew of President B. Youngs [^3]-and they were intimate and congenial to each other—consequently he was called by his Uncle to drive His Family carriage when they were ready to cross the Mississippi River—we started at night on the 12th of Feb crossed the River on the Ice—made our first camp at Sugar Creek Iowa—the last Wagon crossing the river Broke through the ice—My Husband in helping to get the wagon from the river got very wet and took a violent cold that settled on his lungs from which he never recovered—He died six weeks later and was burried by the roadside between two large trees to mark his resting place [^4]—I was then 20 years old-a widow- a baby boy a few months old [^5]—Left to get along the best I could—I had been tenderly cared for 4 years of my married life—but was—inexperienced in this and many things I was called to go through—and you that have lost a kind loving husband and protector—even when surrounded with home comforts know the sorrow and loneliness of heart—but homeless and traveling I knew not where I felt desolate indeed—I was not friendless there were many to sympathize with me—but except their circumstances were not much better than mine—I cannot dwell longer on the unhappy scenes I had to pass through—It was a horrid nightmare from that time until we arrived at Council Bluffs now called Omaha—We spent the Winter there and in April 1847, The original company of Pioneers consisting of one hundred and forty-three men and three women and two children-my Mother [Harriet Page Wheeler Decker Young]—My Sister Mrs Clara D. Young, Wife of Brigham Young Mrs. Ellen Saunders Kimbal and my youngest brother [Isaac Perry, age 6] left Omaha for the Promised Home of the Saints—arriving here on the 24th of July of the same year—On the 13th day of June of the same year a company of one hundred persons of which my self and baby were numbered left our Winter quarters to cross the plains-Jedediah M. Grant was captain of the company—I was given the honorable position of driving an ox team—My wagon was loaded with mill irons that was put into the first mill erected in Utah [^6]—the walls of the old mill still stand as a land mark-in our beautiful Park. [^7] My little boy and myself slept on those irones for 5 months-there has been a vast improvement in bed springs since that time—We had a long tiresome journey-but we had some very pleasant evenings after our wearisome day was over we would have songs and prayer and thank our Heavenly Father that our lives had been spared from the cruel Indian and wild beasts that were often seen on our way—But we had all we could endure both men and women as well as the poor cattle—I drove my oxen through the day—milked 5 cows at night and morning—Baked the bread for fifteen persons eleven of them men—done everything that came to me to do but yoke my oxen—I was asked to do that by the Captain of the ten I was traveling in—But I drew the line at that request—and on measuring the yoke with me the odds was in my favor—I could not lift the yoke—my weight at that time was 80 pounds-But with all our hardships we were blessed with good health and looked on the cheerful side and the months passed away and we were nearing the valley as it was called—Theres one more—incident that occurs to my mind—I had never heard of a cloud burst—but I was called to witness one that nearly cost myself and baby our lives—We had camped in Emigration canyon for noon lunch—I started with my little boy for a walk—I had not got far from the wagon when I heard a very unusual sound-and looking back across the canyon the mountain seemed to be coming down into the road—and the roar was deafening. In less time than it takes to describe it—the water was-upon me—I started for my wagon—but the water came to my waist—I had my babe in my arms—I found my strength leaving me—I could not stand—I was near a stump—I placed my baby on the stump and held him and myself from being swept away in the current—until an old gentleman seeing my danger came to me—I took baby in my arms and he took us both to our wagon—by this time the water was running into my wagon box and logs, stones and other debris were hurled in every direction—but the blessed mill irons saved the day—they anchored the wagon and kept it from oversetting—But the End was not yet—after the flood had passed—we had no road left—we had to stay on two days until the road was made safe we had on the evening of the 5th of October 1847 we arrived in Salt Lake Valley and camped in what was called the North Fort-the place that was to be my abiding place for the next year——

386Now my dear Madie I hope this will not be tiresome to you or your friends—But it has been 67 years since these events took place—and I am near my 89th birthday so you will excuse all poor writing and composition

386Mrs. H.A.Hanks

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:444.
