Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Mary Pugh Scott [^1]

397Another British immigrant who traveled to Nauvoo in 1842 entirely on her own was twenty-one-year-old Mary Pugh, who married John Scott as a plural wife two years later. "I felt perfectly at home with the Saints," she wrote, "and whenever I was sick I was always cared for and comforted." She traveled with John and two of his other wives from Nauvoo in March 1846 and on to Salt Lake City in the Heber C. Kimball company in 1848. Her account is full of the daily routine of trail travel. "Dismayed by the very immensity of the view," when she first saw the Valley, she declared herself willing to make a "good home in this new wilderness."

While waiting to leave for Zion, I washed and ironed the Temple Clothes in the basement of The Nauvoo Temple. John Scott was a very prominent man in Military affairs in the early days. He held the rank of Colonel in the First Regiment of the Nauvoo Legion. He was also a body guard of the Prophet Joseph Smith and he was one of his best loyal and true friends. He was so dependable and when the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum were Martyred John went with others to bring thier bodies back to Nauvoo.

398The Mob Thought that now they had put an end to the Mormons by killing thier leaders but little did they know that there was in reserve another Man of God to continue the work and build up the kingdom that will endure forever. At the public burial only sand was in the caskets as they were deposited in the grave. [^2] Later John helped when they were laid to rest at the rear of the home where Joseph Smith had Lived. I, Mary Scott heard and saw the sham trial of [the murderers of] Joseph and Hyrum Smith. I saw some of the guilty men pointed out.

398Some of them were trying to whittle sticks, but thier hands trembled so much that they made little progress. The reason that I was there, I accompanied the young woman who gave her testimony against the murderers. [^3] She lived in Warsaw [^4] at the time at the Hotel and saw the mob that had tried to wash the black off thier faces there, then ate thier supper at the Hotel. So she got a look at them, and was able to point them out. But the Guilty were not brought to Justice. Thier crimes were just winked at. [^5]

They were allowed to rob us of our homes and Widows and Children were turned out of thier homes sick and shaking with the ague. They were driven to the banks of the River to starve and die. They had no mercy on Young or old. After The Prophet Joseph's death there was great worry and confusion about who should be the President of the Church. John, Elizabeth, Sarah [plural wives] and I went to the Meeting. It was held in the Bowery [^6] to decide this. We all bore testimonies of the Transfiguration of Brigham Young.

399While he was speaking he seemed to have the voice of the Prophet Joseph Smith. We also saw the form of Joseph Smith before us. So there was no doubt in our hearts and minds from then on. as to who should be our leader. The Scott Family knew unitedly that Brigham Young was the right man in the right place. In 1846 the companies were being organized to start for the Rocky Mountains. March the first we were told to be rea[dy] to start at noon. We reached the Missouri River about the middle of June.

399Then they called for six hundred men to go to Mexico to fight. They thought that by taking all those men the Mormons would be wiped out of existance. Men were selected and by the middle of July the Mormon Battalian march began. All plans were now abandoned to leave this year.

399We went into Winter Quarters, now called Florence. John was called on a special mission to stay one more year and help prepare all for the trip. Finally May 30 1848 John Scott and Family started in Heber Kimballs Co. John was Captain over 10 wagons His company included 662 People- 266 wagons- 150 loose cattle- 25 Mules- 737 Oxen- 57 horses- 299 chickens- 96 pigs- 52 dogs- 17 cats- 3 hives of bees- 3 doves- 1 squirrel

399Rules of a camp: Each had a Captain, A captain of the Guard, a chaplin and clerk.

399All names were enrolled. 1. Noise and confusion will not be allowed after 8 p.m.

400John's responsibility for ten wagons made it difficult at times to help his own Families. Elizabeth in one wagon had sons 4 [John William]- 6 [Ephraim]- and 11 [Isaac], Daughters 8 [Louisa]-10 [Matilda] and a new baby [Elizabeth] too Mary had a son [Hyrum] 22 months old and Sarah 23 years old had a son [Joseph L.] 11 months old in her arms Yet here we two who have been raised in luxury, are bravely trying to drive a Mule Team across the plains, holding our Babies. We take turns driving. You can just imagine we three women climbing in and out over wagon wheels to cook on the camp fire and wash clothes.

400We sleep in our Camp wagons or on the Ground along the swampy river bottoms. John helped a lot before leaving going among Non Mormons and asking for clothes, bedding and money for those who had every thing in the world taken from them. He also Converted three people to our Gospel. I am now 27 years old and trying hard to be a good wife. We cook in a camp kettle, it is an iron pot with three legs

400It had a heavy lid and could be set right on the beds of coals and biscuits corn bread or cake could be put in, then a shovel full of coals was put on top to bake them. Some who had no kettles cooked on hot rocks to do thier baking. Some of our meals were just broiled meat and bread. Other times all we had to eat was water gruel (a very thin mush) One Wedding dinner on the plains consisted of fresh bread baked in a skillet, fresh butter and a piece of meat.

Milk and cream could be placed in a churn in the morning and by night you could have a pat of butter by the jolting wagon over rough trails. An English Emmigrant whose sense of smell had left him due to age, was one day hungryly out looking for food, found a strange animal and killed it. (it was furry and black and white) He skinned it and proudly brought it to camp. "a skunk" and to his amazement everyone fled as he approached and for some days he was an outcast.

401Our daily exertions made hunger a constant companion. The quanity of food was limited and meals were usually scant. At other times fish was caught in streams and ducks, geese, turkeys and prairie chickens were shot. The men hunted for buffalo elk and deer and these added to our daily diet. Pig weeds, [^7] thistles and other greens were gathered at times and cooked to add variety. And some times if several [Buffalo] were shot the Saints woud stop over for a day or two and we cut the meat in strips.

401This we dried for future meals. Some places an abundance of wild red and black currants and sometimes gooseberries were gratefully gleaned. Some of the Children while walking wore a bag and picked up buffalo chips and sticks to make fires for the evening meals. As soon as we camped everyone tried to share in the labors. Some carried water and gathered wood for fires. Big high sagebrush was used and in timber country we burned wood. But all was not desolation on the long journey.

401We enjoyed the smell of the pretty wild roses. At some places beautiful wild flowers of all hues could be seen and we enjoyed the singing of the birds. Young girls tended weary babies until they could be fed and put to sleep After prayers the camp retired for the night, with camp fires burning and the lights of lanterns in the wagons. The looing of the cattle, bleating of the sheep mingled with the neighing of the horses in the corrals of wagons.

401The howling of coyotes and wolves on distant hills and prairies mingled with the Half Hour Cry of the Faithful Guards, "All is well" "All is Well." Right.

There was always the dread of crossing dangerous streams and rivers. Yet many plucky women gathered up thier skirts and waded right through them. Some times large herds of Buffaloo crossed our path, so many that at times we had to wait one hour or two while they clumsily lumbered by. And there was always the danger of meeting Indians, some friendly and others hostile and dangerous and they almost always demanded some of our scant food supply. One day we nearly lost our lives.

402One day due to a delay, our Family Wagons got separated from the main body of the Saints. Suddenly we were completely surrounded by a big band of wild Indains who enjoyed scalping people just for the fun of it. We sat terrified and motionless with fear praying silently that we would some way be spared a tragic end. Yelling and shouting wildly they rode around us. We shook with fear not daring to move or speak. They came closer and closer. Then they Gathered in a big group.

402They held a big "Pow-Wow" minutes seemed like hours as we tried to keep our children quiet. They gestured and yelled louder and we grew more frightened as our fate seemed so hopeless. Again I breathed a prayer, Father I am so young, will I have to die here on the plains with my Family, now we are so near the end of our journey? Will I never see Zion after I have given my all for my religion? Then some of the Indians slid off their ponies and as they came nearer we saw a young white man.

402He had been captured by them and forced to live with them—but he had recognized John Scott as a boy he had gone to school with in Canada. He begged and pleaded with the Indians to spare our lives and he finally persuaded them to go away. It was a miracle from God we always thought after, and today we owe all of our lives to that brave young man's pleadings and to our kind Heavenly Father. Once during the journey the authorities gave John ten gallons of whiskey to pacify the Indians

They were on the war path at the time. At last we near the end of the long, long journey, as we enter the Valley of the Mountains and look out over the vast land of Zion. I am dismayed by the very immensity of the view. The boundless Silence and I see miles of sage brush every where. Behind us now are the heart aches and many thousands of silent tears, that fell on the long unknown trail. I remember my dear home in England, of the flowers and trees and beautiful surroundings at that safe place.

403And I am home sick for my Dear Mother and Father. But just as I have covered those endless hundreds of miles, so now I will begin work with renewed Faith, begin the task of building a good home in this new wilderness.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
