Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

403Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy [^1]

Nancy Naomi Alexander Tracy and her husband were in the East when they heard the news of the Prophet Joseph Smith's death in Carthage. They immediately returned to Nauvoo. Once prosperous farmers in New York, the Tracys lost most of their belongings and savings as they followed the Church to Ohio, Missouri, and then Nauvoo. They were never again to know the comfort and security they had enjoyed before joining the Church. An intensely spiritual woman, Nancy Tracy used the hardships she encountered and the sacrifices she made as instruments of faith and died vowing she would do it all over again to be counted among the community of Saints. She and her family traveled west in 1849.

404As soon as we arrived [from our visit to our relatives in the East], we went right home and prepared to go to meeting for that day was appointed for us to choose a first presidency to lead the Church. The saints convened in a grove. Sidney Rigdon and his followers were on hand to contest their right to be the leaders of the Saints. At one time he was one of Brother Joseph's councilors, but he was not righteous, and Joseph shook him off saying that he had carried him long enough and he would carry him no longer. Therefore, it was out of the question to have such a man lead the people.

404Brigham Young was the man chosen and sustained by unanimous vote to be the mouthpiece of God to the Saints. I can testify that the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham that day as that of Elijah did fall upon Elisha, for it seemed that his voice, his gestures, and all were Joseph. It seemed that we had him again with us. He was sustained by the voice of the people to be the prophet, seer, and revelator.

404Soon after this, my youngest child was taken sick and died in two weeks. His name was Theodore Franklin and he was two years and two months old. Now I had two little boys laid side by side in the burying ground, their little graves the same size. [^2]

404Well, the Temple was so far completed that fall that the Lord accepted it at the hands of the Saints, and it was dedicated. The Saints began to receive their blessings. Therein we had our endowments in that house.

405The evil one saw that the Saints were getting power from on high. Of course, he raged and stirred up the feeling of enmity against us, and the people again determined to drive us from our homes. So during the winter months preparations were made and some had already left their comfortable homes and crossed the river on the ice to go into the wilderness beyond civilization we know not where only as the hand of the Lord shall lead us. O liberty! thou precious boon that our Fathers shed their blood to gain, whither hast thou fled? But the hand of the Lord is over us, and so we shall find a resting place.

405On the 15th of March, 1845 [probably 1846], my sixth son [Austin Walter Tracy] was born.

405About the last of May [1846], previous to our departure from Nauvoo, I was aroused from my slumbers on [at] night, hearing such heavenly music as I had never heard before. Everything was so still and quiet when it burst upon my ear that I could not imagine where it came from. I got up and looked out of the window. The moon shone bright as I looked over at the Temple from whence the sound came. There on the roof of the building heavenly bands of music had congregated and were playing most beautifully. The music was exquisite! And we had to leave all this; the Temple, our homes, and the pleasant surroundings and bid farewell. It was to your tents, O Israel.

At another time, fire caught in the roof of the Temple. How it caught, I never knew, but for awhile it seemed that the house would be destroyed. Men, women, and children came out and formed a bucket brigade. The wells were drained and finally they went with wagons and barrels to the river for water and at last succeeded in putting out the flames. The damage was considerable. It seemed that if the evil powers could not harass the people one way, they would do it in another.

But now the time had come for us to take up the line and march, this time far away to the west where white man's foot had never trod. We were going to find a resting place among the red men of the forest. Our journey had been delayed some time on account of my confinement, but as soon as I was able to travel we started out. So farewell to beautiful Nauvoo. May the Lord have mercy on our enemies' souls for their cruelty and wickedness to an innocent and law abiding people. But we are to be a tried people and to be made perfect through suffering. We took with us what effects we could with one strong yoke of cattle. We crossed the river, went over the bluffs, and camped until a company got together so it would be safe to travel. The companies were small. For the present, nothing occurred. The travel was slow. I think there were about ten families of us. We had not as yet an organized camp, but we went on until we neared Council Bluffs and camped one afternoon on what was called Mosquito Creek. Our second son [Laconius Moroni Tracy], eleven years old, took his fish hook and line as he always did when we camped on a stream and went to the creek. He caught quite a string of fish and came up to the wagon and gave them to his older brother. Then he came to me and said, "Oh, mother, my head aches so it seems all on fire." It was about the middle of July and whether it was a sun stroke or brain fever, we could not tell. Of course, we could not travel on. We did everything we could under the circumstances, but he died on the third of August [1846]. This was indeed a trying ordeal to have to bury our dear boy here in the wilderness. There were four families who stayed with us. It was night when the boy died, and we were alone in the wagon except my husband's cousin, Orlin Colvin. I happened to have some fine bleached cloth, and I made his clothes and dressed him. Brother Blodget [^3] took the side boards of our wagon and made him a decent coffin. We had funeral services, and he was laid in the silent grave on a little hill not far from where he caught his last fish. There was one other little grave there where someone had buried a child but the grave was not marked.

We were ten miles from the Missouri river and where the Pottawatamie Indians with some French and half breeds and some Indian traders lived. This was the time when Uncle Sam followed us up to get 500 able-bodied men from the Mormon camps to go and help to fight Mexico. How was this when and after they could not let us have a place amongst them and we were already on the march for the wilderness. Did not this look like they were determined to follow us and harass us to demand all the able-bodied men and thus leave aged and feeble men, women, and children to travel through an Indian country unprotected. Who ever heard of such a thing? But our brethren complied with this demand and the 500 volunteered and went, leaving their wives and little ones to travel on as best they could.

We now came to the conclusion to stay here at Council Bluffs until the next spring; so a few families of us built log cabins and prepared for winter. That fall there were many families that had made a late start stopped here for the winter. They build little cabins and finally a log schoolhouse and opened a school and held meetings there. There were at last about 35 or 40 families stopped here for the winter. The place named Carterville because there were so many families by that name there. There was another stopping place three miles farther on called Kanesville where the Saints that were late stopped for the winter and built up quite a place. They had a store, etc.

Still farther on, there was another place called Winter Quarters. In fact, the Saints had to stop all along to recruit. Of course, it was hard times and much sickness and suffering prevailed, especially at Winter Quarters. In the early part of winter, my husband's old employer, Amos Davis, came along through our settlement with a load of goods from his store in Nauvoo. He stopped with us for a day. When he left, he gave us some tea, sugar, and coffee, which was highly appreciated and was a luxury in those hard times. So, taking it all together, we got along very well. Wood was plentiful and also good water. We rested and took comfort in our religion. We were not conquered.

408Well, the winter passed on, and where were we going? Should we take up the march? No, this was decided against this spring. We stayed and put in a crop and got better fitted out for that long journey, for now we knew that we were going to the Rocky Mountains, a long way off, and we must have better outfits to take us there. Others did the same and stayed for over a year or two that they might better their condition. But little did we think when we stopped here with our sick boy that we should prolong our stay as we did, but the hand of the Lord is over his people.

408The gold fever had taken hold of the people in the states, for the news had gone like wildfire that gold had been discovered in California. Emigration went through thick and fast and we had a chance to trade a good deal with the people as they passed through. They paid for food and vegetables and things we could spare. It was surely a great help to us. So we stayed on for three years more and enjoyed ourselves for we had meetings. We felt free for no one molested us. We could go down on the river bottom in the fall of the year and gather bushels of grapes to make wine, and we gathered walnuts and hickory nuts and there was no one to ask why we did so.

408The second winter here, on the 25th of February, 1849, my seventh son was born. We called him Helon Henry, a name to be long remembered, but now he is dead and gone before me and has left a large family. In the fall before the birth of this child, there was a circumstance that cast gloom over our settlement. William Carter married a young and beautiful girl by the name of Meekham [Roxena Mecham]. One afternoon she went home one mile to see her mother. She did not return the next day, and so they went over to her mother's where they discovered that she had not even been the day before. Therefore they instituted a search. There was a stream of water to cross on the way she should have gone. Above the bridge a short distance, they found her shawl and bonnet on the bank, and in the stream they found her dead body, drowned. No one ever knew why she committed this deed, for she seemed all right when she left. My husband helped to take her body out of the water, and she was buried by the side of my boy.

409Diminicus Carter also buried a wife there, [^4] and before we left this place there was quite a little burying ground.

409As I said, we stayed in this place for three years. The third year we began to make preparations to go on our journey. My husband had had three of his brothers come on from the east and two of them were going with us. We had been able to get in better condition to travel this time. We could put two yoke of cattle and one of cows on the wagon and were pretty well fixed for the journey.

409There was a widow lady by the name of Brocket who wanted to go with us. We thought she could help me, and so concluded to take her along, but she was very sickly although a very good woman. And then there was the widow Lamb that Amos Davis had fitted out with wagon and a yoke of cattle and a yoke of large cows. He wanted my husband to find a driver to take charge of this family and team. There were two little children in this family.

409So all being ready, we started out, crossed the Missouri River, and went into camp to wait for the company to be organized. One brother [Benjamin] Hawkins was chosen to be captain over 100 wagons, and then a captain was chosen over each of the two fifties' and one over each 10 wagons. Thomas Johnston was over our fifty and my husband [Moses Tracy] was captain over the second ten they organized. In this manner we rolled out. There had been a general rally this year for the great Salt Lake.

409We traveled on in this way for days and all went well. We had a good rest while at Council Bluffs. We enjoyed ourselves around the camp fire at night when the moon shone. After supper was over and the work done for the night, they would clear away a place and go forth in the dance for we had plenty of music in camp.

Finally we got as far as the Platte River. Here they thought it was best to divide the camp into two companies and travel separately in order to travel faster.

410The Indians were generally peaceable although sometimes they were a little troublesome, begging around. However, they did not commit any depredations in particular. Once a large band of Sioux came up to where we camped and came inside the corral of wagons. One of the young bucks picked up a sack of crackers and ran off with it. The chief was informed of this, and he soon brought him back with the crackers and gave him a tremendous whipping over his naked head and shoulders.

410While we were traveling along the Platte River, the men thought they would stop and give the cattle a rest and have a buffalo hunt for the buffalo were quite numerous. In the meantime, the women could do their washing and baking. We camped in a little skirt of timber. The next morning the men started out to hunt. It was a very hot day, but the men came in at night loaded with meat. However, there was a young man, Charley Jonson, the widow Lamb's teamster, who, when he came in was so thirsty and hungry that he could not wait for supper, and so cut a piece of raw buffalo meat and ate it. The poor fellow, that night he was taken with cholera and died next morning. The brethren worked all night with him but could not save him. His groans were heart-rending to hear. They dug a deep grave, rolled him up in blankets, and buried him there. They could do no better under the circumstances.

When we made ready to move on, we discovered that one of the widow Lamb's cows was missing. They hunted for her but could not find her and finally came to the conclusion that Indians had driven her off. So we had to go on without her and had to leave poor Charley in his lonely grave. My oldest son [Eli Alexander Tracy, 16 years old] then had to drive the widow's team. The large wolves followed us that morning for they were very numerous.

411We went on without further incident till we passed Fort Larimie when one evening there came two deserting soldiers into camp. They began to travel with us, saying that they could stand it no longer at the fort. They traveled two days with us, and then were overtaken by officers from the fort. Poor fellows! they might easily have been protected, but there was a reward up for them and our captain delivered them up. They were strapped to horses and taken back to receive their punishment. My husband and our captain had quite an argument about it. It was indeed cruel, but a little money was tempting for it was scarce.

411There began to be considerable sickness in camp and some deaths. Peter Shirts, captain of the first ten, had to bury his wife by the wayside. [^5] Abram Durphy [Abraham Durfey] buried one of his children, and there were others who died.

There were two emigrants traveling with us bound for California. One of them came down with small pox and died, but there were such precautions taken that no one else took it. However, the whole camp was vaccinated, and some were quite sick. I was, myself.

412Well, those were very long and toilsome days. Still we plodded on until they had to stop for rest. The cattle were giving out and becoming footsore and had to be shod. So we stopped in the country of the black hills for twelve days. There was water and plenty of timber, but previously to this, they sometimes had to tie up the cattle at night without feed or water. But here there was good feed and water and the poor animals surely needed it for they were about worn out. My two cows had given milk all the way and worked in the yoke besides, and so when there was no other alternative, we could drink their milk. But they were failing in this now. So we camped and overhauled and cleaned up generally while the men were busy shoeing the cattle and making tar out of the fat pines for the wagons for pine trees were abundant. When they got through with all this, they spent the time hunting until we were ready to move on. They killed elk and deer; so we had meat. But O the wolves! At night they made the air hideous with their howling. Of course, we always kept a guard at night ever since we started, and this was telling on the men. Many a time when my husband was on guard along the Platte River, I have gone out with some nourishment even if it were nothing but a hot potato.

412There was one circumstance I forgot to mention in its proper place. We had to cross over one fork of the Platte River. It was one quarter of a mile wide. We had to pile everything as high as we could in the wagon and then sit on top. The water was shallow at first but grew deeper as we got into the stream. Of course, the men had to go in the water to guide the teams and hold on to the ox bows. The water came up to their shoulders and was very chilly. But we got across safely and unloaded the fifty wagons and crossed back to bring a herd of sheep over. That meant that the men had to cross the ugly stream three different times. Then we had to stop over one day in order to dry the things. I was glad we saw the last of that river as I also was when we rolled out of our camping ground in the Black Hills, although we had a good rest there.

412We were now on the last half of our journey and began to feel anxious to get to our final stopping place. My husband was beginning to feel the wear of the trip severely.

Memory fails to think of anything worthy of note as we traveled on, although there was one place I remember well. The wagons had to be let down an embankment into a stream and had to travel on some distance in the stream before they could climb the bank to the road again. The men in letting the wagons down the bank into the stream had to tie strong ropes to the back of the wagons and several of them had to pull back on the ropes so as to let the wagons down easily. It took some time and was slow work but was accomplished. I often think how different the mode of travel is now to what it was at that time in 1850, and it is now 1895.

413The travel became slower and more fatiguing. At last we got to the crossing of the Green River. The river ran on very swift and looked angry and deep. The first ten drove in. There was one Brother Gifford [^6] who held on to his ox bows till he lost his hold and went down. He could not swim but one of the brethren went to his rescue and brought him out more dead than alive but he was brought around after a while. The rest got across safely and moved on toward the mountains that we were now approaching. In a few days, we began to raise the heights of the big mountain and reached the summit. When we did reach the top, we were struck with amazement as we gazed at the valley below, the long sought for place of rest. O how beautiful and grand the valley, dotted with dwellings and with the Great Salt Lake sparkling in the sunlight, appeared. We feasted our eyes upon the scene. It looked like paradise after three months of toil through the hot summer. We were about to reap the reward of our labors. We had found a place of rest far away from our enemies and those that had persecuted us and shed the blood of the Saints and prophets of the most high. Here we could live and worship God and keep his commandments. Will they let us alone now or will they follow us? Time alone will tell.

On the 12th day of September, 1850, we came down into Salt Lake City. We went to the west of the city and camped for a few days and looked around. But as feed for the teams was scarce, we moved on north to a place called Session Settlement [Bountiful] where some people by that name had settled. [^7]

414We stayed in this place for three weeks. My husband and son went into the mountains and got wood and took it to Salt Lake and sold it for provisions for we were out. The times were pretty hard for the crickets had made such havoc with the crops. But we got enough together to last awhile, and learning that a good many people had gone up north about the Ogden river to settle, we concluded to follow on and settle there. Sister Brocket was still with us but she could get a place in Salt Lake to live, and as her health was poor, she decided to stop. It was now the middle of October and would be sometime before we could build and have a shelter; so we bid her good-bye and started north.

414We came to the Ogden river and found a few log houses there. We crossed over at this point about one mile and camped at Farr's Fort where there were a few families. It was getting to be cold, and the wind from the canyon blew all the time. Timber was plentiful; so we had a cabin thrown up as soon as we could, and under shelter, the next thing was to secure something to live on through the winter. We sold a yoke of cattle for one large beef ox, and this we sold for twelve bushels of wheat, which was scarce and hard to get at any cost. We had a little corn meal, and the cows still gave a little milk. There were six of us in our family. I would cut the children a slice of bread, make some cruit coffee with a little milk in it, and tell them to thank the Lord for it, and they were satisfied.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
