Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

415Warren Foote [^1]

415In 1833 Warren Foote "professed" his belief in Mormons and associated himself with the Church in 1837 when he moved to Kirtland to teach school. He followed the Church to Missouri and then on to Nauvoo, where he was finally baptized in 1842. He left that city in May 1846 and situated himself and his family in Kanesville, Iowa, where he stayed until going west in 1850. He is one of many who recorded special promptings of the Spirit in connection with their departure for the Salt Lake Valley. He evidently kept a daily journal and drew from it to write an account of his 1850 stewardship as captain of a hundred.

415I will make some extracts from my private Journal in order to show my situation in the spring of 1850, and the dealings of the Lord with me, in causing me to seriously consider the advisability of going to Salt Lake Valley this year.

My nephew, Franklin Allen, and myself had purchased the little gristmill at Kanesville of Jacob Myers, our fatherinlaw, [^2] and was running it ourselves. There was a heavy emigration of California Gold Diggers, (as they were called) and grain was scarce and very dear. Corn $2.00 per bus. Wheat $2.25. We made considerable money and made some payments on the mill. About the first of May I took a severe cold, and was not able to do anything. I hired a brother, who had just come to Kanesville from Scotland, (a miller by occupation) to run the mill my half of the time. His name is David Adamson.

416My health being so poor, I began to reflect upon my situation and about going to the Valley of Salt Lake. I felt that my health would never be much better here in this changeable climate. One day, being greatly impressed by the spirit, I repaired to the top of the bluff north of the mill, not far from the burying ground, and there earnestly poured forth my soul in prayer to the Lord, asking Him to make known His will to me, - What He would have me do; and if it was his will that I should move to the Valley this season to open up the way, that I might sell my share of the mill, and obtain a fitout for that purpose. While I was thus engaged in prayer, the Spirit of God rested upon me, and impressed me by a still small voice which thrilled my whole body; saying: "The way shall be opened before you, and notwithstanding your ill health, inasmuch as you put your trust in me, I will preserve your life, and not one of your family shall fall by the way, but I will bring you safely to the valley of Salt Lake." This filled my soul with joy, and I returned to my house with a full determination to set about preparing to go.

416While the California Emigrants were passing through, I had a light wagon at Bro. Obanion's shop, [^3] for which he was making a box. One of the emigrants seeing it, wanted to trade a heavier one for it. I told bro. Obanion to trade with him, I gave a little chopfeed to boot, and thus got a good strong new wagon - strong enough to haul 4000 lbs to the Valley. This was before I had any idea of going to Salt Lake this year. But I am satisfied that the Lord was then preparing the way for me.

About the last of May I sold my half of the mill back to father Myers, and obtained a comfortable outfit.

417Two weeks from the time I sold out I was ready to start with one wagon, two yoke of oxen, and three cows. Two of the cows I worked between the oxen. George Kent, whose brother is in the Valley is going to drive my team for the privilege of going with me, and board. I will say here, that brother Otis L. Terry, who had been following blacksmithing in Kanesville, and with whom I had become intimately acquainted, was preparing to go to the Valley this season. We agreed to go together in the same Company. On the 10th of June, we started from Kanesville in company with brother Terry's father, and his brother Charles A. Terry. The Saints are crossing the Missouri river 18 miles below Kanesville this year, and going up the south side of the Platte river. We drove down to Musquito [Mosquito] Creek bridge and camped.

41712th We moved on down to within a mile and an half of the Ferry and unhitched our teams just in time to attend the meeting for organizing the Company. Elder [Orson] Hyde soon arrived and proceeded to organize the hundred. There was quite a congregation present but many who were going had not yet arrived.

Brother Hyde arose and after looking over the congregation, said, "I nominate bro Warren Foote for captain of hundred." This was so unexpected to me, I must confess that I was completely dumfounded. It was voted unanimously. Then brother Hyde nominated Otis L. Terry Captain of first fifty. Voted unanimously. He was as much taken by surprise as I was. Elder Hyde then asked for some one to nominate a Captain of the second fifty, and some one nominated William Wall. It was voted unanimously. Elder Hyde then said that the captain of the hundred and the captains of fifties, would organize the fifties into tens. This we accomplished during the afternoon.

418As has been stated, brother Otis L. Terry and I had agreed to travel together across the plains, but little did we think then that we would be associated togather as leaders of the Company. Elder Hyde asked if the brethren were generally supplied with firearms. Upon inquiry we found that there were several families who had none. He said there were muskets belonging to the Nauvoo Legion stored at Kanesville and that we could have them on conditions that we would deliver them to the Authorities of the Church in Salt Lake City. It was decided that I should return to Kanesville and get the muskets. Accordingly I returned on horseback and selected 15 that were in shooting order, and got a man who was going down to the ferry to take them along. I returned to camp the next day, (June 16th.) The second fifty commenced crossing on the 13th. I had my family ferried over the 14th and camped with the second fifty a short distance from the river. On the 16th the first fifty were all ferried over and all camped by a creek three miles from the Ferry. As brother Terry < had agreed to travel togather. I concluded to travel with the first Fifty, and < was decided that my wagon should take the lead or head of the Company which place I occupied throughout the journey.

418I have written the foregoing as a kind of preliminary to bro Mulliner's Journal. [^4]

418The succeeding pages contains my Review of the Journey.

418I will briefly review our Journey.

418As I have previously stated, my health my health was not very good before I left Kanesville.

After starting from the Missouri river I made it a practice towards camping-time, to get on a horse and ride ahead of the company and select a camping place. After we had been traveling about a week as I was about five miles ahead of the company looking for a camping place, there came up a thunder shower, and I was completely drenched. I took a terrible cold which settled on my lungs which caused the illness spoke of in the Journal. I was not so but what I could get around a little, but my lungs were so weak, that I could scarcely speak above a whisper. When we were along about Plum Creek, the atmosphere was so close and heavy, that it seemed to me that I would have to give up breathing altogather.

419I remembered the promises of the Lord that were made to me before I sold my share of the mill; and humbly asked the Lord to fullfil the same. I was impressed to be baptized for my health; and requested brother Mulliner to perform the ordinance; which he did; and was then administered to by the brethren. [^5] After this I began to recover slowly. When we arrived at Scotts' Bluffs I was able to walk short distances. From this place onward the atmosphere became lighter, and dryer, and my health improved very fast; and I was able to again take a more active part in the management of Company.

419It was a very serious time while the Cholera was raging in the company, but after it abated, we enjoyed our travels, and as a general thing, a good spirit. In places where feed was very scarce, there was some who murmured about our camping where there was so little grass, but the next morning as we traveled along, they would acknowledge that our camping place was as good or better than it was a "little ahead." They would say on camping, that there was a better place a "little ahead."

419Although there was some murmuring occasionaly, yet I think that we crossed the Plains with as little difficulty as any company that has crossed them. I am certain that a journey through a desert country of a thousand miles, with five hundred souls will try the patience of any man, or set of men who are appointed to preside over them as leaders, especially so, when the company consists of different nationalities, having different customs, and some without experience in driving ox teams and taking care of them.

I am thankful to be able to say that, the Lord blessed me with patience to such a degree, that one Captain of ten said in one of our council meetings that I was certainly one of the most patient men that he ever saw. I do not think that he said this as a compliment to me, but it was because I would not agree to a tyranical proposition that he was proposing. I was determined that every person in the Company should have their rights respected, and I am pleased to say that Captain O. L. Terry stood firmly by me, in fact we were one in all our councils.

Bro. Mulliner has omitted to state that at the foot of the last mountain, where we camped for the < time before we entered the Valley, the first fifty were called together for the purpose of settling all difficulties, if any existed, and ask each others forgiveness; so that we could enter the Valley free from any hard feelings towards any of our brothers or sisters. A good spirit prevailed; and all expressed a desire to forgive and be forgiven.

The second Fifty arrived in the Valley a few days before the first Fifty. When we stopped to rest a few days, and hunt, a little east of the Devil's Gate, the second fifty was Camped about a mile ahead. Captain Wall came to see me, and get some instructions. I told him that they had better push on to the Valley as fast as their teams were able to travel, and not wait for the first Fifty, as it was getting pretty well along in the season. I also charged him in particular to take the muskets, (10 in number) belonging to the Nauvoo Legion, that were in his fifty and deliver them to the Authorities in Salt Lake and take their receipts for them. This he never done. He did not even go to Salt Lake City, but as soon as he got into the Valley he took a road running south and went direct to Provo. As the second fifty were all dispersed before we got to Salt Lake City, I never recovered them. I got those that were in the first fifty and delivered them to the President's Clerk and took his receipt. I spoke to him about those that were in the second fifty. He said that they were all in the valley any way, and he seemed to think that it did not make much difference whether they were delivered or not. In fact they were not of much use to any one. The first Fifty passed through Salt Lake City in the afternoon of the 26th of Sept. and camped on the Jordon bottom west of the City. Many of the brethren were anxious to get some counsel, where they had better locate. On the morning of the 27th, Captain Terry and I went up in to the City and found Elder Hide [Hyde] at Bro. H[eber]. C. Kimballs residence and reported our arrival, and told him that some of the brethren wanted to know where would be the best place to locate. He said that they had been up north looking for locations for the saints to settle, and among other places he mentioned Ogden, and said that place would suit him best. On our return to Camp we reported what bro. Hyde said to us, and many of the brethren resolved to go north. Some located in Salt Lake City, and a few went south to Little Cottonwood.

Warren Foote,

Captain of One Hundred

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
