Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

433Elias Smith [^1]

433JULY - 1851

A prominent lawyer, judge, and newspaper man in Utah, Elias Smith, after being taught the gospel by Joseph and Hyrum Smith, was baptized by Hyrum in 1835. (He was born in Royalton, Windsor County, New York, near Joseph Smith's birthplace.) He lived in Kirtland and Missouri and then settled in Nashville, Iowa, when the Saints moved to Nauvoo. While there he worked as business manager of the Times and Seasons and Nauvoo Neighbor. When he went west in 1846, he settled in Iowaville, Iowa, remaining there for five years while he farmed the land. Finally, in 1851 he moved to Kanesville, arriving in July in time to join the John Brown company headed for Utah. His is an excellent journal for trail buffs since he notes distances, road conditions, and camping sites with great precision.

434Tues, 1 - Samuel [P. Hoyt] [^2] and I went to Kaneville, at which place as well as at other places this side of the Nishnabottany [Nishnabotna] we saw many of the brethren with whom I was acquainted. Most of them advised us to go ahead, as we were ready, and the companies not all gone from the ferry on the Missouri.

434Wed, 2 - We got our cattle across Muskets [Mosquito] Creek to brother Silas's [^3] and I made arrangements to have an axel tree fixed as one of mine had got badly sprung. We went over to Silas's to supper and then to our wagons to sleep on the bank of the creek.

434Thurs, 3 - Silas went and took my axeltree and two wheels to a smith shop and I got the tire set, axeltree ironed, and some chains mended which took all day. Weather warm.

434Fri, 4 - We went to Kaneville and did some trading after waiting for a shower or two in the morning. On our return we got our wagons over the creek in a shower, the citizens having built a bridge and finished it today whilst we were in town.

Sat, 5 - I wrote two or three letters in the morning. We then packed up our wagons again, and about two o'clock we left brother Silas' house and came to Kaneville. He and Hiram [Bennett] [^4] accompanied us. We did some more trading, laid in our supplies and at night camped near the town. Hiram and Silas returned after bidding us farewell.

435Sun, 6 - We started early, but before we got out of town we met with brother Silas again. The road to the ferry near Winter Quarters across the Missouri for the first 6 miles was very hilly and the last six was low and muddy, and in some places the water was two feet deep. We arrived at the ferry just at dark and met a company of Oregon emigrants recrossing the river, having lost so many of their cattle in a stampede that they had not enough to proceed with; so they returned after getting out one hundred miles or more.

435Mon, 7 - We crossed the river and came ten miles over a hilly road. At the ferry I made a bargain with Mr. William Janes [Jaynes] to drive one of my wagons to the Valley on condition of taking him a ways with us. He is one of the returning emigrants who had lost his cattle in the stampede on Beaver River. Showery in the morning and warm all day.

Tues, 8 - We started early this morning as we were anxious to overtake a company of emigrants under Captain [John] Brown which we ascertained from the returning emigrants would be at Elk Horn on Monday (yesterday) evening. Having concluded to go that way instead of taking the new route round Elk Horn, which most of the emigrants have taken this year owing to the high waters. [^5] We arrived at the ferry at three o'clock and found the company crossing over. We had come near overtaking the rest of the train at the Pappea [Creek] eight miles from where we camped and nine from Elk Horn. The roads were good and the weather being cool we travelled fast. We stopped an hour at Pappea as we saw the train and knew that we could overtake them before they would get to the ferry. We camped on the bank of the river as we could not get over that night.

436Wed, 9 - A shower in the morning after which we went to the ferry, crossed our wagons, swam the cattle, and came two miles and ferried a creek and then camped. Before we left the river, Robert McCoy, a man who was driving a team for a Mr. [Thomas] Judkins, an Oregon emigrant whom I had seen near Kaneville, came up and wanted some to wait at the creek and help them to get over when they came up, which we did, and got them over the river and creek and camped there together, the balance of the train having gone ahead to a better camping ground.

436Thurs, 10 - About three o'clock we came up with the main camp at the Platte River, thirty-nine miles from Winter Quarters, consisting of fifty-four wagons and a buggy or two and some sixty men.

436Fri, 11 - Travelled thirteen miles over rather heavy road and camped on the bank of the Platte.

436Sat, 12 - The roads better today. Travelled sixteen miles. The weather fine the last three days and everything about looks prosperous. Camped on the prairie.

436Sun, 13 - I sent a few lines by some men who were looking after cattle, to brother Silas, to let him know how we were getting along. We travelled some six or seven miles to get to a camping place, crossing two or three bad sloughs. The weather warm.

436Mon, 14 - The roads good today. Came twenty miles and camped on the banks of a small lake near the Loup Fork, having travelled up that stream all day.

436Tues, 15 - Crossed Looking Glass Creek, Beaver River, and camped on Plumb Creek near the old Pawnee Mission Station, having travelled some over sixteen miles. West of Beaver the Bluffs near the road were covered in place with scrubby looking oaks. The roads generally good, and the weather warm.

Wed, 16 - Started late, having to fix a bridge over the creek and get some wagon timber in the morning. We stopped at the lower ford and examined it. Thought it too deep, and concluded to go the upper ford on Loup Fork to cross. In the afternoon crossed Cedar River and camped on the high prairie. Distance today, 7 miles. A pleasant shower in the evening after we camped.

437Thurs, 17 - The road not so good as it might be. Crossed deep ravines, some of them muddy after the shower yesterday. We passed an old Pawnee Village, and another today. At one half mile from the old village we came to a muddy creek which was hard to cross and one company of the train did not get over, but remained on the east side of the creek. That company was ours. Distance, about ten miles.

437Fri, 18 - Last night soon after we went to bed it commenced raining and we experienced one of the most tremendous showers ever seen accompanied with wind and hail. Fortunately it lasted but a short time. In the morning the creek was out of its banks, and we had a bridge to make before we could get over, which took till late in the day. The train swerved on to the upper ford of the Loup Fork, six miles, where we encamped. The country beautiful on the banks of the river extending back two or three miles to the bluffs. The soil of the best quality.

437Sat, 19 - On examining the river this morning it was found unfordable. I went with two or three others to examine an old mountaineer ford, four or five miles higher up the river, but the water was too deep. Captain Brown concluded to wait till Monday, by which time he thought the river might be forded, as the water was falling.

437Sun, 20 - Rested today. Had public service in the afternoon. A woman, Mrs. [Erthur] Kimpton, late from London, died and was buried late in the evening.

437Mon, 21 - Forded the river without difficulty in the forenoon, travelled four and 3/4 miles and camped, as we cross here to go nineteen miles before fording water. A gentle shower about noon today.

437Tues, 22 - Travelled nineteen miles, most of the way over sandy bluffs. Camped on the south side of Prairie Creek. Got wet in a shower before we travelled.

Wed, 23 - Came 11 3/4 miles to Wood River, and about one mile above a wagon broke down after one upsetting, and we stopped to have it mended. Very warm.

438Thurs, 24 - The weather very warm. We travelled about 15 miles. One ox in Capt. [Edwin] Rushton's company died, and one in Capt. [Alex] Robbins' was left behind no better than dead. The road the very best. In the evening I wrote a letter to Lucy's [his wife] friends in England. Camped on the Platte.

438Fri, 25 - The road today over rather flat land, and in a wet time would be bad enough. We have even got along very well. Wrote a letter to Mr. Turman and finished one to brother Silas. Capt. Brown is going over to Fort Kearney to mail letters, so I improve the opportunity. Camped on the Platte south of road. Travelled about 13 miles only, being hindered some by Capt. [George D.] Watt's company, the fourth ten in the course of the day.

438Sat, 26 - Capt. [Preston] Thomas's, the first ten went ahead today, it being their turn. Travelled twenty miles. The roads excellent. Camped on Dry Creek, so-called, tho there was plenty of water. 217 3/4 miles from Winter Quarters. Came 84 miles this week, 65 3/4 last week, and 80 (from Kaneville) the week before.

438Sun, 27 - Lay in camp and rested, tho some of the company had to fix their wagons, as the dry warm weather during the last few days had loosened the tires on many of them.

Mon, 28 - There were some twelve or fourteen tires set this morning before the company started. Crossed Elm and Buffalo Creeks and camped near a slough on the south of the road, having travelled about 13 miles. About noon, and at Elm Creek, we first came in sight of buffalo, the plains being covered with them for miles and miles as far as the eye could reach, and before night we passed thousands and tens of thousands of them on the hills and plains on both sides of the river. Several were killed by the hunters before night, and we had any amount of fresh meat, which was a great luxury to some.

439Tues, 29 - Had to wait this morning to have a wheel mended which was broken down carelessly yesterday evening by a raw teamster from the Old Bay State, named Riggs. Started late; the weather warm, the road dusty. Came 13 miles and camped near the Platte opposite an island. Saw thousands of buffalo. In the afternoon met Samuel Newcomb, a brother Bateman (an apostate, as afterwards ascertained), and some others eight days from Salt Lake City. From them we learned that Elder [Orson] Hyde, Judge Brookers, [^6] and those with them who left Kaneville one week before we did and went around the Elk Horn (the new route) [^7] had been robbed by the Pawnees. They had come into our road some five or six miles back, and were ahead of us, but Elder [Orson] Pratt [^8] and company, and several other companies were yet behind on that route which was represented as being very hilly and bad.

Wed, 30 - Some time in the night after all were in bed but the watchman, there was a tremendous shower of rain and hail, and the wind blew a hurricane. This morning the air is some cooler. Travelled eighteen miles. The road excellent. Turned off the road and camped one and a fourth miles west of Deep Dry Creek.

440This evening from our encampment we saw a company ahead of us encamped on the prairie which proved to be Captain [Luman A.] Shurtliff's company, the first fifty of Capt. [Easton] Kelsey's company, which went the new route round the Elk Horn; and before dark another company, Capt. Morris Phelps' came in just ahead of us, and before morning the company from Garden Grove, Capt. [Harry] Walton, came in, most of the companies having taken a route farther west than the one mentioned by the company we met from the Lake on Tuesday last. We also learned that Elder Hyde came in on the upper route. These companies, or some of them, had lost some of their cattle and one company, Captain Shurtliff's, were in some confusion and had left one company of ten behind some thirty miles looking after their cattle. They report two other companies near by and think Elder O. Pratt some days behind. He is with the last fifty of his company. They confirm the report of Elder Hyde being robbed, and the bad roads by the new route, which is some 200 miles farther. That we found incorrect, as it was some twenty or twenty-five miles ahead to where they started the old road. In the course of the day we passed vast herds of buffalo, and about ten thousand in one herd came running past our train, and about fifty ran through between my wagon and Samuel's, which were a little distance apart, but as fortune favored us, our cattle were not frightened.

440Thurs, 31 - Travelled nineteen miles, part of the way over a very sandy road, especially at the sandy bluffs. Camped on Skunk Creek. A fine shower in the evening after we retired to our wagons to sleep. The companies which came in from the north went on ahead of us with the exception of the one from Garden Grove which stopped to look after some cattle which they had lost in a stampede some days ago.

440AUGUST - 1851

440Fri, 1 - The road today has been very sandy and the weather warm. Passed a beautiful cold spring at the upper end of the Pawnee Swamp. Travelled fifteen miles and camped on Carrion Creek.

Sat, 2 - This morning our company passed Capt. Phelps' company in their camp, and also Capt. Shurtliff's, both of which came on and passed us at noon. The last went ahead, and the first camped soon after they passed us at noon, opposite some willow islands, intending to stay there till Monday as the two hundred mile stretch without timber is now before us. After gathering a little wood, consisting of willows only, we came ahead, again passing Capt. Phelps and company, and encamped for the Sabbath on the banks of the Platte near a small creek 317 1/4 miles from Winter Quarters, having travelled 99 1/2 miles during the week.

441Sun, 3 - Lay in our encampment. Very cold in the morning. Had a meeting in the afternoon and had a goodly session together.

441Mon, 4 - Came to North Bluff Fork three and a half miles from our encampment, which we crossed without difficulty. At the east foot of the sandy bluffs Brother Samuel and I came up the bed of the river with our teams to save coming over the bluffs. The balance of the train came over. We got into the road of the west foot of the bluffs about one hour before the others came up. Crossed the second sandy bluffs and camped near Bluff Creek, having travelled fifteen miles. Road very sandy.

Tues, 5 - Our road today has generally been sandy and hard on teams. Crossed the third Sandy Bluffs and several small streams, such as Petite, Piccanninni, Goose, and Duck Weed Creeks. After we crossed the latter the road was excellent. Camped on a beautiful prairie near the river two miles below Rattlesnake Creek, having travelled some eighteen miles. At noon Lisbon Lamb came up and reported Capt. Smith's ten, which were left behind by Capt. Shurtliff, [^9] were close upon us; also Capt. Phelps and company, and several others were within ten miles. Before night we learned that the Garden Grove company had had another stampede and lost some more of their cattle.

442Wed, 6 - We travelled nineteen miles today, mostly over a good road, crossed Rattlesnake Camp and several other small creeks. Met a company of men returning by way of Salt Lake from Oregon and California, twelve in number, with pack animals. They left the Lake the 15th July and report all well there at that time. Camped on Wolf Creek at an early hour. After we camped [met] two more men belonging to the same company we met in the forenoon. They had been left in consequence of losing their horses, and having found them were pursuing to overtake the company.

442Thurs, 7 - Came some over nineteen miles. Mostly a good road after crossing the bluff at Wolf Creek, which was very bad. Captain Phelps overtook us before we all got over. That company is only a few miles behind us tonight. James Monroe was over to our camp this evening from the other side. His company [Captain Homer's company] left the frontier a week or ten days before ours, and are now only fifteen miles ahead.

442Fri, 8 - Today we travelled twenty and a half miles. Road first rate. Camped on Crab Creek. Saw a train on the other side the river going down. Some one of our company was over. It proved to be a merchant train, Phelf's [?] 20 days from Salt Lake with mule teams and no load. In the forenoon I went out on a hunting excursion with Bros. Brown and Thomas. One antelope was the fruit of our labor, which was rather dearly bought.

442Sat, 9 - Crossed Cobble Hills and passed the "Ancient Bluff Ruins," west of which about six and a half miles we encamped, having travelled about sixteen miles; and one hundred and eight and a quarter miles during the week. In the forenoon saw another train going down on the south side (ten or eleven wagons) supposed to be a government train from Laramie. Went out a-hunting in the afternoon with brother Thomas. We caught no game, but saw a fine grove and good water in a valley in the bluffs (unobserved before by the emigrants as far as we know) about five miles west of the Ancient Bluff Ruins. There is an abundance of cherries and currants there to be found by going up the ravine a short distance.

Sun, 10 - The Garden Grove company passed us today, and one ten of Capt. Shurtliff's company which had been left behind to look after their lost cattle. They travel on Sunday's, but we think it best to rest. We had a pretty shower in the evening.

443Mon, 11 - The road in the forenoon some sandy. After crossing a sandy hill the land in wet weather I should think was rather wet, tho the road is excellent now. Turned off the road some distance to camp, as the road from the bluffs below to Scott's bluffs does not run very near the river. Came about nineteen miles.

443Tues, 12 - The road excellent but very dusty. The air in the morning was very cool. Passed "Chimney Rocks" and camped about eleven miles west, having travelled about twenty miles. Capt. Phelps' company keep about two miles behind us, and have, since overtaking us last week.

443Wed, 13 - Passed Scotts Bluffs today. Road first best. Very warm in the middle of the day. Morning and evening cool. Came 17 miles. Turned off the road a little and camped on a creek some earlier than common as one ten, Capt. [Joseph] Chatterly's, had to stop to set some tires in the morning and have been far behind all day.

443Thurs, 14 - Travelled eighteen miles or thereabouts. One of my oxen has been lame two or three days. There was a fine shower last night, and it has been good travelling. Saw an Indian for the first time on the road. Several were seen by others ahead of the train.

Fri, 15 - Came about fifteen miles. Road most of the way sandy. Passed Raw Hide Creek (now dry) and camped about six miles below Laramie. Passed many Indian encampments along the river and saw many of the Lamanites of the Sioux tribe. They were thick about our train all day and after we camped. A span of horses took fright at them and ran, which started several of the ox teams, and in the confusion one woman, Sister Sandifor, [^10] was run over and hurt, tho not very bad.

444Sat, 16 - This morning some of the cattle were missing and were not all found in time to start till noon. Six of them went on ahead to another camp in the night. We tied up all our cattle every night till within a few days, but the grass is getting shorter and we have thought best to let them be loose that they might have a better chance to graze, and we have never had any stray away till this morning. After starting we came past the camp of the last ten (so called) belonging to Shurtliff's company. They were laying by to buy some cattle, if possible. At Laramie Fort we passed Capt. Phelps' company again, as they had started before us in the morning before finding our cattle. Capt. Brown did not think best to cross the river at Fort Laramie, so we kept up on the north side about four miles and encamped, having travelled about one hundred and a half miles during the week. Capt. Phelps' company went on a little further and camped in a very poor place. Ours was bad enough, as the grass was very short. There are so many Indians all along the river that the bottoms are covered with their mules and ponies, and in the neighborhood of Fort Laramie the animals belonging to the Government would keep down the grass if the Indians were not about. I did not go over to the Fort, but some did. I sent over two letters to be mailed, one to A. B. Fuller and the other to brother Silas.

Sun, 17 - The grass was so short that Capt. Brown thought best to move on a piece in order to find better feed for our cattle, so we started on at a late hour. Came about two miles and crossed over the river to the south side. Soon after we got over we passed Capt. Phelps' company once more, they having stopped in the place we expected to in order to spend the sabbath. After passing them about four miles we passed the Garden Grove company, also encamped for the sabbath, which they do not often do. We found little feed till we came to the point where the road leaves the river 12 1/2 miles from Laramie, and then had to turn our cattle over the river. Distance travelled today eight and half miles.

445Mon, 18 - The company did not get started till late, and before we all got on the road the Garden Grove company, Capt. Walton, came up and kept close to our train all day. Capt. Phelps' company was close in the rear of Capt. Walton's, and as we wound over the hills all together we made quite a splendid show. Soon after leaving our encampment, Capt. Brown took the river road, so-called, which was very good but some hilly. We travelled till late to get where there was feed and water, and camped by two excellent springs of water. The season has been very dry and feed is scarce, tho there is water enough in places. Before we stopped we passed Capt. Thomas' company (which came up the south side of the Platte) in their encampment, some off the road. Came about twenty-three miles. Two wagons' wheels broke, and a part of Capt. Chatterly's company did not reach camp tonight.

Tues, 19 - This morning whilst waiting for Bro. Chatterly, Capt. Homer's company passed us. In the company I found several of my old acquaintances, among whom were: Brother Alfred Bell and family, D. Porter, Capt. Homer and others. The two companies that were behind us yesterday also went past us in the course of the forenoon. It was so late when Bro. Chatterly came up that it was thought advisable to remain where we were during the day and repair wagons, wash, etc. At night the cattle were taken two or three miles ahead to some excellent feed on Horn Creek, and a few took their wagons to the creek, among whom were Samuel and myself. The place was beautiful and the evening delightful. Plenty of currants and cherries and we enjoyed ourselves first rate.

446Wed, 20 - It was late before the cattle could be taken back to the camp and the company get up to where we were, so I wrote, or commenced writing a letter to Silas and Hiram. Lucy and other gathered cherries and currants till the company came up. Mr. Judkins stopped to wait for his son who had gone back in search of a cow. There was a child born in the camp today. Sister [Emma] Sharkey, wife of Robert Sharkey had a fine little girl born in the forenoon. We came about nine miles to the Platte River, where we stopped at noon. Then the road took into the bluffs again as the river just above where we came to it runs thro a deep cut in the rocky bluffs which the road had to wind into the bottom above. We came to the river again at night. Travelled in all some eighteen miles.

446Thurs, 21 - Crossed the river to the north side and came about twenty miles and recrossed it, and camped on the south side again. The road today some sandy in places. Passed several dry creeks and several bad places being rough and crooked. The ford where we crossed in the morning very good, much better than where we forded at night. Overtook Capt. Phelps' company and camped with them on the same ground. One wagon broken only, which was good luck considering the road and the teamsters.

446Fri, 22 - The road today some crooked and rough. Came about thirteen miles. Mr. Lytle, [^11] an Oregon emigrant, had his oxen run away and his wife got hurt badly. Camped on the banks of the Platte, as usual, for there is no feed only on the river or near it and on the small streams, most of which are now dry.

447Sat, 23 - It was late when we got ready to start. The morning was cool, but as soon as the sun began to shine it became very warm. At about eight miles we came into the road that crosses the Black Hills. From thence we came to Deer Creek, five miles, where we expected to find plenty of feed. But the season has been very dry in this region, and the grass was so short even there where it was supposed to be good that Capt. Brown thought best to go on further. We came about seven miles further and camped at a late hour. About ten o'clock Mr. Judkins, who had stopped behind on Wednesday to look after a cow, came up and joined us again. We have made about the same distance as last week, one hundred and three fourths of a mile allowing the road we came to be the same distance as the road over the Black Hills.

447Sun, 24 - We lay in our encampment all day and Elder Thomas preached a sermon on the first principles of the Gospel in the evening.

447Mon, 25 - We started early and came eight miles and encamped where there was good grass on the south side of the river for the purpose of setting some wagon tires and repairing wagons. Soon after we stopped two men from the Lake, Brother James Ferguson, and Mr. Holman, son of the Indian agent [Jacob H. Holman], rode up. They were on their way to Fort Laramie after some soldiers to guard the Snake Indians who are between here and the South Pass on their way to Laramie to attend the Great Council of the tribes there the first of September next, as they are afraid of the Shyens [Cheyennes?] with whom they have been at war. In the evening I went out to the mountains with a party from the camp on a hunting expedition and camped out there all night.

447Tues, 26 - Got in from our hunting excursion in the afternoon, the company having killed four or five buffaloes and some other game, very tired and weary indeed.

Wed, 27 - At a late hour this morning we got started and travelled about twelve miles and encamped a little below the Upper Platte Ford. There was a woman died about noon today. She had been confined a day or two since, and had not been well for many weeks before. Her name, I believe was Henderson, [^12] or perhaps Henry.

448Thurs, 28 - Crossed the Platte and then took the road up the river which was some hilly, but not bad, only in a few places. Came twelve or thirteen miles and camped on a small creek where there was plenty of grass a short way up from the river. There was a light shower about noon, the first rain we have had for about three weeks. Met a company of Snake Indians going to the treaty at Laramie, being the chiefs of the tribe and part of those mentioned above, being afraid of the Chyans. Mr. Holman, the Agent was with them, a subagent or two together with a small company of returning gold diggers, Mr. [Stephen B.] Rose, subagent, and Joshua Terry and B. Wood, mountaineers.

448Fri, 29 - We travelled today some twenty five miles. Road very good. Passed the Alkali Swamps and Willow Springs and camped at a late hour on a small creek south of the road some four hundred yards where there was grass and plenty of water. Four mountaineers from Green River camped with us at night on their way to the states. Frost and ice this morning.

448Sat, 30 - Crossed Greasewood Creek, a fine stream, and then left the old road and followed the creek down to the Sweet Water River. This road is some farther than the old one, but the sand is not so bad and we could reach grass on the river nearer than the other way. Came about ten or twelve miles and camped on the river near the saleratus lakes.

448Sun, 31 - We lay in camp today and rested our cattle. Lucy went with me and some others to the Saleratus Lakes and got some saleratus to take to the Valley. We travelled last week only sixty-seven miles, according to the Guide, but we came some further in consequence of taking other roads in order to find feed for our cattle.

448SEPTEMBER - 1851

448Mon, 1 - Started at a late hour and came fifteen miles, passing Independence Rock, crossing river, and camped about seven miles above "Devil's Gate" on the south side of the Sweetwater, where there was excellent grass.

Tues, 2 - Camped at night near the Gravelly Bluff. Came seventeen miles. Road sandy enough, tho we kept the river road. Several oxen sick this evening.

449Wed, 3 - Came seventeen miles. Crossed the river three times and camped just below "ford No. four." A little shower in the evening. Some cool, but fine. We overtook Capt. Phelps' company and are camped near them tonight.

449Thurs, 4 - Before we got started this morning Capt. Walton's company hove in sight. They having been off the road a short distance west of the "Devil's Gate" to repair wagons, and recruit their teams a few days, and we have passed them on Monday last. Capt. Phelps went on ahead of our company, and Capt. Walton was close in our rear all day till we turned off the road to camp about three miles below Ford "no. Five." Came about fifteen miles besides going off the road to a good camping ground some two miles further. One wagon broke down (br. Margetts) [^13] and several oxen gave out. The road most of the way very sandy.

449Fri, 5 - Capt. Brown thought best to lay by today and let our cattle rest, as there was excellent feed for them and some of the wagons wanted fixing a little. I spent the forenoon in fixing mine and bringing water to wash with, and in the afternoon went and caught some fish in company with Capt. Brown, Thomas, and others.

Sat, 6 - This is an anniversary of my birth day, [^14] and the semi-annual conference of the Church will commence in Salt Lake City. I should have been happy to have been there, but I am glad that I am as near and am with the prospect of being in the Valley in a few weeks. We came twelve miles today and camped before night as we could not reach grass if we went on till after dark. This week we have made seventy-five and three fourths miles.

450Sun, 7 - We lay in camp in the forenoon, and as Capt. Brown thought best to move from where we now are in consequence of poor feed, we started on and camped on a branch of the Sweetwater, which took us till late in the evening. There we found water, but little grass. Distance thirteen miles.

450Mon, 8 - We could not find all the cattle till late, and as I had mine I came over to the Sweetwater with Samuel's team ahead of the train and others followed as fast as possible after finding their cattle. Some however did not get off till afternoon. A heavy frost this morning. Before starting this morning the mail from Salt Lake came past, and Doctor [John Milton] Bernhisel was along on his way to Washington, having been elected Delegate from Utah Territory to Congress at the August election. [^15]

450Tues, 9 - This morning I set the tire on one of my wagons, having prepared for it yesterday afternoon whilst laying by, as we could not find grass after leaving the Sweetwater short of twelve or fifteen miles. We started early, crossed the Sweetwater for the last time, came through the Pass and camped on Pacific Creek about one mile below the crossing. Came nearly eighteen miles. Frost in the morning. Two wagons belonging to Capt. Robbins were broke down and his ten did not get in till late at night.

450Wed, 10 - Stopped all day to mend wagons. The day remarkably fine tho frosty in the morning.

450Thurs, 11 - Some frost in the morning. The country we travelled today was very barren. Came down the Pacific creek about sixteen miles and turned off the road to camp a mile or more.

Fri, 12 - Came to Big Sandy and crossed over and camped about five miles below the old ford. Distance about fifteen miles. Country level, barren, and sandy.

451Sat, 13 - Started late. At about two miles from camp we came to the old road which we had left near Pacific Creek. After we struck the old road we came to the point where it leaves Big Sandy for Green River, and camped to spend the sabbath a little off the road near the creek or river. Came seventeen miles, and 87 during the week. In the morning Capt. Robbins and his drivers had a little difficulty, and six of them left him, which made him late in starting, and he did not get in till late. The difficulty arose about their provisions. The men came on ahead but stopped and camped with us at night.

451Sun, 14 - We rested today. Some teams from the Lake passed us with provisions for the companies. The difficulty between Capt. Robbins and his teamsters was settled. Elder Brown preached to us in the afternoon, and we had an excellent meeting.

451Mon, 15 - Came to Green River, a beautiful stream, forded it, and then went down it some three miles below to where the Guide road leaves it, in order to find grass. Camped in a beautiful cotton wood grove on the banks of the river, and turned our cattle over it to graze.

451Tues, 16 - A light shower last night, and this morning everything around looks smiling. Started early; that is a mistake—we meant to start early, but did not. Came sixteen miles and camped on Black's Fork. Road sandy, rough, and in some places crooked. Land extremely barren.

451Wed, 17 - We came fifteen miles or thereabouts. Crossed Ham's Fork about two miles from where we camped and Black's Fork soon after and camped on it just below the ford, and about seventeen miles from Fort Bridger. A little rain fell in showers and it thundered a little.

451Thurs, 18 - Last night after supper I went back some distance to help Capt. Robbins' men get a broken wagon. He is himself sick with mountain fever, started late, and only came about eleven miles. Turned off the road some distance and camped near Black's Fork once more.

452Fri, 19 - Passed Fort Bridger at noon. The road some rough and stoney, especially toward night. Came down one very steep hill and camped on a creek ten miles from Bridger. Distance made during the day 16 miles.

452Sat, 20 - We came about eleven miles, part of the way on the Guide Road and part not, and camped on a high ridge and drove our cattle down into ravines on each side of the ridge. We are now about ninety miles from the city of the Great Salt Lake, and have travelled eighty-five miles during the week. Mr. Litell, an Oregon emigrant, with two wagons, left us this morning and went ahead. A man named Riggs also went with him.

452Sun, 21 - At about eleven o'clock we started on our way as we were encamped in an uncomfortable place, and Capt. Brown thought we had better do so. It rained all night, tho not so very hard, and the road is some slippery. Two miles from where we camped we reached the top of the east rim of the Great Basin and began to descend the ridge that divides the waters of the Colorado from those of the Salt Lake. The descent is lengthy and some steep. We crossed Sulphur Creek and arrived on Bear River about four o'clock, where we encamped on the west bank. One of my oxen died suddenly on the road about one mile before arriving on Bear River. Several have died in the same manner lately. Cause unknown.

452Mon, 22 - We came about nine and a half miles to Yellow Creek. The road first rate. Some of the cattle could not be found and Capt. Chatterly's ten did not start till late and did not come up at night. Two children have been born in the camp within two days, Brother [Zacarias] Derrick's wife [Mary] had a daughter [Ursula Shepherd] born Sunday morning, and Walter Baker's a son last evening. Near where we camped there was a grave made a day or two before, I think on the 20th, purporting to be that of James Monroe. He was with Homer's train and was taking thro a large quantity of goods to the Lake.

Tues, 23 - We came over a high hill and down a valley to Cache Cave five and a half miles and camped for Capt. Chatterly's company to come up. The day beautiful and fine in the extreme for this season of the year.

453Wed, 24 - Before we started this morning two men came by from the Valley after the body of James Monroe. He was shot by Howard Egan, who came from the Valley and met him where we saw his grave and shot him with a pistol for some interference with his family during his absence in the gold mines of California. We came seventeen miles and camped on Echo Creek at a place surrounded by high hills some—about five miles east of the Weber River.

453Thurs, 25 - We came to Weber River, at which place we met Elder Hyde on his return to Kaneville, and some other going to the states. From Weber River came about three miles and camped at an early hour. Came about twelve miles today. Several men from other companies behind us passed us during the day.

453Fri, 26 - Early this morning we met several more brethren on their way to different parts of the world, among whom were Elder E[zra]. T. Benson, J[edediah]. M. Grant going to Kaneville, [^16] and A[braham]. O. Smoot, Willard Snow, and Samuel Richards on their way to England. Came to Kanyon Creek seven miles, and at night camped about two miles below where the road leaves the creek to ascend the mountain, having come about thirteen miles.

454Sat, 27 - After leaving Kanyon Creek we ascended a high mountain and thence descended to Brown's Creek, on which we camped at night twelve miles from the city. Two or three wagons were broken, and Capt. Rushton did not reach camp, and Capt. Robbins' ten did not get far down the mountain before they stopped for the night. We had not gone far in the morning before we overtook five or six wagons belonging to Capt. Phelps' company which had been left behind, and before we camped we passed Capt. Homer's company camped and waiting for some of his wagons to be mended which were broken coming down the mountains.

Sun, 28 - We came over the Last mountain and down the Last creek to the mouth of the kanyon where most of us camped, tho some went down to the city. Those behind us did not come up at night as we expected. Capt. Brown left us after we stopped and went to the City, and thence to his family from which he had been absent about one year. Several brethren from the city came out to our camp as soon as they heard of our arrival, and among them we had the satisfaction of seeing John L. Smith, Joseph Cain, A[ndrew]. Lamoreaux, and other of our friends and old neighbors from Iowa who had preceded us to this beautiful valley of the mountains.

455Mon, 29 - I got up my cattle as soon as I could and came down to the City of the Great Salt Lake in company with Samuel P. [Hoyt] There we had the pleasure of meeting with many of the old Saints from Nauvoo and other places with whom I had passed thro many scenes of pleasure and sorrow in years gone by, who greeted us joyfully and bid us welcome to the city. We drove through the city to the Council House, where we met with President Young, George A. Smith, D[aniel] H. Wells, [ . . . ] Morly [Isaac Morley], [David] Pettigrew, and many others who received us with every expression of joy and friendship, and my heart was made glad once more after being separated from the Saints during five years and upwards at seeing the faces of so many of my old brethren and friends once more in the land of the living. We left our wagons in the street near Uncle John Smith's, and George A.'s and took our cattle to a pasture over the Jordan to stay a few days till we determined what we should do and where we should go. We had a joyful meeting with Uncle John Smith and family, and with our cousins George A. [Smith] and John L[yman]. [Smith] and their families, [^17] and there was only the absence of our own dear father and mother in the world of spirits that caused our hearts to weep at meeting with our kindred in the distant valley when we had fondly hoped on leaving Nauvoo in 1846 we should all live to greet each other once more this side of the grave. We were highly pleased with the general appearance of the city, which in point of improvement far exceeded our anticipations. Many elegant houses built of adobes, or unburnt bricks, presented themselves in all of the city, and the hammer of the builders were heard on every hand; and all appeared to be busily engaged in preparing for the winter and prosecuting every branch of agricultural and mechanical business necessary for the subsistence and comfort of the Saints in this new and far-off valley of the mountains.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:445. Israel, in this instance, referred to the Indians, or remnants of the Lamanites, descendants of the house of Israel.
[^9] When the Nauvoo Charter was revoked some months after the death of Joseph Smith, the citizens renamed Nauvoo the City of Joseph.
[^10] "Life of George Whitaker, A Utah Pioneer, as written by himself," 8, typescript, Utah State Historical Society.
[^11] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:468.
[^12] Reminiscences of Louisa Barnes Pratt (1879), LDS Church Archives.
[^13] Bathsheba W. Smith described the city as "one vast mechanic shop, as nearly every family was engaged in making wagons. Our parlor was used as a paint-shop for the wagons. All were making preparations to leave the ensuing winter." In Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877; reprint, Salt Lake City, 1975), 321.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535.
[^15] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535-36. See also "Life of George Whitaker," 9.
[^16] As early as May 1842, Joseph Smith had introduced the temple ordinances to several of his closest associates, and before his death as many as sixty-five men and women had received all of the temple ordinances. Frequently noting that he might not live long enough to teach the endowment ceremony in the temple, he presciently endowed these trusted followers in preparation of performing the saving ordinances to the body of the Church. For details of this selected "endowment group," see Andrew F. Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances and the 1844 Mormon Succession Question" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1982).
[^17] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:541-42. The temple was dedicated privately by Joseph Young on 30 April and publicly from 1-3 May by Orson Hyde. Thousands of Saints attended the services. Wilford Woodruff addressed three thousand Saints at the temple on 10 May.
