Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Other EmigrationHCAugusta Dorius Stevens [^1]

Other EmigrationHCFor Augusta Dorius (Stevens), "crossing the plains" meant a journey of more than eight months that began in Copenhagen, Denmark. She was the first of her family to emigrate, traveling, as a girl of fifteen, with eighteen other Danish converts under Erastus Snow's leadership in 1852. They all traveled west in the Eli B. Kelsey company. She wrote, "I wondered how I received courage to leave my family and go to a strange land and then too, when I did not know how far we should have to travel to get to Zion, and I could not speak the language." From her reminiscence, one would not guess her to be a Danish emigrant; her responses to the events of the trek, and language to express them, resemble those of her American traveling companions.

Other EmigrationHCAugusta Dorius Stevens, daughter of Nicholi and Sophia Christopherson Dorius, was born October 29th, 1837 in Copenhagen, Denmark. When I was two years of age I lost one of my eyes through an accident. I had many minor accidents but got through them all right. I attended school until I was about thirteen years of age. About that time the Mormon Elders came to Copenhagen with the Gospel of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day-Saints. My father embraced the Gospel of and was baptised November 14, 1850. For this reason I had to quit school on account of the immediate persecution waged against me in school on account of joining this then unpopular religion. We lived in the same house where the L.D.S. meetings were held; we lived down stairs and the meetings were held upstairs. One night the mob came up to the hall and broke down the door. They wanted to get Brother Erastus Snow and subject him to bodily punishment. We had to break up the meeting and Brother Snow walked out with the crowd of saints and the mob did not get him. My mother could not see that our church was any better than her Lutheran Church, and so she did not join until 1862 when my two brothers Carl and John left Utah for a mission to Norway. While there the boys went to Copenhagen, Denmark, and took Mother with them to Norway to the city of Christiania where they made their headquarters, and where she was baptized. Mother did not come to Utah until 1874. I was accordingly away from my mother for twenty-two years.

Other EmigrationHCI did not know how many persons had joined the church when I left for Utah. But at that time the spirit of gathering becam[e] an important item among the Saints in Copenhagen and there were twenty-eight persons who got ready to emigrate with Elder Erastus Snow when he returned from his first mission to Scandinavia and I was one of this number. I had assisted a family by the name of Ravens as a girl in their home at general domestic work. Mr. [Christian Hildur] Ravens was a sea Captain; the family was quite well off. They had joined the church and took quite a liking to me for the work I was doing for them and inasmuch as I had also joined the church, they offered me the opportunity to join them in coming to Utah and they paid my way. My father thought it would be a good thing for one of the family to go to Zion and the rest of the family would come later. So it was arranged for me to go. I thought this was a fine plan and I was happy to think I was the first of the family to go to Zion.

Other EmigrationHCThe day came for us to start; it was the fourth day of March, 1852. I had great faith in the gospel I had embraced, so I fle felt all would be well for me. But when I said farewell to my parents and brothers and sisters, and seeing the steam boat sail out and my folks begin to fade out of sight, I felt alone, and I surely felt badly and wept as I then realized for the first time that I was alone to face the world and that too on foreign soil. If I had known or realized how far that journey would have been, I certainly should have felt worse, but traveling was something new to me and there were many interesting sights for me to see which were interesting and entertaining and I wonder sometimes how I received courage to leave my family and go to a strange land and then too, when I did not know how far we should have to travel to get to Zion, and I could not speak the language. But it was the gospel I had received and the Spirit of Lord that helped me. I was ignorant of the world and did not understand it as I came to know later. When I think of one of my daughters starting out at that age, going into my fifteenth year, I wonder how it would go for her. But if she ha[d] the same faith I had I think it would be alright for her, too. But there were few who have strong faith as those who came from the old country in those days. I have never regretted that I came when I did, but am thankful to the Lord that I was thus permitted to come to Zion.

Other EmigrationHCAs the steam ship on which I left Copenhagen reached Liverpool, England, we transferred to a sail ship by the name of Ital[y] and the ship propelled by the wind on the sails took nine weeks in which to cross the Atlantic ocean, and we landed at New Orlea[ns.] The Mississippi River at its mouth was quite shallow and sometimes the wind unfavorable and our larger sail ship was tugged up the river by two small steam boats—one pulling on each side of the sail ship Italy. Thus the ship was pulled up to the city of New Orleans. From this city we completed the balance of our river journey by steam boat to the city of Kanesville on the Missouri River. This unloading point is on the east side of the river, and we remained there a month to prepare for crossin[g] the Plains; getting the Oxen, wagons, and equipment ready for the journey. At this point I experienced a new phenomimon. There came a day the worst wind and thunder storm that I could ever in imagine and an experience I had ever known of in Denmark or on the journey so far. The appointed time came for the great journey across the Plains into the almost unknown West. The wagons and equipment and members of the emigrating party were taken over the Missouri River by ferries and the oxen, cows and horses had to swim across as there was then no accommodations for ferrying animals across the Missouri.

Other EmigrationHC464There were representatives of several nationalities including Americans but in our particular division of the emigrant train which included fifty wagons, there were twenty-eight from Copenhagen and in our company of ten wagons there were included quite a number of Americans. Our Company was presided over by John Butler who was the Captain over our Company which occupied ten wagons. The entire fifty wagons with occupants was presided over by a head captain in the person of E[li B.] Kelsey, and the whol[e] emigrant train is known as Kelsey's Company. There were then five companies with ten wagons to each company. Each presided over by a captain; a chief captain to preside over the entire train of fifty wagons. The women generally rode in the wagons and always slept in the wagons. Personally I thought the emigra[nt] wagons most remarkable vehicles as I had never seen anything of the kind before starting on this journey. Upon nearing the Rocky Mountains, the oxen became somewhat worn out and then it was necessary for many women to walk while traveling. Upon camping at night the wagons were driven in a circle and the camp fires were made inside the circle. Being young and in my fifteenth year, this being the year 1852, it became a part of my regular duty to gather buffalo chips which served as part of the fuel for the camp fires. During the first part of the journey across the plains, the novelty of travel was new and the evenings across this trip we felt to enjoy the company of the members and the friends we had made. One member had a fiddle as we then knew it and all joined in the evening dances around the camp fires within the big circle. Prayers and hymns were part of the daily morning and evening program. After walking a good deal during the days, I felt so tired I could often have been glad to have gone to bed without supper but I always had to help with the dishes and help with camp duties including the preparing of the beds.

Other EmigrationHC464Occasionally I walked with some of the other girls in head of the train; as far as we dared to go on account of the Indians and then wait for the wagons. My thought would go back to my parents in Denmark feeling sure that I should never see them again because the journey into the wild west seemed so long and hard and uninviting that it seemed I could never hope to have them join me in the distance place somewhere far in the west known as Zion. Surely my elderly parents at least when I had left in the Old Country could not endure the hardships of such a journey. I had my sobs and cries and pangs of sorrow. What comfort it would have been to me if I could even have been able to speak or understand the American language in this to me the New Land of American.

Other EmigrationHCOne of the singular incidents that happened enroute was the occasion of a stampede of a herd of buffalo which came direct to ward our wagon train. The stampede ran providentially just in head of the train with the fierceness of the rush and tramp and as it appeared almost a cyclone of dust. This caused a great commotion and almost stampeded among the oxen and horses of the train. The few rifles available were used and fortunately enough for the emigrants, a few buffalo fell which were prepared and this gave us extra provisions on the long journey in head of us. Upon another occasion nearly a dozen Indians came on their horses and approached the emigrant train. A great deal of apprehension was caused among the emigrants as they felt sure an impending disaster was before them. They thought this was the first contingent of hordes of Indians that lurked in the ravines near the trail. The daily prayers were answered and we were assured that Heavenly Father was mindful of the needs and protection of his Saints. The Indians spread their blankets by the side of the trail and each wagon was required to give its toll of food to the Indians as it passed.

Other EmigrationHC465Most unusual treatment and care was given me by the family of Ravens who stood the expenses of my journey. Especially did I appreciate the kindness of Sister [Maren Marie] Ravens as she cared for me as her own child. I assisted them all I could on the journey to at least partly pay for their unusual kindness to me.

Other EmigrationHC465When we had advanced to the Green River Station, now Green River, Wyoming, the supply of flour had been exhausted. The fall snows commenced bringing the cold blizzard and wintery blast all of which added to the perils of the journey. It became necessar[y] to send a man with the best and fastest equipment on to Salt Lake City to get flour and rush back to Green River which was only sufficient enough to sustain the party in the train for the balanc[e] of the trip.

Other EmigrationHC465On into the mountains we went along the already broken trail which had now been traveled over by the emigrant trains of for five years. We arrived in Salt Lake City October 16, 1852, after eight months and twelve days of journeying since I had waved my last farewell to my parents and friends from the deck of the ship that sailed away from the port port of Copenhagen.

Other EmigrationHCElder Erastus Snow had come by horse conveyance across the Plains and had not stopped the month at Kanesville. Upon entering Salt Lake Valley, Elder Snow met the train and invited our original twenty-eight Scandinavians to his house for dinner at which we were served salt, rice and bread (raisin). I must here remark that I have never tasted a cake that to me tasted as good as that bread after this prolonged and tedious journey of hardships.

Other EmigrationHC466I remained in Salt Lake City one year until October 1853. During this time I worked for an American family by the name of Warner [^2] that came in our company across the plains. Of course this was of great assistance to me to learn to speak the English language. In the fall of 1853 there came a large company of Scandinavians from the old country and there were several from my home city of Copenhagen. I was so happy to see them and they seemed almost like my own folks from home. Only those who have been through a similar experience of breaking away from all family ties and going on a similar pilgrimage journey can appreciate my real inward feelings.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
