Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Other EmigrationHCHannah Dorcas Tapfield King [^1]

Other EmigrationHCOne of Mormondom's most gifted poets and writers, Hannah Tapfield King joined the Church in 1850 and was baptized with her children in the River Camm, which runs through the city of Cambridge, England. Her husband did not join the Church but was willing to emigrate to America with her and their children: Georgiana (twenty-two), Louise (twenty), Bertha (nineteen), and Thomas Owen (thirteen). Georgiana was the wife of the captain of their ten, Claudius Spencer, with whom Hannah had a troubled relationship. The Kings bought a large, commodious carriage in which to travel and carried with them many purchases from New Orleans for their future home. Ann, a young hired girl, traveled with them to assist Hannah with the family's needs. Hannah's diary often mentions the friendship she developed with a young man traveling with them, referred to as S.N. (Samuel Neslen). He was particularly kind to her and became a companion and confidante. Until the last few weeks of travel, Hannah found camp life interesting. "There is something in this life that suits me," she wrote, "a sort of Eastern Oriental life, suits my taste and fancy." But in time she became impatient with the tedious travel. Like the other Saints who traveled those thousand miles by cart, wagon, and carriage, she found that the closer she came to the end of the journey, the more obsessive she became about reaching the Valley. Her diary begins near Sugar Creek, Iowa.

Other EmigrationHC[May] 20th [1853] [Iowa] Lovely morning—Oh! this is a sweet spot—the same party breakfasted with us—at Eleven I made them Eggs beaten up with wine and Brandy—They dined with us—I then went & sat in my carriage as usual Br [Horace] Eldredge came & Talked with us—In the course of our talk, it came out he had 2 wives! He was the first man that ever confessed that to me I exclaimed Oh! Br Eldredge! he is a good man—I liked him as soon as I saw him There is a chaste look about him—

Other EmigrationHCSaturday 21st Lovely day In the Evening I went for a walk alone—I shall long remember this lovely location—I do so much enjoy it—Saturday night & Sunday morning Violent thunder storm and poured with rain which continued until Sunday 22 I had my break fast & dinner in my carriage We all felt triste—Had it been fine we should have had much company. Went to bed early—in the night was awoke by some one touching the Carriage. looked out of the window & saw S[amuel] N[eslen] sitting over a fire he was on watch—felt rather poetical about it but have not yet Embodied my thoughts—

Other EmigrationHCMay 25 left our late Locality and went up the Hill Here we have been till this morning

Other EmigrationHCMay 27th My first daughter's birthday—She would have been 24 or 5—but she has gone to her Father in Heaven [^2] Walked alone in the Evening down to our late Location enjoyed it—a meeting in the Evening to organize the company—Mrs [Eunice] Neslen [mother of 21-year-old Samuel] complained to me and seemed in a bad spirit—27th Left again & came into our present Location—a lovely spot! Oh! how I enjoy these Exquisite places—They are my delight! and I feel I have nothing to regret "The lines have fallen to me in pleasant places" literally and I Bless God for all things would that all were as happy as I am—S. N. is often my companion—always my friend & confident

Other EmigrationHC48028 Left Sugar Creek at 8 A M and journied to the prarie a distance of about 15 miles where we camped—We passed thro' Farmington and over the Mississippi [Des Moines], Just before we reached our destination we nearly had a serious accident—Going down a steep short hill with a muddy place at the foot of it our Horses sank in up to the middle & could not extricate themselves or the Carriage—They got them out and then Br [Christopher] Arthur brought his horses & fastened them to the back of the Carriage and drew it out—The brethren pushing at the wheels One of our Horses in the morning had been very gay and had broken the whipple tree—which we had stopped to get mended. had he been in it might have been serious affair—but every thing proves daily—hourly to me that "Whatever is—is right" when applied to the people of God! I feel thro' all things, to rejoice and to Thank Him always, for indeed He has been very good to me from the beginning of my life even to the present moment—and I daily experience "Not more than others I deserve—yet God hath given me more"—

Other EmigrationHCSunday May 29th Had a good night and awoke refreshed—being very tired last night I wish Mr Shores could have come again to take me out for a drive once more—he certainly was very kind, and kindness in a foreign Land is doubly valuable—how it calls out the heart with it's noblest and best affections—

Other EmigrationHC482Monday arose early, and started. had to pass a terrible place—but Claudius went forward & they laid down trees & bushes & we got over pretty well—had nearly had an accident with the carriage, but our Guardian Angels were around us, & it all passed off with a little fright!—Camped soon after we passed "Dog Town—" walked at the back of the Camp in the Evening, & fell in with a Scotchman—he had been in America some Years—Mr [Thomas Owen] King [her husband] bought a Yoke of Oxen of him—he brought them up next morning and drove me over a bridge & places that I was afraid to pass—we talked much during the Time, and he seemed pleased—and said he hoped we should meet again—also a friend of his a nice man who had been in England—I drove over some horrid places, which made me very nervous for long after—Often when coming to a dangerous place I have stopped the Horses & prayed the Lord to give His Angels charge of us—Ive got over—Sometimes I would call Anne [^3] when no man could be got & she would head the Horses or perhaps drive them thro'—At last we camped near String Town—a thunder storm came on us as soon as the Tent was put up—I had not felt well for some days & this Evening I feared was going to have an attack of erysiplas [^4]—I had worn my English bonnet this day and the Sun scorched my face—it felt on fire—Mr Shores took particular pains to caution us against getting our complexions spoilt—even Anne he talked to about covering her arms—he said he hated to see a Woman's fine skin burned up—Mr Shores! Thou wert a Man!! Went to bed Early & had a tolerable night—Was awake with the men greasing my carriage wheels wherein I was sleeping I found my face & eyes swollen lips parched & tongue white—I have been excited by driving over these awful places—however I eat 2 or 3 mouthfuls & mounted my post i e to drive the Horses—They are pets [unreadable word]—but plenty of spirit and such frightful places! I feel sure few women (English) dare drive over where I have gone—and it has shaken my nerves into a muddle—at 1/2 past 2 a Thunder storm came on—Could do nothing but sit still and wait—it poured down in torrents At last we got some tea—I did not get out of the Carriage—Anne brought it to me and I enjoyed it as well or better than I ever did in my drawing room—I then made part of the bosom of a shirt for Tom Owen and made up my Journal so far—Thank God for all things—I rejoice ever more and am grateful that I feel well to night—Bertha not very well—The rest quite well—

Other EmigrationHC482Wednesday 8th, June Anniversary of Margaret's wedding day, 20 years ago! It is some days since I journalized—Much has transpired of small matters but which at this time seem all importance—True it is that "trifles make the sum of human things"

Other EmigrationHC482The 1st of June Bertha has taken poorly & has continued up till the present time—I believe it is the Lords plan to punish her for a complaining disobedient Spirit to which she has forever given way to and had not been produced by this Journey or anything attendant to it—it seems inherant in her had she only given way to it I should have thought the present circumstances were too trying for her but such is not the case For when surrounded by all that mortal Girl could wish she was discontented as at the present time and that complaining—unhappy spirit has attended her every step of our voyage & journey—& my heart tells me it is necessary that she should be afflicted that she may be brought to know herself—I have prayed much a bout her, and give her entirely into the hands of the Lord to do as He pleases with her for I have long felt she was more than I could manage!—

Other EmigrationHC482June 6th a baby died—Oh! by the bye on Sunday we camped on a beautiful hill & had afternoon service and all seemed to enjoy it much. The sacrament was administered—a few strangers were present who expressed themselves much pleased & Edified Friday morning we came down the steepest & most frightful hill I ever saw—Tho' we had passed thro' a splendid Country before we came to it—Monday Sister How's baby died & was buried the next morning before we started—we then travelled on thro' the new Town of Chariton [Iowa]—

Other EmigrationHCJune 7th Went to a Store and bought a few things that we needed and we then came on to our camping place this morning—

Other EmigrationHC483June 8th We started at 8 oc but it came on rain and we were obliged to Camp at 12 oc—All very wet. I brought Bertha in the carriage—but she complained of cramped limbs & fatigue so she might as well have been in the wagon—here we are all wet & uncomfortable externally but with a tolerable degree of peace and equanimity for myself I feel happy all the day, and only wish that all surrounding spirits were as happy & peaceful as my own—I have been blest with good health except sea sickness & debility in consequence ever since I left England—and I am a marvel to myself, for truly I have had many trials—but then God has blest me every day—and raised up friends that have been kind & good to me even in a foreign land—I have ever found friends or at any rate one friend to go where I might that has stuck closer to me than a brother!—

Other EmigrationHC483Saturday June 12th started at 1/4 to nine in the morning reached Pisgah about 4—and our Camping place about 5 oc Had tea & went to bed soon—Anne washed some things for us—

Other EmigrationHC483Bertha still ill and very trouble some—she is a strange unaccountable girl! I feel she did not enter this Church with the right spirit of the Church—& has not progressed in it Yet she came in of her own will & pleasure

Other EmigrationHCHere I take a breathing pause.—it seems hardly worth while to write every days journal for they consist all the time of thunder storms—mud holes making bridges—getting wet thro' beds and all I note down some of these, and then add how I enjoy my Carriage bed & how thankful I am for my many blessings &c &c

Other EmigrationHCJune 24th—53. Yesterday morning very busy packing in the waggons—re-arranging the things—luggage &c &c In the afternoon Mr King Saml Neslen and I went to the Bluff City [Kanesville] to see Sister Merrill—She was quite overjoyed at seeing us—She had letters for me from Br Johnson, [^5] Wallace, [^6] and Larkin [^7] as also one from Mr Barber—but Oh! That ugly little word—They were in a box that had not yet arrived—and indeed she almost feared was lost!!! Heighho! how trying are such things But 'tis vain to repine—disappointment in such matters appears to be my lot—or rather I seem in my present dearth to be unable to lose any thing—The Bluff City is most beautifully situated it is a spot marvelous for its beauty—but the Houses are poor—and the people look queer and uncultivated—S. N. and I richly enjoyed ourselves—We had some delicious coffee with Sister [Mary Ann] Crawley—where Sister Merrill is staying We also called on Sister Bray—then came home rather late—Mr King being very nervous on acc of the bad road—However at last we got into Camp safely and to bed—Claudius sent me a glass of port wine, enjoyed it much.—S. N. came to bid me good night. I anticipate that "Good night God Bless You" as the Ultimatum of the good things I experience thro' the day—He has been ever kind—gentle and respectful to me—and in the dearth and the wild of this Journey such are to be blessings that I cannot over look I acknowledge the kindness of the Lord in sending him to me—in my present circumstances for whom can I make a friend of?—I dare not tell Mr King much that has troubled me and does still—he came out for the love of his family and for the cause of God & the love I bare him I wish to make his path as smooth as I can—My son is a child—I cannot tell him & Claudius I have not full confidence in—and he holds me aloof and is often unkind to me—and inconsiderate of my feelings but Samuel is wise & kind, & withal my friend and I can trust him with my life if need be—and all that is dear to me—Oh! my Father! give Thine angels charge concerning them—for in my present dearth all things are Valuable! that is, of love & kindness Mr King and Claudius gone off to buy a waggon and cattle—Mr K. to give him 43—10S and he will buy them and bring on our Luggage but the waggon & cattle are to be his all the time! I don't understand this logic! Well I am in a school, and if I receive the lessons aright, I shall be improved by them if not, they will do me harm—Oh! my Father! hold me and bless me or how shall I proceed? Last day of peace—encamped on the banks of the Missouri River—I feel weary today and my Spirit flags—drove thro' the water up to the axel of the carriage—few women would have cared to have done it—I went behind Claudius—Met two brethren in the water—One turned and walked by my Carriage till I was out of the "deep waters" it was very kind of him & I will not forget it I must learn his name! I know his face well I wish I could get my letters—but it is a satisfaction to know they have written—Bless the Lord for the kind friends that I have—it is in answer to B [Elijah] Larkins' prayer & his words Certainly no woman had ever had more disinterested Love & Kindness offered to her than I have ever had bestowed on me! & thank God, for it is better to me than Gold or Silver—Here follow a few petty disagreeables—Tho' not petty at the time to those who were made to feel them—but I will not write them down—let them go!—A few weeks more and I shall enter that renowned place, "The Valley" I feel I cannot analyze my feelings at the present time—They are so complicated—and I see thro.a glass very darkly. There is a strong Vein of pleasure and happiness and then there are uncertainties—but my Father, Thou Knowest—I have given all my affairs into Thy Keeping—& I know in whom I have trusted—This night a dreadful thunderstorm & other annoyances—here follow some more remarks which I throw into my Oblivious Reservoir—and I finish by blessing the Lord for his goodness!

Other EmigrationHCJuly 3rd—Sunday.—Lovely morning—No prayers I feel starved spiritually—but soon we will hear the prophets voice—S. N., Lizzie [^8] & I walked to the top of one of the beautiful hills that surround this spot—Sat on the top, Lizzie gathered some "fat hen" [^9] for dinner—descended & returned home—put my Carriage in order read in the bible & wrote—The sun is now setting on those beautiful hills—The Cattle are feeding as tho' they knew it was their supper time—and all around looking beautiful The girls are in the Tent talking—Anne washing the supper things—Mr King sitting at the side of the Tent & Claudius with him—talking! S. N. walking around our circle—he ever appears to be happy to be near us—& I feel he is my friend & does me good—How I wish I could hear from my dear parents it would comfort me and be a delight—Here follow a pouring out of sorrowful feelings—always winding up with Thankfulness for my great blessings—seven oc same day—Claudius gave me a glass of port wine being the 4th of July!! and asked me for a Toast for my adopted Country! This filled up my heart which was full before—I got out of the Tent and walked to the top of one of these beautiful Hills—where I sat down & prayed & thought. Then returned;—Georgey came & sat in my carriage also Br Robert [^10]—Then he went and Sam [^11] came The fire flies are beautiful here They are like diamond dust over every thing at night.

Other EmigrationHC7th Better this morning—Anne brought me, with her accustomed attention, some tea & toast, enjoyed it much, felt better—at 7 oc started on our way—[unreadable word.] have felt better to day as S. N. said I should last night—got safe into camp & to bed. Anne has been very attentive to me and her duties generally and this is something on the plains Started at 7 oc—nice morning—a flat road—high grass road not very good—camped for an hour to water the cattle—We also got some Refreshments Started again & got to our Camping place about 4 oc—a tolerable nice place—had tea &c—felt better as S. N. said I should he came & sat with me a short time at luncheon hour—mosquitoes troublesome—but all things considered all is well My heart rejoices that every day we are approaching nearer the Valley. I long for my letters—dreamt last night that Louise & Mr Barber were married in secret saw him very plainly—I know all about it

Other EmigrationHC4879th Started at 4 oc in the morning—got to a camping place at 9—had breakfast—On again—crossed the Platte River—last night we had a syllabub. [^12] S. and R. Neslen with us—A tempest in the night—Alarm from the Watch at 3 oc that the Cattle were gone astray? false report—made partly a sun bonnet to day—Went to bed—slept nicely—

Other EmigrationHC48710th Rose at 1/2 6—got ready to start at 7—Went 10 miles to Loup Fork Ferry ferried over by 5 oc PM set the wagon & tent—washed & had tea I wrote this much of my Journal and here I feel to thank Thee Oh My Father for Thy Great and boundless Goodness to me & mine and to the Camp generally for His Great Kindness to us on this long Journey—truly His Hand has been displayed almost palpably to us His frail & erring people!—This is the 7th Sunday after Trinity [^13] I recall how often we have sung that beautiful collect [^14] and its no less beautiful accompaniment—and a 1000 recollections crowd upon me—S. & R. Neslen came into our tent in the evening—We sang—a beautiful moonlight night—soon all went to bed S. N. & I walked thro' the Camp last thing—then bade good night at the Carriage door—

Other EmigrationHC48711th. Woke in the morning with the cry that the Cattle were all gone astray!! All the men called up! false alarm!!—at 6 oc S. N. put two lovely Tiger Lillies thro' the curtains of my Carriage—The offering pleasd me—every kind act however small seems a blessing in the dearth of the present time—He is ever kind to me—God sent him to me!—We went off to a pretty Camping place late—but a regular mosquitoe bottom—

Other EmigrationHC12th Wet morning set off—went on till the Evening Camped again—S. N. not well—came and sat in the Carriage with me—had some nice conversation—as we always do when we talk at all bid him "Good night" and to bed—at 9 or before.

Other EmigrationHC48813th Slept feverish and awoke unrefreshed—Thundered in the night—off at 9—not good roads—slight mud holes—& no good water—got to a place at 4 oc where there was some tolerable good water long grass & hosts of snakes! which destroy my happiness—Got into the Carriage and finished my sunbonnet for Georgey Carried it into the Tent when I went to tea—had nice tea & toast bacon—pudding & rice—enjoyed it much Felt grateful for all things & happy—Mr King was in a grumbling spirit which marred it as he often does—finding fault with every thing—This is his way at times—he would do it were he surrounded with all he wished—so I do not feel so bad over it—I detest a grumbling spirit—I had washed him and brushed his hair & did what I could for him—S. N. a little better—This morning before starting I gave him a glass of new Milk with some brandy in it—I love to do good—& he says I always do him good I have not much Scope now—but I do all I can and that the Lord will accept—

Other EmigrationHC14th A long day's travel all weary and worn—I felt used up—All things looked dark—The dark things darker—and the bright things clouded—much that I have suffered crowds upon my mind—the harshness I have suffered the changes—the privations—all—all crowded upon me and steeped my soul in the waters of Marah! [^15] Oh! how I wept! for I felt how changed were all things around me—& what was far more trying to me how changed were those who were so lately all to me! but there has been an influence at work, ever since I have been on this Journey trying to withdraw my influence from those dear to me—Can this be right?—I cannot think it is!—felt low and nervous—but slept tolerably—

Other EmigrationHC15th St Swithen [^16]—did not rise till 7 oc got some breakfast—felt shaken and triste—Set off to walk.—having declared I would not drive the Horses again—as I had been made to do—Having had an accident yesterday—poor Tom having run his waggon against the carriage as we were waiting at a horrible mud hole—I have often been spoken to severely when an accident has happened—so I came to the decision—I would drive them no more—and poor Tom—a mere child—has been made to drive a waggon—when of course he knows nothing about ox teaming—Proposed Mr Spencer to drive it—But Mr King would not hear of any thing but that I must drive it as before,—So I walked on leaving them to settle it: Anne was started off with it and overtook me—I soon rode, still feeling queer—On we went Louie looking gloomy, I have done what I could to comfort and cheer her on this Journey—I think also that I have done much to keep up faith and good feeling & love—but I have failed in most cases—however, I feel to leave all tho' my heart often suffers—Oh! for the Valley—Last night I had a few words with Claudius he has taken a curious Course with us, & me in particular—he does not seem to me to have the element of happiness within him self & therefore he cannot confer happiness. We crossed "Prarie Creek" a wicked creek as C. calls it. They threw in grass and brush—wood & earth & so filled it up enough for the waggons to cross—all are by this time nearly over—Sam & Robt. Neslen came & chatted with us—these young men cause ennui often to disappear from my Orbit—They are always on hand to do us good where they can—

Other EmigrationHCSunday July 17th We again crossed this wicked Creek twice—and then went on to Wood River which was a bad place to cross, but all got over safely—Camped by the side of it—In the Evening about 11 oc a dreadful Tempest—yea, awful—I think I never in England witnessed such a one—I thought it would have blown the Carriage over—I prayed earnestly & felt my prayers were heard—Mr King dead asleep the whole time at last after about an hour it abated—The Watch were indefatigable & the Cattle were all safe—our bed got very wet—at last got some sleep—dreamed I got my letters—but I thought they had been opened & were briefer than usual—This I do not believe would be the case—at any rate I wish I had the trial—In the morning felt tired and prostrated as I often do after a tempest—Walked some of the way with Bertha & Br Samuel—sang two hymns with Anne & him—then came into my Carriage & wrote this much of my Journal I feel happy & cheerful but by no means elated—had meeting in the afternoon. Br [John Joseph] Hayes, [Samuel] Neslen [probably Senior], [Henry] Walker, and [Daniel] Spencer spoke—A Baby blest by the name of Samuel, My Brother's & Grandfather's name—May all the blessings spoken over it be ratified in the Courts above Some Californian Emigrants passed while we were in meeting—

Other EmigrationHCMonday 18th felt tolerably—Sister [Harriet Coman] Dye confined last night with a son—These Mormon Women I think I should have been left in my grave in similar case—but truly God fits the back to the burden—This we realize daily and I think in nothing more than in such cases—She went on with the Train and reported "all right" at night "Going on well" "Beautiful boy" &c &c Long drive to day got in late—had a deal of trouble to find a Camping place—at last Br Spencer selected a spot in the midst of the wild Prairie Our carriage was set close by a g[rea]t hole, which we all thought was a grave! Had the Carriage & waggons moved on a little—Went to bed at dark—after I got in smell a very unpleasant smell. Thought it came from the old grave! The thought of it made me feel ill—and I could not sleep—at last fell asleep—soon awoke feeling ill—all next day felt unwell—Was it fancy?—it was not fancy that I felt ill, but the cause I leave in doubt the idea was enough

Other EmigrationHCTuesday 19th Drove to wood river. crossed a deep ravine and then on 2 miles—Camped close by some Californians with a large flock of sheep.—Slept well—

Other EmigrationHCWednesday 20 Started early—Claudius drove the Horses attached to the Carriage. Georgey I and Lizzie rode with him—also Louie—Had some agreeable & edifying talk upon plurity—the first wife being head or Queen Lizzie said she would be first wife or never be married and Br Spencer tried to convince her it was a mistaken idea—but it seems to be in corporated in her system the idea of being great according to her notions of greatness—perhaps she'll learn better in time—we are all more or less biased by such feelings—Crossd several creeks & above all Elm Creek, where Br Spencer was driving the horses over. it was an awful bridge where few but "Mormons" would think of crossing a large piece of wood stuck up at which the brown mare shied & Lo! she pushed over the other Horse right into the water!—but by dint of real presence of mind & management we saved the Carriage from being dragged in—The Californians came to our assistance, & we got the horses landed without a buckle being broken!—After this wonderful feat (Br Spencer jumped into the water to his Knees) He helped over the 48 waggons! One of the Californians killed a buffalo—We had a large portion of it Had some fried for dinner—got into camp late—had tea & to bed—did not sleep the first watch! S. N. on watch till 12 oc—saw them thro' the window of the Carriage—Then composed myself & went to sleep—dreamed an uncomfortable dream about my Mother—

Other EmigrationHC21st Rose early—breakfast & then off we were. Claudius drove us—Louie & Georgey & Lizzie rode with us—had more talk upon plurality—but it never seems a happy theme—arrived at Buffalo Creek.—Found a letter stuck in a stick from Br Atchinson [^17] saying they were all well, i e his company and had left some Buffalo meat for us I had the tongue to pickle—Got safe over the creek. as Sister Chambers came up her Son told us his Father was dead! [^18]—He had been ill a long time They asked me to go & look at him which I did He looked like a statue so thin & wasted—Death is ever aweful! and it made me feel low & triste at last they all came up & got safely over—we then went to Sister C. and asked her if we could do any thing for her—she gave me some domestic to make a shroud or wrapper for the corpse—which I did. Then sent her some wine— for herself and the women who laid him out—dined & Br Spencer decided he would not go on till to morrow so we prepared to wash some clothing—at 1/4 to 3 the grave was completed & Br Spencer told us he wished to attend the funeral of Br Chambers to the grave—We did so—it was a nice dug grave They laid leaves at the bottom & then lowered the Corpse into it some boughs over him & then was filled up Br Samuel assisted all thro' Br Neslen made ahead board—on which was "Joseph Chambers—Native of England aged 53—Anno—53—We can only say "Resquiescat"

Other EmigrationHC22nd—Last night a very heavy tempest—Br Spencer says the heaviest we have yet had—And we have had many—Our bed was very wet indeed—we got but little sleep—had breakfast and started at 10 A M—passed thro' a very wet road—saw many Buffaloes & a Rattle Snake—at 1 oc arrived at a deep creek—water too deep for us to cross—Obliged to Camp got our Biscuit wet—had some fried for dinner and Bacon & boiled beef—fine day and a nice healthy Air—Claudius—Georgey—Louie & Lizzie rode in the Carriage—wrote a few of my Thoughts to S. N. not being able to have a word with him and wanting to do so—Oh! how I long to be in the Valley! to behold the Servant of the Lord! and those that have been so good & kind to me in past days—& whose society I have so much Enjoyed in England—I feel when I attempt to realize it it will be almost Happiness too much—and that I shall almost feel like Israel of old "Let me die since I have seen thy face"—it is Enough—

Other EmigrationHC26th of July—Days have passed & I have not Journalized Today rose early and started on our Journey—after Camping near the Platte river—had a good night Walked on—after a time got into the Carriage alone with Claudius—We got into an agreable chat—He asked me who Susanna was engaged to?!!—as I had told him I Knew—I at once said, "May I speak plain?" he said Yes—I said to you!!! [^19] This led to an excitable conversation—for certainly I did not think he had treated well very often—and we then got up to the Girls & feeling quite unfit for conversation or Company—I got out walked alone—and at last rode in the waggon Staid & had some refreshments at 1 oc—in the afternoon rode again with Georgey—Louie & Lizzie—at last I suggested we staid, as I was afraid of Indians—C. said there was but one Lady to take—being Miss Stayner [^20]—as I and G. were married & Louie engaged!—Louie started and said—It was more than she knew!—The conversation then went on in a diamond cut diamond fashion—strain between C. & me—at last he said I should either do an immense deal of good—or an immense deal of Evil!!! I felt this to be a most cutting remark—God knows how I desire to do right—and as I told Him I will have no other faith than that I shall do an immense deal of Good—In my past life I have had the power to do so & I believe that God will love and nurture that which He alone has sown & fostered—I will believe that the past will be guarantee for the future but I thought it unkind & unmanly to attack me in that rude manner, for we can not but Know how great are my trials & how I do try to be brave. [^21]

Other EmigrationHC27th. Claudius brought me a note this morning in answer to one I wrote him last evening after his cutting remarks. It was good, but somehow he does not comfort my heart—is the fault in me? not all certainly—I think we lack that confidence in each other which makes advice acceptable—I drove the Horses a good part of the day—C. being with his team—staid in midday nearly one hour—Saw a company of people upon the hills opposite—Set off again A tempest gathering—Got to the camping place at 5 oc—a sharpish tempest Sat all the evening in my Carriage—Read Brigham's Sermon & other things in Deseret News S. N. came for a few moments but no talk—It appears we can seldom talk now—it seems there is an influence at work trying to destroy our friendship or at any rate the Life & beauty of it—went to bed at 8 oc—

Other EmigrationHCSunday July 25th, 1853 MCIII Set off in the morning having been detained a day on acct of the Creek being so swollen Got over safe—Br Walker taken ill and died almost instantly—On we went—came in sight of a company & found it was the Elders that we expected—and Oh! Joy! As soon as I got [to the] creek, Br Spencer being first with Georgey Louie Miss Staynes & Lizzie with Mr King—Louie held up a letter found it was one from Br Johnson sent to me by the Elders—This was an unexpected pleasure and I Enjoyed it much—tho' it was a brief affair—but all's right—it was a letter! and thats some thing as times go—In the afternoon we had a meeting Several spoke—among them Bros Ross & [William Warner] Major Br M. brought my Letters, and I gave him some to carry to England—and 1/2 a Sovereign for a present Gave Captain [Philemon] Merril a Sovereign for the Company Mr King gave him one also, ditto—ditto A party of them took supper in our Tent—and we did what we could for them. Baked some cakes for them & gave them sugar & tea &c—They stood on the opposite side of the creek & prayed & blest us as a company, and said we should be blest We then bid farewell & on we went on our Respective Journeys.

Other EmigrationHCJuly 28. Had a good night wind very high—feared the Carriage would be capsized—started in the morning at 7—soon reached a mud hole—flies & mosquitoes very troublesome it was a horrid place—Claudius drove me over—the girls went in the waggons Some wheels were broken—had to wait for them to be mended—'tis very troublesome but words are Vain in such a case—Deeds, not words is indeed the motto of this Journey—if not of the Church itself.—I feel weakened & my Spirit Caged by stopping—

Other EmigrationHC495Last of July Sunday—Rose—breakfasted & started at 8 oc— Lovely morning.—drove over mudholes—creeks—&c till we arrived at an immense bluff, which we ascended & found ourselves on a high Eminence—soon Camped, at 3 oc—Poor water—but otherwise pleasant We had some wood with us & found Buffalo chips I have no Sunday feelings while travelling on Sunday Yet I desire to go forward—Yesterday we had a long day's travel & camped near the Platte River S. N. came for a few minutes Said he felt sad—we had a little talk—but said nothing tho' both inferred that something made us feel triste—we seemed truly to understand each other—

Other EmigrationHC495[July 29] Friday Evening—he drank tea with us but there did not seem to be a happy spirit with in the Tent—The fact is C. V. feels—towards tho' I Know for what reason—we all parted and said good night. Louie & Lizzie stood by their waggons for a moment, & I stood by my Carriage when some one came behind me—it was S. N. came to bid me good night Valley fashion! he is ever good & kind to me & in this dearth I can but love him—may God bless him for his goodness

Other EmigrationHCAugust 1st Another day nearer the Valley—We have come about 19 miles today,—good road a few creeks & no mudholes and no accident. I hear S. N. singing—I am glad for he has seemed low of late—We all feel tired and somewhat used up but we shall be immortal till our work is done Oh! my Father my heart is full but I do not feel to make it all palpable but to Thee Work for me and by the whisperings of The Spirit, lead me right—remove far from me those that stand in my path to Salvation!

Other EmigrationHC4962nd Lovely morning. This day 20 years ago—Mr King Sen[ior] died—We started at 8 oc—we went on very cherily—at last met an Indian on horseback He told us 300 were a head He seemed very friendly—rode by the side shaking hands, &c, Br Spencer made a few arrangements—and soon we met the whole body of them—a party of Horsemen came forward to meet us—Br Spencer advanced with his gun—& made a sort of Military Salute or pass—which they responded to very gracefully—descending from their Horses & kneeling or rather squatting in their not ungraceful Indian fashion Br S. then went up & shook hands with the Chief who presented a paper recommending them to white men they might meet—The name of the Chief was "Shell"—He came forward to the Carriage with Br S. who introduced him to us & to Georgey as his Squaw!! he shook hands with all of us—Br S. gave him some whiskey & water which he seemed to Enjoy after he had tasted it—but he seemed to fear to taste it till Br Spencer had done so. We i e the Camp all contributed some sugar, coffee—biscuit &c &c for them and we then bid them adieu—they drawing off on one side to allow our train to pass on—did not camp till 2 oc—by accident I got a long way off—but still in sight—Enjoyed my silent position as I ever do enjoy solitude at last gathered the Cattle and off we went—had not gone far when a thunder storm came—had to "put up"—When it ceased on we went and are now Encamped 2 miles from Crab Creek.—

Other EmigrationHC3rd Rose & breakfasted & started passed Crab Creek—Camped at 1 oc after passing the Bluff ruins—They are very beautiful—I should like to have an explanation about them—but I suppose none know their history—They stand out in bold relief with a silent eloquence that speaks trumpet-tongued to every thinking mind—There they are looking eternally silent—walked as I often do after dinner or rather Supper The Mosquitoes dreadful! Had a talk with Sister Smith of Northampton She said she quite enjoyed it We have had the Platte river by us for the past week it is very pretty—full of little islands—Oh! I can write no more the mosquitoes drive me mad! Oh for an end to this Journey! truly we pass over "The bridge of sighs" to the Valley of the Free!

Other EmigrationHC497August 5th A long day's travel! this day these Sublime Bluffs in view all day!—They plainly speak a designer—tho' ages must have rolled along since that design was carried out—I felt extremely ill & prostrated last night & this morning I revived again—on we went without water all day till 8 oc in the Evening when we camped—I went to bed at once and Anne brought me my tea in bed S. N. came to bid me good night—Br Spencer also came and we had a long talk in the Carriage—enjoyed both!!

Other EmigrationHC497August 6th Arose & set off at 8 oc got into Camp at 3 oc—Cleaned out the Carriage & other jobs—got tea—

Other EmigrationHC497Sunday, 7th Fine morning—Got into Camp about 3 oc—Just as tea was ready two indians came & put us about a little & frightened us some a strong Guard was put on at night. I dreamed several things, among other things that I returned to England and to D. D! [^22] and all looked so changed & I felt so wretched that I had been so foolish as to return, I will not go into particulars—suffice that when I awoke & found it to be a dream, I did not Know how to feel Thankful enough—and I feel sure such would exactly be my feeling—All is well

Other EmigrationHC497Monday Louie very poorly—nervous and weakened. Claudius laid hands upon her—& advised her going into his wagon with Georgey.—so she went all day & seemed very happy & to enjoy themselves well—I have had some conversation lately with C. & G. They told me their minds a little—but I do not feel to write—Yea, I don't feel to analize my own feelings—but somehow they do not feel happy and comfortable when I think about it—Whether my feelings are right I do not Know—but I wish to do right, & to be right—I must leave it where I leave all I possess—in the Hands of Him who is my Father as He is the Father of All! Some American Gentlemen came from the Fort & talked with us—One is going on to the Salt Lake & offers to take letters for me—I sent one to Br Johnson by him

Other EmigrationHCAugust 9th—Tom Owen not very well to day

Other EmigrationHC49811th Dull weather this morning—rose & drest—had breakfast in the Carriage—then got out and arranged my bed &c—and then went into the Tent a Gentleman soon came, who staid nearly all the morning had quite a chat—I then went to the Carriage & found S. N. sitting there—he remained a bout an hour reading to me—but there is no rest—They came to grease the Carriage! Soon Tom came feeling ill—wanted me to wash him—I did so and he felt better—

Other EmigrationHC49812th Finer day—Louie's birthday We had a plum pudding—some Gentlemen came & dined with us—Mr. MacDonald—Fleming Stewart & [Hector C.] Haight [^23] had a meeting in the afternoon enjoyed it pretty well—but I feel saddened—All seems changed & somehow against me!—

Other EmigrationHC13th Left our encampment near Fort Laramie Journeyed on to a place near a Creek—where we found Brs Haight & Stewart already camped—felt low—mournful & worn down—I see the determined attention Claudius keeps to Louie, and it takes away my Soul—drinks up my Spirit. I feel too that it affects Georgey! Surely he might wait till he gets to the Valley.—it seems to me that such a girl as Georgey ought to content a man for a proper time at any rate—I cannot reconcile myself to this new doctrine coming in such a form—I feel that it works upon Georgey's feelings also—Oh! my Father—help me & give me not up to my own dark thoughts—Tom Owen very unwell—Went to bed unhappy and dejected

Other EmigrationHC49914th Tom awoke us this morning about 2 oc—having got up in a delireum. Came to our Carriage calling to us that some of the Carriages were gone ahead We took him into our Carriage bed for an hour to soothe & comfort him—& then Mr King took him back to his own bed He rose again early—we had breakfast & started at 7 oc—T.O. in the Carriage with me—he was drowsy & quite delirious all day—Oh! how unhappy I have felt this day! Claudius is so very odd & unkind to me—God knows I desire to do right—& to please him as far as is consistent but it appears I have not the power.—

Other EmigrationHC49915th T. O. very ill—which makes all look dark with me—Br Neslen & Claudius administered to him at noon as he lay in the Carriage—I felt wretched but hope at the bottom of all—Claudius asked him before he laid his hands upon him—if he knew what he must do to get well—he said, have faith in God! He then clasped his hands & went off into a beautiful little prayer which startled us all—Claudius thought it was one he had learned—but not so it was spontaneous it broke up the deep fountains of my heart & all seem affected—They then laid hands upon him and we all felt he had received a blessing The disease Mountain fever seemed arrested from that time—tho' he still continued very ill—Claudius slept with him that night

Other EmigrationHC49916th T. O. still very ill—delirious—travelled all night till 1 oc "under the moon" my thoughts were "Legion" & have been for some days past—but when is it they are not?—Thought with me is a Kingdom—Got into Camp & had some tea & went to bed at day break.—Tom slept with me in the Carriage Rose Early—

Other EmigrationHC49917th Rose & washed him all over with Saleratus Water—got him into the Tent and soon again into the Carriage which was set in a shady place—Sat with him all day—he was calmer seemed Exhausted—S. N. came & sat with me in the afternoon—

Other EmigrationHC49918th T. O. still very ill—had him administered to by Br Arthur & Claudius he being all unconscious Yet I felt more happy and hopeful.

Other EmigrationHC19th Set off at 8 a m T. O. no worse—a beautiful morning lovely air—Got into Camp at 1 oc John Tom ran against one of our other waggons & smashed the wheel! Consequently we could not go on—Sat in the Carriage all the afternoon with T. O. he no worse—I hope better—S. N. went on "Doctor" to our Late Camping place to find one of their Lost Oxen Slept in the Carriage with T. O.—

Other EmigrationHC20th Lovely morning—beautiful pure air quite ambrosial! I hope Tom is better—but still nothing very decided about him—I washed him all over in vinegar and water—changed his bed & put him on all clean Linen—he looked comfortable and comforted my poor wounded heart.—I feel still hopeful—I cannot think the Lord will take him from me—in this embryo stage of his temporal & spiritual Existence! Surely He will remember mercy seeing the integrity of my heart all my life Long for 'tho conscious of my imperfections—Yet thro' all one strong pervading bias has run thro' all I did & said, i e the Love of my God & the desire to do His Will—I have also sacrificed as few women have the strength to sacrifice—I stepped out of my beautiful happy Home & from all I held dear for the Gospel's Sake—His Gospel—& will He forget all this? And is not this dear boy one who promises well to be good & useful—& have I not already buried 4! [^24]—and have I not again & again dedicated him to the Lord? and if he will restore him I will religiously carry out my determination and my Vow!—He will be faithful to His promise that those who trust in Him shall not be confounded and I believe & therefore will I speak—therefore will I hope—therefore will I contend asking all only and entirely of Jesus Xt—Amen.—

Other EmigrationHC[Aug. 21] 4 oc P M Sunday We are now camped at Deer Creek, a beautiful place for such wild surroundings Trees & water and a patch of green grass make it an Arcadian Paradise after our weary toil for so long over such an arid soil—After we got in T. O. appeared worse—he had a paraoxysm that quite alarmed me—it appeared anger when I at tempted to wash him—he is now calm & lies peacefully Oh! My Father! Grant that the destroyer may have no power over him—forgive me if I have done any thing to bring this up on myself for God Knows I value his life & would not for the world lose him Oh! set a watch up on my mouth & Keep the door of my lips—Oh! spare this child to me Oh! God my Father 4 weeks more & we shall be in the Valley or very near it, if we have good fortune—is it possible that this Long Looked for and anticipated—much sought after—much talked of—prayed for—worked for and suffered for Event—This Consumation, devoutly wished for is really so near at hand!!! I cannot realize it—Am I to realize also Thy afflictive Hand?—Oh! spare me my Father this one more dreaded event I ask it only in the name of Jesus Xt—

Other EmigrationHCMonday 22nd I have been too much engaged & my mind too feeble & full & too unhappy to journalize—T. O. has been very ill—I feel nothing but faith has saved him But today he is decidedly better—and my heart rejoices—Yes I am right Thankful to my Heavenly Father, to His Servants and to my beloved friends for the blessing of his restoration—I ever felt our faith & prayers & exertions would Keep his life on the Earth—Bless the Lord Oh! my Soul, & forget not all His benefits for indeed he has been gracious to me He raised up Bertha who was nearly as sick as T. O.—yet I never saw Death around her but I did around him every day—but she is healed & I feel he is saved & for all this my heart swells with gratitude—We are now about 380 miles from the Valley—Can it be possible? Oh! how sad it seemed to me travelling all night last Thursday & he delirious all the time—but his voice was weak & pretty of 5 or 6 & he talked innocently but not outrageously—Once he called out "Mama—Grandfather has been here & Eddie!"—Oh! how Kind is my Father in Heaven!! how gently He chastises me, & warns me of the frail tenure of all Earthly possessions! Oh! may these Gentle Lessons be never forgotten by me but may I apply them to the bettering of my Nature—for I desire to be right & to do right—The scene around is wild & dreary Oh! for the beautiful Valley—where my heart has long been—Upper Platte River—

Other EmigrationHC50328th August—Sunday—I have not journalized for some days—Much has transpired & I have intended every day to write—but something has always prevented me or we have been late in Camp.—Thought as usual has been busy with me & I have felt weary & worn both in body & mind—Tom O. has been exceedingly ill—but faith has saved him—and he is better Thank God!—I have many thoughts about many things but God is all-sufficient & will leave all my affairs in His Hands—Who knows what is best for me—Oh! may His will be revealed to me—and may I be obedient to it—We have been for some days passing the "Rocky Mountains" they are rather more wonderful than beautiful—yet they are certainly Sublime—it seems something marvellous & mysterious that our Cavalcade should pass along breaking the Eternal Silence of these wild places—my feelings are undefinable but there is a degree of awe & sadness about them to me Yesterday we passed "The Devil's Gate" but I did not see it—Louie went & Lizzie—and others went but I staid in the Carriage with the invalid—S. N. rode a little while in the Carriage with me—We are now only 300 and a few miles from the Valley Marvellous! wonderful! I rejoice & yet I dread I hardly Know why Either—Lord Charles Fitzwilliam [^25] came by invitation from Claudius into our Tent and took wine & some refreshment with us—he seemed to Enjoy it—he spent a few hours with us he is returning from California—he was Entirely clothed in buckskin from head & feet—like a Mountaineer—I told him I should like to see him walk into some of the splendid drawing rooms of London—how the ladies would stare—Memo, first saw a Splendid bearded Comet on the 22nd of August—1853—A death in Camp—Vincent T. O. very poorly—I in low spirits—thinking him worse—This death makes me feel gloomy—All were to be off as soon as a wheel was mended The funeral had taken place We set off—T. O. improved as we went along, and before Evening I saw a decided change for the better Sister Neslen brought him some broth which did him good—All were Kind he has lost his Voice & cannot articulate a word—thro' excessive talking while delirious—Bertha lost her hearing in her attack—both mountain fever—To day we passed the splendid Rocky Mountains Truly, they are "the everlasting hills"—they are immensely high & look as if piled up by Giants and some huge stones thrown down—We passed Green River 3 times & saw several Indians—an Indian Village and a multitude of Horses—One of the sisters strayed off & lost her way & fell in with them They took her money & looked for earrings & jewels—but when the Chief heard of it he whipped them, and made them restore all they had taken & then saw her home himself to our Camp!—Good for him—had a duck for dinner at 6 oc or later—chatted around the Camp fire then to bed—but my rest was troubled—heard the wolves howling close to us—had a watch to guard.—

Other EmigrationHC50330th Rose & got off Early T. O. mending Thank God! Sandy road saw some graves—S. N. came & drove for me a little while—he is ever kind Claudius & I by no means happy together—why I hardly Know—but I do not feel that he fills the place of one Son to me yet & he desired two—to which I am not yet reconciled—Oh! may the Lord reveal His will to me—Mr King is better—he is Kind & Good in many ways—tho' no Mormon—How often I think of my own dear Parents—and their Love for me!!

Other EmigrationHC31st Rose after a good night which is something as times go—Felt happy & refreshed—Temperance in all things sweetens Life!—set off on our daily trip—the wind blowing a perfect hurricane Crossed Green River 3 times before 12 oc!! What a serpentine affair it is!—Camped—I hope not for the night—One of the Sisters is ill so we wait for her—how foolish of women to be in that way on Such a Journey as this! but some people consider nothing but their own appetites Bah!! T. O. better Thank God! Most heartily do I thank Him—Saw several graves this morning.

Other EmigrationHC5041st Sept. Thomas Robinson's birthday I wish he was here with all my heart—he would be a great Comfort to us all—This has been a long day's travel to us—camped at Sweet Water Creek—in a perfect basin—Got in late—and then off to bed feeling cold & the carriage not placed nicely or comfortably—but these things are trifles—Which by the by "Make the Sum of human-things"—Came over mountains high & ridgey—They are truly named "Rocky Mountains" for they were nothing but rocks piled up. T. O. mending but still slowly—very weak. The Saints are all Kind—The Children i e the girls assemble round my carriage every morning Just before I start to ask how he is—and to bring him flowers &c—Kind little things! Only 240 miles from the Valley!! 'Tis wonderful! I seem I cannot realize it—

Other EmigrationHC504Sept 2nd Rose after a tolerable night—T. O. somewhat better—The Cattle all tired out—Set off in the morning & come on 7 miles & here we are camped at Willow Creek.—We wait to day Yesterday Sister Jones [^26] was confined with a daughter amid Thunder & Lightening—I should think something of it were it my case—We often get wild ducks & hares & other game which I like very much but I pine for the Valley—

Other EmigrationHCSept 7th Lovely morning—We are Camped in a nice place.—We are just going off—I have not Journalized for some days—perhaps it's as well—for my mind has been shook up into a muddle by what I see going on around me, but I hope all will be well—& that the Lord will reveal His Will to me, & then I shall be able to obey We have seen such a number of dead oxen it makes me sad We have lost one thro' carelessness perhaps before we get to the Valley we shall be taught the folly of such neglect

Other EmigrationHC505Sept 8th Just going to start this morning when came that Sister Sutton was shot in the arm accidently of course—Br Spencer went to administer to her & Sister Neslen to bind up the wound—We travelled late & met Br Decker with the Mail from the Valley—Claudius gave them some wine coming to ask me for it nearly a week has passed & I have not bidden S. N. good night! I suppose it could not be—but I miss his kind "bless you" which ever does me good—The road pretty good the last few days prospect wild were it not for the Lovely Skies and pure atmosphere it would be bleak indeed but they are something Heavenly!—different to any thing we ever saw in England—Reminds me of Byron's exclamation, "So cloudless clear, & purely beautiful, that God alone was to be seen in Heaven"! [^27] T. O. mending fast tho' he cannot speak! he has been very very ill!—I had a dream this morning that I was pulling out one of his teeth that was horribly decayed—Which I don't like—

Other EmigrationHCSept 10th Yesterday we travelled till quite late & passed some splendid bluffs ruins—These Bluffs are something I cannot describe They are Sublime & Mysterious—There is beauty and order in them—and it requires no very fanciful stretch of imagination to form Baronial buildings—"Keeps"—gateways, &c &c—& Georgey even made "The Porter" looking over the Gate!! They are very high—I should like to hear a philosophical discription of them—They please and interest me more than I have language to express—There is much design in them—yet they say they are solely the work of Nature—Well I must leave them like all mysterious things—T. O. mending up to last night when he had an attack of diarhea Could my dream portend this?—I trust he will do well yet—but he is very delicate tho' he has an immense appetite for Eating—Last evening S. F. N. came & had a nice chat with me which I enjoyed much—This morning we started at 9 oc & went only 2 miles—Camped to feed the Oxen here being some food & water—Black's Fork being the name—We now are going on for Fort Bridger—We saw the smoke from it last night—The air here is so pure and rarified and the sky lovely

Other EmigrationHC506Louie not very well—I expect her mind is bothered about what she shall do and I expect C. V. is always after her either by a "dumb expression" or otherwise and she "halts between two opinions"—Well I shall leave it but as I now feel I shall never give her to him—if it must be it will only be to Georgey that I can ever give her—& she is a gem of the first water, and she is worthy of all I can do for her, or her husband either—I only hope he appreciates her!—he ought to—here is another Saturday [September 10]—how fast time flies!

Other EmigrationHCSept 17th I have not had a moment to Journalize the past week—I would fain recall a few things We have passed beautiful & sublime scenery, Echo Canyon especially—that surpasses every thing I have yet seen before—and some spots yesterday I felt I could live and die in! but here we have truly "no continuing city"

Other EmigrationHC507Sept 15th Last Thursday was a day of days! The iron belonging to the whipple tree of the Carriage broke—I called to Anthony [^28] to come and assist me & Mr King went on—Br Spencer then detained him to help mend the road—Soon Claudius & I went on—When we soon saw one of our waggons overturned! The very one T. O. was in on acct of his enfeebled health Oh! the agony I suffered till we got up to it & found he was safe & well—Darling Georgey, with her every prompt kindness came towards the Carriage leading him gently along to let me see he was safe blessed children!! how dear they were to my poor heart!—even then the Excess of Joy was as hard to bear—but suffice 'twas a moment of agony that I shall long remember We soon got the waggon over & all right again and we camped close by—S. N. came back as they were sent forward in the Evening!—he ever does me good by his Manly comfort—days passed over after this—beautiful Bluffs—beautiful Kanyons & some things that were any thing but beautiful—sorrows & troubles & tears! &c &c were mixed up with the beauties of nature Our Carriage Horses gave out—perfectly worn down We had oxen put to our Carriage—but on Sunday the two Brs Cahoon [^29] met us & put to our Carriage their horses & at last on Monday 19th of Sept 1853 we entered the Valley of the Great Salt Lake!!! the goal for which we had so long panted—and were set down at Br Daniel Spencer's [the father of Claudius Spencer]—found her pleasant and kind—she provided for us a delicious supper and was very hospitable—felt tired—worn & exhausted—Dear Georgey has been ill some days very ill to day [^30] The company did not come in with us Lost therefore our kind friends & fellow travellers, the Neslens—and I ever miss kind friends—They are scarce!

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:445. Israel, in this instance, referred to the Indians, or remnants of the Lamanites, descendants of the house of Israel.
[^9] When the Nauvoo Charter was revoked some months after the death of Joseph Smith, the citizens renamed Nauvoo the City of Joseph.
[^10] "Life of George Whitaker, A Utah Pioneer, as written by himself," 8, typescript, Utah State Historical Society.
[^11] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:468.
[^12] Reminiscences of Louisa Barnes Pratt (1879), LDS Church Archives.
[^13] Bathsheba W. Smith described the city as "one vast mechanic shop, as nearly every family was engaged in making wagons. Our parlor was used as a paint-shop for the wagons. All were making preparations to leave the ensuing winter." In Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877; reprint, Salt Lake City, 1975), 321.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535.
[^15] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535-36. See also "Life of George Whitaker," 9.
[^16] As early as May 1842, Joseph Smith had introduced the temple ordinances to several of his closest associates, and before his death as many as sixty-five men and women had received all of the temple ordinances. Frequently noting that he might not live long enough to teach the endowment ceremony in the temple, he presciently endowed these trusted followers in preparation of performing the saving ordinances to the body of the Church. For details of this selected "endowment group," see Andrew F. Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances and the 1844 Mormon Succession Question" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1982).
[^17] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:541-42. The temple was dedicated privately by Joseph Young on 30 April and publicly from 1-3 May by Orson Hyde. Thousands of Saints attended the services. Wilford Woodruff addressed three thousand Saints at the temple on 10 May.
[^18] Reminiscences of Sarah De Armon Pea Rich (1885-93), LDS Church Archives.
[^19] From a variety of sources, Susan Easton Black sets the Nauvoo population at eleven thousand in 1845, but there may well have been several thousand more throughout Hancock County and environs and in Iowa settlements along the Mississippi River. See Black, "How Large Was the Population of Nauvoo?" Brigham Young University Studies 35, no. 2 (1995): 91-94.
[^20] Eliza Cheney to Parents, Brothers and Sisters, January 1848, in Historical Letters and Sketches, 1841-1919, Eliza Jane Rawson Collection, LDS Church Archives.
[^21] Frederick A. Norwood, Strangers and Exiles: A History of Religious Refugees, 2 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1969) 2:246.
[^22] In November 1845, Willard Richards, Church historian, made a plea to the Saints to collect and bring to him any records, documents, maps, charts, books, or information of any kind relating to the Church and requested all missionaries to submit a written report of their experiences if they had not done so, all to be included in The General History of the Church. See Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:526. Eliza R. Snow preserved the minutes of the Nauvoo Relief Society, which she carried with her throughout Utah territory when she organized Relief Societies in 1867-68. These minutes were of special value to the women of the Church, containing the carefully recorded words of the Prophet Joseph Smith to them, outlining their responsibilities, position, and privileges within the Church.
[^23] The Nauvoo Temple bell was crafted in England, cast in bronze, and sent under the care of Wilford Woodruff to hang in the tower of the temple even before the temple was completed. When the Saints abandoned Nauvoo, the bell was taken down and hung in the belfry of the Methodist Church, from which it was later removed by a group of Mormons who carried it safely to Winter Quarters and from thence to the Salt Lake Valley in the first company to follow the pioneer company. It was finally installed in a campanile on Temple Square under the auspices of the Relief Society in 1942, the hundredth anniversary of that society's founding. For more information, see Mary Grant Judd, "A Monument with a Message," Relief Society Magazine 29 (January 1942): 12, and Lois Leetham Tanner, "Old Bell, Temple Bell," unpublished paper in author's possession.
[^24] Sally Randall to Parents, Brothers and Sisters, 1 June 1846, in Letters of Sally Randall, LDS Church Archives.
[^25] History of the Church 7:464-65.
[^26] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:578-79.
[^27] Helen Mar Whitney, "Our Travels Beyond the Mississippi," Woman's Exponent 12 (1 December 1883): 83. Her account is made up of her own reminiscences and the daily journal of her husband, Horace Whitney, as well as other pertinent documents and personal accounts.
[^28] Samuel Brannan, born in 1819 in Maine, was baptized into the Church sometime in the 1840s after becoming acquainted with William Smith, the Prophet's brother. Supporting William Smith's claim to succeed Joseph Smith as prophet, Brannan was disfellowshipped but later reaffiliated with the Church. In New York he published first The Prophet and later The Messenger before his appointment by Orson Pratt to lead the Brooklyn Saints to California. He died in California in 1889.
[^29] All but twelve of the original voyagers reached California, with two additional passengers born on the way.
[^30] "The Ship Brooklyn Saints," in Kate B. Carter, Our Pioneer Heritage, 20 vols. (Salt Lake City: Daughters of Utah Pioneers, 1960) 3:473-587.
