Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Other EmigrationHC508Louise Charlotte Leuba Graehl [^1]

Other EmigrationHC508Louise Graehl's story of coming west began in Geneva, Switzerland, where she and her husband ran a confectionary shop. She claimed to have been the first woman in Geneva to join the Church when she was baptized in 1853. She and her husband and their three young daughters traveled the next year to the United States and continued on to Utah in the Robert Campbell company. Her account is brief but shows the interdependence of women on the trail and their self-reliance in the face of adversity.

Other EmigrationHC508I was born in Geneva, Switzerland on the 15th of September, 1822. Both my parents died when I was quite young and I went to live with her [my mother's?] dear old friend, Mrs. Maurice, "Aunty," as I called her. I was married to George L. Graehl on the 31st of August, 1844. We kept a confectionery store. Ten years had passed since our marriage when we lost a sweet little girl, Emma, just fifteen months old. At the funeral I had a visit from the minister of the ward [Church] in which we lived and another minister of the Christian Church, who came to comfort us, but they could not tell me if my sweet baby was saved, for they said there was no provision in the Bible for the salvation of children, but that we may hope that the Lord would take care of them. This time I felt indignant at their speech for in my heart I was sure that my little angel was all right and that those ministers knew nothing.

Other EmigrationHCSometime after this Mr. Roulst, one of our acquaintances, came and spoke to me about a new religion that he had just embraced. He seemed to be full of joy and said many things about the great light he had received; but I must confess that I paid very little attention to all that he said for I had known him only as a man of the world and I thought it very funny to have him speak that way about religion. At that time I did not care for any religion anyhow. However, he continued to talk and one day he brought me some pamphlets to read. They were on the first principles of the Gospel, and I was astonished in reading them, for they threw a new light on the Scriptures that I had read so often, but not understood before.

Other EmigrationHC509I was baptized into the Latter-day Saint Church on the 7th of June, 1853, being the first woman in Geneva to join the church, and my husband was baptized one month later. It was arranged that the first emigration of the Switzerland saints should start for Utah on the 7th day of February, 1854, so we sold our business, with considerable loss, and got ourselves ready for the long journey. On that memorable day we got up early for we had to start at eight o'clock in the morning. Our three little girls, Eliza, Fanny and Adeline who had expected to take their pretty dolls along, at the last moment had to kiss them a tearful goodbye, for it was found impossible to make room for them. At the station we found a few very dear friends who had come that cold morning to bid us goodbye. My heart was sad for I was leaving forever the city of my birth.

Other EmigrationHC509On the 12th of March we boarded the John M. Wood which was to take us across the Atlantic. We were seven and a half weeks on the sea. We were very glad to arrive in New Orleans where we parted with some of our fellow travelers. Without even getting a look at the beautiful city, we were ushered on a steamboat that was to transport us to St. Louis. We were twelve days on that boat. After eight days in St. Louis we took another steamboat for Kansas where we were to begin our camping life. This was indeed something new for us. The fixing of tents under the trees in the wood, the building of a campfire, the baking of our bread in baking kettles, the washing of our clothes, and the tending of our baby boy just learning to walk were sometimes trying to one who had hardly ever cooked a meal, mixed bread or washed clothes. But, though some of the work was hard and many were the privations that we were beginning to feel, we still felt happy.

Other EmigrationHC510Eliza, my oldest girl and constant companion, died and was buried in a lonely grave in the wilderness. They made a fine coffin of black walnut and six young ladies of our company carried my lost treasure to her final resting place. Not even a flower was found to put on her bier, but we made a wreath of wild grape leaves.

Other EmigrationHC510Little Fanny was very sick with the dread disease [^2] and we were very much afraid that we were going to have to part with her, too; and as we were going to move our camp, we asked the brethren to come and anoint her and pray that if she was to die, we would rather have her buried with her sister. The next morning she was better and, though it took quite a long time to get her restored to health, still she lived to come to Utah and is living at the time of this writing.

Other EmigrationHC510It was the beginning of July that our tiresome journey across the plains begun. We found out when we were ready to start that we lacked many things that would be needed on the road and that it would be difficult to procure them. Father had met some people who had discouraged him, and one fine afternoon, taking his trunk and his gun, he started for the village, where he had not been able to coax me to remain. I was afraid of the country, for there were many apostates around, and I had not left my beautiful country to make my home anywhere outside of Zion.

Other EmigrationHCThat afternoon was a sad one for me, for I felt bad for my husband and didn't know how I could manage to travel alone with my children. The sisters came and comforted me promising that I would certainly be helped. But, in the evening, my husband came back having met a good brother who promised him that he would procure the desired articles and so we resumed our journey.

Other EmigrationHC511We had been traveling a few days. I was in the wagon with my three little ones, when all at once we had a stampede. Our team composed of two yokes of oxen and another one, started running in the grass that at that place was about five feet high. Sometimes the wagons came near wrecking each other, then again the animals ran in different directions not seeming to feel any trouble at pulling their heavy loads. At last they stopped, our companion losing one yoke of oxen that could not be found again. After such a scare we were glad to walk to camp, but it was not so easy for me for I had to carry a little girl in one arm and a baby in the other and to find my way through the high grass. I was very much afraid that I would trample on a rattlesnake.

Other EmigrationHC511We arrived in camp at last—it was past dinnertime. The good sisters came to welcome us and gave us some dinner. But the next day and for quite a long time I could not persuade the children to ride in the wagon, and as for myself, I had to help father drive. I tell you it was a pretty hard job to help drive through the long summer day with a baby in my arms and another at my side crying to be carried but after a time we had no more runaways and the children rode in the wagon.

Other EmigrationHCWell, we had many adventures in crossing the plains; they would fill a volume if we could write them all. My husband had not been well since we left the old country and now he became worse and had to keep to his bed in the wagon so I had to drive. That was all right for some of the sisters helped, but what made it hard for me was that we had a yoke for the oxen that was not strong enough. It was tied with buckskin strings that would wear out and break at any time causing me much trouble. Once, for instance, it was dusk and we were a little behind the company when our yoke broke and our oxen ran away to camp about two miles off. There we were right in the road, obliged to stay alone until some good brother, by chance meeting our oxen, had the kindness to come to our rescue. I could not light a fire for I had no materials so I sat in the front seat holding my axe in my hands ready to try to defend myself and dear ones from the wolves who were howling all around. So I waited until midnight when some brothers came for me. They made a fire to scare the wolves away and we slept, by turn, until morning.

Other EmigrationHC512Another time there was a river to cross, and again it was toward evening and we were the last of the company. There was no one to help us as our captain was absent. "What are you going to do?" called dear father from his bed. "I am going to drive right over and the Lord will help us," I answered, and we did it all right. At camp, in the evening, the captain went around to find out who had helped Sister Graehl. Well, it was the last night before we reached Salt Lake City. It had been snowing and it was dark before we stopped for the night. That night I could not get any wood to light a fire nor could I bake bread. The next day we mixed sugar with flour and ate it raw. The same night a little child was born in the camp. The next day we arrived in Salt Lake. It was with a sad heart that I parted with many of our traveling companions who had been so kind and obliging to me in my trouble.

Other EmigrationHC512It was October, 1854, that we arrived and we immediately started in search of rooms in which to live. After much trouble we found two small rooms—then we had to buy a stove. We had to pay twenty-two dollars in gold for a little sheet iron stove and nine dollars for about five feet of pipe. We had no wood to burn and wood was very expensive. Some one had taken charge of our oxen out in the country for the winter or else I could have rented them to some party that would have brought me plenty of wood to burn and money besides. I only found that out too late, and as I had only a little money left, I did not like to spend it for wood. I had noticed how many people seemed to be careless about picking up their chips, so I took a gunny sack early every morning and filled it and that lasted us all day. But by and by, when the chips got frozen under the snow, I could not pick them up anymore, but I found a way of getting wood by renting our wagon.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
