Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Isaiah Moses Coombs [^1]

Isaiah Moses Coombs, a second-generation Mormon (his parents joined the Church before his birth in 1834), poignantly describes the emotional turmoil of leaving his young wife a year after their marriage in order to join the Saints in Utah. Married in 1854 when he was just twenty, Isaiah, a new schoolteacher, felt the pull of the gathering and consulted with apostle Erasmus Snow in St. Louis about emigrating to Utah. His wife, Sarah Turk Coombs, pregnant with their first child, would not convert and refused to leave their home in Columbia, Illinois. Isaiah was appointed company clerk in Isaac Allred's company. He eventually remarried and became a teacher. He also supervised the tithing office for seventeen years. His diary is introspective and emotional, revealing the compelling draw of the gospel.

After a night's reflection on the subject, sleeping none, praying much, I decided to go with the emigration to Utah, be the final decision of my wife what it might. "Very well," said Bro. [Erastus] Snow, "that is as I would have decided myself. It is the best thing you can do." Accordingly, on my return home [to Columbia] I represented to Sarah how my affairs stood. I told her that the only course left for me to pursue was to go among the people whose cause I had espoused and cast my lot with theirs and that I had resolved to go that spring, and to start in a very few days. Said I, "You are my wife and as such your place is by my side. I shall expect you to accompany me." She wept long and bitterly, calling on me to renounce Mormonism and stay with her. "Your school," said she, "will soon be full again when the people learn that you are no longer a Mormon, and beside this there are many positions of honor and profit open to you if you will but identify yourself with the people." At the close of our interview I felt more desolate than ever for I knew that there was but one course for me to pursue and it seemed more evident than ever that in pursuing that course I should have to sever myself from the dearest object of my affections. What made me feel worse than anything else was the knowledge that in a few months my wife would become a mother, and that during the most trying and critical period of a woman's life she would be without a husband's sustaining arm and tender care. But I thought of all of this before I made up my mind. I had counted the cost and I was ready for the sacrifice. I dismissed my little school and in sadness and silence prepared for my long and lonely journey.

515At length the day arrived, the hour when the parting hand must be taken. Father, brothers and sisters bade me good-bye but they looked forward to a joyous meeting, distant perhaps, but sure, when they should follow me to the gathering place of the Saints, and this thought was an anchor to the soul; but when I came to part with my wife, my heart sank like lead within me. Henceforth, we were to see each other no more in this life. Such was the thoughts of my anguished soul as I pressed her to my aching heart. That ordeal was passed in silence. No word was spoken. Hurrying away I entered the wagon that was waiting, buried my face in my hands, and looked not up again until Columbia and all its near and dear associations were left far behind. If I had not turned to a pillar of salt or ice, the sight of my beloved wife standing in the door would have melted my heart within me and I should have returned, and thereby braved the displeasure of the Almighty and perhaps have yielded little by little to the voice of the tempter until I, with her, should have been eternally lost and shut out from the presence of God and the holy Angels. The responsibilities resting upon me were too great. My father, brothers, and sisters tied hand and foot in Babylon with the iron chain of poverty, looked to me as a deliverer; they expected me to go ahead and open the way for them to come. A long line of ancestors who had died without the gospel in the ages past were calling to me with their spirit voices and bidding me go up and assist in rearing a temple wherein to officiate for them that they might come up and receive blessings equally with the living. And last, though not least was the consideration that I was obeying the voice of God and that I was taking a course that would secure my own glory and exaltation and that would eventually either in this life or that which is to come enable me to bind my wife to me in bands that could not be broken. She was blind then but the day would come when she would see.

515The thirteen miles that intervened between Columbia and St. Louis were soon travelled over. I went immediately to Pres. E. Snow's [^2] office on the corner of Washington Avenue and Fourth Street and was received by him with open arms.

I was informed that a company of Saints would start up the river in a few days and that I could go with it. But the few days lengthened out to two weeks before we started. I spent the time writing in the office, visiting among the Saints and walking about the city with my brother Hyrum who was learning the printer's trade in the office of "The Luminary," a weekly paper published by Bro. Snow. Here I counted my money and valued my clothing and found myself worth just one hundred dollars. Ten dollars of that I handed over to the church clerk as a commencement of my tithing, the receipt of which is carefully kept among my papers.

Finally on Tuesday the 8th day of May, I embarked with a large company of Saints on board the Golden State bound for Atchison, Kansas, the outfitting point for the overland journey to Salt Lake. Nothing worthy of record occurred on this trip. We were just eight days in making it. We found many large camps of Saints scattered on the prairie near Atchison, outfitting for their journey across the plains. Far as the eye could reach in every direction were to be seen the tents of Israel with their vast herds of cattle grazing on the rolling prairie. The largest of these encampments was out about twelve miles from the river at what was known as "Mormon Grove." All the camps finally centered around this point near which a large tract of land was taken up by the church which the emigrants fenced and cultivated, but which was soon afterwards jumped by some rascally gentiles. I soon found employment, first as a herdsman, then as cook for the returning elders of the Church, and finally as clerk and collecting agent for the Superintendents of the Emigration, Elders Daniel Spencer, R[ichard]. Ballantyne and Erastus Snow. In these several capacities I labored and toiled heart-sick and weary for over two long months. I think during all that time I received but one letter from my wife. In the performance of my duties as collecting agent, I had to make frequent trips to Atchison. These trips were nearly always performed on foot and frequently when I could scarcely stand for bodily weakness. But I did not complain and no one suspected how much I suffered.

One hot afternoon I was sitting in the tent humped up over my writing suffering from a severe attack of cholera morbus. My suffering was excruciating. While I sat thus Elder Daniel Spencer came to the tent door leading a horse by its bridle. "Here Bro. Coombs" said he. "I wish you would mount this horse and take a ride about twelve miles out to the little Grasshopper where Bro. [Jacob] Seicrist's [^3] company will camp tonight and borrow some money for Bro. Snow." I answered that I could not possibly—that I was racked with pain and had made up my mind to die that night. "Oh, no," replied Bro. Spencer. "You shall not die—you will have a pleasant canter over the prairie and I promise you in the name of the Lord that you shall return feeling much better and that you shall be sick no more till you get home."

With that promise I allowed him to help me into the saddle, and after receiving my instructions proceeded slowly and wearily to wend my way through the encampment till I reached the highway on the prairie. Here I gave my horse the rein and just as the sun was sinking beyond the western horizon I started off on a keen gallop for the distant Grasshopper. The first few jumps of my steed occasioned me great pain, but I hung on to the pommel of the saddle determined that that ride should either cure or kill me. I had not gone far before all pain left me. Thereupon a wild, reckless spirit took possession of me and putting spurs to my horse I dashed along the road at headlong speed, whooping and yelling as I went. But I continued not in that mood a great while. On reaching a grove of timber I dismounted and on my knees returned thanks to God for this manifestation of His loving kindness to me. I there promised if He would forgive the lukewarm service I had hitherto rendered him that I would in future give Him my whole heart. I arose feeling that I stood on holy ground, remounted my horse and pursued my journey. I came up with Capt. Seicrist's company just as they were camping for the night. I spent the night in the captain's tent, formed a pleasant acquaintance with him. Next morning I transacted the business with which I was intrusted and started on my return just as the company was striking their tents. I never saw Captain Seicrist again as he died of overwork on the journey and was buried by the wayside.

At last what was known as the Church train was being fitted out for the journey and I was to accompany it. One of the Salt Lake missionaries, a Bro. Gregory, had died at the Grove on his return home from the Eastern States where he had been to get some means that had been left him by some relative, and his body was to be taken to his family in a metallic coffin. A light wagon was selected for this purpose and two yoke of young half broken cattle were purchased to draw the same. This wagon and team with Bro. Gregory's body and effects were placed in my care with instructions to take them to the family of the deceased in the far off city of Salt Lake. Bro. Snow helped me yoke my wild team and hitch them to the wagon and as I was a new hand entirely with an ox team, never having before handled one, he condescended to drive out half a mile for me on the road. The train had got the start of me and were at least two miles ahead. I had taken the precaution to tie a rope to the horns of my near leader and was taking hold of this when Bro. Snow bade me goodbye. Away I started July 28, 1855, an independent teamster bound for Utah. I went on gloriously for a time, but alas! the chain that connected my leaders with the tongue of the wagon broke. I managed to stop my team but in trying to toggle my chain together one of the oxen took a notion to kick up its heels and have a run, and as I was in the way I received one hoof in my stomach which sent me to the grass breathless, perfectly hors du combat, [^4] and away the leaders ran in the direction of the train that was now about a mile ahead and in plain sight followed by the other yoke with the wagon. As soon as I could recover my breath I started in pursuit as fast as possible. It did not take us long at this rate to overtake the train and some of the brethren soon helped me recover my refractory team. Fortunately they had kept the road and as it lay over a level prairie no harm had been done.

That evening we camped on the Big Grasshopper and next day returned to the Grove with our teams to draw out some more wagons and this we did also the next day. We had not more than one third enough teams to draw the wagons that had been assigned us but we had been promised some more in a few days. But we got no more teams and at the end of two weeks dragging through the mud we had to leave ten wagons by the side of the road. Even then we were too heavy loaded, and after breaking one wagon down in a mud hole, we left three more. The wagons then left were all loaded with church property: books, clothing, steam engine, etc. Even after this we dragged along but slowly. I have often wondered how Bro. Snow could have had the heart to start out a train so late in the season and so illy provided with teams. A thousand miles of weary travel lay before us. We labored under another disadvantage which proved to be a serious one before we got through. We were the last train on the road. Scores of large emigrant and merchant trains had traversed the road before us and their teams had eaten out the grass so thoroughly on the line of travel that our poor oxen had hard fare indeed. In many localities the ground was full of alkali and as the grass was short many of our cattle got alkalied and were left behind to die. Of the four oxen that I started with not one lived to reach Salt Lake. Our company numbered 61 souls including the women and children. Out of this number two died. One, an old man, died and was buried on the banks of the Little Blue. The other, quite a young man, Joseph Redfern, fell off his wagon tongue and was run over, which caused his death in two or three hours. This was as we were crossing Scotts Bluff, and we buried him that night on Horseshoe Creek.

Isaac Allred, a returning missionary, was Captain of our company, James Pace was his counsellor and Jas. C. Sly was captain of the guard. The last two named were also returning missionaries and all three were fine men. We dragged slowly and wearily along. We at last got into the mountains and found better feed for our poor animals in the shape of bunch grass, but as it grows high upon the sides of the mountains, it was hard work for them to get at it. The scenery was now more diversified and grand and travelling actually seemed less laborious than when we traversed the unbroken plain. At last we reached and crossed Green River. Here we found ourselves compelled to call a halt, and send on to the valleys for assistance. Capt. Allred, myself and eight others of the brethren remained with ten wagons and all the worn out cattle while the rest pushed on for Salt Lake. We grubbed willows out of the midst of a dense thicket and here we had a picturesque camp where we spent two long and tedious weeks. During that time our provisions ran out entirely, but were again replenished from the camp of a trapper in the vicinity whom Capt. Allred accidentally found one morning while hunting for game. At length on the evening of the fourteenth day a solitary horseman was seen approaching our camp at a swift gallop from away toward the west. It proved to be the eldest son of our Captain with the news that Bishop Abraham O. Smoot was at hand with plenty of cattle and provisions.

It was a joyous meeting of father and son after a separation of over three years, and we, who had never before seen the boy, was scarcely less glad to meet him for the news he brought us. We were now, of course, in the midst of the Rocky mountains, those grand, old rock ribbed hills I had read of as a boy and my heart throbbed with wild joy as I trod their lofty summits or walked in the deep vales and canyons between them. Old winter was coming on apace. It was late in October that we abandoned our friendly willow camp and set our faces once more homeward. It was a cold, windy, snowy day. Mountains were already shrouded in snow half way to their base and the wind that came sweeping down from those dizzy heights was piercing cold. I was placed in charge of about ten yoke of our worn out cattle that could but just creep along and with a sick man placed in my wagon was appointed to bring up the rear. Long before night I found myself in the rear and my cattle almost ready to lie down in the road with fatigue. With the helpless man in my wagon I felt far more lonely than if I had been entirely solitary. I tried to grope my way but the road was so completely covered with the drifting sand that I was completely baffled. I accordingly let the oxen take their own course and plodded on by their side bewildered and anxious not knowing whether I was travelling east or west. At last, I observed a light in the distance which proved to be the camp fires of my friends and soon I heard the friendly shouts of brethren who had been sent back to help me on.

And thus we toiled on through snow and sand drifts, threading canyon after canyon, climbing mountain after mountain for eleven weary days. Fort Bridger was left in the distance, and at last standing on the dizzy top of Big Mountain we caught a glimpse of the distant valley of the Great Salt Lake, the home of the Saints. Our hearts swelled with joy at the sight and we gave vent to our feelings in three hearty cheers. That was the last night that we spent in the mountains. When I arose next morning I threw from my blankets at least six inches of snow. By noon we had gained the bench land that overlooks the lovely city of the Saints with the lake from which it derives its name sleeping in the distance. Date Nov. 2, 1855.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
