Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

522Christian Nielsen [^1]

522With so much to tell, Christian Nielsen somehow condenses in a single letter to his family in Denmark a compelling story of his travels to Utah and the life he made for himself and family as converts to the Church. Such letters had to bridge time and distance to keep together families that the gospel had separated. Only a portion of the letter follows. A model of comprehensive and informative correspondence, it continues on for many pages offering a detailed description of the Sanpete Valley where the Nielsens settled, the Indians of that area, and his experiences establishing a home and farm in Manti, Utah.

522Manti City, Sanpete Valley, Utah Territory,

522April 27, 1856.

522To Fisherman Carl Nielsen,

Dear Brother-in-law, brothers and sisters, brother, son, family, friends, old neighbors and acquaintances and everyone who might be interested in hearing from us. We greet you all with loving and friendly greetings in the name of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Amen.

We don't know if you have had any news from us since we left Denmark. In the summer of 1854 we wrote a letter to a man who lived close to Vejle, [^2] but he was on his way to this country before the letter could reach its destination, so we don't know if the letter has come to his successor or not. In the future—as long as it is the will of God that we shall live and He will grant us His grace—we shall write a letter once or twice a year to our family, but not to everyone each time. First of all, we want to tell you how we are. You probably believe that we are dead, but we are, thanks be to God, alive and are living well; we are all healthy, bodily and spiritually; we own our own home and land, cattle and tools to till the soil; for the time we have five head of cattle, besides calves etc., about 27 acres of land, and two lots of about 3 acres which we use as a garden. We have a deed to this. In the city in which we live, we have a lot for our houses, room for our cattle and grain and a small flower garden. On this lot we have up till now built five houses, and this coming summer we expect to build two more. The house which faces the street, and which will be at least two stories high we cannot manage to do. I hope that my son Niels Emanuel will come and help me build it, and with the help of God I shall keep him to build two. Fritz is our farm hand and a little girl whom we had with us from home is with us most of the time. Our daughter Sophie is not with us here, but remained in the capitol—Salt Lake City—when passing through there. It is 150 miles north of us, where she was married January 13, 1855, to a young man, Jacob Knudsen, from the island of Funen. [^3] I expect that they will settle here this coming summer. In this town there are about 300 Danish families, and 7 miles to the north are almost just as many.

We have hundreds of things to tell you, but space does not permit us. First of all we wish to tell you that the journey to the valley was a very good one for us. We left Liverpool January 16, 1855, dropped the anchor at the mouth of the Mississippi March 7, and we stayed here until the 14th as the ship on which we were went too deep; 1400 sacks of salt were thrown overboard; two steamships tried to pull it out, but to no avail, and the ship was grounded, and we had to stay there during the night. In the morning the water had risen, and the steamers hauled us for about 4 miles, where we anchored, and stayed there until sunset, when a steamer came with another frigate, and took our ship along, one on each side, and we arrived in New Orleans on March 17th, 100 miles. On the 19th we went aboard a steamship which was to take us to St. Louis, 1200 miles, and we arrived there on the 29th. Our travel on the Mississippi was very interesting, varying with forest, beautiful houses, gardens and lovely cities. The houses were surrounded with flowers and fruit trees in the most beautiful bloom; oranges and lemons were hanging on the trees in the plantations where Negroes worked and plowed and the Negro women drove the plows. The birds were singing, and in each place we sailed by women and children, well dressed, greeted us with white handkerchiefs; there was only arable land where the forest was destroyed by fire, and in several places the forest was on fire. We stayed about a month in St. Louis. Towards evening on April 30 we boarded a steamer which took us 200 miles further up the Mississippi to Keokuk [Iowa] where we arrived in the evening of May 1st. Here was a very large camp of English, Welsh, Americans and Danes etc. and here were also many hundreds of wagons and tents.

Here we received wagons, tents, and oxen. Every day companies came and left; it was very lively and the surroundings lovely. The forests, for the most part oak and all kinds of fruit trees and vines were blooming. We now had to live in our wagons which were covered with canvas, and tents where we slept as well as in a house. We were given four oxen, one wagon and a tent. On the 21st we started on our journey. In the beginning it went slowly as the oxen were not acquainted with us, and we not with them, as the way in which they drive them here is entirely different from the Danish way. They pull with a yoke of trees which is placed on the neck of them in which there is an iron brace to put the wagon ring in; there are four oxen, the first ones pull in an iron chain. It can be removed in a minute. They are steered with a whip and some very definite words which the oxen know, and in this way from eight to ten pair of oxen are steered by one driver. This form of transportation is common in North America. Our wagon is of excellent quality and solid and is far superior to the Danish. We traveled through the state of Iowa to Kanesville at the Missouri River, and arrived there on June 25th, about 360 miles. The country through which we traveled was sparsely settled; a few towns and houses, many miles apart, but boundless grass fields of the very best kind. Our oxen became fat, fields and forests were full of fruit. The roads were very poor. Here we received supplies for the remainder of the journey, and were ferried across the river. It took us to July 12th before we were ready to travel further. We were now in the State of Nebraska. The country was unsettled. We traveled for a couple of days and came to a river called Loop [Loup] Fork, across which we were ferried. On August 2nd we came to a place where there were buffaloes and the very biggest. In the afternoon of the 5th I went hunting for buffaloes together with some other men, but the time was too short. The camp broke up, and we had to return. We went up into the mountains where we could see a great plain, full of buffaloes. There were several thousands of them besides deer, antelopes, wolves, etc. We camped for the first time on August 4th on the banks of the La Platte River, viz. on the north side. We traveled along it for about 500 miles to Fort Laramie where we crossed the river to the southern bank; in this fort there were soldiers to protect the emigrants against attacks from the Indians. Lately we had previously been visited by the Indians who are always begging and stealing. We often came across gold diggers returning from California, mostly riding, driving mules before them. On July 31st we met among others a man from Kiel Germany; he had been a soldier in Copenhagen, but during the Schleswig War he had joined the insurgents. Until the middle of August we had fine grass for our cattle, but now it began to become less fine, and sometimes we had to travel for two or three days before the oxen could graze. We lost one of our oxen and had to drive with three. Once in a while the road was sandy; oxen and cows lay dead by the thousands at the roadside. The road and the country were strewn with carriage fittings—the wood was burned—bedding, clothing, kitchen ware, guns etc. I wish to say here, that before us 12,000 emigrants had traveled to California. They are the ones who burn the wagons when their cattle die, to join the others, as otherwise they will have to stay. The Mormons do not burn their wagons, they help each other; does a person lose his oxen, the others come to his rescue; is anything broken, the whole company will have to wait until it is repaired; generally speaking there are blacksmiths and other craftsmen in the company. The blacksmiths set up their workshop, and in a short while everything is fixed. Nothing is thrown away unless the wagons are overloaded which is often the case, and they have to "throw it overboard." One would think that we could become rich by picking things up in the desert; this is not the case; there might be some who are greedy and cannot stand to see all that iron and clothing lying there; to begin with they pick up everything they see and are running around in the camps to find more. They load it on their wagons and let their oxen drag it along; sometimes they take it along for several hundred miles. More and more is thrown along the road; they can't take it along, and it breaks their hearts; here they see a fine wheel, there a brass kettle, here a pan and there a kitchen range, etc. They have to drive past it; they are stuck in every hole they pass over; the others must help them all the time; at last they get tired of it and leave them behind, as it is generally that kind of people who constantly ask for help, but will help no one else. Here they are sitting now. First of all they try to give the oxen a sound thrashing, but they are overloaded and cannot do it. It irritates them; they take off what they can, and finally they get the wagon out. They load it again; they cannot leave the things behind, they have brought it so far. They now drive on for a distance of a gunshot or two; they are stuck again; they do as before; but they overstrain themselves, the pulse beats intensely, they must leave some of the things behind to their dismay. Thus they are stuck several times, until they have nothing but the empty wagon; the oxen are tired and can neither get food nor water; they cannot be saved and are at once attacked by wolves to which they fall a prey. It is most comical with those who have preceded them, and who are greedy; in the morning they load their backs and are ready to give the whole thing up in the afternoon, as they have to leave it; the next morning they again find something which they feel they must take with them, it is a good piece which they can use for many purposes, sell it at a good price, they make big calculations, until it goes like the day before, and thus it continues every day in such a way that when they arrive in the valleys, they have nothing.

On September 20th we came to a fort called Bridger; here were soldiers from the valleys to protect the emigrants against the Indians; we heard that a war was being fought with them in the valleys and that they had stolen a couple of hundred cattle. We now got up in the mountains where sometimes we journeyed upwards for a couple of days and then downwards, tearing along. In some places the wagon was lowered with ropes. At last we reached the valleys on September 30th; at 8 o'clock in the evening we entered Great Salt Lake City. From Kanesville we had traveled 1,031 miles. One would think that we didn't like to travel any further; no, we at once made up our minds together with several others to proceed to this valley (Sanpete Valley), 150 miles south of here. On October 4th we started on our new journey. We traveled through many settlements; the people were very good to us; they gave us all kinds of things. In Provo a fat cow was killed for us, but the farther south we got the more warlike it looked; all were armed. In Nephi we camped in a place where eight Indians were shot a few days before. From there we traveled through a mountain pass to this valley where we at once came across two wagons, from which the boxes were thrown off, and beside was a trunk that had been broken open, some wheat, several percussion caps, etc. which we gathered and picked up. Here the Indians had killed four of the brethren from this town. The fort in which we were to live was the one from which the Indians had stolen the many head of cattle, and the settlers had left there to go to other places. It was a miserable fort, the walls were poorly made, the houses in uninhabitable condition, and we had to be armed constantly; there were good pastures which could have become wonderful fields, but we were too weak to resist the Indians. My family and I didn't stay very long there. A new mill had to be built in the city and I was recommended to build it as a millwright, and traveled to this place on November 10th. I took the job to build the mill, which by the help of God went very well; it is built Danish style. I made more than $300.00; a dollar is 2 "daler" and 2 "skilling" in Danish money.

The whole journey is in no way dull. Everyone had his special duty. The voyage across the Atlantic Ocean was as pleasant as one could wish. We sailed along the West Indian Islands, between Cuba and Jamaica. At the latter island we stayed on February 24th; it was dead calm. The ship was turning around; it was quite a sight for us to see the sky-high mountains; it was extremely hot, and we perspired extremely.

529The journey across the country isn't dull either. In the morning we are busy preparing breakfast and make ourselves ready to go as soon as the horn is blown. At noon we generally camp for about an hour if we can get close to water and grass. Now they are busy preparing dinner, get wood and water; the same thing in the evening. We have to walk most of the way, for our loads are big; is the road good the children and the women ride. I had a widow with two children from the island of Bornholm in my wagon, so I had to walk almost all the way. To economize on my boots I walked barefooted for about 200 Danish miles, or about 800 English miles, and let my beard grow for a long time. Many of us looked awful with sunburnt faces and long beards; my beard was so long that it hung way down on my chest. I was afraid to look in a mirror. The Indians stared at me; they don't have any beard. The weather during Nebraska until we reached Fort Laramie in the middle of the desert was warm with much thundering. In Iowa it was terrible; it is almost impossible to imagine it unless you have seen and heard it yourself; it was lightning constantly day and night, about every other night or day we had thunderstorms the like of which is never heard in Denmark; as a rule it comes and begins with a terrible storm and a whirlwind. The thunder is approaching with awful booms and bangs, the air is one big blaze; the rain is pouring down and fills the tents with water, and many of the tents are blown down. In Nebraska we drove behind the company for a little while when a thunderstorm hit us; the lightning hit us. My wife felt a pressure on her head, my daughter in her chest, and Anders Nielsen who was the driver one on his right arm; those in front fell to the ground; I walked around among them and saw the lightning among us, but didn't feel anything. In the wagon were two children; we opened it very fast; they were lying well and safe. God had protected us.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
