Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

537Ulrich Loosli [^1]

537For thirty-year-old Ulrich Loosli, Zion was not only a spiritual haven but also a material blessing, a place where he could enjoy "the richness that nature affords." He traveled with his wife and two children in the James D. Ross company. In a letter to loved ones in Switzerland, he described the new land in farming terms, noting its productivity and potential commercial value. He also reaffirmed his decision to leave his native land to gather with the Saints in Zion. His letter shows that by 1860 both traveling west and making a home in Utah were easier than a decade earlier.

537Dear Beloved Mother [Barbra Kahser Loosli], Brothers and Sisters in our Lord Jesus Christ:

Once again I take my pen to write to you to give you further information concerning my travels over the plains of America, concerning which you hear so much of in Europe. Also the hardships and inconveniences of the travelers. So I thought I would write some of my own experiences as I found them.

538It is 1030 English miles from Florence to Salt Lake Valley. I had a real good wagon, three yoke of oxen, two cows and one calf, which I bought in Florence. Our company consisting of thirty-six wagons left Florence on June 14th, 1860. Our company's captain's name was Br. [James D.] Ross, who was first counselor of the European Mission. This company was divided in four sections and each one had a leader. I was appointed captain of the Swiss Company, which consisted of ten wagons. We bought our provisions in Florence, which consisted of flour, ham, bacon, butter, onions, sugar, dried fruit and many other things. We took many cows with us; therefore we had an abundance of milk. During the first five hundred miles the feed for the cattle was plentiful, but as we traveled further the grass became scarce, and so naturally by the time we reached Salt Lake City the cows were nearly dry.

538As a rule we traveled fifteen to twenty miles a day. We started at six o'clock in the morning and stopped an hour for lunch at noon. We pitched camp early in the evening, after which each man took care of his oxen, which didn't take very long. The men then gathered wood while the women prepared the evening meal. Everything was done in order. The wagons were drawn in a circle, the tents were placed within the circle and outside of the tents the women did the cooking. The cattle were guarded day and night as a protection against the Indians and to prevent them from straying. Each morning I blew the horn to call the company to prayer.

The English gathered on one side while the Germans gathered on the other side, after which we all had breakfast. I blew the horn again as a signal to hitch up the oxen. After everything was in readiness I blew the horn as a signal for the company to start. In the evening I blew the horn for prayer, after which we retired. The signal for us to rise was given by the guards, or by those who watched the cattle during the night. In the beginning the oxen were hard to catch and hitch, but they soon became tame. Many people in Switzerland think that this kind of travel is hard, but I can truthfully tell you that during the last twenty years I've worked harder than I did on this journey even though I was the leader of the company and had to do more than the rest.

I had to take care of my company; each day I had to blow the horn eight times for all four companies. Whenever we came to a bad place in the road I had to stop and wait until every wagon had passed safely. My brothers Hans Kaspar and [Jacob] Fuhriman often say this journey was only a joke for them. We had good times, spending our evenings in songs, speeches, and in encouraging entertainments of all kinds. I had my wagon at the head of the company all during the trip. Notwithstanding we had many bad places in the road to pass, our trip was better than we had expected. For hours and hours we traveled on a road which was wide and level. It was a beautiful sight to see, these thirty-six wagons traveling along the level road. I had a brother from Thurgau [^2] who drove my oxen, but many times I had to take the whip and drive them myself. When I was four hundred miles from Florence I purchased another yoke of oxen. I then had four yoke of oxen on my wagon and with them I was able to drive safely under any conditions. It took knowledge, alertness and skill to drive over the bad roads, but on good roads the driver could ride if he understood the driving of the oxen.

In Switzerland you should be amazed to see from four to six oxen on one wagon without a line or halter or rope of any kind to drive them. It also made me open my eyes. On the more unruly oxen we placed ropes on their horns so we could guide them. Many times when the oxen became unruly I had to drive them for the other drivers. On our trip we lost a few oxen. The English and the Americans admired us and marveled at our strength and many times we helped them out of their troubles. On the 1st of September we camped ten miles from Salt Lake City and on the 2nd, four Apostles [^3] came to our camp and preached to us; on the 3rd we entered Salt Lake City. The same day, Brigham Young and Brother [Daniel H.] Wells, his second counselor, and many others came to our camp to give us any advice we wanted.

Let us take one more glance back over our trip. I have often wondered at the success of our journey for we were always so happy and blessed. The people in Salt Lake City marveled at our appearance. Some men made the remark that we were in better condition at our arrival than any other company they had seen. We had but one death in our company; a man from Switzerland. There were no accidents to the wagons or oxen throughout the whole journey. Everything went well and successful; we sang and prayed together like the children of a good family. Many times during the journey we went hunting and caught rabbits, sage hens and ducks. We also killed one deer and a bear. It was a great joy for me to travel over the great plains. As we traveled we passed many houses, also some stores where we could buy anything we wished, such as: coffee, sugar, vinegar, brandy, ham, bacon, butter, soap, whips, rope, etc. but we paid a very high price for these things.

As far as the Indians were concerned, we had no complaint to make. During the first six hundred miles, several Indians visited our camp and wanted something to eat. We gave them some flour. I saw the Indian town of Genoa [^4] of about 5,000 inhabitants, the most Indians I have seen in one place.

541I am at present living in Salt Lake City; most all the other Swiss emigrants have gone to other places. Hans Kaspar went with other emigrants to Cache Valley, which is about 80 miles from here, on the 7th month. There are many valleys where new settlers are going to make their homes. The city of Salt Lake is larger and more beautiful than I thought it was. I think it is about one-half hour broad and one-half hour long. There are quite a few houses, several manufacturing establishments, and stores where one can buy anything necessary to live on. The city is so nicely built and laid out, that many of the unbelievers wonder at it all. There are several cities in other valleys some distance from here. I am working at present on a new road, 17 miles from the city of Salt Lake and receive one dollar and one-half per day or 1 Fr. 7, or 87 Centimes.

541Bro. Kaspar had an occasion to send me a letter, and reported that he and Bro. Fuhriman are well and are working for a man at a sawmill. They intend to build themselves each a small house in the near future. I am looking around in different localities and wherever I like it best I will settle next spring.

There were lots of grain and good large potatoes raised this year. I have heard nothing about sickness. I have been inquiring about the fruitfulness of the land and this week I heard from an Englishman that he sowed 1 1/2 bushels of wheat and harvested 75 bushels, each bushel weighing 60 lbs. I inquired many times of English and Americans about different things and they have always been very kind and courteous to me. They have invited me to their homes and to meetings, and they have helped in every way possible. The food and drink the people have here is as good as any gentleman has in Switzerland. The land is very easy to work and the harvests are good. I have seen brethren here who came four, five or six years ago without money or a wagon or oxen and some of them in debt, and now they possess a farm, house, cows, oxen, horses or mules, pigs, a number of chickens and ducks, and all paid for. The people have plenty to eat and they live like lords. The land is irrigated wherever possible, and it yields abundantly. It only rained five times last year, but we hope next year it will rain more.

542The Latter-day Saints are not going to Zion to find riches and be selfish, but instead, to be blessed by the God of Israel with the richness that nature affords; the fresh mountain air, and the pure water which flows through the land. I don't wish myself back in Switzerland one moment, because I feel happy and thank God that He has led me here. Not until now did I realize how poor the Swiss people are, and how nice they could have it if they would obey the call of the Servants of God and keep the commandments of the Lord.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
