Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

542William Wood, Sr. [^1]

William Wood, Sr.,a British convert, was baptized in 1855 and then joined the Royal Navy as a butcher, sailing to Peru, China, Japan, and Ceylon. Returning home in 1860, he resumed his association with the Church and eventually made up his mind "to gather." He and his fiancÃ©e, Elizabeth Gentry, left England together but traveled with different companies to Utah, William in the David P. Kimball freight train and Elizabeth in the John S. Brown independent company. His concern for her flows throughout his account. He arrived in the Salt Lake Valley in October 1862 and married Elizabeth the following month.

I was born at Ostend, near Burnham, Essex, England, on May first, 1837. My parents were members of the Church of England; thus I was christened in the old Burnham Church. My parents moved from Ostend to Heybridge in 1847. I attended the school of those times; also the Sunday School of the Church of England. My father moved from Heybridge to Queensborough, Isle of Sheppy, Kent, in 1852. At this time I obtained a situation at the town of Whitham with Mr. Charles Barwell, a butcher, for 2s. 6d. per week and board. I lodged with a Mr. Philip Wood, no relation of mine, but a very religious man. He would preach and persuade me to join the Independents. [^2] This unsettled my religious views very much; however, I continued to observe my mother's advice on our parting, so I always attended the Whitham parish Church at Chipping Hill every Sunday afternoon. I often delivered meat to the Roman Catholic Monastery in Whitham during the week and the Sisters often talked to me and would advise me to attend the services in their chapel on Sunday mornings. I often attended and always felt much interest in their devoted service, and especially in the beautiful singing. The Sisters gave me much encouragement.

Just at this time Mr. Barwell closed his business through advanced age and he secured me a position with Mr. John Walford at the same wages (2s. 6d per week with board and lodging). When I had been with Mr. Walford for a few months he closed his business; however he got a position for me with his cousin, Mr. Robert Blaxall, a butcher of Maldon, Essex. By this time I had become very much unsettled in mind as to which church was right and which were wrong; however, by invitation from Mr. Blaxall, I attended the parish church with his family, having the privilege of sitting in their pew. I had now reached my 17th birthday. There was a school fellow of mine, John W. Bridge, serving his apprenticeship to a harness-maker, only a few doors from Mr. Blaxall. After closing in the evening Mr. Bridge often came to talk with me. Just at this time I was very much concerned as to how I could escape the damnation of the wicked. I had a most terrible fear of death, received through a sermon which was most impressively preached by the Reverend Harwood upon the damnation of the wicked. I told Mr. Bridge how I felt in regard to this sermon.

It happened about that time that he became a Latter-day Saint, and there was to be a conference held in Maldon, in the Cromwell Lecture Hall attended by some of the prominent Elders of the Latter-day Saint's Church, from America, Mr. Dunbar and others; also some local Elders, among whom was Charles W. Penrose. The latter preached a sermon upon the Godhead, and it upset all my very confused ideas of the God represented by the Church of England Prayer Book wherein the Deity is described as being without body, parts, or passions. I learned from Mr. Penrose' sermon that the true and living God was a God with a body, and parts, and passions, and that his attributes were developed to perfection. After reflecting sincerely and candidly upon the attributes of the Deity, as explained by Mr. Penrose, I found that through faith, I could lay a sure foundation for life and salvation. This idea removed the fear that I had suffered through Reverend Harwood's sermon concerning the damnation of the wicked.

545By this time Mr. Bridge discerned that I was gradually learning the truth. Thus a full explanation of the precept and example of Jesus Christ followed. And it dawned upon my mind that my mother's church was not the Church of Jesus Christ, from the fact that it ignored the vital principles introduced by our Saviour, and thus the organization was by an uninspired man, and I found the Lord had nothing to do with it. I had prayed often and fervently to my Heavenly Father that I might be correctly impressed as to what was right for me to do, and Mr. Bridge urged me to yield obedience to the teachings of our Lord and His apostles of which I had read in the New Testament promising that I should receive a testimony that God had revealed to Joseph Smith the Primitive Gospel and divinely authorized him to declare it in the name of Jesus Christ to all nations, kindreds, tongues and peoples.

I was now almost eighteen years old, and was baptized in the River Blackwater, Maldon, Essex by Joseph Silver, who with Henry Squires confirmed me, after which I was ordained a Priest. At my baptism I received a strong testimony and that a very peculiar one. In coming to the surface from the immersion I looked down the ebbing tide and saw a very large bundle of sticks, and, as I looked, the band broke and the sticks all floated rapidly down stream. It was to me the promised testimony in evidence of my obedience to the principle of baptism for the remission of sins; and no man on earth could persuade me otherwise, and now that sixty years have passed it is as unchanged in my mind as at the moment it appeared to me. It was soon reported that I had become a Mormon; and I was jeered at and called old Joe Smith and old Brigham Young, and many things were charged to them as well as to myself. However, all this only caused me to cling with a stronger tenacity to the principles of truth and to defy their charges. [ . . . ]

546[In 1860] After having been home about 2 weeks [from a four-year stint in the Royal Navy], I made ready to go to our meeting at Sheerness. My sister thought I was going to see my sweetheart so I told her to come along and she did. The meeting was held in a little upstairs room in a dirty back alley. On going into the room, President George Wager gave me a hearty reception, and the Saints who knew me did the same. In a few moments the meeting opened and I was invited to speak and I related briefly some of my travels, and offered a testimony to the truth of the Gospel. You can imagine the surprise of my sister at finding me still a Mormon and hearing me preach, as she called it. My desire to come to Utah had increased. I secured a position with a Mr. Bilby, a butcher in Sheerness, and after having worked for him for two months I received a letter from my old employer Mr. Blaxall asking me if I would return and work for him. This offer I accepted and went to Maldon, whence I found many of the old Saints had emigrated. I had placed my money in a bank and was adding to it all I could save.

I was now twenty-four years of age and began to think of selecting me a wife. I became quite intimate with Mrs. Blaxall's sister, a Miss Gipp. She was not a member of my church, however I used to influence her as much as possible but as her relatives were all against it I could not accomplish much. Mr. Blaxall called me in and talked the matter over with me. He said "Why do you want to go to such a bad place as Salt Lake City?" He said he had a proposition to make to me if I would relinquish that detestable Mormonism and stay in Maldon. He said that if I would stay and marry Lucy he would start me in a good business. I told him that I never could do that, because I knew Mormonism was true, and that I would never marry a non-member of the church.

547It was now 1862. Brother Francis M. Lyman and Brother Geo. Taylor were traveling Elders in Essex Conference. So I thought no more of Miss Gipp, and formed an acquaintance with Elizabeth Gentry. Brother [Edward Samuel] Gentry was president of the Maldon Branch, and all the family belonged to the church. I had now made up my mind to gather and to bring my young lady, to whom I was now betrothed, with me to Zion. I had enough money to pay all expenses to the frontiers, so I gave Mr. Blaxall a month's notice, after which I stayed at Father Gentry's and made preparation to leave for the Valley by May 13th in the old sailing ship William Tapscott. Brother F. M. Lyman had counselled me in everything, and particularly as to the journey. Miss Gentry accompanied me in visiting my father and mother and all our kindred. They all treated us very kindly, but expressed their sorrow that we were led away by such a disreputable people as the Mormons.

547After our visit we returned to Maldon and took farewell of Father Gentry and all our Maldon friends, gathered up all our baggage and proceeded to London, meeting the Saints to start for Liverpool. When we arrived we boarded the William Tapscott. It was an interesting sight to see the Saints boarding the ship with all kinds of tin utensils tied in bunches and some were carrying their straw mattresses on their heads, while others were loaded down with all kinds of parcels and lunch baskets. Some had old pieces of furniture, such as a tea-caddy or teapot or some old picture of great-grandparents.

After the English Saints were on board, several hundred Danish and Swedish Saints embarked, making a total number of eight hundred. There was a little confusion until after the doctor's inspection; however, it was remarkable how quickly the people settled down to the requirements of those who were selected as bishops over the respective wards. I do not think the same number of non-Mormons would have settled down to such order. Nothing but the Spirit of the Lord would produce such harmony. Songs of Zion were being sung, such as: Ye Saints Who Dwell on Europe's Shore; Come, Come, Ye Saints; Oh Babylon, Oh Babylon, We Bid Thee Farewell; I Long to Breath the Mountain Air, and others and a very divine influence seemed to prevail.

We sailed from Liverpool May 13th, 1862, and the eight hundred people were organized into wards, and space with bunks allotted to each ward with a presiding officer. Brother Lyman had charge of the company. He was returning from his first mission, and because I had been on a British warship for five years, he requested me to look after the following persons: Sister Filer and her daughter from Braintree, Essex; Sister Coalbear and son David from Mundon, Essex; Sister Rose Livermore from Maldon, Sister Elizabeth Gentry from Mundon and an aged Brother Perkins from Essex. I was to look after the above by way of getting their rations; also to see their food cooked and to render them any assistance that they needed. I was also appointed by Brother Ebenezer Farnes to assist in the serving out of the provisions. After the ship had got fairly out to sea the people were lying in all directions with seasickness. It was a severe trial to them, being so closely confined. However, they tried to bear up in a marvelous manner and called upon the Elders to administer to them in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Brother William Gibson and a Brother John Clark rendered great assistance in regard to the governing of the company. We had head winds and double reef topsail breezes often, thus the good ship labored very heavily. We encountered a violent gale of wind on Whit Sunday which affected the people badly, and which they never forgot. Poor Brother Lyman was very sick.

After forty-two days we arrived in New York and were quickly hustled into Castle Garden [^3] and passed the inspection, after which we took train for St. Louis. On account of the Civil War we were routed and changed about a number of times. At one place we were hustled on board of a freight train. The cars had been loaded with hogs and they had not been swept or cleaned out, thus we were choked with the dust and we could taste it for days afterward. We arrived at St. Joseph on the Missouri River on the 4th of July. We camped in a large barn waiting for a steamboat. Everyone in the town was celebrating the 4th, and there was much excitement, as reports came that the Confederate Army was making toward the Missouri. We were hurried onto a small steamboat, the crew of which consisted of Negroes who were very rough. On arriving opposite Council Bluffs on a very dark night, the boat ran alongside of the river bank and landed the gangplank in a big bunch of willows and then pitched our baggage all into the willows. It was midnight and we laid about as best we could on the bags and bedding till daybreak when there was a hunt for baggage. I found mine easily enough as they were sailor's black bags with my name on them.

By eight A.M. Brother Joseph W. Young, who was our Church emigration agent that year, called a meeting and explained the circumstances, telling us that teams would be sent down to the river to haul up our luggage to a camping ground and provisions would be served out to all who needed it; and that tents also would be given to every ten or twelve persons. Thus we were again organized into tens, fifties, and hundreds. I was appointed Captain of the Guard.

550The teams began to haul up our baggage and when about half of it was hauled onto the camping ground, a fearful tornado started with heavy rain and the most vivid lightning, just like those encountered in the tropics. It scared the cattle and they stampeded, doing great damage and running over Brother Young and nearly killing him. Those who were already on the camp grounds were almost drowned by the cloudburst. The volume of water washed gullies ten feet deep and in some instances washed away boxes and bags and buried them in the sand, some of which were never found. Three persons were struck dead by the vivid lightning, one being a teamster from the Valley and the other two were from the London Conference. Several others were badly injured. One sister was confined in the midst of it. I was Captain of the Guard so rendered her all the assistance I could by covering her with the tent that had blown down. Mother and babe both pulled through very well, and the dear woman settled in Bountiful, Davis County, Utah, and was always a fast friend. The boy grew up and traded with me for many years. A group of men was organized to assist all the women and children and old folks to the Church store. In two or three days we recovered from the terrible experience, but some never found their bags.

We returned to camp and put up our tents and prepared for the long wearisome journey across the Great American Plains. While here in camp all who had the means bought wagons and cattle as they had to be broken to the yoke. The young tenderfoot men from the big cities were not much in it, and were generally out of the way when most needed. As my sea experience fitted me for the job, I was engaged by a man by the name of Cooper to break his cattle to the yoke and get everything ship-shape, and to drive a team to Salt Lake City for the hauling of my young lady and her baggage. We had got nearly to a stream called, I think, Loup Fork when Mr. Cooper said, "Brother Wood you are a young man and can do well to take up a farm at Wood River where I am going to stop, and I want you to stop with me." I said, "No Sir, I am bound for the valley of the Saints." "Well," said he, "if you will not agree to stop with me I shall turn you and your girl right out here." I said, "Sir, I will never agree to stop with you." So he went back to my wagon and pitched out my baggage and told my girl to get out, and he drove on and left us without bread or water. My dear girl wept bitterly, but I did not feel like weeping but rather like meeting the peculiar circumstances.

551Cooper drove on about half a mile and camped at a small stream. I remembered that Cooper had a fifty-foot rope that belonged to me, and I made up my mind that I would have that rope and so told Elizabeth that I was going to get it. She begged me not to, but I thought I would be a coward to let him get away with that rope so I started to the camp with a full determination to get it at any cost. As I approached the wagon Cooper said, "I thought you would change your mind." I told him that my mind was still unchanged and that I had come to get my rope that he had staked his cow out with. He said that if I touched that rope he would shoot me. I replied that he could shoot but I was going to have that rope. He went into his wagon and drew a beeline on me with his old Yorker. I went straight for the cow and pulling her up hand over hand as near to me as I could. I cut the rope and away went the cow. I coiled the rope and returned to the wagon and Cooper did not shoot. I laid down the rope and said, "Mr. Cooper I am going to lay off my religion and give you a licking so that you won't forget me." So I went for him and gave him a good boxing. By this time my young lady was on the ground praying me not to hurt him.

551I left him and we returned to our baggage. While we were reflecting on our condition, we observed a big dust in the west coming rapidly toward us. In a short time it came up to us and proved to be Elder Lyman and Apostle C. C. Rich. We were both overjoyed at the sudden and unexpected change in affairs. Brother Rich sat down and comforted us, telling us to be faithful and the Lord would bless us. While talking, we noticed a dust coming from the east. It proved to be a family [the Wardell family] that had crossed the sea with us. The result was that my young lady was to continue on with them to Salt Lake City and I was to pay forty dollars for her fare, and I was to go to Florence with Brothers Lyman and Rich.

I think this was the greatest trial I ever underwent—to leave my betrothed and go back. However, I submitted and kissed my girl goodbye and gave her a half sovereign, all the money I had in the world, and jumped into the buckboard and off we went, I with a sorrowful heart and a mind full of reflections as to the outcome of it all. Brother Rich found I was in tears and told me to cheer up and have faith and all would be well.

On our arrival at Florence all was excitement. I was introduced to a number of young men fitting out a freight train, some of whom had crossed the sea with me and some who had come from the mountains who were dressed in buckskins fringed and tasseled, (rough looking Saints they seemed to me). In the evening they all gathered into the tent and D[avid]. P. Kimball called all to order. He called on one of those rough looking buckskin-clad fellows to offer prayer, which was done in very appropriate manner and words. During all this time my mind was rambling over many things, especially as to when I should meet my dear girl again. As the shades of night closed down upon us and we were all in the tent, the talk was principally about breaking steers, putting up wagons, and selections made as to duties required of each one. I was appointed grease boss and was to drive four yoke of cattle and stand guard half of every night until our arrival in the Valley. I was asked if I accepted of these conditions at $30.00 per month. It was explained to me that through my peculiar experience, Brother Rich had used his influence on my behalf[,] and as I had agreed to, through his counsel, pay to Brother Wardell the usual fare paid by emigrants for crossing the plains[,] I was to receive the amount mentioned above, I being the only one of the tenderfeet to receive pay. The others had to work for their passage only.

After this business, we began to turn in. I had occasion to go to my bag for some clothes and in taking out what I expected to be white duck sailor overalls and holding them up and examining them they turned out to be some sort of ladies' unmentionables trimmed and adorned with lace. The eyes of the crowd caught onto it, and in all the long years that have passed, in meeting any of the old friends and comrades who were there that night, this circumstance would be rehearsed and has caused many a good laugh. I had made a mistake and got my sweetheart's bag instead of my own. Of course you can imagine the remarks that followed. Some claimed that they had a full rigged lady aboard. Everybody was now turning in and someone asked me where I was going to sleep. I told him I was provided with an outfit. I had rolled up into quite a small parcel a hammock and blanket of my own manufacture. The others who all slept on the ground came out to see me sling my hammock and get into it. This was the way I slept for three months; when it stormed I would just throw a canvas over me. I fastened my hammock from wagon wheel to wheel.

In a few days we rolled out. My duty as grease boss was to see that every wagon in the train was greased every sixty miles. Our little troubles began soon, especially with the young men who were indeed tenderfeet and inexperienced. Their ropes and chains would often break and they could not toggle a chain nor splice a rope, and it was a week or two before they could manage their teams. They got into the queerest predicaments that you can imagine. Our first trouble was a terrible thunderstorm, then in guarding the cattle at night some of the men would doze and the cattle would get away. It was some time before they could realize the responsibility of watching, as well as praying, which latter was attended to night and morning. Our first great difficulty was when we came to a swollen stream and no bridge. The water was deep and the banks abrupt and we had thirty wagons, a very small train, but they were loaded to their full capacity, four thousand pounds. Of course they were the old-fashioned kind, built expressly for cattle. D. P. Kimball was an experienced pioneer. He ordered all hands to fell timber. Some had never taken an axe in hand; however, enough timber was felled to build a raft. The next thing was to cut down the banks of the stream so that the wagons could be run down onto the raft. In this way we succeeded fairly well and ferried all the wagons over, then the cattle and a few horses were forded.

554By this time we had become inured to the great change in our circumstances, and as we drew further west day by day the scenery and weary travel became very tiresome. We often saw antelope and black-tailed deer and occasionally a few buffalo. Brother Kimball sometimes went with two or three other mountain men on a hunt and never failed to bring in meat or game of some sort which always came in very acceptable, especially as our ham and bacon were becoming low. The rations of our camp life were good. We laid over on the Sabbath and sometimes a day to wash clothes or repair wagons and shoe cattle. As we approached what is called the Chimney Rock our cattle became affected with murrain, and day after day we sustained losses which curtailed our travel, and shorter drives were the result, which tended to lengthen out our journey, and we missed reaching a cache of flour and thus were on half rations.

About this time, on account of strong saleratus bread, I was taken with bloody flux, and the worry about my young lass all had a bad effect upon me, although I stood my ground and never gave up. By this time we had reached a locality where the plains were strewn with dead carcasses and the bleached bones of horses, cattle and mules. Upon these bones much writing was left by the trains, and information given as to the health and success and ofttimes a few words from some lover would be written on the rib of an ox and stuck in the ground alongside of the trail telling the oncoming lover or friends of the incidents of travel, and much interesting matter. However, not a word from my lass did I find, although I had learned that she had not forgotten me. Of course it was a kind of lottery business whether the identical bone would be found by the right person. Something like this would be picked up: "Miller's train, July 24th, Mr. John Ford is to be married to Miss Sue Brown on arriving at Plum Creek," and on another, "Miss J. Jones has made love to Simon Hicks." I began to be afraid that someone would pick up a rib with "Miss E. Gentry has made love to someone or married someone or is to be married to someone."

1862 was the year that the telegraph poles were erected from the frontiers. One day we came across a stranded played-out cow. The poor brute had been left to perish. She had just the power to wink her eyes. I butchered her very quickly and hoisted her to a pole. She was almost a skeleton. However, as we had been on half rations then a number of days, we thought it a Godsend, so we feasted, with the result that a number were very sick. We were by this time nearing the south pass. Our oxen were continually dropping down until I had only three left out of my eight, and so we doubled up, leaving some of the wagons, and would then lay over and go back the next day and pull them to the main camp. Of course in the midst of this, many incidents occurred; such as wagons breaking down, tongues getting broken, tires coming off, and we had to be our own blacksmiths and set them. We had an emigrant train overtake us more than once. It was then that we would have dances, and sometimes good sermons were preached encouraging us to bear all the trials and Zion would soon be reached. These spurred us on, as we believed that our Father in Heaven was ruler over all these circumstances and that our promises and blessings were sure. And thus we journeyed on in the faith that we were obeying the principle of the Latter-day Israel and felt we were going up to the House of the Lord God of Jacob to learn of His ways and to walk in His paths. For we believed as Isaiah says, I think in his 2nd Chapter, that the work of God should go forth out of Zion and the law of the Lord from Jerusalem. These circumstances were happening to almost everyone. I remember Mr. Turner who was driving the next team in the rear of mine fell from the tongue of his wagon. I saw him fall, and both wheels of the wagon pass over his head, and to my astonishment he got up without help and shook the sand out of his curly hair. No injury was sustained, probably due to the fact that it occurred in a sandy place. It was to me a marvelous escape. He came to Utah and raised a family.

By this time we were reaching Ham's Fork and we had to send a horseman to report that we could travel no further without assistance. So we laid in camp till aid came from the Valley in the form of four-span mule teams laden with the fruits of the promised land and with meats and cakes and pies like those from home, also blankets, overalls, wagonsheets and every imaginable thing to comfort the tired and weary pilgrims. They came with mules enough to take in half of the train; we then had cattle enough to double up and take the remainder. We were now getting into the mountainous part of the west. Fort Bridger and Bear River were passed and in a few days the noted Echo Canyon was reached where just a handful of Mormons held back the army of General Johnston and kept them at Bridger all winter to pick bones of many a starved mule. There are prominent bluffs or rocks that project into the canyon around which the Mormon boys made trails in sight of the Army's reconnoitering parties and the boys kept circling the rocks at these points until the soldiers concluded that there were thousands and tens of thousands of the Mormon army in the canyon, when in fact only forty or fifty men were there. The canyon is a nearly impregnable pass and well adapted for a stronghold or a defense.

Passing this formidable place, we emerged on the Weber River where we were in the fastness of the Rocky Mountains proper. There had just been new dugways and roads opened that year which, however, in many places were left unfinished, so that it was dangerous, especially to inexperienced drivers and teamsters, and we had quite a time pulling through. While going up Silver Creek a rock bluff projected so that it formed a corner or bend in the creek, and in rounding this I did not keep in and hold the cattle enough and the result was that my wagon stalled against the rock. Nothing was broken, however, and when the boss missed me he came back and through his skill as a teamster I soon got out of the difficulty.

557We passed through all kinds of barriers while going through Parley's Park, a place of high altitude and among big timber. We were now within twenty-five miles of the Valley of Salt Lake and it was down hill all the way. Passing through Parley's Canyon we emerged into the graceful and enchanting valley with the Great Salt Lake in the distance, and the many homes of the Saints in the foreground, the City, with its wide streets laid out by the points of the compass. Imagine if it is possible, our feelings of joy and thanksgiving to God whom we acknowledged as the means of our safe arrival to the haven of our hopes.

557It was on Saturday evening and the sky was illumined in many colors by the setting sun which to me was sublime, indeed I have not the language to express the gratitude of a thankful heart to the Almighty.

---
Notas:
[^1] The story of Charles Shumway and, through his experiences, the tale of the trail west and settlement in the Great Basin are effectively told in Joseph E. Brown, The Mormon Trek West: The Journey of American Exiles (New York: Doubleday, 1980). The narrative account is beautifully illustrated with photographs by Dan Guravich. Like Wallace Stegner's The Gathering of Zion (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), the text is not footnoted, nor does it include a bibliography, though the diary entries used to tell the story are all credited.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
