Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

567Amelia Eliza Slade Bennion [^1]

567There was a branch of the Mormon ChurcIt took William and Amelia Slade many years to raise the money to take their young family to the United States and eventually to Utah. William emigrated first and settled in Philadelphia; the others followed three years later. When William died unexpectedly, Amelia Eliza, their oldest daughter, remembered her mother's determination to "go home" to Zion, although it seemed impossible at the time because of her large family and their lack of means. With help from the Church, however, the family was able to begin the long journey west. Amelia Eliza Slade Bennion, who recounts the trip of her mother's family, was just ten, but as the eldest child in the family, she had adult responsibilities and her recollections are vivid, especially when she remembers the strength and determination of her mother. Though Amelia Eliza wrote that "'Going home' meant unsurmountable difficulties," the Slades met and overcame them all.

h in Philadelphia at this time [1864], to which Father and Mother had been able to go occasionally as it had meant a long ride on the cars for them. The children, rather than receive no religious training, had attended a Presbyterian Sunday School. Mother had said with firm conviction, "I'm going home." [^2] But as far as human eye could see "going home" meant unsurmountable difficulties. Once more "man's extremity proved God's opportunity." While Mother sat in the Sunday meeting the president of the branch arose and announced that on the following Wednesday a company of immigrants were leaving for Utah and that means had been provided for Sister Slade and her children to go with them. Mother's prayer had received its answer. Orson Pratt and Hyrum Clawson were the speakers, and after the meeting was over they both came to Mother. Orson Pratt placed $2.50 in her hand saying, "I'm on my way to England. I have enough money to get me there, and I am sure you need this worse than I do." Brother Clawson gave her $5.00. They shook hands with her and spoke words of encouragement and cheer. Some of the sisters, Sister Ware and Sister Fenton, especially, were willing and anxious to help.

569There was much hurried preparation to be ready in time. Mrs. Bancroft [^3] cried when Mother came for me. "She is so dependable," she told Mother, "that I can trust her implicitly in all things." This was a splendid compliment to live up to. Then I came in contact with some bitterness that existed against the Church in those days. When Mr. Sellars [^4] saw our arrangements for leaving, and came to tell Mother good-bye, he said, "Well, I'm glad you are going back to England instead of with those Mormons; had you decided to go with them, I certainly would have taken steps to have these children taken away from you." Mother did not tell him that home meant Utah. She was soon on her way to New York. We each had a bundle to look after. Mother found it quite difficult to keep track of all of us—Rhoda, Martha, Willie, Eliza, Eddie and baby Charlie—to say nothing of the bundles. [^5] Here we took the train for the little town of Wyoming, [^6] on the banks of the muddy Missouri River, where we were to wait until a company of emigrants from England joined us before proceeding west by ox-teams.

569How vividly I remember the little town of Wyoming on the Missouri just one thousand miles from Utah. What a change from the green woods and meadows of Pennsylvania. So desolate and wild. The Missouri, just one big river of mud, flowing out of somewhere, sluggishly past, and on to nowhere. "How ever can we wash our clothing in this?" was my uppermost thought and I was greatly relieved when I found that all the washing was to be done at a spring pleasantly located in a group of trees near the camp.

Here, also, we had our first experience at sleeping in the great out-of-doors, a rather terrifying one till we got used to it. Every single night, it seemed to me, it stormed. The inky darkness would be broken by sudden, blinding flashes of lightning, and the steady howl of the storm by roars of rolling thunder. The seven of us huddled even closer together, but not even tent walls and bed clothes could shut out the blinding flashes of lightning, nor deaden, but very little, the terrific claps of thunder. Then one awful night, the tent blew down, the pole falling across Mother's neck in such a way that she was left utterly powerless, either to call for help or to assist herself. She must have soon died had not Rhoda, sensing her peril, managed to move the heavy pole in such a way that her neck was freed. Supplies were issued from a storehouse centrally located. We did our cooking over bonfires. We lived like this about a month or six weeks; then we were joined by a company of Saints who were emigrating from England. [^7]

One day came the glad shout, "The ox-teams are coming!" "The ox-teams are coming!" Everybody turned out to give them welcome as they lumbered slowly into camp, a long train of covered wagons, each drawn by yokes of oxen. This was the train that was to take us to Utah, each outfit being furnished by the men who had been called on a mission by President Young to meet the emigrants and bring them to Utah. [^8] We were all anxious to get started on our way, little sensing, any of us, what a long, tedious journey it was to be, and little sensing the trials and hardships we were to encounter, but bravely ready for whatever fate held in store for us. The train was in charge of Brother Warren Snow. [^9] Our outfit was in charge of Brother Frank Cundick. Besides our seven, there was a feeble old lady, sick and ailing, who was assigned to ride with us. Baby Charlie was assigned to Rhoda's care, and little Eddie to mine. They were both beautiful children, rosy and healthy, giving every promise of growing to strong and sturdy manhood.

After what seemed many days in August 1864, we bade Wyoming good-bye and turned our faces westward. Conditions were too crowded for us all to ride at the same time, so those who were able, took turns walking. We would fill our aprons with dry buffalo chips as we walked, or with anything that would burn and could be used to make our campfires. Then, one day, Mother discovered that the bundle containing Rhoda's clothing and shoes had been left behind, with other luggage belonging to the train. Poor Rhoda, her feet grew sore and blistered and cracked. One day I heard her scream, and running to her, found that she had stepped upon a prickly pear. The blood was falling in drops from her wounded foot, but she would not let me pull the thorns out. I helped her all I could and finally we hobbled into camp. Her foot was growing more painful. "That cactus must come out," I thought, and then aloud, I cried, "Oh, look, Rhoda, Indians, quick!" and as she turned her head to look, I jerked the cactus out of her foot, before she had even time to say "ouch." My fingers were filled with thorns, but we soon got them out, then found Mother. We cooked our meals over the campfire and went to bed. In spite of the strange cries of prowling beasts and birds, we slept soundly through the cool, sweet night. The next morning we were up at sunrise, fresh and ready for the long day's march. Rhoda's foot was still somewhat sore. "Do you know," said Mother, "I dreamed last night that your shoes were coming and that they will be here today. I am sure they will." To our great joy they did come, along with the rest of the missing luggage, save some that had been stolen. Mother's dreams often came true. Our money, fifty or sixty dollars, all we had in the world, was missing. Then one night Mother dreamed that she saw it sewed up in a feather bed. When she awoke she arose and looked for it, and found it just as her dream had told her.

One day the old lady with us died, the first of our band who didn't finish the journey through. They made her a grave at the side of the trail. Then watering places grew scarce and we were obliged to buy our drinking water at twenty-five cents per keg. It was not always good water at that, for dysentery broke out among us. The woman in the wagon ahead of us died. Mother was very ill and so were two of the children. Brother John Kay, a young man returning from a mission, was stricken and died. A side was taken from a wagon to make him a coffin. For little Charlie there was not a thing that could be utilized to make him even a rude coffin. Mother tore a shawl in half, and we left him sleeping by the long trail. Later, the other half was used for little Eddie. Sick, disheartened, and weary, we had to carry on.

I remember one cold wet day in particular. We kept huddled up for warmth in the wagon all day long, while the rain beat its monotonous tattoo on our canvas roof. When we stopped for the night, fires were out of the question. We were hungry and went to bed crying for something to eat. Next morning Mother climbed out of the wagon. Through the drizzling rain and mist she saw a little old shack with smoke pushing its way out of the chimney. She made her way to it and as the door opened to her knock, there greeted her a rush of warm air, fragrant with the odor of frying meat. "Will you sell me some bread?" she asked of the woman who answered the door. "We haven't any to spare," replied the woman, but seeing how sick and weak Mother looked, she said, "We are just going to have a bite, come in and eat with us." "I cannot eat, my children are hungry." "You shall eat," she insisted, "and you shall have bread for your little ones even if we have to go without." When Mother came back, we were all out on the wagon tongue. She broke the bread in chunks and handed each of us a piece.

572Eddie died as we were nearing Green River. This final stroke proved too much for Mother, and she became very, very ill. One day as Rhoda and I came near the wagon, we heard voices. "Yes, Sister Slade, your children will be cared for." The wild fears that arose in my breast seemed to smother me. Baby Charles and Eddie, and now Mother! Taking my sister by the hand we ran off some distance into the sagebrush and kneeling down we prayed in all our childish anguish, "Please, Heavenly Father, don't let Mother die. Please make her better, in the name of Jesus, Amen." We felt sure then she would get well. Next morning she was much better, and after some days she was trying again to take her share of the burdens.

572One day we passed large, white saleratus beds. Mother had read of saleratus biscuits, and, as we were nearing our journey's end, food supplies were running low. Mother decided we were going to have hot biscuits, so with a zeal not backed up by knowledge, she made them. We ate them, for the bitter flavor was entirely outdone by their delectable rich orange coloring.

572The last day of our journey our food gave out and we became really hungry. Towards evening we entered Emigration Canyon. As we came into the valley, we could see in the distance the glow of a big bonfire that had been lighted to welcome us. About ten o'clock we stopped at the square where the City and County building now stands. Such laughing and crying, such hugs and kisses! Soon we were seated around the big fire, while willing hands, backed by warm hearts, served us with everything that the little settlement could afford in the way of delicious hot food. There were mashed potatoes and gravy, chicken and vegetables, pie and cake. Then, when we just couldn't cram another delicious morsel, I noticed by the light of the fire, a tempting green slope. "Come on," I said to the girls, "let's roll down here," and roll we did, to our hearts content, entirely unreproved by the older folks. They were "Home" at last and too happy to notice it.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:445. Israel, in this instance, referred to the Indians, or remnants of the Lamanites, descendants of the house of Israel.
[^9] When the Nauvoo Charter was revoked some months after the death of Joseph Smith, the citizens renamed Nauvoo the City of Joseph.
