Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

"Grace Shall Be As Your Day": The Handcart Migration

AT EARLIER CROSSINGS OF THE Sweetwater, this Wyoming river had appeared "beautiful to the eye as it rolled over its rocky bed as clear as crystal," one handcart pioneer remembered. [^1] But in the grey light of November, it no longer held any beauty or charm for the sick, weary and desperate people of the Martin handcart company. By the time they reached the last crossing of the Sweetwater near Devil's Gate, what they saw was a wide, menacing stream, numbing cold and thick with ice floes. All were dismayed when they reached the river, remembering the devastating crossing of the Platte before any rescue teams had reached them, but one fatigued and weakened man gave in to his despair. "Oh, dear! I can't go through that," he exclaimed as he dissolved in tears. At once his solicitous wife replied, "Don't cry, Jimmy, I'll pull the handcart for you." [^2] With that tender exchange, James and Elizabeth Bleak entered history, their words permanently inscribed on the historical record of the ill-starred Martin handcart company. James was just twenty-six years old, his wife Elizabeth, twenty-seven, among the youngest and hardiest adults of the company at the outset. Traveling with their four children and five hundred seventy-six other converts from England, the Bleaks relied on a blessing promising that they would "not fall by the way" to see them through this uncertain venture. [^3] As it turned out, Elizabeth did not have to pull the handcart for her husband. The small rescue party that had shepherded the destitute company sixty-five miles from Red Bluffs to this crossing of the Sweetwater would pull the handcarts across the stream and ferry women, children, and the disabled on their backs. Among the rescuers were three teenage boys whose youth came to symbolize the heroism of all who joined in the rescue effort, many of whom received no individual public commendation. Though "some writers have endeavored to make individual heroes of some of our company," wrote Daniel Jones years later, "I have no remembrance of any one shirking his duty. Each and everyone did all they possibly could." [^4]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC585Nothing else quite captures the drama of the handcart migration more than the heroic rescue of the two belated companies of 1856. This incident at the Sweetwater also demonstrates that the gathering to Zion was an organized cooperative undertaking, and swift action followed if the system faltered for any reason. A chain of responsibility linked Church headquarters with every company on the emigrant trail from Europe to the Salt Lake Valley throughout the period of the gathering.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe Willie and Martin companies have become historic signatures of the entire handcart migration. The tragic circumstances that engulfed them and the heroic rescue mission that saved them are extraordinary incidents in the history of the western trail. Some have concluded that this plan to bring the "poor saints from Europe" was ill advised and reckless considering the tragedy that befell these two companies. Their suffering was indeed acute and their death toll enormously high, numbering more than two hundred, but it is also remarkable that nearly eight hundred of their number survived the same extremities of cold, hunger, and privation. [^5]

Perpetual Emigrating FundJourneys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe genesis of the handcart migration is found in Brigham Young's commitment to bring thousands of Latter-day Saint converts in the States and Europe to Utah as inexpensively as possible. Many emigrants had funds to provide their own transportation, but many more did not. In 1849 as many as ten thousand Mormons still waited at the Missouri for the means to move on to the Great Salt Lake Valley, and many thousands more waited in Europe. The solution was a revolving fund, known as the Perpetual Emigrating Fund, to which the Salt Lake Valley Saints contributed five thousand dollars to launch the enterprise. [^6] The fund first brought the emigrants from the States, but in 1852, when Kanesville (now Council Bluffs, Iowa) was finally vacated by Church members, European Saints were targeted for assistance. Over the forty years of its existence, the PEF, nearly always in debt and the subject of constant appeals for support, managed to bring twenty-six thousand gathering Saints to Zion. [^7]

Perpetual Emigrating FundJourneys of the Handcart PioneersHCWith stirring epistles from Brigham Young, appeals in the Millennial Star (the Church's British publication), and the impassioned urging of missionaries, European converts, who made up the ten handcart companies, could hardly resist the "spirit of gathering." [^8] As early as December 1847, Brigham Young counseled them to "come home speedily," [^9] now that the resting place for Israel had been established in the West. He continually warned the Saints of impending catastrophes and counseled them to "listen to the call of the Good Shepherd." There would be "safety in Zion," he promised, "the land of God's appointing—the home of the Saints." All, he urged, "who can procure a bit of bread, and one garment on their back . . . come next year to the place of gathering." [^10] The Church was ready to help. Cutting the cost of emigrating was clearly the answer to bringing all of the "faithful poor" to Zion.

Perpetual Emigrating FundJourneys of the Handcart PioneersHCWagon travel was expensive and lengthy. Buying and outfitting a large wagon with enough teams to pull it was beyond the reach of most European emigrants, who had the expense of a long ocean voyage and land travel over half a continent to consider. Bearing the cost of transporting Saints to Zion this way took a heavy toll on the PEF and on contributing Church members. By 1856 only one of twenty who wanted to come to Zion had benefited from the fund. [^11] A simpler and cheaper way had to be found to spread the funds among more people. As early as 1851 Church leaders had considered using handcarts as a possibly faster, less cumbersome, and much less expensive way to travel. Finally, in 1855, with the PEF deeply in debt and a devastating grasshopper plague curtailing surplus resources in Utah, the time had come to try this new idea for western travel.

Perpetual Emigrating FundJourneys of the Handcart PioneersHCIt would be a test of faith, Brigham Young declared, for if the Saints "have not faith enough to undertake this job, and accomplish it too, they have not faith sufficient to endure with the Saints in Zion the celestial law which leads to exaltation and eternal lives." [^12] In 1856 the Saints in England read in the Millennial Star that the Church was providing money for emigration that year only if they were willing to "walk and draw their carts across the plains." Have them "gird up their loins and come while the way is open," Brigham Young advised mission president Franklin D. Richards. This the Saints did, in large numbers, showing their faith in this untried means of reaching Zion.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCAmong the first to answer the call were 130 Welsh Saints who sailed on the Caravan, leaving the British Isles in February 1856. Most of them traveled in the third handcart company under Captain Edward Bunker. Nearly three thousand more Saints set sail from Liverpool between March and May of 1856: the Enoch Train carried 534 LDS passengers followed by the Samuel Curling in April with 707 Welsh emigrants. [^13] Not until May did the Thornton leave with 764 passengers, and the Horizon with 856 passengers. Of these emigrants, a thousand either stayed in the States or traveled in wagon trains that year, financing their own transportation. [^14] Nearly two-thirds, or 1,891 of them, however, accepted the offer to travel to Utah that year by handcart. Not all of them could be considered "poor Saints." Some who might have bought teams and wagons nonetheless elected to travel by handcart to stay with friends and family. Others, like James Bleak, were branch presidents who felt obliged to travel with their congregations. [^15] At the outset, people like Archer Walters and his family left their homes "rejoicing in going to help the building up of the Lord's kingdom in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains." [^16] They were filled with the spirit of gathering, a compelling call that promised both spiritual and material reward. The promises were fulfilled for many, but at a heavy cost for some.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCLike the tragic tale of the Donner party of 1846, the drama of the Willie and Martin handcart companies a decade later has tended to eclipse the rest of the handcart story. But eight other companies with double the number of travelers also walked their way to Utah with fewer than forty deaths among them. All ten companies that traveled west between 1856 and 1860 experienced the misery of food shortages, unrelieved exhaustion, the vagaries of weather, and the usual claims of disease and accidents. But eight of them escaped the tragic toll that an early winter exacted of the two late-starting companies of 1856. It was not the mode of travel that created disaster for these two companies, but a late start, hasty and inadequate preparations, and an early change of weather. [^17]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC590Iowa in 1856 was not nearly as hazardous as it had been for the Nauvoo refugees a decade earlier. Traveling on what locals called "river to river" roads and on a more northerly route than the 1846 refugees took (though it was just as dusty and muddy despite being more clearly defined and passable), the handcart pioneers also encountered more villages and towns along the way. A major challenge was conditioning themselves to push and pull their heavy loaded handcarts across the three-hundred-mile Iowa stretch while coping with sudden summer storms, hot and humid Iowa weather, and the novelty, for most them, of camping out every night. For some, the occasional stares and taunts of the villagers and other western travelers may have been equally daunting. "Saw quite a novel sight," wrote one California-bound traveler, "58 hand carts with 3 or 4 women and a man to most of them. The poor deluded creatures are Mormons bound for Salt Lake City. . . . Some of them poor old gray-headed men looked as though they ought to know better." [^18]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCMost of the handcart emigrants embarked on their long walking journey from Iowa City, a town in eastern Iowa that had become the terminus of the Chicago and Rock Island Railroad late in 1855. There each trainload of emigrants encamped for several weeks getting properly outfitted for their walking journey. Out of heavy cotton cloth called drill or drilling, women made cart covers and tents large enough to sleep twenty. Some of the handcarters, particularly those in the Willie and Martin companies, had to build their own handcarts, often from unseasoned wood without the iron supports to strengthen them for the heavy use ahead. The shafts, about five or six feet long, were connected at the front by a heavy cross bar on which to lean or push the handcart. [^19] For most of the European emigrants, the stay in Iowa City was their first experience living outdoors, cooking over open fires, washing in streams, and sleeping on the ground with only a tent for protection or privacy. They had much to learn.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC591The organization required to coordinate sea, train, river, and overland travel for thousands of emigrants took masterful planning, especially in the days before the telegraph. LDS emigration agents in Liverpool, New York, Iowa City, and Florence, Nebraska Territory (the former Winter Quarters and final outfitting post), many of whom were Church leaders and returning missionaries, carried a tremendous responsibility for chartering ships, purchasing railroad tickets, preparing schedules, meeting emigrants at arrival and departure points, buying and distributing equipment and supplies, and keeping financial records in order. Ideally the ocean crossing would be timed to bring the Saints to Iowa by May or June at the latest, so that after the three- to four-week trek across Iowa, they could leave Florence, Nebraska, no later than sometime in July. All connections clicked for the emigrants on board the Caravan, the Enoch Train, and the Samuel Curling the summer of 1856. While not all of their number went on to Utah that year, those who did had only a brief layover in Iowa City to collect their handcarts and another brief period in Florence to make final preparations for the main stretch of the trail.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCFollowing the policy of organizing each wagon company, the handcart Saints organized into companies, a captain of hundred supervising five tent groups. Four or five people were assigned to each cart and twenty people to a tent. Each person was allowed seventeen pounds of luggage, carried on the carts along with bedding, utensils, and some food. Two or three large supply wagons accompanied each group carrying the main store of provisions, tents, tools, and other gear. Milk and beef cattle completed the caravan.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCStarting out with light hearts and utopian dreams, these European Saints knew little about the American West and a physical environment so different from their own. The prairie heat and mountain cold, the swift rivers and sandy plains, the mountain passes and sudden bursts of wind and storm left them struggling to adjust. Thunder and lightning over the broad, treeless western plains alarmed those not used to such celestial fireworks. While walking to reach a destination was not unusual for most of them, pushing a loaded handcart thirteen hundred miles was a Herculean task, especially for the elderly. Their excitement at finally being on the road to Zion was their saving grace. Only when their energies were totally spent did they fail to sing the familiar hymn of the handcarts: "Some must push and some must pull, / As we go marching up the hill, / As merrily on the way we go, / Until we reach the Valley, oh!" [^20] If the captains of the companies seemed to keep them moving at an often exhausting pace, as one handcarter complained, it was only because they knew that timing was crucial, something not yet fully appreciated by these novice frontiersmen and women. [^21]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe vast reaches of the American West never failed to surprise European emigrants, and the drudgery of primitive travel over such a wide expanse set in quickly. The unrelenting labor of pushing and pulling the carts, their need of constant repair, the changeable weather, and diminishing food supplies gnawed at the enthusiasm and goodwill of the handcart travelers. C. C. A. Christensen, the well-known Mormon artist, and his wife Elise honeymooned their way west as part of Christian Christiansen's 1857 handcart company. He noted that "our hats, or what might once have been called hats, assumed the most grotesque shapes, seeing that the sun, wind, and rain had the superior force. The ladies' skirts and men's trousers hung in irregular trimmings, and the foot coverings proportional to the rest, with or without bottoms. Our faces were gray from the dust, which sometimes prevented us from seeing the vanguard; our noses with the skin hanging in patches, especially on those who had as much nose as I have; and almost every lower lip covered with a piece of cloth or paper because of its chapped condition, which made it difficult to speak and particularly to smile or laugh." [^22] Disease often hovered near; even the hardiest had no defense against the devastating sweeps of cholera and dysentery. When she started the journey, Priscilla Evans enthusiastically wrote, "This is a glorious way to come to Zion," but in time the unrelenting squeal of ungreased cart wheels began to wear on her bright optimism, and sharing a tent with her one-legged husband, two blind men, a one-armed man, and a widow with five children did little to lighten her load or lift her spirits. Besides these incursions on her good nature, she bemoaned her inability to converse with her fellow travelers. Though she was Welsh by descent and traveling with three hundred other Welsh men and women, she had lived only in England and did not speak Welsh; there were only a few in the company besides the captain, her husband, and the widow and her children with whom she could converse. [^23]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC595The first three handcart companies, under the guidance of Captains Edmund Ellsworth, Daniel McArthur, and Edward Bunker, left Florence, near the site of Winter Quarters, before the end of July in 1856, and all arrived in the Salt Lake Valley to tumultuous welcomes. [^24] Though they had subsisted for weeks on the emigrant diet of salty bacon and flour (made into gravy, biscuits, or gruel), occasionally enjoying a taste of berries picked along the way or a little buffalo meat or beef, even these items disappeared well before the end of their journey. They were overjoyed when relief wagons met them with bread, melons, potatoes, onions, and other fresh vegetables, which they had not enjoyed for months. Brigham Young and his counselor Heber C. Kimball were among the welcoming party that traveled as far as Big Mountain, twelve miles east of Salt Lake City, to meet the weary travelers, relieved and heartened that they had arrived safely. Bands played, people cheered, and a veritable parade escorted them into the Valley to the homes of the Saints, where the travelers were immediately given rest and food. [^25] Of the 815 emigrants who traveled in these first three companies from Florence to the Salt Lake Valley, twenty-seven died, a reasonable number considering the hazards of such travel and the number of elderly in the groups.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC595The success of the first three companies in reaching the Valley with relatively little trouble proved the system was workable. Edmund Ellsworth, the thirty-seven-year-old captain of the first company, was a veteran of the original 1847 pioneer band. Completing a mission to England in 1856, he had shepherded the passengers of the Enoch Train across the Atlantic and all the way to Iowa City. There he was appointed captain of a handcart company with 274 people, fifty-two handcarts, and five supply wagons. Among the group was Mary Ann Jones, a pretty nineteen-year-old girl traveling on her own. During months of travel, Mary Ann slipped easily into the warmth, camaraderie, and security of her traveling community. Captain Ellsworth kept a watchful eye on her throughout the trip and evidently decided to make such scrutiny permanent, with which she was agreeable, and the two were married soon after they reached the Valley. All accounts indicate that age and family situation made a marked difference in the kind of experience a traveler had. A young girl without family responsibilities, like Mary Ann Jones, usually fared very well.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCMary Ann Jones [^26]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC597On the 21st of March 1856 a company of Latter Day Saints, 534 in number left the shores of England on the ship E"> We traveled 1400 miles in nine weeks. We were alloted 1 tent to 20 persons & 4 hand carts to each tent. We traveled as high as 28 miles a day & always got to camp long before the wagons. We were allowed 17 lbs. of baggage each, that meant clothes beding cooking utensils etc. When the brethern came to weigh our things some wanted to take more than alowed so put on extra clothes so that some that wore [were] real thin soon became stout so as soon as the weighing was over put the extra clothes in the hand cart again but that did not last long for in a few days we were called upon to have all weighed again & quite a few were found with more than alowed. One old Sister carried a teapot & calendar on her apron strings all the way to Salt Lake. Another Sister carried a hat box full of things but she died on the way. The LORD was with us by His spirit for all-though tired & foot sore we could sing the songs of zion as we went along. Some stomacks may recoil at a supper cooked with the water dug in a buffalo wallow & cooked with buffalo chips but it tasted good to us. We came to an emence herd of buffalo. It seemed as if the whole prairie was moving we waited for over an hour for them to cross the road so we could go on. We were stopped on the Platt[e] river by a large band of Indians who demanded food. They were painted in war paint & very hostile. Captain Edmund Ellsworth talked to them & told the brethern to pray while he talked, he gave them some beads and they let us go on our way, for which we felt very thankful. A very remarkable thing happened on the Platt river. One of the oxen died & Bro. Ellsworth was asking the Brethern what could be done. Could they put a cow in the team so we could go on. When one of the men said look Bro. Ellsworth at that steer on the hill for There stood a big fat steer looking at us. Bro. Ellsworth said the Lord has sent him to help us in to the valley, go & get him so we can move on. They did so & he worked as good as the others. When we got within 2 days travel of Salt Lake we met some teams sent out from the valley with provisions & to help us in the next morning when the boys went to round up the cattle to start that steer was gone. They hunted for hours but we never saw him again he went as misteriously as he came. Bro. Ellsworth said the Lord lent him to us as long as we needed him. We were met in Emegration Canyon by the first Presidency & a brass band & hundreds of people in carriages on horseback & on foot, it was a day never to be forgotten. We had reached the goal & on foot all the way. I never left my handcart for a day & only rode over 2 rivers. We waded streams, crossed high mountains & pulled through heavy sands, leaving comfortable homes, fathers, mother, brothers & sisters & what for? To be where we could hear a prophets voice and live with the Saints of God. I have never seen the day I regretted my trip - We arrived in Salt Lake the 26 day of September 1856. [^27]

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:445. Israel, in this instance, referred to the Indians, or remnants of the Lamanites, descendants of the house of Israel.
[^9] When the Nauvoo Charter was revoked some months after the death of Joseph Smith, the citizens renamed Nauvoo the City of Joseph.
[^10] "Life of George Whitaker, A Utah Pioneer, as written by himself," 8, typescript, Utah State Historical Society.
[^11] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:468.
[^12] Reminiscences of Louisa Barnes Pratt (1879), LDS Church Archives.
[^13] Bathsheba W. Smith described the city as "one vast mechanic shop, as nearly every family was engaged in making wagons. Our parlor was used as a paint-shop for the wagons. All were making preparations to leave the ensuing winter." In Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877; reprint, Salt Lake City, 1975), 321.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535.
[^15] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535-36. See also "Life of George Whitaker," 9.
[^16] As early as May 1842, Joseph Smith had introduced the temple ordinances to several of his closest associates, and before his death as many as sixty-five men and women had received all of the temple ordinances. Frequently noting that he might not live long enough to teach the endowment ceremony in the temple, he presciently endowed these trusted followers in preparation of performing the saving ordinances to the body of the Church. For details of this selected "endowment group," see Andrew F. Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances and the 1844 Mormon Succession Question" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1982).
[^17] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:541-42. The temple was dedicated privately by Joseph Young on 30 April and publicly from 1-3 May by Orson Hyde. Thousands of Saints attended the services. Wilford Woodruff addressed three thousand Saints at the temple on 10 May.
[^18] Reminiscences of Sarah De Armon Pea Rich (1885-93), LDS Church Archives.
[^19] From a variety of sources, Susan Easton Black sets the Nauvoo population at eleven thousand in 1845, but there may well have been several thousand more throughout Hancock County and environs and in Iowa settlements along the Mississippi River. See Black, "How Large Was the Population of Nauvoo?" Brigham Young University Studies 35, no. 2 (1995): 91-94.
[^20] Eliza Cheney to Parents, Brothers and Sisters, January 1848, in Historical Letters and Sketches, 1841-1919, Eliza Jane Rawson Collection, LDS Church Archives.
[^21] Frederick A. Norwood, Strangers and Exiles: A History of Religious Refugees, 2 vols. (Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1969) 2:246.
[^22] In November 1845, Willard Richards, Church historian, made a plea to the Saints to collect and bring to him any records, documents, maps, charts, books, or information of any kind relating to the Church and requested all missionaries to submit a written report of their experiences if they had not done so, all to be included in The General History of the Church. See Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:526. Eliza R. Snow preserved the minutes of the Nauvoo Relief Society, which she carried with her throughout Utah territory when she organized Relief Societies in 1867-68. These minutes were of special value to the women of the Church, containing the carefully recorded words of the Prophet Joseph Smith to them, outlining their responsibilities, position, and privileges within the Church.
[^23] The Nauvoo Temple bell was crafted in England, cast in bronze, and sent under the care of Wilford Woodruff to hang in the tower of the temple even before the temple was completed. When the Saints abandoned Nauvoo, the bell was taken down and hung in the belfry of the Methodist Church, from which it was later removed by a group of Mormons who carried it safely to Winter Quarters and from thence to the Salt Lake Valley in the first company to follow the pioneer company. It was finally installed in a campanile on Temple Square under the auspices of the Relief Society in 1942, the hundredth anniversary of that society's founding. For more information, see Mary Grant Judd, "A Monument with a Message," Relief Society Magazine 29 (January 1942): 12, and Lois Leetham Tanner, "Old Bell, Temple Bell," unpublished paper in author's possession.
[^24] Sally Randall to Parents, Brothers and Sisters, 1 June 1846, in Letters of Sally Randall, LDS Church Archives.
[^25] History of the Church 7:464-65.
[^26] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:578-79.
[^27] Helen Mar Whitney, "Our Travels Beyond the Mississippi," Woman's Exponent 12 (1 December 1883): 83. Her account is made up of her own reminiscences and the daily journal of her husband, Horace Whitney, as well as other pertinent documents and personal accounts.
