Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

597Mary Powell Sabin [^1]

598At age twelve ("almost thirteen"), Mary Powell, another young member of Captain Ellsworth's company, was old enough to recognize the hazards of the journey on which she and her family had embarked but young enough for time to soften her memory of its harsh edges by the time she retold her experiences. Traveling with her father, John (age forty-three); her mother, Elizabeth (thirty-five); her elder brother William (fifteen); and four younger siblings (Margaret, eight; Elizabeth, six; Hanna Susan, four; and David, an infant), she brings to life a twelve-year-old's impressions. Upon reaching Deer Creek Valley, for instance, she recorded that it was "charmingly sylvan with little groves here and there and a bright clear creek lined with timber. Said I to Father," she recalled, "'let's build a little log house and stay in this place always.' 'What shall we do for food?' asked father. 'Do as we're doing now,' said I. 'Go without.'"

598We reached Iowa city late at night. We walked four miles from Iowa city out to the camping place of the saints. Mother [Sarah Elizabeth Harris Powell] rode, not being strong enough to walk. A missionary, Brother [Philemon Christopher] Merrill, [^2] whom Mother had entertained in Wales, helped her to alight from the carriage.

598Said he, "Sister Powell, it affords me great pleasure to welcome you to this blessed land of America."

598We remained in Iowa six weeks. All the men were busy making handcarts. Our bake kettle which Father had ordered had not come. We had to fry our dough in a pan over the campfire. A lady seeing me do it said, "come into my tent and use my stove." This lady was not a member of the company. She lived in a tent nearby and owned a nice stove with a good oven which she allowed me to use. In the course of my acquaintance I learned that she was a relative of the Joseph F. Smith family.

598Each day I took pains to watch the women bake bread in their bake-kettles. I was taking lessons from them. I knew that I should have to do the baking when our own kettle came and I was anxious to learn the best way to do it.

598It became necessary for Mother to dispose of some of our things. She sold a little flat iron that I had taken care to carry with me. How I cried when it was sold. I think this was the only time I cried on the whole long journey. I felt worried and said, "Whatever will we do for something with which to smooth out our clothes when we get to Salt Lake City."

598At last the handcarts were all made. There were two handcarts for our family. My brother [William] pulled one of them all the way from Iowa City to Utah. I and father took turns pulling the other one. When I was not pulling father's handcart I was helping to pull someone else's. I walked every step of the way. I was light hearted and glad and had not self-pity.

598Being almost thirteen years old I felt quite responsible for my younger sisters. Sometimes when father or mother took sick I worried, as I did not want them to die by the way side.

We hadn't been long on the march when Brother [John] Kettle died. [He left a wife and 6 children.] We took the last lumber in the company and made him a coffin. We buried him beside a mulberry grove.

599While the company halted, I took a walk in the woods to get away from it all. There were wild grapes, persimmons, hickory nuts, black berries, walnuts and hazel nuts by the score. Here I learned to know a peach. There were many fruits new to me also. I was surprised at the variety I found there.

599I went into the woods every possible chance. How I enjoyed swaying in the grapevine swings. The moss was velvety green, the wild flowers beautiful. Ah! but the time flew by so very quickly.

599I was never lost in the woods. Some folks thought it remarkable how I could find my way out without the least bit of trouble.

599The journey was very hard on Mother. Picture a lady with dark blue eyes, black hair and a face very very pale from exhaustion. She is bearing the trials of the journey without complaint. That is my mother.

599On the road to Council Bluffs, we met a man, woman and child driving in a white topped rig. They seemed to become alarmed on seeing Mother's weakened condition. The man poured out a stimulant for Mother to drink. The woman gave me a slice of corn bread mixed with white flour for Mother to eat. They pitied her very much.

599At Council Bluffs we had the pleasure of meeting an old lady who clapped her hands in delight to see us. She took Mother into her neat little log house and made her lie down on the bed. It was snowy white and the room was spotless. While Mother slept the woman hurried and churned. When Mother woke she gave us buttermilk. Mother said she could never forget it.

599We dreaded to leave this cosy little house. It stood propped on blocks alone in this little grove. It was the only house we saw that day.

From the Bluffs we went up the river to Florence, Nebraska. At Florence we remained two weeks fixing handcarts and wagons. There were two buildings at this place—a large store house and a mill.

600We had been in Florence a little over a week when our bake kettle came. I was overjoyed. Now Mother should have light bread. I took the kettle and went off about a block. In this quiet place I built me a fire, took dough and made twenty four beautiful brown biscuits. I was glad as glad could be. I took the biscuits to camp and surprised Mother. All the women had to come and get a peek into our bake-kettle.

600While in Florence, Nebraska, a gentleman came in our camp. Said he to the captain, "Is there a man here from Wales by the name of John Powell? That's the man I want," said he. "I've been on the look out for him for the last five years. My wife wants to see Bro. Powell. She thinks the world of him. He gave her a home in the old country."

600This man offered Father eighty acres of land if he would settle in Nebraska. He also was willing to help erect a house for us.

600While we were encamped at Florence father secured work. He laid the foundation, also dressed the corner-stone for the first court-house in Omaha. He received eight dollars per day. [^3] He needed this money for said he, "I cannot let my children go bare-footed across the plains."

600Father bought me a pair of shoes, the ugliest I've ever seen in all my life. It was the best he could get.

600From Florence, Nebraska, began our real journey across the plains. All our other experiences had not been a foretaste of what lay ahead of us. There were two hundred and seven souls in our company.

600Our first day's march commenced about noon. We went through acres of hazel brush covered with hazel nuts in the mill. I began gathering nuts, other[s] joined me, and we ate a good many.

That night we camped by a stream. The next day we traveled out into the prairies and didn't see any houses at all. One afternoon Father noticed Bro. [Daniel] Jones pull away and halt by the side of the road. "What is the matter, Bro. Jones?" asked Father.

601"I see danger ahead," said Brother Jones, "I promised Ann's [his wife's] father [I] wouldn't lead her into suffering. I see danger ahead."

601Bro Jones and his wife remained behind in Omaha. Bro. Jones being a butcher by trade, likely secured good work. Father said we should give him due credit for keeping his word to Ann's father.

601Now we halted preparing the crossing of a stream on a ferry. The dark green forest was all around us. I grabbed a bucket and ran into the woods and picked it full of black berries. I took some little girls with me. Someone in camp began worrying about us. Bro. [John] Oakley said, "Don't worry, she'll come back, she always does."

601When I came out with my blackberries they all cheered. As often as I could I ran into the woods. I loved the hills, woods, moss, and hanging grape vines and wild flowers. There were so many birds. Their joy notes swelling in the woods brought a flood of rapture into my soul.

601The fifth day out we reached a little trading post. The men here sold tobacco to the Indians, also trinkets of various kinds.

601Each morning at day break the bugle sounded. Up we rose and assembled for prayer. We then ate a scanty breakfast of dough cakes fried in the frying pan. Once in a while we had a few stewed apples. Then we were ready for our march. At ten o'clock we rested one half hour. Then we traveled until we came to water. At the next meal we would eat what was left over from breakfast. At night we often went to bed without supper. There was very little food to cook and we were too tired to cook it.

There were twenty one persons in Father's big round tent which we pitched every night. We spread down quilts and blankets and went to sleep.

602One day three men went out to shoot a buffalo. The buffalo attacked a horse and ripped its sides. We didn't get any meat that day. Later a crowd of boys went out and shot a steer. That day we had beef.

602Our bake kettle now came in handy. We put twenty pieces of meat (each piece about fifty cents worth of beef) into our bake kettle. In this way we cooked for about twenty families. There being no wood we gathered buffalo chips and built a hot fire under the kettle.

602One night a brother made us a present of a piece of steak. The hour was real late, but Mother was anxious to get it partly baked in order that it might not spoil. I undertook to do the baking all by myself. The fire was quite a distance from the tent. I sat by it watching the kettle until I fell fast asleep. The night guard came and tapped me on the shoulder.

602"Are you Bro. Powell's girl?"

602"Yes."

602"You go to bed, I'll finish your meat for you," he said.

602"But I've promised Mother to do it. I cannot break my word." said I.

602"You are too tired little girl." said he. "Run along, I'll bake your meat."

602"But there are a couple of dogs in camp. I'm afraid they'll get it after it is baked." I said.

602"Never worry, I'll put it in a safe enough place," said he. "Don't worry, go to bed."

602Trusting his promise I crept inside of Father's tent. I must have gone to sleep the moment I touched the pillow.

603In the morning I was awakened by Father's heavy laughter. Bro Card's [^4] wagon tongue was propped into a perpendicular position. On the end of the wagon tongue hung our bake-kettle. The sight of it way up in the air made a great round of laughter as we came outside the tent to take the morning air.

603It was my habit to get up early and sit outside of Father's tent to drink in the cool morning breeze. It rested me for the remainder of the day.

603Some days we traveled more than thirty miles to reach water. Often we would come to a place where the springs had dried down. It might be near midnight. Then little children would form a circle of eager watchers while the men dug down several feet to water. At last when they saw the chunks of wet mud they would lay it on their face and hands. Some of them would suck the water from the mud. When the water burst forth it was usually very thick. The children drank heartily, straining it through their teeth. The next morning it looked quite clear.

603We saw water for miles and miles before we reached the Platte river. The distance was very deceiving. The water seemed much nearer to me than it really was. Mother was getting faint with thirst. There was a selfish old man in camp that did not offer her a swallow from the water in his canteen. It made me quite vexed. That day I walked more than ten miles extra to get Mother a drink. I ran part of the way but secured drinking water for her.

603Traveling in the Platte Valley was very pleasing. My little sister, [Annie] aged four, usually walked beside the Captain. "Come my little partner." said he, "let us begin our journey." Some days she walked eighteen miles.

603During those days the thought upper most in the minds of every man, woman and child was "Oh! to reach the Platte." We could see the milky looking waters far in the distance. How long it took before we reached it.

604One day we saw a speck like a cloud of dust miles behind us. The cloud kept moving toward us and increasing. Within two hours an immense herd of buffalo passed us. They did not seem to notice us in the least but moved right along solid and dumb in one great mass. They passed us with a steady trot and not one soul was harmed.

604The next night we saw a few buffalo off alone. The men went out and killed one, again we had meat.

604At last we reached the Platte. There was a trading post near by. Our captain asked the men at the post how much they would charge to ferry us across. The price they asked was more money than we had in camp.

604The river was between two and three blocks wide. First the men took the handcarts across, then the women and girls followed wading. The water kept getting deeper and deeper. In the middle of the river it was under my chin. When we reached the opposite side we went right on in our wet clothes. We traveled thirteen miles more that day.

604We crossed the Platte in several places. At Fort Laramie it was over my head. [^5] I started down stream. Bro. Oakley pulled me back. At Fort Laramie there was an encampment of sixteen thousand Indians, they were holding a treaty [council]. They were camped for a distance of thirty miles up the river. We camped near the river that night but without a fire.

604The next morning we met five hundred Indians on the road. They were on their way to the treaty. Father presented some of them with beautiful peacock feathers. This pleased them very much. They stopped and looked at our handcarts. "Little wagons, little wagons." said they. How the squaws laughed.

When we struck the mountain region the paths became more rugged to our feet. I picked up pretty little rocks and put them in my apron. By the time my pocket was filled I found other rocks still prettier. I threw away these and took them instead. I wish I could have saved some of the pretty rocks I gathered.

605I was captivated by the place called "Deer Creek's" beauty. It was so charmingly sylvan with little groves here and there and a bright clear creek lined with timber. Said I to Father, "Let's build a little log house and stay in this place always."

605"What would we do for food?" asked Father.

605"Do as we're doing now," said I, "Go without."

605A little farther on I wanted to go down into a certain green cove. The captain forbade and called me back. Just then three bears came out and ascended the flat.

605In the mountains we lost an old man. He had lain himself down and fallen asleep. We had to stop four days to find him. The delay alarmed our captain. He was anxious to keep ahead of the McArthur company.

605Once in a while we stopped half a day to wash clothes. While the clothes were drying the men mended handcarts.

605One night the McArthur company overtook us in the mountains. However, they had to wait for some cause or other. We therefore continued to move on ahead.

605It was easy to make our way over Green River for the crossing had already been prepared. It did us good to view Green River valley. It was almost like taking a rest.

605At Fort Bridger we stopped all night. The men killed a beef. This was our first meat since leaving the buffalo on the prairies. At Fort Bridger we met Bro. Parley P. Pratt. He was then starting on his last mission.

605When within one day's journey of Salt Lake City we ran out of provisions. Two men who had joined us at the fort were on their way to Salt Lake City.

605"What word shall we take from you?" said they to the Captain.

605"Tell them we haven't a bite of food left in camp," said Captain Ellsworth.

A relief party met us with food before we arrived in Salt Lake City. How enchanting it was to enter Echo Canyon to call and have the echo answer.

606The night we were encamped on Little Mountain the McArthur company again overtook us. There was general rejoicing in all hearts. Early the next morning bread, beef and coffee arrived from Salt Lake City.

606That very morning we passed a wagon company that had said goodbye to us in Iowa. I had acquaintances in this company who had said "We will beat you into Salt Lake City." I now had the pleasure of passing them. The men took off their hats and cheered.

606There was a lazy man in camp who had a wife and a baby. For the sake of the wife and child, I had often helped pull his cart. Now we were nearing our journeys end and I made up my mind to let him do his own pulling. We were passing down a slope, he was on the bottom so I simply let his cart go rolling down the slope. "Catch it! Catch it!" I cried. He sprang forward and caught it in the nick of time. Everybody laughed.

606That afternoon the same man climbed into a wagon of soap to ride awhile. We had been better provided with soap than food it seems. Coming down a rough place the wagon partly tipped over. Our friend was almost buried in soap to the amusement of the rest of us.

606When we arrived in Immigration canyon we were met by Pres. Young and several members of the quorum of the twelve apostles. They arrived in wagons drawn by oxen and mules. We halted, they served us melons. Pres. Young told us to eat moderately of the mellon, to eat the pink, not to eat into the green. Father said he was quite sensible.

607My little sister, Annie, age four, had been promised a big piece of bread and butter when she should reach the valley. Just as we were lined up to hear a few words from Bro. Brigham Young, a lady held up a large piece of bread. Annie ran toward her. "That's my piece of bread and butter," she cried joyously. At the sight of this Pres. Young wept, "God bless the child," said he. There were tears in the eyes of the people from the valley but there were only dry eyes among us who had just arrived. Pres. Young said he could defer his remarks until a little later.

607That afternoon we went down into Salt Lake Valley. We camped on the square in the sixteenth ward, remaining there from Friday night until Monday morning. Bro. Brigham Young came and spoke to us. He told us that we had fulfilled a prophecy. He also said that although we had endured privations and hunger on the plains we should never again feel the pangs of starvation if we would do right and live right.

607On monday morning a man came to the camp grounds, said he, "I've a little one room log house down in the Fifteenth Ward. I was going to move it away for a stable but if you wish to use it you may."

607"What will be the rent?" asked father.

607"One dollar and a half a month." said he.

607We moved into this place. Bro. Nelson Empey loaned us three chairs. Bro. Thomas loaned us a chair and table. Bro. Grenic [^6] loaned us a bedstead.

607I did not remain at home. I went to work for some people from London, situated between the Gardo House and the Theater. [^7] The man was known as Clive the Tailor. I worked for these people for five weeks. They did not pay me one cent. On pretext of being afraid food might harm me (due to my scanty living on the plains) they did not let me have half enough to eat.

608Father took his tools and put in a days work on the Temple. Thus the promise made to him by the L.D.S. Elders in Wales, that he should go to Utah and work on the Temple, was fulfilled.

608Exactly two weeks after our arrival in Salt Lake City, Father died. I had been home to see him but once during these two weeks. He died Friday afternoon and was buried about noon Saturday.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
