Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC608Archer Walters [^1]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC609As the father of five children, Archer Walters, a skilled carpenter and convert from Birmingham, found his experience with the Ellsworth company less carefree than either of the young Marys. With two sons and three daughters ranging in age from six to eighteen, Walters keenly felt a father's anxiety for his family. Concern over the fast pace of travel that Captain Ellsworth held them to and the ever-decreasing rations of food fill many lines in his diary. "My children cry with hunger and it grieves me and makes me cross," he wrote on the first of July after their food supply was almost depleted. Giving his portion to his children, he found his own strength waning as day followed day with nothing to ease the hunger pangs or lessen the exhausting labor with the handcarts. After writing almost daily from Iowa City, he ceased to write just days before the company was joyously greeted by Brigham Young and others from the Valley.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC609Monday May 19th [1856] Went into the city of Iowa. Short of lumber. Saw a chapel or church burnt down. They say they were preaching against us yesterday but perhaps they will learn better by this purifying by fire. Had some whiskey and water which took all my strength for it was so hot. Got to camp about 1/2 past 8 o'clock.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC60920th Went to work to make hand carts. Was not very well. Worked 10 hours. Harriet [^2] very poorly.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC609Wednesday 21st Went work. Harriet not so well. Very hot. All very well considering the heat and change of diet.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC609Thursday 22nd Harriet worse with what we are told is the American Fever. Sometimes like the Ague. Sarah [his oldest daughter, age eighteen] went to Lindley's Farm to work and sent poor Harriet some milk and crust of bread.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC609Friday 23rd Harriet still very ill. I went to work. Still very hot to me. All the rest very well and I thank my Heavenly Father.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC60924th Harriet still very ill. Still at work at the carts. Rations served out and got more sugar.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC609Sunday 25th Morning meeting. Bro. [John] Godsall, [^3] from Birmingham, addressed the meeting. Meeting 1/2 past 2. Brother [Chauncey G.] Webb [^4] spoke and someone had been speaking against us. He roared out like a lion and would of slain them with a look of his eyes and if any was honest in heart and had been guilty they must have trembled for he spared none.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC609Monday 26th Went to work. Harriet still very bad. Lightened [lightning] very bad; began about 8 o'clock until 11 o'clock. Never saw it so in my life and it rained hard and our beds began to swim. I was wet on my side as I laid until I found it out.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC60927th Went to work at hand carts. Shift tent on a hill and was scolded for it.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC609Wednesday 28th At work.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC60929th Thursday at work. Harriet still very bad.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC61030th A child born in our tent 1/2 past one A.M.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC6101856 Saturday May 31st Martha [his daughter, age twelve] began to be ill. Still at work at the hand carts. a meeting at night and we are to prepare for off.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC610Sunday JUNE 1st Meeting 1/2 past 10. Bro. _______ spoke and Bro. Webb. Sarah still at the farm, -Mr. Linley's. Henry [his son, age sixteen] went on watch to the cattle. The band played several tunes after the meeting.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC610Meeting 1/2 past two. Many people here.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC6102nd Harriet very ill. Still working at the hand carts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC610Tuesday 3rd All well but Harriet.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC610Wednesday 4th Martha poorly. Made a coffin for a child dead in camp.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC610Thursday 5th All expect to go with our hand carts. I was liberated from working and my tools to go with us to do repairs on the road.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC610Friday 6th Made another child's coffin and a rough table for the Elders to eat upon. Bro. [Daniel] Spencer [^5] said as I had been working my extra luggage should go through.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC610Saturday 7th 8th Started about 60 yards. Camped for the night and remained Sunday, June the 8th, and meetings held as usual. Harriet dreamed about eating fish and Henry went and catched one and she eat it all. I road Harriet in the hand cart round the camp. Very bad night owing to camping so late, the dew being on the grass.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCSunday 8th Meetings as usual. Went to bid Mr. Lindley good-bye. We journeyed 3 miles. Lost the cattle at night. Camped amongst bush and did not rest well. Harriet very ill. Found cattle Tuesday night at the old camp ground.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Wednesday 11th Journeyed 7 miles. Very dusty. All tired and smoothered with dust and camped in the dust or where the dust blowed. Was Captain over my tent of 18 in number but they were a family of Welch and our spirits were not united. [^6] Had a tent but Elder Ellsworth would not let me use it and had to leave my tent poles behind me.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Thursday 12th Journeyed 12 miles. Went very fast with our hand carts. Harriet still ill.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Friday 13th Journeyed 7 miles. A pleasant road but journeyed so fast.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Saturday 14th Journeyed 7 miles. Pleasant.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Sunday 15th Got up about 4 o'clock to make a coffin for my brother, John Lee's son named William Lee, aged 12 years. [^7] Meetings as usual, and at the same time had to make another coffin for Sister [Mary] Prator's [^8] child. Was tired with repairing hand carts the last week. Went and buried them by moonlight at Bear Creek.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Monday 16th Harriet very ill. Travelled 19 miles and after pitching tent mended carts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Tuesday 17th Travelled about 17 miles; pitched tent. Made a little coffin for Bro. Job Welling's son [^9] and mended a hand cart wheel.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Wednesday 18th Rose before sun rise; travelled about 10 miles. Very hot; and camped for the day. Harriet still very ill but hope she will soon be better if it please my Heavenly Father.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC611Thursday 19th Travelled about 13 miles. Camped Bear Creek.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCFriday 20th Travelled about 14 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC612Saturday 21st Travelled about 13 miles. Camped at Indian Creek. Bro. [James] Bower died about 6 o'clock; from Birmingham Conference. Went to buy the wood to make the coffin but the kind farmer gave me the wood and nails. It had been a very hot day and I was never more tired, but God has said as my day my strength shall be. For this I rejoice that I have good health and strength according to my day. Indian Camp Creek.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC612Sunday 22nd Got up at day break and made the coffin for Bro. James Bowers by 9 o'clock and he was buried at 11 o'clock. Aged 44 years, 5 months, 2 days. His relatives [^10] cried very much after I lifted him in the coffin and waiting to screw him down. 11 o'clock, washed in the creek and felt very much refreshed. Meeting 2 o'clock until seven. Bro. [Daniel D. McArthur] MacCarter spoke about being driven and he did walk into the Gentiles first rate and told them that they did not mean to be driven again and not to be excited by the priests to come against us as a people again for they would find them a terrible people.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC612Monday 23rd Rose early and travelled 10 miles; then repaired the hand carts. Harriet a little better.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC612Tuesday 24th Travelled 18 miles. Very hot. Bro. Ellsworth being always with a family from Birmingham named Brown and always that tent going first and walking so fast and some fainted by the way. [^11] Bro. [Edward] Frost worn out by going so fast and not resting and many more.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC612Wednesday 25th Travelled about 13 miles. Sold some files to a Carpenter; repaired some hand carts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC613Thursday 26th Travelled about 1 mile. Very faint for the (lack) of food. We are only allowed about 3/4 of lb. of flour a head each day and about 3 oz. of sugar each a week. Tea good and plenty; about a 1/4 of a lb. of bacon each a week; which makes those that have no money very weak. Made a child's coffin for Sister Sheen - Emma Sheen aged 2-1/2 years.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC613Friday 27th Got up before sun rise. Cut a tomb stone on wood and bury the child before starting from camp. Travelled about 10 miles. Repaired hand carts and quite tired and slept without rocking.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC613Saturday 28th We think Harriet a little better. Rose soon after 4 o'clock. Started with high wind. Short of water and I was never more tired. Rested a bit after we camped then came on a thunder storm, and rain blowed our tent down. Split the canvas and wet our clothes and we had to lay on the wet clothes and ground. I thought of going through needful tribulation but it made me cross. I took poor Harriet into a tent and fixed the tent up again as well I could at Bear Creek Station.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC613Sunday 29th Rather stiff in joints when we rose and thought, As thy day thy strength shall be, was fulfilled upon us for which I feel thankful to my Heavenly Father. Busy all day. My wife and Sarah mending. Short of provisions. Children crying for their dinner. Got the tent up and slept comfortable.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC613Monday 30th Rose in good health, except Harriet, and started with our hand carts with but a little breakfast as only 3-1/2 lbs. of flour was served out over night, but never travelled 17 miles more easily. Got 5 lbs. of flour and bacon about 1-1/4 lb. 3/4 rice, sugar 3/4 lb. and was refreshed after satisfying nature. Sleep very well after prayers in tent.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCTuesday JULY 1st Rose soon. It looked very cloudy and began to rain. Travelled about 15 miles. Walked very fast,- nearly 4 miles an hour. Brother Brown's family and some young sisters with Bro. Ellsworth always going first which causes many of the brothers to have hard feeling. I have heard them call them and Bro. Ellsworth as well, as he always walks with them and looks after them, being in the same tent. 1/2 lb. of flour each; 2 oz. of rice; which is very little and my children cry with hunger and it grieves me and makes me cross. I can live upon green herbs or anything and do go nearly all day without any and am strengthened with a morsel. Repaired hand carts. A storm came on about 11 o'clock and lasted 1 hour 1/2. Split the tent and not a dry thread on us.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC614Wednesday 2nd Rose about 5 o'clock after sleeping in wet clothes, and made a coffin for Bro. [Cyrus William] Card belonging to the Independent Company but travels with us, for his daughter named Polly Caroline Card, aged 14. 5 miles from Indian town. Brother [Robert] Parker's boy [Arthur], from Preston, England, aged 6 years, lost. 2 miles, gone after him which makes us stop today and we hope the brothers will find him. Not found; travelled about 14 or 15 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC614Thursday 3rd Ever to be remembered. Bro Card gave me 1/2 dollar for making his daughter's coffin. Start with my cart before the camp as others had done but was told not and had to suffer for it. Went the wrong way; about 30 of the brothers and sisters and went 10-1/2 miles wrong way. We put our three hand carts together and made beds with all the clothes we had and all layed down about 1/2 past 10 o'clock. 11 o'clock Bro. [William] Butler, who had charge of the mule teams, came with the mules and wagon to fetch us. Got to camp when they were getting up. Laid down about an hour and started with the camp.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC614Friday 4th About 20 miles. Tired out. Tied my cart behind the wagon and we got in, after 3 nights. 1st night, thunder, lightning and rain and our tent splitting and blowing over. All wet to the skin. 2nd night: wind blowing; had hard work to hold the tent up and this last night no sleep. Went to bed; sleep never better and rose refreshed.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Saturday 5th A deer or helk [^12] served out to camp. Brother Parker brings into the camp his little boy that had been lost. Great joy right through the camp. The mother's joy I cannot describe. Expect we are going to rest. Washing, etc. today, Jordan Creek. Make a pair of sashes for the old farmer. Indian meal; no flour. Slept well.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Sunday 6th Made 2 doors for the farmer,- 3 dollars and boarded with the farmer. [^13]

615Monday 7th Harriet better. Lydia poorly. [his daugther, age six] Travelled about 20 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Tuesday 8th Travelled around-about road about 20 miles. Crossed the river Missouri and camped at the City of Florence. Very tired; glad to rest. Slept well. Lydia better and Harriet. All in good spirits. Expect to stop some time. Old Winter Quarters.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Wed. 9th Rested. Florence City.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Thur. 10th Repairing hand carts. Could of got 3 or 4 dollars per day had I not engaged with Brother Spencer to repair the carts. Harriet better.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Friday 11th Repairing carts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Saturday 12th Ditto.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Sunday (13th) Wrote to England and rested.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Monday (14th) Worked all day at carts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Tuesday (15th) Ditto. Harriet still very ill.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Wednesday (16th) Ditto.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Thursday (17th) Left Florence City and we travelled about 3 miles. Went to _____ to seek work to buy a pair of shoes for Sarah but got no work for want of tools. Stopped there all night; slept in a stable. Came back to camp Friday morning, 17th. (18).

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Friday (18th) Harriet very ill. Bought her some little niceties but she could not eat the pickles. Had a piece of buffalo beef given to me.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Saturday (19) Repairing carts all day.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Sunday (20) Preparing to start; travelled about 7 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Monday (21) Travelled about 18 miles. Harriet better.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Tuesday (22) Passed of[f] the ferry at Helk Horn [Elkhorn]. Travelled about 12 miles. Thunder storm.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Wednesday (23) Very hot day. Travelled about 14 miles. Harriet much better.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC615Thursday (24) Very hot. Went about 18 miles. Harriet still better.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCFriday (25) Travelled about 18 1/2 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC616Saturday (26) Passed over the Ferry -Luke [Loup] Fort. Travelled about 6 miles. Has soon has we crossed it looked very heavy and black. We had [not] got far and it began to lightning and so on the thunders roared and about the middle of the train of hand carts the lightning struck a brother and he fell to rise no more in that body,- by the name of Henry Walker, from Carlisle Conference; aged 58 years. Left a wife and children. One boy burnt a little, named James Studard [Stoddard]; we thought he would die but he recovered and was able to walk and Brother William Studard, father of the boy was knocked to the ground and a sister, Betsy Taylor, was terribly shook but recovered. All wet through. This happened about 2 miles from the Ferry and we then went 2 miles to camp. I put the body, with the help of others, on the hand cart and pulled him to camp and buried him without coffin for there was no boards to be had.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC616Sunday 27th The next morning, Sunday 27th, 1856, four miles west of Luke [Loup] Fort Ferry. Rose about 4 o'clock. Put a new axle tree to a cart that was broke yesterday. Travelled about 2 miles to a better camping ground.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC616Monday 28th Travelled about 18 miles. Harriet much better; for such we feel thankful.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC616Tuesday 29th Travelled about 15 miles. Met a Company coming from California. A child born in camp. Sister [Ann] Doney. My birthday.49

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC616Wednesday 30th Travelled 22 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC616Thursday 31st Travelled 18 miles. Heavy thunderstorm.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC616AUGUST 1856 Friday 1st Travelled 16 miles and camped at Prairie Creek.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCSat. 2nd Crossed over 2 creeks, - forded them. Stopt [for] dinner. Camped by Wood River. We saw many buffalo. Travelled about 18 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Sunday 3rd Rested but mended hand carts. Got shell fish out 49. His forty-seventh.of the creek for we was very hungry. Only 3/4 of lb. of flour; 1-1/2 oz. of sugar; a few apples; tea plenty.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Monday 4th Travelled 18 miles. Camped by Platte River.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Tuesday 5th Travelled 16 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Wednesday 6th Saw thousands of buffalo. 4 was killed. So thick together that they covered 4 miles at once. Camped by Buffalo Creek. Travelled 10 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Thursday 7th Thousands of buffalo. Travelled 25 miles. Camped late at night. Had to dig for water and it was very thick. Our hungry appetites satisfied by the buffalo. Got up soon to repair hand carts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Friday 8th Rose soon to repair carts. Travelled about 15 miles. Camped by the side of Flat River. Repaired hand carts. Harriet getting round nicely and I feel truly thankful. My wife very ill tempered at times. An old brother lost named [Walter] Sanderson. [^14] Many went in all directions but could not find him.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Saturday 9th Found the old brother Sanderson on a hill about 6 o'clock. Brought him into camp on a mule. Travelled about 15 miles after repairing hand carts until 12 o'clock.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Sunday 10th Travelled 14 miles. All, or most of the people had with the diarrhoea or purging,- whether it was the buffalo or the muddy river water.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC617Monday 11th Travelled about 17 miles. 4 men sent to shoot Buffalo. Harriet much better; very weak myself. I expect it is the short rations: 3/4 of a lb. of flour per day. It is but little but it is as much as the oxen teams that we have could draw from St. Florence. Forded over 2 creeks. Met a man coming from California by himself; going to the States. One of our cows died. Buffalo killed.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Tuesday 12th Rested while some of the brethren with Captain Ellsworth went and shot 2 more Buffalo and we dried the meat.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Wednesday 13th Travelled 12 miles; forded a large creek.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Thursday 14th Travelled 18 miles. Crossed three creeks. Last herd of Buffalo seen.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Friday 15th Forded over 5 creeks; camped at Snake Creek. Travelled 19 miles; from Florence 352 miles. Harriet much better and walked all the way.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Saturday 16th Forded over 5 or 6 creeks. Travelled 17 miles. Camped by Wolf Creek.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Sunday 17th Crossed over some creeks. Camped over the Platte River. Travelled 12 miles. Brother Missel Rossin, Italian, found dead by the side of the road.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Monday 18th Travelled 20 miles. Camped by the Platte River.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Tuesday 19th Travelled 19 miles. Camped by the Platte River. A nice camping ground. Buffalo chips to burn.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Wednesday 20th Travelled 19 miles. Camped by River Platte.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Thursday 21st Travelled 18 miles. Camped 4 miles past Chimney Rock, Platte River. Sandy Road the last 3 or 4 days.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Friday 22nd Good road. Travelled 24 miles. Camped by Platte River.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC618Saturday 23rd Travelled 16 miles. Camped by Platte River. Harriet getting well, thank God, and not been in the wagons to ride. Our allowance of flour tonight was 1 lb. a head. For this I was thankful for I never was so hungry in my life. Captain Ellsworth shot a cow. Very thankfully received.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCSunday 24th Rested from travels but had to repair hand carts. Meeting at night. Received the Sacrament. Spoke at the meeting. Bro. Ellsworth spoke some time and said we had made great improvement; that the last week there had been less quarreling and those that had robbed the hand carts, or wagons, unless they repent their flesh would rot from their bones and go to Hell.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619Monday 25th Travelled about 19 miles. Saw many Indians. Camped about 19 miles from Fort Laramie. Hand Cart axle tree broke on the road. Plenty of wood. Quite a treat after burning so many Buffalo chips.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619Tuesday 26th Travelled about 19 miles. Camped 3 miles from Fort Laramie. Trucked [traded] away a dagger for a piece of bacon and salt and sold one for 1 dollar 1/4. Bought bacon and meal and Henry and me began to eat it raw we was so hungry. Forded the river. Sister Watts got hurt by the wagon. My wife thinks she would of fell when half way over the river. Bro. John Lee came to her assistance.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619Wednesday 27th Travelled about 18 miles. Had bacon and meal porridge for supper; the best supper for many weeks. A camp of Indians passed us.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619Thursday 28th Travelled about 15 miles. Mended hand carts good and had road hilley. Camped at a nice place called Horse Shoe Creek. Mother and Sarah washed clothes.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619Friday 29th Travelled 25 miles. Camped Platte River. Met some Californians.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619Saturday 30th Travelled 22 miles. Met some Californians and they told us the wagons was waiting at Deer Creek for us.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619Sunday 31st Very poorly, faint and hungry. Travelled to Deer Creek, 22 miles. Brother R. Stoddard from Carlisle Conference, about 54 years old, died in the wagon on road. [^15] More provisions given out.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619SEPTEMBER Monday 1st Rested from travels. I mended carts. Meeting about flour and paying for extra that was brought in the wagons. Harriet getting quite well and walks all the way. 18 cents per lb.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC619Tuesday 2nd Platte River. Travelled 19 miles. Walter Sanderson, aged 56, died.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620Wednesday 3rd Met 4 wagons: Henshaw from Nottingham; John Barns from Sheffield. Travelled 15 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620Thursday 4th Travelled 10 miles.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620Friday 5th Rested. Rained all day.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620Saturday 6th Lost cattle.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620Sunday 7th Travelled 26 miles. Bro. Nipras [George Nappriss, age 23] died. Left on road.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620Monday 8th 11 miles. Had dinner at Devil's Gate.

620Wed. 10th

620T. 11th

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620F. 12th Sarah very poorly. Harriet quite well.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620Saturday 13th Travelled 28 miles. Camped at Paciffick Springs. Trucked a blanket with a brother from the Valley who came from Rotherham, named Goldsmith, part of Bro. Bankses Wagon Co. [^16]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620Sunday 14th Traveled 3 miles. Camped to mend hand carts and women to wash. Sister Mayer died. [Mary Mayo, 65, a widow traveling alone.]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC620[Diary ends here. Company arrived in Salt Lake Valley, September 26, 1856. Archer Walters died two weeks later.]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe successful crossing of the prairies and plains by the first three companies, despite the hardships they faced, encouraged Church leaders, and the way seemed clear to continue this kind of travel.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC621But such sanguine hopes were starkly shaken by the next two companies to start out that same year. The plan that had worked so well for three of the companies faltered at crucial points for the next two. Even before the following two shiploads of more than a thousand emigrants and returning missionaries left Liverpool, there were signs of potential trouble. Their late departure from England in May was surely cautionary to those who knew how crucial timing was to each step of the way from Liverpool to the Valley. But the emigrants eagerly left England, largely unaware of the impact of this first misstep. They were responding to the call to gather, and many of them had left their jobs, sold their farms or shops, and collected their savings and belongings, and they had no alternative but to emigrate that year.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCAnother weakened link in the chain of organization was communication; the Iowa agents did not expect such a large contingent of emigrants who planned to go west that year and did not have sufficient equipment and supplies for them when they reached Iowa City. While fewer than 800 people made up the first three handcart companies earlier that spring, more than a thousand emigrants and returning missionaries arrived in Iowa City in late June, determined to make it to the Valley that year. They might well have wintered in Iowa City since available work seemed likely in the thriving railroad town, but few were interested in staying. Instead, they spent more crucial weeks making their own carts and acquiring provisions.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCFinally on their way in late July, they spent another month crossing Iowa. That trek helped condition them for the longer and more difficult segment of the journey that lay before them, though it was like "only a mile" to what they yet faced, as one pioneer remembered. [^17] Florence might also have been a stopping place for the winter, but it offered little opportunity for work, and few of the emigrants had enough supplies to see them through another year before completing their journey to Zion. But to go on was hazardous. Levi Savage, a returning missionary, was well acquainted with the peculiarities of the trail and the power of the weather on its travelers. His apparently lone voice urged caution. Several diarists recorded his dissenting words as he pled with the Saints to wait until spring. "Some of the strong may get through in case of bad weather, but the bones of the weak and old," he predicted, "will strew the way." Savage knew that a thousand inexperienced men, women, and children could easily flounder under the best of circumstances, and the timing of their journey had already put them in jeopardy. [^18]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCBut the "determined look" that Emma James saw on her mother's face appeared on nearly a thousand others, and the warning was overruled. "We must put our trust in the Lord as we have always done," Jane James exclaimed. Her response was understandable. The eagerness of the Saints to reach the Valley that year and the longing of the missionaries to return to their homes easily superseded any anxieties they might have felt. The straitened circumstances of many of them also offset any enticement to wait another season. The encouraging words of British mission president Franklin D. Richards, who arrived in Florence with several missionaries shortly before the Martin company left the outfitting post, seemed to be the final endorsement of the plan to push on. [^19] Only a hundred were persuaded to stay over. And so it was that late in August the fourth handcart company, under James G. Willie, and the fifth of the season, under Edward Martin, both returning missionaries, left the Missouri with nearly a thousand eager handcart pioneers. Both companies had supply wagons carrying their provisions, as well as cattle for milk and beef. The 385 emigrants who could afford to travel in wagons followed behind in either W. B. Hodgett's company of thirty-three wagons or John A. Hunt's company of fifty wagons.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe earliest problems besetting the handcarters, such as broken carts, sudden rainstorms, Indian harassment, and swollen feet, were mere inconveniences next to those that befell them as the journey wore on. The loss of their cattle early in the journey, the sudden sweeps of diarrhea and dysentery, the crossing of rivers in freezing temperatures that left them wet and exposed to the cold, and the rapidly diminishing food supply taxed their patience, strength, and spirit.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC624But the real trial for both companies came with an early frost in September, which led to brief periods of snow, culminating, on 19 October, with a heavy, continuing, and devastating snowfall. It brought all travel to a halt. The Willie company had reached the fifth crossing of the Sweetwater, and the Martin company was several days behind at Red Bluffs, sixty-five miles east of Devil's Gate. To these companies, already weakened and demoralized, this storm was brutal. The clothing in their small bundles was no match for a Rocky Mountain snowstorm of such magnitude. Many had dropped heavy clothing and bedding along the way to lighten their load as their strength waned. How much they wished for them now! With their food nearly exhausted, their clothes thin and worn, and tents and handcarts their only shelter, both the Willie and Martin companies found themselves helplessly stranded in the Wyoming mountains.

624Eighteen-year-old Sarah James and her seventeen-year-old sister Emma, who were traveling with their father and mother, William and Jane James, and their younger brothers and sisters, had no trouble graphically recalling their family's experience with the Willie company.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:445. Israel, in this instance, referred to the Indians, or remnants of the Lamanites, descendants of the house of Israel.
[^9] When the Nauvoo Charter was revoked some months after the death of Joseph Smith, the citizens renamed Nauvoo the City of Joseph.
[^10] "Life of George Whitaker, A Utah Pioneer, as written by himself," 8, typescript, Utah State Historical Society.
[^11] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:468.
[^12] Reminiscences of Louisa Barnes Pratt (1879), LDS Church Archives.
[^13] Bathsheba W. Smith described the city as "one vast mechanic shop, as nearly every family was engaged in making wagons. Our parlor was used as a paint-shop for the wagons. All were making preparations to leave the ensuing winter." In Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877; reprint, Salt Lake City, 1975), 321.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535.
[^15] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535-36. See also "Life of George Whitaker," 9.
[^16] As early as May 1842, Joseph Smith had introduced the temple ordinances to several of his closest associates, and before his death as many as sixty-five men and women had received all of the temple ordinances. Frequently noting that he might not live long enough to teach the endowment ceremony in the temple, he presciently endowed these trusted followers in preparation of performing the saving ordinances to the body of the Church. For details of this selected "endowment group," see Andrew F. Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances and the 1844 Mormon Succession Question" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1982).
[^17] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:541-42. The temple was dedicated privately by Joseph Young on 30 April and publicly from 1-3 May by Orson Hyde. Thousands of Saints attended the services. Wilford Woodruff addressed three thousand Saints at the temple on 10 May.
[^18] Reminiscences of Sarah De Armon Pea Rich (1885-93), LDS Church Archives.
[^19] From a variety of sources, Susan Easton Black sets the Nauvoo population at eleven thousand in 1845, but there may well have been several thousand more throughout Hancock County and environs and in Iowa settlements along the Mississippi River. See Black, "How Large Was the Population of Nauvoo?" Brigham Young University Studies 35, no. 2 (1995): 91-94.
