Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCEmma James [^1]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC625We were called together in a meeting one evening and there was quite a bit of guessing as to the reason for it. It was a large group who gathered circling the leader. The meeting was called to order, one of the brethren offered prayer, then we were told the reason for the council meeting. We were told that it was 300 miles to [Council Bluff] which was the actual place for starting the trek and that was just a mile to what we had to go to reach the valley. We would have carts such as they were, but the season was late and bad weather could prove dangerous to us if we were in the mountains. Even if we had no trouble we would be late getting to Utah. There had been much talk of these dangers by experienced men in the camp, but I think that the thing which I will remember for the rest of my life and wish that we had heeded was said by a Brother Savage. With tears streaming down his cheeks he pleaded with the people, "Brothers and sisters, wait until spring to make this journey. Some of the strong may get through in case of bad weather, but the bones of the weak and old will strew the way." I can remember that when he finished there was a long time of silence. I was frightened. Father looked pale and sick. I turned to mother to see what she was thinking, and all I saw was her old determined look. She was ready to go on tomorrow. There were many others like her. We really didn't have much choice. There was no work here for us to keep ourselves through the winter, and our family had to live. "We must put our trust in the Lord as we have always done" said mother, and that was that.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThere was nearly 100 people of the companies who decided to winter over and come on in the spring. The majority voted to go on as soon as everything was ready. July 15 our company, under the direction of Captain Willie, with 500 people, 120 carts and four or five wagons left Camp Iowa and headed for our outfitting station at Council Bluff. It was great fun pulling empty carts and imitating the wagon drivers with a "gee" and "haw." We got away ahead of the slow wagons and had to wait for them. We had plenty of time to see the country we were passing through—to run here and there and to explore this and that. There were many things to catch the eye in this strange land. [ . . . ]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC626When we started out on the trail each morning [after leaving Florence, Nebraska] there was always something new to see. Maybe it was a bird running along the road which we chased but never did catch. There were always flowers and pretty rocks to pick. This land was so different from the one in England that it kept us interested. We were constantly being warned not to go too far away from the trail, but I can't remember that we heeded the warning until we had one or two experiences which made us more careful.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCOne day as we were skipping along beside the carts and singing, for we were always happy as I remember it, a group of Indians on horse back rode up and followed along with us for a while. We didn't know the redman well enough to be too friendly, so we quieted down and stayed close to our parents. One of the Indians seemed fascinated by the contraptions being pulling along by people. Finally his curiosity got the best of him. He leaped off his horse, ran over to one of the carts which was being pulled by a woman and her daughter and gave it such a hard push that it nearly ran over them. The woman and girl screamed and got out of the shafts as fast as they could. The Indians pushed the cart for a little ways, and then, apparently satisfied, he jumped on his horse and rode off. He, with some of his friends, came back later to beg for food. We gave it to them because we were told that the Indians were our brethren and that we should treat them so. We never did have any trouble with them except that they never seemed to learn that it was stealing to take something which didn't belong to them. [ . . . ]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC628One evening as we prepared to stop for the night, a large herd of buffalo came thundering toward us. It sounded like thunder at first, then the big black animals came straight for our carts. We were so scared that we were rooted to the ground. One of the captains, seeing what was going on, ran for the carts which were still coming in, jerked out some of the carts to make a path for the steady stream of animals and let them go through. They went passed us like a train roaring along. I'm sure that but for the quick thinking of these men, many of us would have been trampled to death. The animals acted as if they were crazy the way they ran. We hoped that we wouldn't meet such a large herd soon again. After they had gone somebody called out that the cattle had gone with them. This was our only supply of meat, so the men started right out after them. The men on foot soon lost the sight of the herd. Those of us who were left made preparation for the night hoping the men would be back with our cattle by dark. As the sun went down, a terrible storm came up. A strong wind tore the tents out of our hands and sent everything flying in all directions. The thunder and lightening was like nothing we had ever seen before. We had all we could do to keep track of each other. The noise terrified the children so that they ran for any shelter that they could find. Soon we all did for the rain came down in torrents, and in a matter of minutes we were soaked to the skin. The men came in from the hunt empty handed but in time to help gather up our belongings and get ready for our meal. We all went to bed wet and cold.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC628The loss of cattle so early on the trek proved to be disastrous. Using their milk cows to pull the wagons, the handcarters soon found their milk supply diminished as well as their beef, which curtailed the rations earlier and more drastically than they had anticipated. The lack of food denied them the strength to combat the other difficulties they encountered, expecially as the weaterh changed from fall to winter. Sarah James remembered them well.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
