Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC628Sarah James [^1]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC628We were cold all the time. It was either rain or snow or wind. Even when you wrapped up in a blanket your teeth chattered. Father told us one night that the flour was gone and that the word was that we might not get help for some time. Father was white and drawn. I knew that mother was worried about him, for he was getting weaker all the time and seemed to feel that there was no use in all the struggle. Mother had taken as much of the load off his shoulders as she could in pulling the cart. We girls and Reuben [her brother, 13 yrs old] did most of the work so that father could rest a lot. Mother didn't have much to say, and I wondered if she remembered that council meeting in Camp Iowa and wished that we had taken the advice of more experienced people. I'm sure that many of us had those thoughts.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCWe were grateful one morning when we heard that the captain had ordered all the animals in the company killed so that we could have fresh meat. We were so hungry that we didn't stop to think what it would do for our wagons. How good the soup tasted made from the bones of those cows although there wasn't any fat on them. The hides we used to roast after taking all the hair off of them. I even decided to cook the tatters of my shoes and make soup of them. It brought a smile to my father's sad face when I made the suggestion, but mother was a bit impatient with me and told me that I'd have to eat the muddy things myself.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC629It snowed day after day, and we managed to get a few miles each day. We were sort of dizzy and sleepy a lot of the time, so I can't remember too well just what did happen all of the time. Sometimes when we felt that we just had to rest for a time, a captain would come up and help us pull our cart along for a time. I'm sure that we would have laid down and died if it hadn't been for their help and encouragement. Sometimes they had to get cross with some people. I can remember the time when one of the men who was pulling a cart just ahead of us laid down in his shafts and started to cry. We all wanted to cry with him. One of the captains, I don't remember just who, came up to him and just slapped him in the face. It made the man so mad that he jumped right up and started to run with his cart. I remember that it was a mean way to treat the poor fellow but now that it saved his life.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe day we reached the last crossing of the Sweetwater river I will never forget as long as I live. It was a bitter cold morning in October as we broke camp. As usual there were dead to be buried before we could go on. Father and Reuben were with the burial detail. Mother, who was helping to pull the heaviest cart, had stayed behind until they could finish their sad work. After a short service, we, with light cart, went ahead to catch the rest of the company, and mother and Rueben started to follow. Father collapsed and fell in the snow. He tried two or three times to get up with mother's help, then finally he asked her to go on and when he felt rested he would come on with Rueben. Mother knew in her heart that he had given out, but perhaps she said in a few minutes with some rest he could come on. She took the cart and hurried to follow us.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC630She found us on the river bank. We were too frightened and tired to cross alone. We had forded this river before many times, but it had never seemed so far across. It was about 40 feet I guess to the other bank. Mother soon had us on our way. The water was icy, and soon our clothing was frozen to our bodies. Our feet were frozen numb. Cold and miserable we reached the other bank, put on dry clothing and joined the rest of the company. When we stopped for the night, we made inquiries about our people, but nothing had been heard of them. Since there were some who had been a few hours behind us, we felt that they would come with the next group. All night we waited for word. Toward morning some of the captains who had gone out to gather up the stragglers came into camp bearing the dead body of my father and the badly frozen body of my brother Rueben. His injuries were so bad that he would suffer from them for the rest of his life. When morning came, father's body, along with others who had died during the night, were buried in a deep hole. Brush was thrown in and then dirt. A fire was built over the grave to kill the scent to keep the wolves from digging up the remains.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC630I can see my mother's face as she sat looking at the partly conscious Rueben. Her eyes looked so dead that I was afraid. She didn't sit long, however, for my mother was never one to cry. When it was time to move out, mother had her family ready to go. She put her invalid son in the cart with her baby, and we joined the train. Our mother was a strong woman, and she would see us through anything.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC630The time came when we were all too tired to move, so we huddled in our covers, close to each other for warmth. It was snowing, and we were so tired. Suddenly we heard a shout, and through the swirling snow we saw men, wagons and mules coming toward us. Slowly we realized that help had come. The wagons brought food and clothing. They hauled in wood for us, and as we gathered around the huge fire and ate the delicious morsels of food, we came alive enough to thank the Lord for his mercy to us. [ . . . ]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCNow that we had food and warmth for our bodies, we realized that we would have to move on for the weather was getting worse as the days went on. It was decided that we would leave everything except some extra clothing, utensils to cook in and many of our carts which would be guarded until they could be brought on in the spring. Those who couldn't walk would ride in the wagons, and we would travel as fast as we could to the valley.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC631I remember the rest of the journey as being terrible with the cold and snow, but we did have food and some hope of getting to Zion.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCWe arrived in Salt Lake City 9th of November having been on the plains for nearly five months. The Saints took us in and were very kind to us. Bishop [Aaron] Johnson of Springville sent word that he could take one family into his home for the winter, so we were sent South. We older children found work in the homes of the good people in the town, and mother moved into an unfurnished shack where she kept her younger children alive until spring with what work she could find. We stayed in Springville for a year and then moved back to Salt Lake City. Mother's children were marrying and making homes for themselves, so when Mary Ann [her sister] moved to Provo she came with her. Here she spent her last years, and at the time of her death at the age of 96, August 14, 1911, she left a great posterity to revere her memory and give thanks that she had had the determination to come to Zion.

632A member of the Willie company, Susanna Stone Lloyd, at age twenty-six, traveled alone to Utah, the only one of her family to join the Church. Writing her memoirs late in life softened her memory of some of the cruelties of that journey, but her reliance on "the hand of Providence" is evident throughout her brief story. In a small display of personal pride, Susanna wanted to make herself presentable before meeting friends whose companies had preceded hers to the Valley. She had sold her looking glass to an Indian for some buffalo meat long before, so seeing herself in a borrowed mirror proved startling. As she feared, some of those friends did not recognize her, despite her efforts, because she was "so weatherbeaten and tanned."

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
