Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

632Susanna Stone Lloyd [^1]

632My parents, relatives, and friends did all in their power to keep me from coming to America, but I had the spirit of gathering and the Lord opened the way and I came to Utah in 1856 with a handcart company. Brother Willey was our captain, Millen Atwood was his counselor. We traveled through sunflowers and sagebrush for many miles.

The first part of our journey was pleasant, the weather being good. We left Liverpool in May on the sailing vessel Thornton, landing in New York the latter part of June. While crossing the Atlantic, the people's galley took fire and burned, which caused great excitement, but through the blessings of the Lord we were saved. After we landed, we came up the Hudson River in steamboats and continued by railroad cars until we came to the Iowa campgrounds. We stayed there several weeks while our handcarts and tents were being finished. Oxen drew the wagons which brought our provisions and tents. Our clothing to last the journey, which was over one thousand miles, was brought on our handcarts. The rest was brought the next season by the Walker Brothers. [^2]

633After we had proceeded quite a distance on our journey, we lost a number of cattle that drew the provision wagons. Some supposed that the animals were stampeded by Indians or buffalo. We met several tribes of Indians going east to war. It was in the year 1856 when Colonel Almon W. Babbitt had been doing business with the United States Government. Babbitt and his teamsters were massacred. They were a day or two ahead of us with a train of goods which was seized by the Indians. We met a tribe of Indians with an interpreter, who told us all about the circumstances, but we were not discouraged. We traveled on, feeling that the Lord would protect his Saints, and so he did; although we passed through many trying scenes, his protecting care was over us.

633After leaving Iowa [City], we traveled about one hundred [300] miles and came to Florence. By this time we had grown accustomed to traveling and made better headway, but through losing our cattle and having to camp on the Plains for several weeks, it threw us late in the season and made our provisions short for the latter part of our journey. We left England May 2, and arrived in Salt Lake Valley November 5, 1856. I am thankful that I was counted worthy to be a pioneer and a handcart girl. It prepared me to endure hard times in my future life. I often think of the songs we sang to encourage us on our toilsome journey. It was hard to endure, but the Lord gave us strength and courage.

After we had traveled about seven hundred miles our provisions being short, our captain bought up all the biscuits and flour that he could get in Laramie. We had to live on short rations and it became very cold. A number of our older people died. Sixteen were buried at one time. Traveling as we were with scant clothing and lack of sufficient food, we suffered greatly from the severe cold and snow. On account of the loss of cattle, it became necessary for each hand cart to take additional load, but each taking a share of the provisions that were left.

635We waded through the cold streams many times but we murmured not for our faith in God and our testimony of His work were supreme. And in the blizzards and falling snow we sat under our hand carts and sang, 'Come, come, ye saints, no toil nor labor fear, but with joy wend your way. Though hard to you this journey may appear, grace shall be as your day,' etc. Only once did my courage fail. One cold dreary afternoon, my feet having been frosted, I felt I could go no further, and withdrew from the little company and sat down to wait the end, being somewhat in a stupor. After a time I was aroused by a voice, which seemed as audible as anything could be, and which spoke to my very soul of the promises and blessings I had received, and which should surely be fulfilled and that I had a mission to perform in Zion. I received strength and was filled with the Spirit of the Lord and arose and traveled on with a light heart. As I reached camp I found a searching party ready to go back to find me, dead or alive. I had no relatives but many dear and devoted friends and we did all we could to aid and encourage each other. My frosted feet gave me considerable trouble for many years but this was forgotten in the contemplation of the many blessings the Gospel has brought to me and mine. A young man whom I had kept company with in England but would not promise to marry, as I wanted to be free, died enroute and was buried on the plains with many others. When we were within about a hundred miles from Salt Lake our captain had a dream that a company was coming from Salt Lake to meet us. Brigham Young got a lot of our brethren to come and meet us with provisions, buffalo robes and blankets. You may guess the joy that was in camp the day they arrived. We were near Fort Bridger when they met us, and we rode in the wagons the rest of the way, but we had walked over one thousand miles. When we got near the City, we tried to make ourselves as presentable as we could to meet our friends. I had sold my little looking glass to the Indians for buffalo meat, so I borrowed one and I shall never forget how I looked. Some of my old friends did not know me. We were so weather beaten and tanned. When we got near Salt Lake Valley, President Young with a company of our brethren and sisters came out to meet us, and bade us welcome and when we got into the city we were made very comfortable until we met our friends and relatives. There were many things that would be interesting if I could remember them in their proper order. While we were traveling thru the United States the people tried to discourage us by telling us there was famine in Utah, that the grasshoppers had eaten up everything and that there had been a grass-hopper war, etc., but we traveled on, trusting in God.

635George Cunningham was a fifteen-year-old English youth when he traveled across the plains with the Willie company. Emigrating with his parents and three sisters, he, like Susannah Lloyd, left a brief, episodic reminiscence that lacks some of the emotion of firsthand diaries but highlights vividly-remembered incidents. In one dramatic phrase he captured the "dull and benumbed" senses of the desperate travelers. "No one feared death now," he wrote, "nearly everybody seemed indifferent or stupefied."

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
