Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

George Cunningham [^1]

636My parents [George Cunningham and Elizabeth Nelson Cunningham] were the first to embrace the Gospel around our district [^2] but later nearly half of the citizens joined, probably twenty or thirty families. I was raised in the strictest sense of the word 'Mormon.' In the spring of 1856 the chance opened up for us to emigrate to this country, for which we were truly thankful. We sold our small effects and bade our friends farewell, took a train for Glasgow and from there by steamboat to Liverpool. On the 4th of May we embarked on the ship Thornton bound for New York.

636How well I remember the first step that I took on American soil! How thrilled I was to be in the land of the free—the land of promise! I had been taught to believe it was the land of promise blessed above all other lands, and although only a boy of fifteen years, I felt like thanking God for the blessing I then enjoyed.

After a few days in New York we sailed up the river to Albany then by railroad about three hundred miles, by ship on the Great Lakes and then again by railroad to Iowa arriving the latter part of June. We went to the Mormon campground just outside the city [Iowa City] and stayed there for five or six weeks. At length we were appointed to continue our journey with Captain James Willie's handcart company. This meant a three-hundred mile trip through the state of Iowa before reaching a permanent starting place at Winter Quarters or Florence, where we arrived after several weeks of pulling, hauling and praying. People sneered at us and laughed crying out "Gee-haw" but this did not discourage us in the least. We knew that we were on the right track and that was enough.

637I can remember being at a meeting when Brother Levi Savage, a returned missionary, spoke. He counseled the old and sickly to remain until another spring. The tears rolled down his cheeks as he prophesied that if such took the journey at that late season of the year, their bones would strew the way. At length we started, but the number was greatly reduced, about one hundred remaining. I must state here that there was not one of our hundred remained for which we received great praise. The wagons were heavily loaded and we were delayed much by having to wait on them. When we arrived at Wood River we came across a large camp of Omaha Indians who invited us to camp with them for the night. We did so and they were very friendly. We resumed our journey the next morning.

637One night after a long and tiresome day's journey we turned out the oxen and the cows to feed and a large herd of buffalo came running towards them. The oxen ran off with the buffalo and although we hunted the country over for miles we never found them—not one of our cows left with the herd. As soon as we had formed camp one of the terrible prairie storms blew up. It was dark as pitch and all hands had to hold on to the tents to keep them from going up like balloons. The heavy rain soon flooded the prairie, accompanied by the deafening roar of thunder and vivid flashes of lightning which seemed to electrify everything. When morning came all the able bodied men and boys turned out again to look for the cattle. We scoured the country but not even their footprints could be seen because of the heavy rain. The search was kept up for a week and often when we thought we could see old Brin and Nig or Buck and Bright they would invariably take to their heels and prove to be nothing but an old buffalo. I have heard the song, "Through the Wildwood I'll Wander and Chase the Buffalo," but I never expected to experience it in this shape.

At length the command came to 'Move On.' Provisions were getting very short and with a six or seven hundred mile journey before us, we knew that we must do so or perish in the mountain snows. We transferred our provisions from the wagons to the handcarts and hitched the thirty milch cows to the wagons to haul the sick and the children who were not able to walk. We plodded on through the mud with all the courage we could muster. We traveled along slowly and after a few weeks arrived at Fort Laramie. As our provisions were very nearly exhausted our captain went into Fort Laramie and bought a ton or two of flour for which he had to pay $20.00 per hundred pounds.

After leaving here we met a company of missionaries going to the states. Elder Parley Pratt came and talked to us trying to encourage us. The nights now began to get very cold and feed was poor, also our provisions were running out fast. Starvation looked us in the face. We were put on rations of six ounces of flour each per day and nothing else. The old and the weak began to die for want of proper food, and a great many of the young and strong ones soon followed suit. I, myself, have helped to bury ten to fifteen in a single day. We who could stand it were barely kept alive and after several weeks of this ration it was reduced to half this amount. I, however, stirred my three ounces with some water and gulped it down. To make things worse we were caught in a heavy snowstorm on the Sweetwater. It was extremely cold and the last of our flour was gone. Nothing was left but a scant supply of crackers reserved for the sick and small children. The captain ordered that every critter in the train be killed as needed but they were nearly as poor as we were. However, we used to boil the bones and drink the soup. Every particle that could be used was taken, even the hide was rationed and after scorching the hair off, we would roast it a little over the coals and cut it in small pieces and it made what we considered a delicious supper. Towards the last the weather was so cold that all but five or six men in camp had been severely frozen, and let me add right here is where the great test came—some would sacrifice by giving their food and clothing to their friends, relatives and children while others seemed to be devoid of natural affection and would let their family members die off merely for the sake of getting their few mouthfuls of food or perhaps an old blanket that covered them.

In these trying times with eighteen inches of snow and very cold weather, I remember how we built large fires with willows which were abundant at this place. Everybody stood around the fire with gloomy faces, as if in a death trap, when all at once flashed into my mind my dream of the previous night as follows: 'That a number of wagons loaded with provisions were soon to meet us.' How joyfully I related my last night's dream in detail. My mother told them that she knew it would come true, as I was promised that gift in my blessing. And to our great pleasure every word was literally fulfilled. I can recollect that I was in the lead of the crowd, feeling quite inspired by my dream. At their approach I roared out, 'See! See them coming over that hill!' We soon met the wagons with provisions and were very kindly treated and all felt to thank God.

Now the great difficulty was by eating too much. The feelings and senses of our people were dull and benumbed. No one feared death now. Nearly everybody seemed indifferent or stupefied.

640Our Captain showed us a noble example. He was furnished a mule to ride on but he said, 'I will never get on its back. I will set the example—you follow it.' And thus our captains set the example. They would crowd ahead and be the first in the streams to help others across and they were the last out. They waded every stream, I might say, a dozen times between Iowa City and Green River with the exception of the Missouri River. Their feet were worn and bleeding, they became exhausted and had to be hauled the balance of the way, some of them not being able to stand. Among these heroic leaders were: James Willie, our captain; Milan [Millen] Atwood, Levi Savage, William Woodard [Woodward] and another Danish brother whose name I have forgotten.

640At our arrival at Salt Lake City our company was kindly cared for and when we had rested up a bit we were sent to various settlements. We were sent to American Fork where my home has been ever since. Here we met with many old acquaintances and soon made friends with others who helped us. 'Ere long I found employment and thus we were removed from our very straightened circumstances.

640Samuel Openshaw of Lancashire, the eldest of William and Ann Openshaw's children, traveled to Utah with his parents and five siblings in Edward Martin's company. Samuel, age twenty-two, kept a daily diary of his journey, especially through Iowa, noting the settlements they passed, rivers crossed, and mileage covered each day. The latter part of his account was evidently written some time afterwards. At the end of the journey, he had to give more attention to surviving the trip than to writing about it.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
