Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Elizabeth Horrocks Jackson Kingsford [^1]

On the 27th of Aug. we made a final start from Cutlers' Fork, [^2] on our long tedious journey across the vast plains of a thousand miles to our future home. We continued our toil day after day, pulling our hand-carts with our provisions or rations, our little children, etc., through deep sands, rocky roads, or fording streams. It was a dreary journey. Many miles each day were traveled ere, with tired limbs we reached camp, cooked supper, ate and retired for the night to rest, to pursue our monotonous course the following day.

656On the 7th of Sept., near Loup Fork, we were overtaken and passed by Apostle F. D. Richards, C. H. Wheelock and other returning missionaries from Europe. About the middle of this month we learned that A. W. Babbitt had been killed by some hostile Indians.

After toilsome and fatiguing travel, we reached Laramie on the 8th day of October. Here we rested for a short time. Our provisions by this time had become very scant, and many of the company went to the Fort and sold their watches and other articles of jewelry. With the proceeds they purchased corn meal, flour, beans, bacon, etc., with which to replenish their stores of food which had become very scant. Hitherto, although a ration of a pound of flour had been served out daily to each person, it was found insufficient to satisfy the cravings of hunger; but the weary pilgrims were then about to experience more deprivations in this direction. We rested a couple of days and then resumed our toilsome march. Shortly after leaving Fort Laramie it became necessary to shorten our rations that they might hold out, and that the company be not reduced to starvation. The reduction was repeated several times. First, the pound of flour was reduced to three-fourths of a pound, then to a half of a pound, and afterward to still less per day. However, we pushed ahead. The trip was full of adventures, hair breadth escapes, exposure to attacks from Indians, wolves and other wild beasts. When we reached the Black Hills, we had a rough experience. The roads were rocky, broken and difficult to travel. Frequently carts were broken down and much delay was caused by the needed repairs.

During the time of leaving Laramie and reaching the Platte, my husband [Aaron Jackson] had been taken sick. He was afflicted with mountain fever. His appetite was good and he could eat more than his rations. But his ambition was gone. All attempts to arouse him to energy or much active exertion were futile. On the 19th of Oct. the last crossing of the Platte River was reached; but when we went into camp that noon day my husband was not there. Two of the company went back to look for him. They found him sitting by the roadside, resting. He was very weak. They assisted him into camp. When we resumed our journey he was put into a wagon, and rode a few miles to the bank of the river, when it was discovered that the teams had become so weak they were unable to haul the freight across the stream, so my husband was compelled to alight.

"The river" says Elder John Jaques, "was wide, the current was strong, the water was exceedingly cold and up to the wagon bed in the deepest parts, and the bed of the river was covered with cobble stones." [^3] Some of the men carried some of the women on their backs or in their arms, but others of the women tied up their skirts and waded through, like the heroines that they were, and as they had gone thru many other rivers and creeks. My husband attempted to ford the stream. He had only gone a short distance when he reached a sand bar in the river on which he sank down through weakness and exhaustion. My sister, Mary Horrocks Leavitt, waded through the water to his assistance. She raised him up to his feet. Shortly afterward, a man came along on horseback and conveyed him to the other side of the river, placed him on the bank and left him there. My sister then helped me to pull my cart with my three children and other matters on it. We had scarcely crossed the river when we were visited with a tremendous storm of snow, hail, sand and fierce winds. It was a terrible storm from which both the people and teams suffered. After crossing the river, my husband was put on a hand cart and hauled into camp; and indeed after that time he was unable to walk, and consequently provision had to be made for him to ride in a wagon. As soon as we reached camp, I prepared him some refreshment and placed him to rest for the night. From this time my worst experience commenced. The company had now become greatly reduced in strength, the teams as well as the people. The teams had become so weak that the luggage was reduced to ten pounds per head for adults, and five pounds for children under eight years. And although the weather was severe, a great deal of bedding and clothing had to be destroyed—burned—as it could not be carried along. This occurrence very much increased the suffering of the company, men, women and children alike.

659On the 20th of Oct. we traveled, or almost wallowed, for about ten miles through the snow. At night, weary and worn out, we camped near the Platte River, where we soon left it for the Sweetwater. We were visited with three days more snow. The animals and immigrants were almost completely exhausted. We remained in camp several days to gain strength. About the 25th of Oct., I think it was—I cannot remember the exact date—we reached camp about sundown. My husband had for several days previous been much worse. He was still sinking, and his condition now became more serious. As soon as possible after reaching camp I prepared a little of such scant articles of food as we then had. He tried to eat but failed. He had not the strength to swallow. I put him to bed as quickly as I could. He seemed to rest easy and fell asleep. About nine o'clock I retired. Bedding had become very scarce, so I did not disrobe. I slept until, as it appeared to me, about midnight. I was extremely cold. The weather was bitter. I listened to hear if my husband breathed—he lay so still. I could not hear him. I became alarmed. I put my hand on his body, when to my horror I discovered that my worst fears were confirmed. My husband was dead. He was cold and stiff—rigid in the arms of death. It was a bitter freezing night and the elements had sealed up his mortal frame. I called for help to the other inmates of the tent. They could render me no aid; and there was no alternative but to remain alone by the side of the corpse till morning. The night was enveloped in almost Egyptian darkness. There was nothing with which to produce a light or kindle a fire. Of course I could not sleep. I could only watch, wait, and pray for the dawn. But oh, how these dreary hours drew their tedious length along. When daylight came, some of the male part of the company prepared the body for burial. And oh, such a burial and funeral service. They did not remove his clothing—he had but little. They wrapped him in a blanket and placed him in a pile with thirteen others who had died, and then covered him up in the snow. The ground was frozen so hard that they could not dig a grave. He was left there to sleep in peace until the trump of the Lord shall sound, and the dead in Christ shall awake and come forth in the morning of the first resurrection. We shall then again unite our hearts and lives, and eternity will furnish us with life forever more.

I will not attempt to describe my feelings at finding myself thus left a widow with three children, [^4] under such excruciating circumstances. I cannot do it. But I believe the Recording Angel has inscribed in the archives above, and that my sufferings for the Gospel's sake will be sanctified unto me for my good. My sister Mary was the only relative I had to whom I could look for assistance in this trying ordeal, and she was sick. So severe was her affliction that she became deranged in her mind, and for several days she ate nothing but hard frozen snow. I could therefore appeal to the Lord alone; He who had promised to be a husband to the widow, and a father to the fatherless. I appealed to him and he came to my aid.

660A few days after the death of my husband, the male members of the company had become reduced in number by death; and those who remained were so weak and emaciated by sickness, that on reaching the camping place at night, there were not sufficient men with strength enough to raise the poles and pitch the tents. The result was that we camped out with nothing but the vault of Heaven for a roof, and the stars for companions. The snow lay several inches deep upon the ground. The night was bitterly cold. I sat down on a rock with one child in my lap and one on each side of me. In that condition I remained until morning. My sick sister, the first part of the night, climbed up hill to the place where some men had built a fire. She remained there until the people made down their beds and retired, to sleep, if they could. She then climbed or slid down the hill on the snow, to where there was another fire which was kept alive by some persons who were watching the body of a man who had died that night. There she remained until daylight.

660It will be readily perceived that under such adverse circumstances I had become despondent. I was six or seven thousand miles from my native land, in a wild, rocky, mountain country, in a destitute condition, the ground covered with snow, the waters covered with ice, and I with three fatherless children with scarcely nothing to protect them from the merciless storms. When I retired to bed that night, being the 27th of Oct., I had a stunning revelation. In my dream, my husband stood by me and said—"Cheer up, Elizabeth, deliverance is at hand." The dream was fulfilled.

"The 28th of October," says John Jaques in his history of this journey, "was red letter day to this hand cart expedition. On that memorable day, Joseph A. Young, Daniel Jones, and Abel Garr galloped unexpectedly into camp amid tears and cheers and smiles and laughter of the emigrants. Those three men being the express from the most advanced relief company from Salt Lake, brought the glad word that assistance, provisions and clothing were near, that ten wagons were waiting at the Devil's Gate." [^5] Thus you see, my dream and my husband's prediction were fulfilled.

The next day we left the Platte and started for the Sweetwater country. On the 31st of Oct. another grand surprise met us. On reaching Greecewood [Greasewood] Creek, we met Geo. D. Grant, R. T. Burton, Charles Decker, Chauncey G. Webb, and some others, with six wagons of flour, etc., sent from Salt Lake. On the 1st of Nov. we arrived at the Sweetwater bridge, some five miles from Devil's Gate. We arrived there about dusk in the evening. We camped in about a foot and a half of snow. It was a busy evening before bed time in clearing away the snow. For this purpose many used cooking utensils, plates and other things. The ground was hard and almost impenetrable; and it was with the greatest difficulty that the tents could be erected. It became a question that night, whether we should camp there for the winter or go forward to Salt Lake Valley. It was decided to go on. At Devil's Gate the freight was left, as the teams were too weak to haul it. It was left in charge of Daniel W. Jones, Thomas M. Alexander and Ben Hampton, with seventeen emigrants to guard it through the winter.

It was several days after that—I do not remember the exact date—that we made the last crossing of the Sweetwater. In speaking of that memorable event, Elder John Jaques says:—"It was a severe operation to many of the company. It was the last ford the company waded over. The water was not less than two feet deep, perhaps a little more in the deepest parts, but it was intensely cold. The ice was three or four inches thick and the bottom of the river muddy and sandy. The stream seemed to be about forty yards wide. Before the crossing was completed, the shades of evening were closing around, and this, as everyone knows, is the coldest hour of the twenty-four, especially at a frosty time. When the hard carts arrived at the bank of the river one poor fellow who was greatly worn down with travel exclaimed: "Have we got to cross here?' Being answered 'yes' he again exclaimed: Oh dear, I can't go through that!' His heart sank within him and he burst into tears. But his heroic wife came to his aid, and in a sympathetic tone said: 'Don't cry, Jimmie, I'll pull the hand cart for you.' In crossing the river the shins and limbs of the waders came in contact with sharp cakes of ice which inflicted wounds on them which did not heal until long after they arrived in this valley. And some of them are alive, some of them bear the marks of them to this day." [^6]

After this crossing we camped for several days in a deep gulch called "Martin's Ravine." It was a fearful time and place. It was so cold that some of the company came near freezing to death. The sufferings of the people were fearful, and nothing but the power of a merciful God kept them from perishing. The storms continued unabated for some days. Said E[phraim]. K. Hank[s] in speaking of it:—"The storms during the three days were simply awful. In all my travels in the Rocky Mountains, just before and afterwards, I have seen nothing like it—nothing worse." When the snow at length ceased falling, it lay thick on the ground, and so deep that for many days it was impossible to move the wagons through. I and my children with hundreds of others were locked up in those fearful weather-bound mountains. [ . . . ]

663I will not continue this narrative much longer, but will hasten to convey us to our destination. We came by easy stages the remainder of the journey, and finally reached Salt Lake City at mid-day on Sunday, Nov. the 30th. Thus ended the ever memorable overland voyage from the Missouri River to the Capital of Utah, in the eventful year of 1856. The company furnished me transportation to the residence of my brother, Samuel Horrocks, in Ogden City. Here my children and I rested and recruited, and here we have remained ever since. And the Lord has blessed me, and rewarded me with abundance of this world's goods, for all my sufferings, and has also blessed me with the highest blessings of a spiritual nature that can be conferred upon man or woman, in His Holy Temple, in Mortality. I have a happy home for which I thank my Father in Heaven.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe faith that had sustained these emigrants during the fearsome days before rescue was not unavailing. While they suffered the consequences of unnecessary risk and overzealousness, the Lord did not leave his people to perish. By the time Franklin D. Richards arrived in the Salt Lake Valley the first of October, well ahead of the debilitating storm, he knew the handcarters needed help. [^7] Stunned when told that a thousand people were still far out on the trail, Brigham Young deliberated with the returning missionaries and other Church leaders to determine the needs of the companies and resolved to make their relief the primary topic of the general conference, convening the next day. [^8] If he felt any recrimination toward those allowing the groups to leave so late, he reserved it for a later time and met the crisis head on, initiating a relief effort considered to be one of the great rescue missions in western American history. [^9]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCWhen the conference convened, Brigham Young told the audience of the plight of the handcart pioneers and announced to the thousands assembled that the text of his speech was "to get them here." "Go and bring in those people now on the plains," he commanded, asking for wagons, teams, food, clothing, bedding, and men. The response was swift. Volunteers announced their readiness, and supplies came from all over the territory. Some didn't even wait to leave the Tabernacle. Upon hearing President Young's appeal, women in the audience tore off their petticoats and other unnecessary clothing and collected more articles at home to send to their sister Saints stranded on the trail. [^10]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe advance team of twenty-seven men, with sixteen wagons loaded with supplies, elected George D. Grant as captain and William H. Kimball and Robert T. Burton as assistants. Five of this team were missionaries, home only two days but eager to rescue the people they had helped bring to America. Many of them were experienced scouts or trail riders. Most were members of local militias or of a younger group of "Minute Men." Caching supplies at Fort Bridger, they were alarmed when they found no sign of either of the companies a week after leaving the Valley. By the time they reached South Pass, they too had to wait out the storm that had stranded the travelers miles to the east. There they learned the plight of the Willie company when the haggard and frozen Captain Willie and his companion, Joseph Elder, staggered into their camp. They told the rescuers of the critical condition of the handcarters, holed up near the Sweetwater. Even as Captain Willie reached the main rescue party, an advance or "express" team located the stranded members of his company. The team had little to give the waiting company besides a few pounds of flour and hope for more to come. Then the team moved on to search for the Martin group. But their appearance had stirred the benumbed and discouraged Willie company to move forward the next day. When the main rescue party finally met up with the Willie company, the rescuers knew immediately more help than they could give was needed, and they sent a rider to the Valley for more provisions. Though struggling to meet their own winter needs, the Valley Saints managed to round up two hundred wagons and teams, enough to bring all the surviving handcarters into the Valley.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC666Some of the sixteen wagons of the original relief party accompanied the Willie company to the Valley, joined at points along the way by the additional wagons. At Fort Bridger, all the handcarts still in use were left, the Saints now sufficiently supplied with fifty wagons to take them to the Valley. They "rolled into the city" on November 9, a sunny winter day.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC666Other wagon teams pushed on to find the Martin company. Well behind the Willie company, members were dying daily, and others were close to death from starvation and exposure. When the express team finally found them, they, like the Willie company, were roused to move on toward Devil's Gate, where they would find food and provisions and shelter in an old stockade. But they had to wait for more wagons to help them reach the Valley, and for five days the marooned emigrants waited, huddled in the stockade and sheltered caves nearby. At one point, a lone rescuer, Ephraim Hanks, appeared, bringing a little buffalo meat, a healing hand, and hope, once again. [^11]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC666Eventually, emigrants and rescuers came together, and on November 30 a hundred wagons plodded their way through heavy canyon snow and into the Valley, bringing home the survivors of the Martin company, nearly two months after the rescue effort began.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC666The Hodgett and Hunt wagon trains trailed behind the Martin company. They too had long since exhausted their food, and though they were not as helpless as the handcarters against the biting cold, they were just as handicapped by the heavy snow and just as dependent on the rescuers to find their way out of the mountains. They finally arrived 10 and 11 December. For the stranded Saints, their first sight of the rescuers in the Wyoming mountains was faith redeemed. They knew then that they just might make it. Their trials were far from over, however, and after reaching the Valley, many would forever bear the scars of lost or frostbitten limbs and disturbing memories of their struggle to reach Zion.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCA counterpoint to all the deaths that struck these ill-favored bands of pioneers was one birth as the Martin company reached Echo Canyon, near the end of their incredible journey. Twenty-eight-year-old Sarah Squires gave birth to her fifth child on 27 November, three days before the company finally made their way into the Valley. She named her new daughter Echo in remembrance of her place of birth.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC667The men's strength had shown throughout the ordeal, but the handcart experience was also a proving ground of women's endurance. Jane Griffiths, who lost her father and two brothers, expressed what recent studies have theorized when she observed, "It seems strange that more men and boys died than women and girls." [^12] As in the Donner party, more women than men survived the struggle, three times as many in the Willie company. But all suffered to the extreme. Handcart survivor John Jacques aptly expressed their sentiments in writing of his own misadventures with the Martin company: "[I] traveled one of the hardest journeys across the plains by handcart, nearly worked to death, starved to death, and froze to death." [^13] Survival for anyone was little short of a miracle.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCNo bands played or parades greeted the survivors of this ill-fated journey. It had been a sobering experience, not only for those who had endured it but also for those who could only wait and pray. The valley Saints offered food and shelter to the homeless emigrants, their families often divided among several homes since few houses in those early days of settlement had many spare beds or extra chairs at the table. Moreover, Brigham Young did not want the emigrants housed by themselves, where there would be no provisions or comforts or someone to tend to their needs or recharge their spirits. After surviving the arduous ten-thousand-mile journey across water and land, they may well have shared young Peter McBride's doubtful query when they viewed the fledgling village in the stark grip of winter: "Mother," he said, "is this Zion?" [^14]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe wrenching story of the Willie and Martin handcart companies was little discussed publicly or written about until years afterward because of its bitter effects, not only on Church leaders, who had invested so much in its success, and on emigration agents who were responsible for the emigrants, but also on those still waiting to come to Zion for whom no other form of travel seemed feasible. It is not surprising that some who endured or who were in some other way connected to the misfortunes of these two companies became estranged from the Church. [^15] Most, however, like Elizabeth Kingsford, counted it as a sacrifice they were obliged to make for the gospel's sake. And some, like Francis Webster, may have found a pearl of great price in their suffering. That experience had brought him, he said, "the absolute knowledge that God lives," for he "had become acquainted with him in our extremities." [^16]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCThe disastrous experience of these two companies slowed but did not halt the parade of handcarts across the Mormon trail. Five later companies carried more than a thousand more European emigrants across the plains, the last two leaving Florence in 1860. Only twelve known deaths occurred in all five companies. [^17] Though little help was available in 1857 through the Perpetual Emigrating Fund, two handcart companies and five wagon trains (one primary carrying freight) made their way to Salt Lake City that year, carrying both European and American Saints, nearly thirteen hundred of them.

Israel Evans led the first handcart company out of Iowa City in 1857. No deaths were recorded among the 149 pioneers in his group, but they endured all the privations attendant to that kind of travel. Israel Evans performed his duties splendidly, according to one young traveler, "taking the best care of the immigrants, laboring faithfully from early morning until late at night; always selecting the best camping places and caring constantly for the health and comfort of his company." He even put the young handcart pioneer on his own mule during one difficult mountain crossing to ease the pain of a very sore foot, a gesture she never forgot. [^18]

670Nearly three weeks after the Evans company left Florence, Nebraska, the seventh handcart company followed. Made up of Scandinavian emigrants, the company was led by Christian Christiansen, a native of Denmark, who was just completing a mission in the United States. Comprised of strong, able-bodied "walkers," the company traveled fast enough to reach the Valley only a day after the Evans company. They had benefited by meeting Johnston's Army, commissioned by President Buchanan to accompany the newly appointed governor to Utah. Pitying the hungry travelers, one of the officers offered them a lame ox, which "seemed like a miracle" to the handcarters. They butchered the animal and carefully husbanded the meat to make it last until supplies came from the Valley to see them through the remainder of the trip. [^19] The Deseret News reported in a brief sentence the arrival of the two companies: "All in excellent spirits, time, and condition." [^20]

670Kersten Benson, a young Danish convert, traveled in the Christiansen handcart company. While her account relates the physical strains of the journey, it was relatively free from unanticipated hardships. With 330 people in the company pushing sixty-eight handcarts, only three supply wagons accompanied them, and they made very good time.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
[^7] Each man will help driving the cattle 8. Rate of travel for Oxen 3 miles an hour. (The corral made by wagons will not be broken until all of the cattle have been yoked.)
[^8] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:445. Israel, in this instance, referred to the Indians, or remnants of the Lamanites, descendants of the house of Israel.
[^9] When the Nauvoo Charter was revoked some months after the death of Joseph Smith, the citizens renamed Nauvoo the City of Joseph.
[^10] "Life of George Whitaker, A Utah Pioneer, as written by himself," 8, typescript, Utah State Historical Society.
[^11] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:468.
[^12] Reminiscences of Louisa Barnes Pratt (1879), LDS Church Archives.
[^13] Bathsheba W. Smith described the city as "one vast mechanic shop, as nearly every family was engaged in making wagons. Our parlor was used as a paint-shop for the wagons. All were making preparations to leave the ensuing winter." In Edward W. Tullidge, The Women of Mormondom (New York, 1877; reprint, Salt Lake City, 1975), 321.
[^14] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535.
[^15] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:535-36. See also "Life of George Whitaker," 9.
[^16] As early as May 1842, Joseph Smith had introduced the temple ordinances to several of his closest associates, and before his death as many as sixty-five men and women had received all of the temple ordinances. Frequently noting that he might not live long enough to teach the endowment ceremony in the temple, he presciently endowed these trusted followers in preparation of performing the saving ordinances to the body of the Church. For details of this selected "endowment group," see Andrew F. Ehat, "Joseph Smith's Introduction of Temple Ordinances and the 1844 Mormon Succession Question" (master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1982).
[^17] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:541-42. The temple was dedicated privately by Joseph Young on 30 April and publicly from 1-3 May by Orson Hyde. Thousands of Saints attended the services. Wilford Woodruff addressed three thousand Saints at the temple on 10 May.
[^18] Reminiscences of Sarah De Armon Pea Rich (1885-93), LDS Church Archives.
[^19] From a variety of sources, Susan Easton Black sets the Nauvoo population at eleven thousand in 1845, but there may well have been several thousand more throughout Hancock County and environs and in Iowa settlements along the Mississippi River. See Black, "How Large Was the Population of Nauvoo?" Brigham Young University Studies 35, no. 2 (1995): 91-94.
[^20] Eliza Cheney to Parents, Brothers and Sisters, January 1848, in Historical Letters and Sketches, 1841-1919, Eliza Jane Rawson Collection, LDS Church Archives.
