Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

671Kersten Ericksen Benson [^1]

671I left Copenhagen, April 18, 1857 with my father, mother and grandmother. I was 20 years of age and unmarried. We stopped two days at Liverpool, and on April 25 left [at] three on the sailing ship Westmoreland under Mathias Cowley, President with 544 saints. We arrived at Philadelphia, May 31, having been five weeks on the sea. We were eleven days going from Philadelphia to Iowa City by rail and while on this journey I got separated from the company and was left behind and lost, a young girl in a strange land with no friends, and unable to speak the English language or to make my wants known.

I was telegraphed for, and was found by the description of the clothing I wore, and made to understand, by the hands of a watch, that I could go to my company train at 6:30 that night.

673At Iowa City we were organized as a hand-cart company under Captain C. Christiansen. There were about 100 [sic] hand-carts, with three ox teams to help the sick and weak and carry some supplies and the tents. We were allowed to take only fifteen pounds of clothing to each person, and our new clothing and even bedclothing had to be left lying on the ground as we left our camping place, for no one would buy them from us. This was a great trial to me, having brought good clothing from Denmark to leave on the ground for strangers to take. We then started for Florence, Nebraska. Each hand-cart had six persons, but I was assigned to a cart having only four persons, an old couple, a sickly girl and myself. We were heavily loaded with provisions, and myself and the old gentlemen were the pulling team. We traveled through a settled part of Iowa for three weeks, burying by the wayside, some of the aged, and young who died through the exposure and hardships of the journey. We arrived at Florence in the latter part of June, and laid over one week to rest. This three weeks hardships had proven that my father, mother and grandmother, who was 75 years old, could not stand the journey, and it was decided that they stay in Omaha. I came to the conclusion that I could not leave my aged parents in a strange country, and so made up my mind to stay with them. The captain of the company, C. Christiansen, came to me however, and advised me to leave my parents, and promised me if I would do so that God would bless them and me, and preserve us. This was a very sore trial to me, but I put my trust in God and promises of his Priesthood, and He has brought them to pass. On the 15th day of June 1857, we started our journey on the plains, a day never to be forgotten, full of sorrow in parting from my parents. About the fifth day out, I was worn out pulling over the rough roads, up hills and through the sand and was discouraged because I did not believe I could stand the journey, and I came to the conclusion that I might as well die there as suffer longer, and I was lonely for I had no relations in the company. So I purposely stayed behind while the company was traveling and laid down on the grass, expecting to die there, believing there was no one behind me and I would not be found. Soon after the captain came along and promised me that when we came to a hill or sand he would come and help me pull. And he kept his promise and helped me and soon after this the old couple who were with my hand-cart died, and I was changed to another cart that had six pullers and my task was easier than before. It was now July and August and very hot on the plains. My shoes were worn out and we had to get raw hide from the dead cattle along the road and make shoes for ourselves so as to be able to pull. Crossing the creeks and rivers would make the raw hide soft and the hot sun and roads would make them hard, and our feet were nearly all the time sore and bleeding. I being alone and having no bed clothes I had to sleep in an old shawl in the tent. Coming through the mountains the nights were cold and freezing, and having to get up in my turn in the night to bake my bread, I was often too warm on one side and much too cold on the other. When about 200 miles from Salt Lake City, we were overtaken by the U. S. Army under General Johnston, going to Utah to war with our people, but they treated us kindly, and the army was a blessing to our people in Utah. About two weeks journey from Salt Lake City, the relief teams came to our help and oh, how thankful I was to be able to walk and not have to pull the cart, for I was sick and worn out with the journey. We arrived in Salt Lake City, September 13, having been five months on the journey and when I saw how poor the people were in clothing, for they were ragged, I could not help thinking of the good clothing we had left behind. When I arrived at Lehi, I was so weak and sick that I was not expected to live. And B. Hyde (Bishop Hyde of Hyde Park) and Bro Rigby were called in to administer to me but I could not understand a word they said. Bro Benson being there interpreted it for me. I found kind friends who cared for and nursed me until well. The next year my Father and Mother and Grand Mother came into the Valley safe and well. And so were fulfilled the promise of our Captain C. Christensen made to me when I left my parents in Omaha. And so also have been the promises of Bro Hyde when administering to me in Lehi. And I realize that I have been blessed of the Lord and preserved for my obediance [sic] to the counsel of His Priesthood.

Because of the threat of a war in Utah in 1858, occasioned by the appearance of Johnston's Army the year before, only returning missionaries called home by Brigham Young and a few emigrants, no more than two hundred all together, crossed the ocean or the plains that year. While only 809 converts emigrated from Europe the next year, nearly 2,000 Saints crossed the plains, 235 of them in Captain Rowley's handcart company. The 1859 travelers escaped the long march across Iowa. Emigration agents had initiated a new plan that took the emigrants from the East Coast by train to St. Joseph, Missouri. From there they traveled by steamboat up the Missouri River to Florence. This route saved more than three hundred miles of foot travel.

674Like the other handcart companies, Captain Rowley's ran short of provisions, but this group benefited from a generous impulse of some Colorado gold rushers. The party of prospectors, according to William Atkin, pushed on ahead of the handcart company and were successful in killing a buffalo. "They took one quarter of it and covered the three quarters carefully with the hide and put up a notice that read, 'This is for the handcarts,'" Atkin remembered. It was a lifesaver for the hungry company, since they did not have horses to hunt for themselves. [^2] Like the first of the handcart pioneers in 1856, Captain Rowley's company arrived to a grand celebration with several bands and a parade of citizens to accompany them to Union Square in the heart of the city [^3] This company suffered just five deaths in its three-month journey from Florence.

674Sarah Hancock Beesley, a young bride, and her new husband, Ebeneezer, honeymooned their way across the plains in Captain Rowley's handcart company. In later years she refused to talk about her experiences traveling west, but the persistence of an unnamed interviewer drew forth this brief but emotional recollection of those long months of travel.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
