Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

680Daniel Robison [^1]

The 7th of May 1860 we left all this [a cozy house, a beautiful orchard and a garden] [^2] and started west to Zion where we could be free to live our religion, for which we had sacrificed so much, unmolested. As we were nearing Niagara Falls, just across the line in Canada we were heartbroken again, [^3] another little daughter [Agnes Ellen] was taken by death. This child was eight years of age, which only deepened the sorrow because of having had her with us longer. As we were traveling under contract the train in which we were riding was not allowed to stop; so our little daughter was carried away by a negro porter and buried we know not where.

We traveled by rail and water 2000 miles, landing in Florence, Nebraska. Here we camped for two weeks while arrangements were being made for the company; which was one of the last of the hand-cart companies to cross the plains. The companies to follow came with ox teams and horses, which made traveling a little easier. It was while we waited here in Florence that death called again. This time we lost our third child, a son, Johnny, age three. When we were called to team up six teams were put to lead, the carts were in the rear. The people pushed the carts. The boxes and carts were painted beautifully, and had bows over the top. These bows were covered with heavy canvas. The tongues of the carts had a crosspiece 2 1/2 feet long fastened to the end. Against this crosspiece two persons would lean their weight, this they called pushing instead of pulling. It was very common to see young girls between the ages of 16 and 20 with a harness on their shoulders in the shape of a halter, a small chain fastened to that, and then fastened to the cart. There were some four or five to a cart, some pushing, some pulling all day long through the hot, dry sand, with hardly enough to eat to keep life in their bodies.

I was appointed Captain of the company, and although it was one of the last companies it was one of the most successful in its journey. [^4] I tried very hard to avoid any trouble which might arise, and was very much respected by all the people in the company. Provisions were weighed out to each family once a week; at one time we were rationed one-half pound of flour a day. Water at times was very scarce and on some occasions the only water to be had was in boggy places. Shovels were used and after digging three or four feet we would strike water, which was very yellow and resembled rain water which had stood for a long time. This was caused from the alkali in the soil. When we camped at night the carts were placed in a circle leaving an open space of about ten feet. This circle was used as a corral for the oxen. The oxen were unyoked inside the circle and then driven perhaps one-half mile away to feed for the night. Here they were guarded until midnight by two of the men and then they were relieved by others. When morning came the oxen were brought in, each man yoking up his own oxen. As soon as breakfast was over we were lined up for another hot day. The carts were loaded with bedding and cooking utensils, and sometimes little children were put in the carts if their feet had gotten too tired to walk any farther. Most of the mothers were seen trudging along on the scorching ground barefooted, leading their barefooted little tots by the hand, pausing now and then, trying to do something to relieve the pain in their blistered feet. When we camped for the night we always had prayer and songs. We seemed very happy, we were putting our trust in God and were not deceived, for our journey was a peaceful one. Several bands of Indians passed our camp but we were not molested. At one time our food failed to reach camp. I swam the Platte River and made arrangements for provisions to be sent.

Arriving at the Sweetwater River we found the bottom of the river covered with fish. Everyone had all they could eat, which was a treat after having to eat salty bacon from the time we started until now. We had no meat of any kind, except the salty bacon, because we could not keep it, and we did not see any animals which we might kill. We had to cross the Green River on ferry boats, all except the oxen, who had to swim. We ran very low of provisions at this point and we became weak from hunger. We, however, did not get discouraged or lose our faith. We had pledged ourselves with the Lord, and so we would not permit ourselves to think of anything other than the Lord would provide. As we were struggling on our way fighting against despair and hunger, a wagon drove up—we know not from where—loaded with provisions. This proved to us that we had not put ourselves in the care of the Lord in vain. He will always provide if we put our faith and trust in Him.

683We camped at the mouth of Echo Canyon on the Weber River, at a small town, Henefer, which was named after the only people living there at that time. Mr. Henefer donated five bushels of potatoes if we would dig them. The fishing was good in the Weber River, and so after the potatoes were dug and the fish caught and cooked, of course, everyone had a treat. We reached Salt Lake Valley on the 27th of August, 1860. It took us nearly eleven weeks to make the journey.

683I came north as far as Farmington and here I made my home for three years. While living in Farmington, I helped lay rock for the old rock meetinghouse which is still standing. In 1863, I moved from Farmington to North Morgan. Here we built our first cabins with logs cut from the mountains of North Morgan. The roofs were made with small poles and wild wheat grass, the chimneys were built of rock, there was one small window without glass, no door just a quilt or carpet hung in place of a door. We passed through all the hardships of early pioneer days, losing four more children, making seven of our twelve children having passed away. The Union Pacific Railroad was built in 1868-69, money was now more plentiful.

---
Notas:
[^1] Eliza Roxcy Snow, Diary, 10 August 1846, in Maureen Ursenbach Beecher, ed., The Personal Writings of Eliza Roxcy Snow (Salt Lake City: University of Utah Press, 1995), 139.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
