Carol Cornwall Madsen, Journey to Zion ( 1997)

Hannah Settle Lapish [^1]

Emigrating to America (from England) we embarked May 30, 1857 on the ship 'Tuscarora' at Liverpool and arrived in Philadelphia July 3, 1857. This being the year of the great panic, [^2] my husband [Joseph Lapish], together with others, went to Richmond, Virginia, to obtain employment and in the meantime I took in sewing from a knitting factory which proved quite providential at the time as I was left with a three months old babe. After the elapse of three months I joined my husband in Richmond where we resided about three years. During our residence at that place the so-called Harper Ferry raid occurred, [^3] and during the excitement we received a letter from Geo. Q. Cannon counseling us (according to instructions which he had received from President Brigham Young), to leave for the West, as war in the East seemed inevitable. We were told to leave by hook or crook and I have always claimed that we left by the latter. We joined a number of the other Saints at Philadelphia and traveled to Florence, Nebr. where we joined Captain Daniel Robinson's [Robison's] handcart company and started on our journey to Utah on June 7, 1860. I had two children at the time, one about two and one half years old [Laura J.] and the other but six months [Emily V.]. Try to imagine if you can a mother with a babe at her breast undertaking a journey of hundreds of miles on foot. But even that babe seemed to understand something of the life going on about her. Why, do you know that if she wer [sic] in the middle of enjoying her dinner and she heard that bugle blow, she would stop, for she knew she must be put into the cart. I couldn't carry her—indeed no, and she certainly knew it.

Of course it was a dreadfully hard journey and like the other companies we suffered from lack of food. One day on the journey there was a great deal of suffering owing to the scarcity of provisions and as we were near a trading post, I decided to see what I could do. I left the rest of the company and went to a store where I offered the proprietors my jewelry in exchange for a little flour which at that time and place was $10.00 per hundred. I soon observed that he was not going to make the exchange and as I turned around I saw a very tall man, perhaps a trapper or a miner, dressed in beaded buckskin suit standing in the store. He eyed the jewelry which I had in my hand and finally said, 'What do you want for that thing (meaning the jewelry)? For a moment I hesitated and then the answer seemed to come to me by inspiration. "700 pounds of flour, Sir," I answered. He took the jewelry and sent the flour to the camp. I gave it to the commissary of the handcart company who dealt it out judiciously to the hungry travelors, the last measure, half a pint for a person, being distributed on the day we crossed Green River. While we were being ferried across that stream a shout of joy went up from our company as the word was passed that a relief train sent by the Church authorities had just arrived with provisions for us. With this relief our main troubles were over and we arrived safely in Salt Lake City August 27, 1860. Our company was one of the last companies to make the journey in that pathetic way—pushing handcarts across the western prairies and mountains. We are the crusaders of the 19th century. [ . . . ] We handcart people will never outlive the memory of those experiences.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHCBy 1860 the handcart experiment had reached an end. The well-traveled western trail now made it possible for wagon trains to leave the Salt Lake Valley in the spring and make a return trip with emigrants the same season. A new program was inaugurated making use of this round-trip travel. Before the transcontinental railroad reached Utah nine years later, this new system, the "down and back" trains, brought more than eighteen thousand Saints to Utah. But no other phase of the Mormon pioneer story has caught the imagination quite like the handcart experiment. It was truly unique in western travel, and "the experience of these people," Church historian Andrew Jenson wrote in 1893, "will never have its equal in the history of the Church." [^4] As far as we know, he was right.

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC694The experiment did not really need vindicating. It brought nearly three thousand Saints to the Valley, most of whom could not have come any other way. Their zeal for Zion was no less fervent than the desire for gold that pulled thousands of others to California in makeshift conveyances. Though the handcarters could not have known the magnitude of the challenges of such a journey to Zion, common sense told them something of what lay ahead. They were nonetheless willing to take the risk and endure the consequences. Their faith outweighed their fear. But when the journey was over, the handcarts, which must have seemed like an extension of their own bodies as they situated themselves each morning between the cart and its U-shaped handle, no longer held any value to them, real or sentimental. Probably most of them, had they dared, would have joined the young woman who, upon reaching the summit of the last hill before entering the Valley and "tired of the long push, gathered up the few things remaining in her cart, and let it slide down the ravine into the canyon, glad to see the last of it." [^5]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC694Brigham Young, who bore ultimate blame for the disasters as well as credit for the success of the handcart experiment, characterized the spirit that animated these intrepid travelers. "They only had faith and power for the day," he said, "and on the morrow it seemed as though they certainly had to stop. But when to-morrow came they had faith and power to perform the journey of that day, and so they have been prompted day by day, to this point. God is at the helm." [^6]

Journeys of the Handcart PioneersHC694And so ended a remarkable chapter in the pioneer history of the Church and of the West. The handcart pioneers were willing to push and pull their handcarts to Zion because of the magnetic power of the gathering. They were latter-day exemplars of "the poor of this world rich in faith" (James 2:5), a courageous band of westering Saints who tested the endurance of the Nauvoo Covenant as they proved their steadfastness in making their way to Zion.

Notes

---
Notas:
[^1] From T. B. H. Stenhouse, The Rocky Mountain Saints: A Full and Complete History of the Mormons (New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1873), 312-32. The pioneers were obliged to cross the Sweetwater at least four or five times as they proceeded westward.
[^2] See letter of Brigham Young to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 7 vols. (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1932) 7:431.
[^3] Ann Hughlings Pitchforth to Father & Mother, May 1845, holograph, Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
[^4] Diary of Zina Huntington Jacobs (Young), 10 March 1845, Archives, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, hereinafter cited as LDS Church Archives. Brigham Young elaborates on this theme in his letter to Wilford Woodruff, 27 June 1845, in Joseph Smith, History of the Church 7:430-32.
[^5] An excellent study on the early references to the Rocky Mountains as a refuge for the Saints is Ronald K. Esplin, "'A Place Prepared': Joseph, Brigham and the Quest for Promised Refuge in the West," Journal of Mormon History 9 (1982): 85-111. For a larger study, see Lewis Clark Christian, "A Study of Mormon Knowledge of the American Far West Prior to the Exodus (1830-February 1846)" (Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1972); a shorter version is Christian, "Mormon Foreknowledge of the West," Brigham Young University Studies 21 (Fall 1981): 403-15.
[^6] Joseph Smith, History of the Church 6:406. This and other references to the place Nauvoo would fill in the ultimate expansion of the Church can be found in Esplin, "'A Place Prepared,'" 85-111, esp. 95-96.
