Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

GRACE

A General Discussion

The theological doctrine of grace is one of the greatly misunderstood doctrines of the Book of Mormon and the New Testament. The word is frequently used therein, but nowhere is it dearly defined. [^1] The Scriptures, as we all realize, do not contain a glossary of their own terms. Authors who first used the word grace followed the example of a mother teaching her child a new word: rather than to define it, they merely used it in proper context, until, after much repetition, its meaning became clear. Implicit in the New Testament word grace is the connotation that God has done for us something which we could not do for ourselves. When God bestows grace upon His children, He goes beyond the requirements, of justice. His love transcends the quid pro quo [^2] which, under the law of the land, is the binding element in all legal contracts.

Nowhere can we find a more forceful nor more poetic expression of this principle than in Portia's famous plea, in which the word mercy may be considered roughly equivalent to the word grace:

The quality of mercy is not strained, It droppeth as the gentle rain from Heaven Upon the place beneath; it is twice blessed; It blesseth him that gives and him that takes; 'Tis mightiest in the mightiest; it becomes The throned monarch better than his crown; His scepter shows the force of temporal power The attribute to awe and majesty, Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings; But mercy is above this sceptered sway, It is enthroned in the hearts of kings, It is an attribute to God Himself, And earthly power doth then show likest God's When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew, Though justice be thy plea, consider this, That in the course of justice none of us Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy, And that same prayer doth teach us all to render the deeds of mercy. —Merchant of Venice, Act IV, Scene I

God's gift of grace includes the gift of life, and the gift of faith which leads to true repentance. Forgiveness of sin is an act of grace; and crowning all other gifts, of course, is the gift of immortality and Eternal Life, wrought by the Atonement of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. To obtain the riches of this world, one need go no further than the market place; but to obtain the gifts of grace, one can only look beseechingly to Heaven, for these gifts are unobtainable from among the treasures of the Earth.

And of His fulness have all we received, and grace for grace. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. ( John 1:16 John 1:16-17 )

The scriptural doctrine of grace springs from the recognition that finite man is powerless to create the agencies of his own existence and Salvation. It is true that as a son of God he is heir to an infinity of powers and dignities. It is true that man is made "a little lower than the angels," and is crowned "with glory and honor." ( Ps. 8:5 Ps. 8:5 ) It is also true that man may eventually "overcome all things" (D&C. 76:60), and become "gods, even the sons of God." (Ibid. 76:58)

All of this cannot obscure the fact, however, that during the course of mortal life the children of God are very finite. Their vision is circumscribed. Their powers are weak. Their capacities are limited. Men realize, with a shattering awareness, intensified in the experiences of every passing day, that without help they are impotent.

No mature, thinking person could question the wisdom of Isaiah's words:

For My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways My ways, saith the Lord. For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are My ways higher than your ways, and My thoughts than your thoughts. ( Isa. 55:8 Isa. 55:8-9 )

Even the startling sixth verse of the 64th Chapter of Isaiah must be accepted as a poetic, but essentially accurate portrayal of the lowliness of man's existing mortal state:

But we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away. ( Isa. 64:6 Isa. 64:6 )

It has been truly said that the greatest of all Christian sins is the sin of self-sufficiency. This is the sin of repudiating, not only God, but the very need for God. It is the rejection of Christ's atoning Sacrifice for the human race. It is the impious affirmation of man's omnipotence. Such impudence can only lead the way to spiritual death, and does more than any other act to divest humanity of its heritage of divine grace.

At the heart of the Christian doctrine, therefore, and at the fountainhead of all spirituality, is an awareness of man's inherent limitations, and of his need for power greater than his own to effectuate his exaltation.

Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Whom ye crucified, Whom God raised from the dead, even by Him doth this man stand here before you whole. This is the stone which was set at nought of you builders, which is become the head of the corner. Neither is there Salvation in any other: for there is none other Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved. ( Acts 4:10 Acts 4:10-12 )

This dependence of man is reaffirmed with great clarity by Jacob, the son of the Prophet Lehi:

Nevertheless, the Lord God showeth us our weakness that we may know that it is by His grace, and His great condescensions unto the children of men, that we have power to do these things. ( Jacob 4:7 Jacob 4:7 )

This same prophet also stresses the interrelationship between grace and works:

And He suffereth this that the resurrection might pass upon all men, that all might stand before Him at the great and Judgment Day. And He commandeth all men that they must repent, and be baptized in His Name, having perfect faith in the Holy One of Israel, or they cannot be saved in the Kingdom of God. And if they will not repent and believe in His Name, and be baptized in His Name, and endure to the end, they must be damned; for the Lord God, the Holy One of Israel, has spoken it. ( 2 Ne. 9:22 2 Ne. 9:22-24 )

On still another occasion, Jacob spoke of grace:

Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved. (Ibid., 10:24)

In a reference to the gift of grace, the Prophet Moroni observed:

Yea, come unto Christ, and be perfect in Him, and deny yourselves of all ungodliness; and if ye shall deny yourselves of all ungodliness and love God with all your might, mind, and strength, then is His grace sufficient for you, that by His grace ye may be perfect in Christ; and if by the grace of God ye are perfect in Christ, ye can in no wise deny the power of God. ( Moro. 10:32 Moro. 10:32 )

Some of the celebrated words of the Apostle Paul explain the saving grace of Christ:

But God, Who is rich in mercy, for His great love wherein He loved us, Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, (by grace ye are saved;) and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in the ages to come He might shew the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness toward us through Jesus Christ. For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves: it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them. ( Eph. 2:4 Eph. 2:4-10 )

But now the righteousness of God without the law is manifested, being witnessed by the law and the prophets; Even the righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe: for there is no difference: for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God; being justified freely by His grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in His blood, to declare His righteousness for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God; to declare, I say, at this time His righteousness: that He might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus. ( Rom. 3:21 Rom. 3:21-26 )

Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

And not only so, but we glory in tribulation also; knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope; and hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.

For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. For scarecly for a righteous man will one die: yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. But God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For if, when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.

And not only so, but we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement.

Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: (for until the law sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is no law. Nevertheless death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, who is the figure of Him that was to come. But not as the offence, so also is the free gift. For if through the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offences unto justification.

For if by one man's offence death reigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.)

Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous. Moreover the law entered, that the offence might abound. But where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: that as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord. ( Rom. 5:1 Rom. 5 )

The grace of God was manifested in providing a Savior and Redeemer, whose atoning Sacrifice gave immortality to all the human race. Through the Savior, God also gave mankind an opportunity to achieve individual exaltation through the exercise of faith (which includes works) and through obedience to other Gospel laws and ordinances.

The extent of the suffering which Jesus endured for us in His crucifixion is beyond the power of finite minds to comprehend.

For behold I, God, have suffered these things for all, that they might not suffer if they would repent; but if they would not repent they must suffer, even as I; which suffering caused myself, even God, the greatest of all, to tremble because of pain, and to bleed at every pore, and to suffer both body and spirit—and would that I might not drink the bitter cup, and shrink—nevertheless, glory be to the Father, and I partook and finished My preparations unto the children of men. ( D&C 19:18 D&C 19:18-19 )

This was the supreme act of grace, the most impressive manifestation of pure love in all the history of mankind.

For God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life. ( John 3:16 John 3:16 )

He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent His only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through Him. ( 1 Jn. 4:8 1 Jn. 4:8-9 )

To fail to understand the doctrine of grace is to fail to understand God's love and, therefore, to fail to understand God.

The Necessity of Both Grace and Works

Theological disputations over the relative role of grace and works in the process of man's Salvation have spanned the centuries of Christian history. From Augustine's agonized confessions to Luther's protestations, works were spurned by the lofty theologian, presumably with Paul's blessing, [^3] while the lowly Christian masses, prodded along by a superstitious clergy, performed countless little acts of penance, designed to move both the depraved living and the deceased occupants of purgatory heavenward inch by inch. These lowly efforts supposedly found strong support in James' treatise on works. [^4] This controversy has not yet ended. However, the Reformation brought a simplification of the forms of worship and an enduring emphasis on grace.

Could Paul possibly have intended, in his statement to the Ephesians on grace, to eliminate the need for personal righteousness (good works)? His admonitions to the Saints to live righteously dispel such a notion. His counsel to Titus characterizes these admonitions:

In all things shewing thyself a pattern of good works: in doctrine shewing uncorruptness, gravity, sincerity . . . For the grace of God that bringeth Salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; Who gave Himself for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. ( Titus 2:7 Titus 2:7 ; Titus 2:11 11-14)

Paul's encouraging words to faithful Hebrews make his position on this doctrine abundantly clear:

For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have shewed toward His Name, in that ye have ministered to the Saints, and do minister. ( Heb. 6:10 Heb. 6:10 )

In a search for the true position of James on this matter, it is well not to overlook the admonition which precedes James' aforementioned treatise on works:

Do not err, my beloved brethren. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with Whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. ( James 1:16 James 1:16-17 )

James makes plain his belief that the grace of Christ is always available to man provided his attitude and deeds qualify him for this good gift:

But He giveth more grace. Wherefore, He saith, God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace unto the humble. Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. Draw nigh to God, and He will draw nigh to you. Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double minded. ( James 4:6 James 4:6-8 )

Nowhere is the true relationship of grace to works more clearly and cogently stated than in the Book of Mormon:

For we labor diligently to write, to persuade our children, and also our brethren, to believe in Christ, and to be reconciled to God; for we know that it is by grace that we are saved, after all we can do. ( 2 Ne. 25:23 2 Ne. 25:23 )

Latter-day restoration of the Gospel clarified the doctrine of exaltation, thus making it clear that obedience to the laws and ordinances of the Gospel (works) was not lost in the doctrine of grace. Unfortunately, however, this renewed concept of the place of works in the plan of salvation has not alone clarified the relationship of works and grace, but has also had a tendency to elevate works above grace in the minds of many believers. Moreover, some exponents of the latter-day word, after making clear allowance for both grace and works, have oversimplified the matter. They have limited grace to the free gift of resurrection, and have attributed to works alone the power to exalt man in the Celestial Kingdom of Glory. This conclusion is unsupported by written authority. Full recognition is given throughout the scriptures to the fact that man is incapable of fully living the Gospel in any of his stages of progress, without help from God. In 'is great doctrinal sermon, Jesus made clear that living His Gospel would be much more than the simple application of a clear-cut formula to the problems of life. Man's salvation would be achieved by keeping in touch—by asking and searching.

Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. ( Matt. 7:7 Matt. 7:7 )

He promised that the good gifts would be forthcoming to those who righteously searched and requested them.

For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. Or what man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread, will he give him a stone? Or if he ask a fish, will he give him a serpent? If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that ask him? ( Matt. 7:8 Matt. 7:8-11 )

Thus we see that man's forward movement is aided by one gift after another, or as John has said: "grace for grace." [^5]

A careful reading of the teachings of Jacob in the Book of Mormon dispels any notion that works alone have the power to exalt.

Wherefore, my beloved brethren, reconcile yourselves to the will of God, and not to the will of the devil and the flesh; and remember, after ye are reconciled unto God, that it is only in and through the grace of God that ye are saved. Wherefore, may God raise you from death by the power of the resurrection, and also from everlasting death by the power of the atonement, and that ye may be received into the eternal kingdom of God, that ye may praise him through grace divine. ( 2 Ne. 10:24 2 Ne. 10:24 , 2 Ne. 10:25 25)

The Doctrine of Grace in a Broader Context

Much has been said in recent years about the doctrine of eternal progression. This doctrine is filled with vitality and inspiration. Properly understood, it is both rational and scriptural. [^6] It teaches that God's children may progress throughout the eternities, until they may reach the status and the glory of the Creator Himself. However, this doctrine requires qualification to render it entirely consistent with the Holy Scriptures.

Its exponents liken man's quest for eternal glory to climbing a flight of endless stairs. By mastering one more eternal principle, or conquering one more weakness of the flesh, the heaven-bent pilgrim mounts a new stair.

This analogy has merit, and suggests the vast and seemingly limitless possibilities for growth open to every mortal, as he pursues his quest for eternal glory. The analogy, however, as it stands, is deficient. It does not give sufficient recognition to the doctrine of grace. The analogy suggests that once man has found the endless staircase (which staircase presumably represents the Plan of Salvation), he becomes, thereafter, the means of his own salvation. Salvation becomes a matter of exerting the effort required to climb the stairs. In such a concept, our Heavenly Father's role becomes essentially that of an omniscient instructor, who is eternally urging His children to exert the effort to ascend to greater heights. This concept, however, fails to give full force and effect to the atoning Sacrifice of Jesus Christ.

If we must cling to the stairway analogy, we should modify it to include a huge and unbridgeable chasm somewhere along the stairs' upward course. When man reaches that chasm, he cannot cross it without aid. All the wisdom, righteousness, and brilliance of performance which mortal man may marshal in his own cause cannot transport him across the empty void ahead. Finite powers stand in helplessness before this impasse in infinity.

The Third Article of Faith reads: "We believe that through the atonement of Christ, all mankind may be saved, by obedience to the laws and ordinances of the gospel." In our analogy, obedience becomes the effort by which we ascend the endless stairs; it is the Atonement of Christ which carries us across the otherwise unbridgeable chasm. No mortal man has ever earned this Atonement for anything which he has done. It is not a stipend. It is not a reward. It is a gift of love beyond price. It is the grace of God.

To the above qualification to the stairway analogy we add another. Man may, from time to time, find himself without the strength to keep climbing; he also may become confused and find himself in danger of falling. But he has been told that he may ask for help. When that help comes, it is a gift or an outpouring of grace.

The restless mind, however, may find itself impelled to go behind and beyond the conclusions herein expressed, in search of causes and justifications more remote. "Why," it may ask, "was the Atonement of Our Savior necessary; Why did the Heavens decree this bloody orgy to be prerequisite to the throwing open of celestial gates which mark the entrance-way to Heaven's glory? Why this agony? these tears? this broken flesh, and flowing blood? Why did not this cup of sorrow pass by the only lips in all the world which had no obligation to drink?"

There are reasons. They are plainly perceptible even to those of limited discernment. The Atonement was an act of love. The Creation itself was an act of love. Christ's responses to our petitions are acts of love. Life is shaped and nourished and given meaning by countless acts of love. Without love expressed in human conduct, life would be bestial, anarchistic, and meaningless. Existence would degenerate into a dreary battle for survival.

The birth of a child is a baptism of pain and anguish to its mother. It is one of the most dramatic expressions of love in all of human experience. From birth until death, the human being lives and breathes and survives through countless acts of love. Tender hands and arms caress him, feed him, clean him, and rock him in his infancy. Loving parents give, and plan, and work, and suffer so his life might ripen and unfold in the fulfillment of his destiny. He goes to secular and to ecclesiastical schools to learn. He realizes that he would not be there—in fact there would be no schools at all—but for the sacrifices of hosts of scholars, teachers, saints, and martyrs whose impressive accumulation of knowledge and culture was often purchased at the cost of great effort, even of life itself.

So it is that the human being moves through life. He gives and he takes. He loves and is loved. His wife, his children, his friends and his neighbors sacrifice ten thousand times for him, and he for them. He contributes willingly his time and money for the destitute whom he will never see. He spends his efforts on causes from which he will derive no apparent personal benefit. He gives up wealth and personal treasures that others might have opportunities. He goes into the temples of God, and there he spends long hours to help save others whom no then-living person has ever seen.

Why? How can we explain love? We can not! It is the ultimate justification of all else. We do not use a ruler to measure itself. Neither do we justify love in terms of other virtues. Love is its own justification.

How then could the plan of salvation ignore the basic principle of love? Without it, salvation would be no more than a self-centered, ugly spectacle.

Imagine, if you will, a plan of salvation without love expressed in some great sacrifice. What would you have? Millions of ambitious, jealous candidates for celestial glory, selfishly pushing themselves forward and upward along the road to Heaven.

It seems manifest that Salvation must embody more than a struggle for self perfection. True, it involves self perfection, but it involves much more. In any university one can see a host of students spending time and efforts perfecting themselves. This effort is no doubt commendable; progress would be impossible without education. Can anyone argue, however, that education alone represents the ultimate in human achievement? The world is full of intellectual giants who are selfish, egocentric, and spiritually dwarfed, who often compound rather than relieve human miseries. Intellect without love is cold and unproductive. Salvation is not exclusively individual, and cannot be. The human race is knit together by the ties of interdependence. No man is an island unto himself. His highest fulfillment is made possible through acts and thoughts of love.

In recognition of this transcendently glorious principle, God gave the world His greatest and most beloved possession: His Only Begotten Son. In this supreme act of love, the human race is brought into a closer union. A supremely perfect and divinely-ordained pattern of individual conduct is presented. God has given His sanction to, and has placed His seal of approval upon, all righteous sorrow and the agony of love. By this agony, man will be purified. By this grace, man will be saved.

Grace

---
Notas:
[^1] Those who would turn to an up-to-date dictionary for an authoritative explanation of the word grace are apt to be disappointed. This is particularly true if they are doing more than seeking a conventional explanation of the word's etymology. It must be remembered that the dictionary draws its meaning from current usage far more than does current usage draw its meanings from the dictionary. If usage, therefore, should succeed, over the years, in obscuring the original meaning of a theological term such as grace, the dictionary definition would naturally tend to embody that obscurity. The dictionary shows that the meaning of the word grace is derived from the Latin word gratis, which was derived from gratus, meaning beloved, or dear. Grace, in English, denotes kindness, favor, benignity, largesse, condescension. It suggests an outpouring of the love of God upon the heads of His children.
[^2] Quid pro quo means literally "this for that." As every law student learns, early in his course in contracts, a contract must be supported by good and sufficient consideration, or quid pro quo. Each party to the contract must do, or promise to do something which he is not by law required to do, or to promise to do. The little which man gives to God, however, can in no sense be considered as consideration given in exchange for God's gift of grace to man.
[^3] For by grace are ye saved through faith; and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man should boast. ( Eph. 2:8 Eph. 2:8-9 )
[^4] What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? can faith save him? ( James 2:14 James 2:14 ; also verses 15-26)
[^5] John 1:16 John 1:16
[^6] The doctrine of eternal progression is strongly inferred, among other places, in that portion of the celebrated 76th Section of the Doctrine and Covenants which deals with the qualifications for entry into the celestial kingdom, and particularly the following verses: "They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things-they are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness and of his glory; and are priests of the most high, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son. Wherefore, as it is written, they are Gods, even the sons of God. Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present or things to come, all are theirs, and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's. And they shall overcome all things." ( D&C 76:55 D&C 76:55-60 )
