Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

REFERENCE TO VOLUME 3

Volume 3 of the Commentary on the Book of Mormon commences with the first year of Alma's Reign as Chief Judge. Could our readers have taken a glimpse at the fair Capital of the Nephites at that time (91 B.C.), already rich in the rewards of human industry, combined with the lavish productions of nature in that much favored land, they might have noticed in the principal street, a portly, handsome man, manifesting in his carriage the evidence of great bodily strength, combined with vanity, self-sufficiency, and subtlety. They might have observed that his raiment was made of the finest fabrics that the looms of Zarahemla could produce, lavishly embroidered and ornamented with the labors of the cunning workman in silk, feathers, and the precious metals, while at his side hung a richly decorated sword. This man was no king, no governor, no general of the armies of Israel; he was simply Nehor, the successful religious charlatan of the hour, to whom the unstable listened and the weak-minded flocked. His teachings had at any rate the interest of novelty to the Nephites, yet some of his theories were older than Idumea. They had been rejected in the Counsels of Heaven before Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, fell. He would save all men in their sins and with their sins; he abolished Hell, established a paid order of priests, and taught doctrines so liberal that every man could be a member of his church and yet continue to gratify every vice his nature inclined to. For this liberality of doctrine, Nehor expected in return liberality of support for himself and assistants, in which anticipation he was not disappointed. Many adopted his heresies; his success fired his zeal and developed his vanity. He was so used to the sycophancy of his converts that he was restive under contradiction, and when Gideon, the aged patriot and teacher in the true Church, one day met him in the streets of Zarahemla and upbraided him for his wicked course, neither respecting his great age nor his many virtues, Nehor drew his sword and smote him until he died. For this wilfull and unprovoked crime, the murderer was tried, convicted, and afterward executed. His execution took place on a Hill called Manti, and, from the way his death is spoken of, we imagine that he was hanged.

Though Nehor's shameful life was thus ended, unfortunately his doctrine did not die with him. It was too pleasant to those who desired to gain Heaven without a life of righteousness. Consequently it spread widely through the teachings of his followers. In later years the traitorous Amlicites, the apostate Amalekites, the blood-thirsty Amulonites and Ammonihahites, were all believers in his soul-destroying doctrines. The bloodshed, the misery produced, the treasure expended, the wickedness and folly of these base creatures cannot be computed.

The increase of these false teachers among the Nephites rapidly developed class distinctions and social divisions; their adherents being generally gathered from amongst those who loved the vain things of the world. Naturally, they became proud and overbearing, and bitter in their feelings towards the members of the true Church of Christ. Many of the latter received severe persecution at the hands of the dissenters and bore it without retaliation, while others returned insult for insult, and gave blow for blow.

The example of these self-appointed teachers produced a like spirit throughout their churches, and their members became idle and full of devices to enable them to live without honest toil. They gave way to sorcery and idolatry, to robbery and murder, and to all manner of wickedness, for which offences they were duly punished according to the law whenever conviction could be obtained, and when the intent of the law was not thwarted by their unholy combinations. This development of priestcraft also gave rise to another evil. Many belonging to the apostate churches, though not willing to openly plunder or murder for gain, were anxious for a monarchy to be established, that thereby they might be appointed office holders and fatten themselves at the public crib. Their hope and intention was to destroy the Church of God, and undoubtedly to despoil its members.

In the Fifth Year of the Judges, a willing instrument arose to effect their purposes. His name was Amlici, corrupt and ambitious, but cunning in the wisdom of the world. He was chosen by the enemies of the Commonwealth to be the king of the Nephites. The whole question was brought before the people at a general election, as provided by the Code of Mosiah. The monarchists were outvoted; the Republic and the Church were saved.

This should have ended the matter, but it did not; the turbulent minority, incited by Amlici, would not accept this constitutional decision. They assembled and crowned their favorite as king of the Nephites, and he at once began to prepare for war, that he might force the rest of the people to accept his government. Nor was Alma idle; he also made ready for the impending contest. He gathered his people and armed them with all the weapons known to Nephite warfare. The two armies of those who so short time before were brethren, met near a Hill called Amnihu, on the eastern bank of the River Sidon. There a bloody battle followed, in which Amlici's forces were disastrously defeated with a loss of 12,532 men, while the victors had to mourn the loss of 6,562 warriors slain.

After pursuing the defeated monarchists as far as he was able, Alma rested his troops in the Valley of Gideon which was named after the martyr slain by Nehor. There he took the precaution to send out four officers with their companies to watch the movements and learn the intentions of the retreating foe. These officers were named Zeram, Amnor, Manti, and Limher. On the morrow these scouts returned in great haste, and reported that the Amlicites had joined a vast host of Lamanites in the Land of Minon, where unitedly they were slaying the Nephite population and ravaging their possessions; at the same time they were pushing rapidly towards the Nephite Capital with the evident intent of capturing it before Alma's army could return. Alma, at once headed his soldiers for Zarahemla, and with all haste marched toward it. He reached the crossing of the Sidon without meeting the enemy, but while attempting to pass to the western bank of the river he was confronted by the allied armies.

A terrible battle ensued; the Nephites were taken somewhat at a disadvantage, but being men of faith, they fervently sought Heaven's aid, and in the increased valor this faith inspired, they hastened to the combat. With Alma at their head, the advance guard forded the river and broke upon the enemy who stood awaiting them. By the impetuosity of their charge they drove in the ranks of the enemy, and as they pushed onward they cleared the ground by throwing the bodies of their fallen foes into the Sidon, thus making an opening for the main body of the Nephite army to obtain a foothold. In this charge Alma met Amlici in personal combat and they fought desperately. In the midst of this hand-to-hand fighting, Alma lifted his heart On High, and prayed for renewed strength that he might not be overpowered, but live to do more good to his people. His prayers were answered, and thereby he gained new vigor to battle with and eventually slay Amlici. Amlici slain, Alma led the attack to where the king of the Lamanites fought. But that monarch retired before the impetuous valor of the High Priest and commanded his guards to close in upon his assailant. This order was promptly obeyed, but it did not succeed. Alma and his men bore down upon them with such fury that the few of the king's warriors who escaped their valiant charge made a hasty retreat. Pushing steadily on, Alma kept driving the allies before him until his whole army had crossed the Sidon. There the enemy, no longer able to withstand his well ordered advance, broke in all directions, and retreated into the wilderness that lay to the north and west. They were hotly pursued by the Nephites as long as the latter's strength permitted, and were met on all quarters by patriots who rallied to the call of the Commonwealth and who slew them by thousands. A remnant eventually reached that part of the wilderness known as Hermounts. There many died and their carcasses were devoured by the wild beasts and vultures with which that region abounded.

A few days after this battle, another Lamanite army appeared. This one advanced along the east bank of the Sidon. Alma, having been wounded, sent one of his officers, who met the hosts of the Lamanites, and drove them back to their own lands.

The great losses sustained by the Nephites in this war, not of warriors alone, but of women and children, together with the vast amount of their property which was destroyed, had the effect of humbling them and softening their wayward hearts, so that many thousands, during the next few years, were added to the Church by baptism. But the recollection of their former disasters was gradually worn away by time and prosperity. Three years later we find great inequality in the Church—some poor and some rich, the more powerful abusing and oppressing their weaker brethren. This course proved a great stumbling-block to those who were not numbered with the Church, as well as being the cause of much sorrow and ill-feeling among its members. Finding that no one man could properly attend to the duties of his many offices, Alma determined to resign the Chief Judgeship, and devote his entire time to his duties as the earthly head of the Church. Preparatory to his resignation, he selected one of the leading Elders of the Church, named Nephihah, to be his successor as Chief Judge. This choice was confirmed by the people (83 B.C.).

Alma now gave his entire attention to the duties of his calling as a preacher of righteousness. He commenced his labors in Zarahemla. Thence he went to the City of Gideon. After ministering there for some time, he returned for rest to his home in the Capital City.

The next year (82 B.C.), Alma turned his face westward. He visited the Land of Melek, where his labors were crowned with abundant blessings. Having satisfied himself with the good that he had accomplished, he traveled three days' journey on the north of the Land of Melek to a great City called Ammonihah. There he found a godless people filled with the falsehoods of Nehor, who were committing all manner of abominations without repentance, because they cherished the flattering lie, as the foundation of their religion, that all men would be saved. This city was in the hands of a corrupt clique of judges and lawyers, who stirred up sedition, tumult, and rioting, that they might make money out of the suits that followed such disturbances. Further than this, they were secretly plotting to overthrow the government, and rob the people of their highly prized liberties. Among such a people Alma labored in vain; none would listen, none would obey, none offered him rest and food. Scorn and mockery were his reward; and he was spat upon, maltreated and cast out of the city.

Weary in body and sick at heart because of the iniquity of the people, after many fruitless efforts, fervent prayers and long fastings, Alma sought some other people more worthy of Salvation's priceless gifts. He bent his way toward the City of Aaron; but as he journeyed, an angel of the Lord (that same angel that beforetime had been the agent of his conversion to God) stood before him and blessed him. He told Alma to lift up his heart and rejoice, for because of his faithfulness he had great cause to do so. The angel then directed Alma to return to the sin-cursed city he had just left, and proclaim unto its citizens the awful message that except they repented the Lord would destroy them.

Without delay the prophet obeyed the angel's words. By another road he drew near the doomed city, which he entered by its south gate. As he passed in he hungered, and asked a man whom he met, "Will ye give to an humble servant of God something to eat?" With joy the man (and strange though it may appear, he was a rich man) took him to his home, and fed, clothed, and lodged, him. Furthermore, Amulek, for such was his name, told Alma that he also had received a visit from a holy angel who had informed him of the High Priest's coming, and had directed him to receive him into his house. Then Alma blessed Amulek and all his household, and tarried with him and recruited his strength under the generous hospitality which their home afforded. But Alma's rest was not to be an extended one; the people waxed stronger in sin; the cup of their iniquity was nearly full. "Go," came the word of the Lord, "Go forth, and take with thee My servant Amulek, and prophesy unto this people, saying, Repent ye, for thus saith the Lord, Except ye repent, I will visit this people in Mine anger; yea, I will turn not My fierce anger way." Filled with the Holy Ghost, these servants of God went forth and valiantly delivered their terrible message. One of those who most bitterly opposed Alma and Amulek was a lawyer named Zeezrom. We find recorded at great length the details of the controversy that occurred between him and the two servants of the Lord. As a result we have handed down to us some of the plainest teachings regarding the Atonement, the Resurrection, the powers of the Priesthood, etc., that are had among mankind. No matter what Alma and his companion said, Zeezrom could twist it from its proper meaning; find blasphemy and heresy in the sublime truths of the Gospel, and extract treason from the simplest of God's laws. Zeezrom questioned and cross-questioned, he promised and threatened, he twisted and turned, he abused and vilified, but all to no purpose, he was caught in his own trap. His Heaven-inspired opponents made manifest his thoughts and intentions, they exposed his lying, they overthrew his sophistries, and with a power more than human, they exhibited the blackness of his heart. As Alma and Amulek proceeded, the power of God increased upon them, their words grew yet more forcible until Zeezrom, himself, felt their power. As his corruptions were laid bare before him, he began to tremble, first with rage, then with fear. Bad as he was, he was not the worst among his people, and when once he realized the power he was combating, his heart began to acknowledge its guilt.

With this feeling he commenced to inquire of Alma, not now in mockery, but in solemn earnestness, with regard to the Kingdom of God. The answers he received were like a two-edged sword, piercing to his inmost soul, bringing to him a terrible sense of his awful position before God, and encompassing him about with the pains of Hell. He realized that he had been a leader in iniquity, that his lyings and deceivings had greatly contributed to drag the people down to their existing corruption, and that he was among those most responsible for their hardness of heart.

In this frame of mind Zeezrom made an effort to plead with the people; he acknowledged his guilt, testified to the virtue and integrity of Alma and Amulek, and interceded in their behalf. But in vain. The degraded populace reviled him, they mocked at him, they said he was possessed of a devil, and further, they spat on him; then they cast stones at him, and ultimately, with some others, drove him out of their city; while the two prophets, with many who believed in their holy message, were thrown into prison, there to suffer all the indignities, persecutions, and annoyances that apostate hate could inflict. Nor was this the worst; these retrobates took the wives and babes of those believers whom they had driven away, with such as had accepted the truth who still remained in the city, and, gathering them in a body they mercilessly burned them to death in one great martyr's fire. Into the torturing flames they cast the records that contained the Holy Scriptures, as though, they imagined, in their blind fury, that they could thereby destroy the truths that were so odious to them.

In their devilish glee and savage exultation, they carried the two enchained prophets to the place of martyrdom, that they might harrow up their souls with a view of the sufferings of the perishing women and children. Amulek's brave and impetuous spirit could ill bear the fearful scene. The groans, the cries, and supplications of the tortured innocents carried untold agony to his soul. He begged Alma to exercise the power of God that was in them to save the martyrs. But the Holy Spirit revealed to Alma that this sacrifice was by Heaven's consent, and he replied, "The Spirit constraineth me that I must not stretch forth mine hand; for behold the Lord receiveth them up unto Himself, in glory; and He doth suffer that they may do this thing, or that the people may do this thing unto them, according to the hardness of their hearts, that the judgments which He shall exercise upon them in His wrath may be just; and that the blood of the innocent shall stand as a witness against them, yea, and cry mightily against them at the Last Day. Then Amulek said, "Perhaps they will burn us also." To which Alma responded, "Be it according to the will of the Lord. But, behold, our work is not finished; therefore they burn us not."

When the fire had burned low, and the precious fuel of human bodies and sacred records were consumed, the chief judge of the city came to the two prisoners as they stood bound, and mocked them. He smote them on the cheeks, and jeeringly asked them if they would preach again that his people should be cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, seeing that they had no power to save those who had been burned, neither had God exercised His power in their behalf. But neither answered him a word. Then the chief judge smote them again and remanded them to prison.

After the missionaries had been confined three days, they were visited by many judges and lawyers, priests and teachers, after the order of Nehor, who came to exult in the misery of their prisoners. They questioned and badgered them, but neither would reply. They came again the next day, and went through the same performance. They mocked at, smote and spat upon the two disciples. They tantalized them with blasphemous questions, such as pertaining to the nature of the faith their obedience inspired. "How shall we look when we are damned?" sneeringly asked these unbelievers in damnation.

Patiently and silently all this was borne. Day after day was it repeated. Harder and harder grew the hearts of the Ammonihahites towards their prisoners. Fiercer and stronger grew their hatred. They stripped Alma and Amulek, and, when naked, bound them with strong ropes. They withheld food and drink from them, and in various ways they tortured their bodies, and sought to aggravate and tantalize them and harrow up their minds. On the twelfth day of the tenth month of the tenth year of the Judges (82 B.C.), the Chief Judge of the city together with his followers again went to the prison. According to his usual custom, he smote the brethren, saying as he did so, "If ye have the power of God, deliver yourselves from these bonds, and then we will believe that the Lord will destroy this people according to your words." This impious challenge, the crowd, one by one, repeated as they passed by the prophets, and smote them in imitation of their leader. Thus each individual assumed the responsibility of the defiance cast at the Almighty, and virtually said, "Our blood be upon our own heads."

The hour of God's power had now come—the challenge had been accepted. The prophets, in the majesty of their calling, rose to their feet. They were endowed with the strength of Jehovah. Like burnt thread the cords that bound them were snapped asunder and they stood free and unshackled before the terror-stricken crowd. To rush from the prison was the first impulse of the God-defying followers of Nehor. In their fear some fell to the earth, others, impelled by the crowd behind them stumbled and fell over the prostrate bodies. They quickly became a confused mass of frightened mobsters, blocking each other's way; struggling, yelling, cursing, pleading, fighting; frantically, but vainly, endeavoring to reach the outer gate.

At this moment of supreme horror an earthquake rent the prison walls. They trembled, then tottered, then fell on the struggling mass of humanity below, burying in one vast, unconsecrated grave, rulers and judges, lawyers and officers, priests and teachers. Not one was left alive of all the impious mob, who a few minutes before defied Heaven and challenged Jehovah's might. But Alma and Amulek stood in the midst of the ruins unhurt. Straightway they left this scene of destruction, and went into the city. When the citizens saw the two servants of God, great fear fell upon them, and they fled, as a goat fleeth with her young from two lions.

Alma and Amulek were then ordered to leave the city. This they did, and went to the neighboring Town of Sidom. There they found those who had been cast out of Ammonihah, and in grief and sorrow they related the story of the burning of the wives and children of the fugitives, and also the history of their own miraculous deliverance.

While the fearful tragedy was being enacted in Ammonihah, Zeezrom—trembling, heart-sick and faint—wandered with the others to Sidom. The horrors of the damned took hold of him, until his body succumbed to the agony of his mind. He was scorched with a burning fever, which continually increased until the glad tidings reached his ears that Alma and Amulek were safe; for he had feared that through his iniquities they had been slain. No sooner did they reach Sidom than he sent for them, as his heart then began to take courage. They did not hesitate, but at once proceeded to where he lay. When they entered his presence, he stretched forth his hands and besought them to heal him. Alma questioned him regarding his faith in Christ, and finding that the good seed planted in his bosom had brought forth fruit, this mighty High Priest cried unto the Lord, "O Lord, our God, have mercy on this man, and heal him according to his faith which is in Christ." When Alma had said these words, Zeezrom leaped upon his feet and walked, to the great astonishment of all who witnessed it. Alma then baptized the repentant lawyer, who began from that time forth to preach the glorious message of Eternal Salvation. His energy, wisdom, learning, and talents were now used towards the upbuilding of the Kingdom of God. With as much zeal as he before time had labored for corruptible riches and worldly fame—for Zeezrom was a whole-souled, courageous man, he did nothing by halves—when he served the devil he was a profitable servant; when he turned to God, he did it with all his heart. From this time Zeezrom became a preacher of righteousness, laboring under the direction of Alma, and we next hear of him ministering with Amulek to the people in the Land of Melek.

Next year Ammonihah was destroyed. Less than four months had elapsed since the two inspired followers of the Lamb had left it to its fate, when the Lamanites fell upon it like a whirlwind in its suddenness, and as an avalanche in its utter destruction. The dark-skinned warriors of Laman swept over these murderers of the Saints like a tempest of fire, leaving neither young nor old, babe or grandsire, to repeat the story of their woes. Not one of Ammonihah's boasting children was left to defy Heaven. Nor was the city itself spared; it, also, was given to the destroyer, and its palaces and temples, its homes and its workshops, were consumed by the devouring fire. For in one day the fierce flames consumed the walls and towers of Ammonihah. Their light illumined the lurid skies, shone on the distant mountain tops, and lit the neighboring valleys. Then an uninhabitable desolation, stinking with the rotting carcasses of man and beast, only remained to mark the place where Ammonihah once stood. As the Desolation of Nehors, it was known and avoided by the Nephites for many succeeding years.

Emboldened by this signal triumph, the Lamanites entered the borders of the neighboring Land of Noah. There they continued their depredations, carrying off many Nephite captives into the wilderness. At this juncture the Nephite General, Zoram, with his two sons, Lehi and Aha, rallied their forces in the hope of intercepting the Lamanite armies on their return to the Land of Nephi, and of delivering the captives.

Before starting on their march, Zoram determined to inquire of the Lord. He and his sons knew that Alma was a prophet and revelator unto the nation. Wisely they went first to him and sought to know if it was the Lord's will for them to advance into the wilderness in search of their captive brethren.

Alma laid the matter before the Lord. The divine answer came: "Behold, the Lamanites will cross the River Sidon in the South Wilderness, away up beyond the Land of Manti. And behold there shall ye meet them, on the east of the River Sidon, and there the Lord will deliver unto thee thy brethren who have been taken captive by the Lamanites."

Obedient to these plain instructions, Zoram and his sons crossed over the River Sidon with their armies, and marched southward beyond the borders of the Land of Manti, into that part of the great southern wilderness which lay east of the River Sidon. There they came upon the enemy, as the Word of the Lord had declared, and there they joined in battle. The Lamanites were defeated, scattered and driven into the wilderness, and the Nephite captives were delivered. Great was the joy in the Land of Zarahemla when it was found that not one Nephite had been lost of all those taken prisoners; but every one, great and small, had escaped the horrors of slavery in the hands of the Lamanites, and they all returned in peace to possess their own lands. Here we have the happy result of seeking the Word of the Lord and then faithfully carrying out His instructions.

Again there was peace throughout the land, but the name of Zoram, the Nephite General, is no more mentioned in the Sacred Record.

During this period of peace, Alma and his fellow brethren preached God's Holy Word in the power and demonstration of the Spirit, and with much success. Great prosperity came to the Church throughout all the Lands of the Nephites. At this happy time there was no inequality among members of the Church. The Lord poured out His Spirit upon every part of the land where His people dwelt, as Alma supposed it was to prepare their hearts for the coming of the promised Savior. Like many others of the ancient prophets, he antedated that glorious event. He little knew of the wars and contentions, the apostasies and dissensions, the spiritual tribulations and material commotion, that would precede that blessed day. But, however, with the prospect of Christ's coming at no far distant time, he labored and rejoiced, preached, blessed, and prophesied; never tiring or failing in his energies, and feeling sorrowful only because of the hardheartedness and spiritual blindness of some of the people.

At the same time that Alma was ministering to the Saints throughout the Land of Zarahemla, and also in seasons parallel with the horrific scenes enacted in Ammonihah, the sons of King Mosiah and their brethren were laboring in the Land of Nephi on a perilous mission they had undertaken to convert the Lamanites to belief in the Everlasting Gospel of Christ.

The names of Mosiah's sons were Aaron, Ammon, Omner, and Himni; among their companions were Muloki and Ammah. These all took their journey into the southern wilderness during the last year of Mosiah's reign, or 91 B.C. They carried with them their bows and arrows and other weapons, not to wage war but to kill game for their food in the wilderness. Their journey was a tedious one; they lost their way and almost lost heart, and indeed were on the point of returning when they received Divine assurance of their ultimate success. Nerved by this assurance, and with much fasting and prayer, they continued their wanderings, and before long reached the borders of the Lamanites. Commending themselves to God they here separated, each one trusting to the Lord to guide him to the place where he could best accomplish the purposes of Heaven.

Ammon entered the Lamanite territory at a Land called Ishmael. Here Lamoni was the chief ruler under his father who was King of all the Lamanites. Ammon was no sooner discovered than he was taken, bound with cords, and conducted into the presence of Lamoni. It was the custom of the Lamanites to so use every Nephite they captured, and it rested with the king whether the captive should be slain, imprisoned, or sent out of the country. The king's will and pleasure was the only law on such matters. The king's whim was the captive's reward.

Through God's grace, Ammon found favor in the eyes of Lamoni, and, learning that it was Ammon's desire to reside among the Lamanites, the king offered him one of his daughters to wife. Ammon courteously declined this intended honor and begged to be accepted as one of the king's servants, which arrangement pleased Lamoni, and Ammon was placed in that part of the king's household that had charge of the monarch's flocks and herds.

Lamoni was rich in the possession of many cattle, probably the result of taxes he levied upon his people, but even the king's property was not secure from theft. Marauding bands of rustlers would watch for his numerous flocks and herds as they approached their watering places. Then with yelling and prolonged shouting they would stampede the frightened, animals and drive away all they could beyond the reach of the king's servants. These would gather up what few cattle remained, if any they found, and return to the king in the full expectancy of being made to forfeit their lives in payment of the stolen domesticated beasts. They were seldom disappointed for Lamoni, or some one of his predecessors had established a somewhat unique criminal code with regard to stealing the royal cattle. They had adopted the idea that it was easier and cheaper to make the herdsmen responsible for the losses and to punish them therefore, than to hunt out and capture the thieves. It had at least one virtue, it prevented collusion between the robbers and the servants; but it produced much discontent among Lamoni's subjects.

On the third day of Ammon's service, one of these raids was made upon the king's cattle as they were being taken to the Waters of Sebus, the common watering place. The cattle fled in all directions, and the dispirited servants, with the fear of death before their eyes, sat down and wept instead of attempting to stop them. Ammon perceived that this was his opportunity. He first reasoned with the other servants, then he encouraged them, and having sufficiently aroused their feelings, he led them in the attempt to head off the flying herds. With much exertion he succeeded. The cattle were all gathered, but the robbers still watched and waited at the watering place to renew the attack when they drew near enough. Ammon perceiving this, placed the servants at various points on the outside of the flock and himself went forward to contend with the robbers. Though they were many, he knew he was more powerful than them all, for God was with him. The idea of one man withstanding so many was supremely ridiculous to the robbers. But as one after another fell before his unerring aim, they were astonished, and dreaded him as something more than human. Enraged at the loss of six of their number they rushed upon him in a body, determined to crush him with their clubs. Ammon, undaunted, drew his sword and awaited the onslaught. Their leader fell dead at his feet, and as one after another raised their dubs, Ammon struck off their arms until none dared to approach him, but, instead, retreated afar off.

It was a strange procession that returned to the palace of the king. The fears of the herdsmen had been turned into joy, and they marched in triumph into the presence of their royal master with the arms of the robbers as testimonies of the truth of the story of Ammon's prowess. Doubtless they did not diminish the telling points in the narrative; the numbers of the band, the courage of the Nephite, were each dilated upon with the vividness of superstitious imagination. When the king had heard their marvelous story his heart was troubled, and he came to the conclusion that Ammon must be the Great Spirit of whose existence he had an indistinct idea. He trembled at the thought that perhaps this Spirit had come to punish him because of the number of his servants whom he had slain for permitting his cattle to be stolen.

Notwithstanding his misgivings, Lamoni desired to see Ammon, who, acting as if nothing particular had happened, was preparing the king's horses and chariots, as the servants had been directed. When he entered the royal presence of the king, the king was too much filled with, emotion to speak to him. More than once Ammon drew to the king's attention that he stood before him as he had been commanded, and wished to know what were the king's desires. But Ammon's inquiries elicited no response. At last, perceiving the monarch's thoughts, he began to question Lamoni regarding sacred things, and afterwards to expound to him the principles of Life and Salvation. Lamoni listened and believed. He was conscience-stricken, and with all the strength of his new-born faith, he humbly asked the Lord to show the same mercy on him and to his people that He had shown to the Nephites. Overcome with the intensity of his feelings the king sank to the earth as in a trance. In this state he was carried to his wife, who with her children anxiously watched over him for two days and two nights, awaiting his return to consciousness. There was great diversity of opinion among his retainers as to what troubled the king. Some said that the power of the Great Spirit was upon him, others said an evil spirit possessed him, yet still others asserted that he was dead, and with remarkable acuteness of smell affirmed, "he stinketh." At the end of this time they had resolved to lay him away in the sepulchre when the queen sent for Ammon and pled with him in her husband's behalf. Ammon gave her the joyful assurance, "He is not dead, but sleepeth in God, and tomorrow he shall rise again." Then Ammon added, "Believeth thou this?" She answered, "I have had no witness, save thy word and the word of our servants, nevertheless I believe it shall be according as thou hast said." Then Ammon blessed her and told her "there has not been so great faith among all the people of the Nephties."

So the queen continued her loving watch by the bedside of her husband until the appointed hour. Lamoni then arose, as Ammon had foretold. Lamoni's soul was filled with heavenly joy. His first words were of praise to God, his next were blessings upon his faithful wife whose constancy he felt or knew. He testified to the coming of the Redeemer, and of His greatness, glory, power, and mercy, of which he had learned while in the spirit. His body was too weak for the realities of Eternity that filled his heart. Again Lamoni sank overpowered to the earth, and the same spirit overcame his wife also. Ammon's rejoicing heart swelled within him as he heard and witnessed these things. He fell on his knees and poured out his soul in praise and thanksgiving to God until he could not contain the brightness of the glory, the completeness of the joy, that overwhelmed him. Unconscious of all earthly things he sank beside the royal pair. The same spirit of unmeasured joy then fell upon all present, and with the same results. There was but one exception, a Lamanitish woman named Abish, who many years before had been converted to the Lord, but kept the secret in her own bosom. She comprehended the why and wherefore of this strange scene. She saw the workings of the Almighty through which the untutored minds of the Lamanites could be brought to an understanding of the Plan of Salvation. From house to house she went, calling the people to witness what had occurred in the palace of the king. They gathered at her call, but as might be expected, their impressions were very conflicting. Some said one thing, some another; some argued for good, some for evil; to some, Ammon was a god, to others, a demon. One man, who had a brother killed at the Waters of Sebus, drew his sword and attempted to slay Ammon, but was struck dead by an unseen power before he could carry his rash intent into action. So fierce was the contention, so angry grew the controversy, that Abish, fearing greater trouble, by an inspiration took hold of the hand of the queen, who thereupon rose to her feet. The queen's first thought was of her husband. She took his hand and raised him up, and ere long all who had been reposing in the spirit stood upon their feet. The king, the queen, the servants, all rejoiced with an ecstasy unspeakable. They all bore testimony to God's abundant love and goodness, and some declared that holy angels had visited them. Still the contention was not entirely appeased until Lamoni stood forth and explained to them the divine mysteries of which they were so ignorant. Many believed, others did not, but Ammon had the indescribable happiness of shortly thereafter establishing a Church to the Lord in the midst of the people of the Land of Ishmael. Ammon's humility, faith, and patience were bringing forth their fruit; while his soul gathered faith and strength in the fulfillment of the promises of the great Jehovah in answer to the pleadings of his faithful, loving, father.

When the Church was satisfactorily established in the Land of Ishmael, Lamoni arranged to pay a visit to his father who was the great king of all the Land of Nephi, to whom Lamoni was desirous of introducing Ammon. However, the voice of the Lord warned Ammon not to go, but instead thereof to proceed to the Land of Middoni where his brother Aaron and other of the missionaries were suffering in prison. When Lamoni heard of Ammon's intentions, and the causes thereof, he decided to accompany him. Lamoni felt that he could be more serviceable in releasing the prisoners than could Ammon alone, as Antiomno, the king of Middoni, was one of his personal friends and likely to grant any favor he might ask. They accordingly started on their errand of mercy, but on their way were surprised to meet Lamoni's father, who grew exceedingly angry when he found Ammon in the company of his son. All the hatred born and nurtured of false tradition boiled up in his breast. He listened impatiently to Lamoni's story of Ammon's visit and its fruits, and when it was finished he broke out in a torrent of abuse toward the Nephite "son of a liar," as he ungraciously styled Ammon, and ordered Lamoni to slay him. Lamoni, without hesitation, refused to become the murderer of his most loved friend, whereupon the old monarch, in the blind fury of his anger, turned upon his own son, and would have killed him if Ammon had not interposed. Little used to controversy, much less to direct opposition, the king was not softened by Ammon's interference. Savagely he turned upon Ammon, but youth, dexterity, and above all the protecting care of the Lord were with him, and he struck the king's sword arm so heavy a blow that it fell useless at his side. Realizing that he was now in the power of the man whom he had so foully abused, Lamoni's father made abundant promises, even to half of his kingdom, if his life was spared. This boon Ammon quickly granted, asking only favors for Lamoni and his own imprisoned brethren. The king, unused to such generosity and manly love, granted all Ammon's requests, and when he proceeded, on his journey his mind was filled with reflections regarding Ammon's courage and great love for his son. He was also troubled in his heart concerning certain expressions of Ammon on doctrinal points, which opened up ideas that were entirely new to his mind.

Lamoni and Ammon continued their journey to Middoni, where by God's grace, they found favor in the eyes of King Antiomno, and by his command the prisoners were released from the horrors and inhumanities practiced upon them. When Ammon met his faithful brethren, he was greatly grieved because of their naked, wounded, starved, and otherwise wretched condition, but when they were delivered they enjoyed a season of grateful joy, thanksgiving, and mutual congratulation. After this Ammon returned to the Land of Ishmael to continue his labors.

It appears that when Ammon and his brethren separated on the borders of the Lamanites, Aaron took his journey towards a Land called Jerusalem, which was situated near the Waters of Mormon (See Mosiah 18:4 Mosiah 18:4-8 ). Here the Lamanites, the people of Amulon, and some others, had built a great city to which they gave the name of Jerusalem. In this great city the people, many of whom were Nephite apostates, were very wicked. They would not listen to his teachings so he left them and went to a Village called Ani-Anti. There Aaron found Muloki, Ammah, and others preaching the Word, But their efforts were fruitless; the people of this place would not receive the truth, therefore he left them and went over to the Land of Middoni. There they preached unto many though few believed in their words. Before long the wicked raised a rebellion against Aaron and his brethren, and some of them were cast into prisons while others fled to escape the hatred of the Lamanites into regions round about. In prison they were treated with great cruelty; they were bound with strong cords which cut into their flesh; they were deprived of proper food, drink, and clothing, and otherwise suffered nameless afflictions. There they remained until they were released through the intercession of Ammon and Lamoni.

Some time after Aaron and his fellow-prisoners were released, he, with some others, went to the Land of Nephi-Lehi, or as it is more often called Nephi. They were presented before the old king who was the father of Lamoni. When this monarch saw them he was greatly pleased, for his heart had been touched by the words and conduct of Ammon. At his request Aaron explained to him many of the things that related to the nature of God; for, though he recognized the power and might of the Great Spirit, he was altogether ignorant of things concerning the Deity.

Aaron, by degrees explained to him the principles of the Everlasting Gospel. He commenced with the creation of man, showed the aged king how Adam fell that man might be, and how the Plan of Salvation, or the Plan of Redemption, through the Savior's sufferings was devised before the world was, and how man, by obedience to the Gospel, would triumph over death, Hell, and the grave.

Aaron's words were gratefully received by the king, who besought him to teach him how he might obtain this Eternal Life of which Aaron spoke. Aaron instructed the king to bow down before the Lord in prayer, and then in faith ask for the blessings he desired.

The aged king did as Aaron had told him. He prostrated himself on the ground and cried mightily, saying, "O God, Aaron hath told me there is a God, and if there is a God, and if thou art God, wilt thou make Thyself known unto me, and I will give away all my sins to know Thee, and that I may be raised from the dead and be saved at the Last Day." So great was the king's emotion that when he had said these words, he was struck as if he were dead.

When the king thus fell his servants ran and told the queen what had happened. She at once came into the room where he lay, and seeing Aaron and his brethren standing by, she became very angry as she supposed that they were the cause of evil that had, in her estimation, befallen her husband. She, without hesitation, ordered the king's servants to take the missionaries and slay them; but the servants dared not for they feared the power which was in Aaron. The queen was also afraid, but she seemed to think that the best way to get rid of the trouble was to destroy those who she fancied brought it. As the king's servants refused to obey her command, she ordered them to go out onto the streets and call upon the people to come in and kill Aaron and his companions.

When Aaron saw the temper of the queen, he feared lest the multitude, in the hardness of their hearts, would raise a great commotion, and be a cause of hindering the work of God, which had so auspiciously commenced with the king. Therefore he put forth his hand and raised the monarch from the earth, and at the same time said to him, "Stand." The king at once received his strength and arose, at the sight of which the queen and the servants wondered greatly and were filled with fear.

Then the king began to explain to them what he had learned while in the spirit in regard to God and the Gospel. He spoke with such power that his whole household was converted, and the multitude also that had gathered at the call of the queen were pacified by his words. At last when the king saw that their hearts were softened he caused that Aaron and his brethren should teach them the Word of God. After the king was converted, he sent a proclamation throughout the land forbidding any and all from persecuting Ammon and his missionary companions, giving them liberty to preach anywhere and everywhere that they desired. Our readers may be sure that this privilege was not neglected. To use Ammon's own words, the missionaries entered into the houses of the people and taught them; they taught them in their temples and synagogues, in the open streets and on the lofty hills. But often they were cast out, spit upon, smitten, stoned, bound, cast into prison, and made to suffer all manner of afflictions, from which the Lord, in His mercy, delivered them, and from which the king's proclamation afterwards protected them. Nor was the result of Aaron's labors trifling, but glorious in the saving of many souls; for unto the Lord were converted the people of the Lamanites who dwelt in the lands of Ishmael, Middoni, Shemlon, and also in the cities of Nephi, Lemuel, and Shimnilon; and they became a righteous, peaceful, God-serving people; and from faithful obedience to His Law they never fell away. But the various bodies of Nephite apostates who dwelt among the Lamanites universally rejected the Gospel message, with the exception of one single Amalekite, and of what ultimately became of him we have no record.

History often repeats itself, but we have no recollection of any parallel to the events that followed this marvelous conversion. The Lamanite people now became two as distinct and separate bodies as they and the Nephites had beforetimes been. But with this strange complication, the apostate Nephites now occupied the place and did the work of the natural Lamanites, while the true descendants of Laman and Lemuel took the ground previously held by the righteous Nephites. So clearly defined did the division become that the supreme ruler (Lamoni's father), having turned from the traditions, habits, and customs of the Lamanites, was determined to also cast aside the old name. If they were Lamanites in name only they would cut that weak cord which alone held them to the past, and be as new in name as they were in spirits, feelings, hopes, loyalty, and religion. So, after advising with Ammon, and his fellow missionaries he gave to his people the name of Anti-Nephi-Lehies, and to his son, to whom he transferred the royal power, that of Anti-Nephi-Lehi.

The renegade Amalekites, Amulonites, and others, were not willing to be ruled by a Christian monarch. They had rejected Christianity altogether, and would not have it as the ruling power, either in Nephi or in Zarahemla. With the old sophistries and falsehoods they raised a mutiny in the hearts of their associate Lamanites and urged them on to rebellion against the rightful king and his believing subjects. But the converted Lamanites made no preparations to resist them; they felt that in times past with unholy hands they had spilt blood as water on the land; blood that they could never atone for, but they would do it no more. Passive non-resistance would for the future be their policy, but the blood of a fellow being they would never again shed no matter how great the peril, or how intense the aggravation. As a witness of the completeness of this resolve, they took their weapons of war and buried them deep in the earth with an oath and a covenant that they would never dig them up again. When the maddened hosts of their embittered brethren rushed upon them, they came forth unarmed, bowed down before their assailants, and submitted to their fate. With them, to live was Christ, to die was Salvation. The vengeful Nephite apostates led the inglorious charge and shed most of the blood that flowed that day, when 1005 unresisting martyrs glorified the Lamanite Race by the tribute of their lives to God and the truth. A thousand ransomed souls, washed white in the Blood of the Lamb, that day entered the Gates of Heaven to stand amongst the saviors on Mount Zion in the Great Day of the Redeemed. Nor was there joy alone in that bright World Beyond, but on Earth the Church of God was gladdened by fresh accessions to His cause. When many of the actual Lamanites -not apostate Nephites—witnessed the great change that had taken place in the hearts of their brethren, even that they would quietly, peacefully, joyously, lay down their lives, their consciences smote them; they stayed their hands, and rose in tumult against their Amalekite leaders, and refused more to be the murderers of their kin. The blood of the martyrs was indeed the seed of the Church, for there were more added to the Fold of Christ on that memorable day than all those who had passed away to the presence of their God.

Near the close of their glorious undertaking among the Lamanites in the Land of Nephi, Ammon and his brethren met in what developed to be a grand reunion where all rejoiced in the blessings which the Lord had bestowed upon them. Great was their happiness in the success which crowned their efforts, for had they not, they reasoned, brought literally thousands of their Lamanite brethren into Christ's Church? Ammon ended his Song of Praise with these words: "Now my brethren, we see that God is mindful of every people, whatsoever land they may be in; yea, He numbereth His people, and His bowels of mercy are over all the Earth. Now this is my joy, and my great thanksgiving; yea, and I will give thanks unto my God forever. Amen."
