Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

THE BOOK OF ALMA

CHAPTER 27

Alma 27 1 Verse 1

The Lamanites found it was impossible to destroy the Nephites. When the Lamanite warriors who had gone down into the Land of Zarahemla intent upon the destruction of the Nephites saw that their intended victims were more than equal to the planned onslaught of their Amalekite commanders, they changed whatever plot they had designed and made a disorganized retreat to the Land of Nephi whence they had come. In vain the darkskinned hordes of Laman had struggled to impose the godless will of their apostate leaders upon the faithful and peaceful Nephites. In vain they had challenged the might of the Lord in preserving His people. Now defeated and confused the Lamanite army sought the seclusion of their homes in their own land.

Alma 27 2 Verse 2

Alma 27 2 The Amalekites were exceeding angry. The great losses sustained by the Amalekites in their repeated assaults upon the beleagured Nephites so weakened their attacking forces that it was useless for them to attempt any further depredations. In their efforts they had faltered, then disbanded; there was One more powerful than they. The prayers of the righteous Nephites had prevailed on Him who reigns On High. They were delivered! It is enlightening to remember that of the many Lamanites who were slain by the Nephites in defense of their homes most of them were Amalekites and Amulonites.

Alma 27 2 Now it happened that because of their losses, not only in men and their equipment, but in morale as well, the Amalekites no longer held the firm grasp that they previously had upon their underling hosts. They sought for revenge that they imagined would repay the ruin that had come upon them. But they saw that to obtain it from the Nephites was a hazardous undertaking in which they had already failed. In their disappointed pride which grew more bitter and malignant as their defeat became more apparent, they began to incite the remaining part of their disorganized army to murder their brethren, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies [^1], whom they said were friendly to the Nephites. The Sacred Record says: "Therefore they began to destroy them."

Alma 27 3 Verse 3

Alma 27 3 The Anti-Nephi-Lehies again refused to take their arms. Notwithstanding what appeared to mean sure death in so doing, the Christian Lamanites refused again to use their implements of war even in defending themselves. Their almost passionate determination not to shed the blood of their fellow men stiffened the resolve they had made when they buried their swords deep in the earth ( Alma 24:12-18 ). "They suffered themselves to be slain according to the desires of their enemies."

Alma 27 4 Verse 4

Alma 27 4 Ammon and his brethren were moved with compassion. The slaughter of the Anti-Nephi-Lehies by their vengeful brethren, the unbelieving Lamanites, could not go unheeded by Ammon and his fellow missionaries who were filled with compassion for the defenseless believers in Christ. Because of their love for all His children, Ammon and his brethren had offered their lives upon the altar of service in God's Kingdom. They had forsaken all they held dear to proclaim the Gospel to the benighted Lamanites whom they knew to be a "wild and a hardened and a ferocious people." On the other hand, too, the Lamanites whom they, with the help of the Lord, had converted to His cause, looked upon the missionaries "as though they were angels sent from God to save them from everlasting destruction." The love of each, that is the missionaries and the converts they had made, was mutual, and in their distress which was also mutual, Ammon and his brethren sought ways and means to deliver the oppressed Anti-Nephi-Lehies from a fate so appalling that it made the strongest among them quake with despair and anguish.

Alma 27 4 To the end that the Anti-Nephi-Lehies should be freed from the prospect of annihilation the missionaries consulted with the king, whose name also was Anti-Nephi-Lehi. In the hope that justice would prevail, and that mercy from Heaven be given, the Nephite servants of God judged that the Lord, having so thoroughly tried the faith of this devoted people would provide some way of escape. With this thought in mind, "they said unto the king":

Alma 27 5Verse 5

Alma 27 5Let us flee out of the hands of our enemies. Ammon and his brethren were not willing to have the new disciples continually harassed by their enemies and be ultimately exterminated. No doubt plan after plan to insure their safety had been devised and then laid aside as being unworkable. To return blow for blow and injury for injury had not even entered their heads. At last they saw only one way to escape the wrath and hatred of their erstwhile friends and neighbors. That was in flight! To go some place and settle there where peace and liberty prevailed was the objective of which they dreamed. That place was in the land of the Nephites. There, if the Christian Lamanites could be transplanted, they would be safe from the predatory assaults and the angry passions of their former countrymen.

Alma 27 5"Let us gather together this people of the Lord, and let us go down to the Land of Zarahemla to our brethren the Nephites, and flee out of the hands of our enemies, that we be not destroyed," was the counsel the Lord's servants gave to the king."

Alma 27 6Verse 6

Alma 27 6Behold, the Nephites will destroy us. You will remember that the king, Anti-Nephi-Lehi, was only recently born to a new life in Christ, and with this new life came new ideals. He was now about to learn the meaning of just one of those ideals. For centuries the Lamanites had been brought up in hatred of the Nephites. On every hand they had sought to destroy what their white brethren had laboriously made. Their spite of the Nephites was keen and inexhaustible. Murder, robbery, rapine, and all manner of vicious crimes gave shape and form to the method the Lamanites used to lay waste the peaceful pursuits of the Nephites. Raid after raid, assault upon assault, especially in the outlying districts, kept the Nephites in a constant dread of open warfare. True, many of the Christian Nephites often resorted to reprisal. Ill will, and a desire to get even, guided their actions. Thus we find retaliatory measures were used by both in seeking to subdue each other's ambitions whether good or bad.

Alma 27 6The king now came into direct opposition to this age-old practice. Ammon and his brethren taught him the great truth that Christian people do not harbor the idea of reprisal. Neither do they long remember the past. Forgiveness is a Christian virtue. It was taught by the Lord, Himself, and was graven upon the Brass Plates of Laban and therefore was familiar to Ammon and the other missionaries because King Mosiah, the father of four of the missionaries, had them in his possession, and the study of them was the greatest part of his sons' education. The Lord in remonstrating with His people, Israel, said through the prophet: " . . . thou hast wearied Me with thine iniquities." But He continued, "I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for Mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins." ( Isa. 43:24-25 ) This promise to ancient Israel included, we may be sure, that branch of the tree that was transplanted in the Western Hemisphere.

Alma 27 6The Nephites at this time were full of the spirit of forgiveness, they loved the Lord and sought to do His bidding. Having taken upon themselves the Name of Christ, and having truly repented of their sins, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, nevertheless thought that the Nephites would destroy them for past sins which they had committed if they settled in their midst. This afforded a rare example to the king of Christian forgiveness. He needed not to have expected the Christian Nephites to meet out to his people the penalties of savage warfare, but, instead, the Christian Law of love which both peoples had espoused. He was further assured that the Nephites would not attempt to right a wrong by committing another wrong. Imbued with the Spirit of Christ men do not return evil for evil. Neither do they fight error with evil intentions. Therefore, King Anti-Nephi-Lehi was mistaken when he supposed that the Nephites in Zarahemla would destroy his people because of deeds perpetrated by them in the past, and of which they had now fully repented.

SC Alma 27 7 Alma 27 8 Alma 27 9 Alma 27 10Verses 7-10

SC Alma 27 7 Alma 27 8 Alma 27 9 Alma 27 10Ammon said: I will go and inquire of the Lord. When Ammon and his fellow missionaries saw and realized that any plan of theirs to deliver their brethren from the hands of their enemies was beforehand doomed to failure, they, after much tribulation and searching of their souls, decided to place their problem directly before the Lord. They knew that He was wiser and more powerful than them all, and that He would not forsake them nor leave them in their grief. Confident that He would hear and answer their supplications, Ammon, in the strength of his faith, cried unto his brethren and to the king: "I will go and inquire of the Lord."

SC Alma 27 7 Alma 27 8 Alma 27 9 Alma 27 10Ammon's solemn proposal found immediate acceptance in the king's heart. What before had appeared as an utterly unanswerable and dark mystery now became illumined with light and hope from Above. Despair gave way to gladness; the king saw triumph in the Lord; together with Ammon he affirmed the joyful prospect, "Yea, if the Lord saith unto us go, we will go down unto our brethren, and we will be their slaves until we repair unto them the many murders and sins which we have committed against them,"

SC Alma 27 7 Alma 27 8 Alma 27 9 Alma 27 10Ammon thereupon explained another of the great Christian ideals to the king. It had been the habit of the Lamanites for many generations to make slaves of any Nephites who fell into their hands, this or slay them. But with the Nephites it was different. The Nephites, being of the House of Israel, could not observe the Law of Moses and enslave their brethren. (See Mosiah 2:13 ) Also according to the Code of Mosiah which was the supreme law of the Nephites it was unlawful to make slaves of human beings. Ammon knowing the hearts and the desires of the Nephites, their willingness to forgive and their anxiety to extend the Gospel of Christ unto all men, answered the king: "therefore let us go down and rely upon the mercies of our brethren."

SC Alma 27 7 Alma 27 8 Alma 27 9 Alma 27 10The king, now more than ever, was anxious to rely on the wisdom of the Lord. Again he bade Ammon: "Inquire of the Lord, and if He saith unto us Go, we will go; otherwise we will perish in the land." With no thought of abandoning his new belief in Christ and His Gospel to gain respite from earthly tribulations, Anti-Nephi-Lehi was ready to obey the counsels of God, and in the event that the Lord said No, he was ready to pay the cost of his recently discovered faith with the sacrifice of his life.

SC Alma 27 11 Alma 27 12 Alma 27 13 Alma 27 14 Alma 27 15Verses 11-15

SC Alma 27 11 Alma 27 12 Alma 27 13 Alma 27 14 Alma 27 15Ammon went and inquired of the Lord. We judge by the text that Ammon went by himself to place his petition before the Lord. Here in the solemnity of a Heavenly grace, and with no desire but to aid his fellow men, Ammon poured forth his unselfish soul to the great Giver of all Good. No doubt he reminded the Lord of the devotion of the Anti-Nephi-Lehies; of their integrity to righteous principles; of their loyalty to His servants, and of their trials and afflictions. To Ammon's fervent prayer the answer came. The Lord said unto him: "Get this people out of this land, that they perish not." (Verse 12) The Lord promised a blessing on them besides the instructions He gave unto Ammon. The Lord said: "Blessed are this people in this generation, for I will preserve them."

SC Alma 27 11 Alma 27 12 Alma 27 13 Alma 27 14 Alma 27 15The Word of the Lord thus received was joyfully obeyed. The Anti-Nephi-Lehies gathered up their flocks and herds, and departed into the wilderness that lay between the lands of Nephi and Zarahemla. There they rested while Ammon and his brethren went forward and treated with the Nephites in behalf of the persecuted hosts they had left behind.

SC Alma 27 16 Alma 27 17 Alma 27 18 Alma 27 19Verses 16-19

SC Alma 27 16 Alma 27 17 Alma 27 18 Alma 27 19Ammon and his brethren meet Alma. As Ammon and his fellow missionaries were on their way to the City of Zarahemla, they, in one most glorious event, had unspeakable joy. They met Alma, the companion of their youth who was now the Presiding High Priest of God's Church. Alma was traveling south on one of his missionary journeys from the Land of Zarahemla to the Land Manti when the meeting occurred. Mutual rejoicing crowned the reunion. (See Commentary on the Book of Mormon, Volume 3, p. 242 ff, also Alma 17:1-4 ) The joy that filled Ammon's bosom was more than his physical body could endure and he fell to the earth, his strength exhausted. (Read the 26th Chapter of Alma where Ammon's rejoicing in the Lord is more fully stated.)

SC Alma 27 20 Alma 27 21 Alma 27 22 Alma 27 23 Alma 27 24 Alma 27 25Verses 20-25

SC Alma 27 20 Alma 27 21 Alma 27 22 Alma 27 23 Alma 27 24 Alma 27 25Behold, we will give up the Land of Jershon. The story of the plight of the Christian Lamanites was rehearsed to Alma, who on hearing it, returned with the missionaries to Zarahemla. There the condition of affairs among the Lamanites was unfolded to the Chief Judge, who thereupon laid the whole subject before the people, so that whatever was done in relation to the Anti-Nephi-Lehies might be done by common consent.

SC Alma 27 20 Alma 27 21 Alma 27 22 Alma 27 23 Alma 27 24 Alma 27 25The Nephites decided to give the Land of Jershon to these people for an inheritance. And not only that, but because the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi had foresworn any resort to arms, no matter how much they were provoked to do so, the Nephites also pledged their armies in the protection of the newcomers. "And behold, we will set our armies between the Land Jershon and the Land Nephi, that we may protect our brethren in the Land Jershon."

SC Alma 27 20 Alma 27 21 Alma 27 22 Alma 27 23 Alma 27 24 Alma 27 25The Land Jershon was situated to the north of the City of Zarahemla, and was evidently chosen for the reason that the strength of the Nephite Nation would lie between the fugitives and their former countrymen, the Lamanites, who thirsted for their blood. It was bounded by the Caribbean Sea and the Land Bountiful on the north and east, and by the Land of Antionum on the south. Its western boundary is not defined, but we are inclined to believe, from the context, that it was the River Sidon. With regard to its southern boundary ( Alma 31:3 ) Antionum lay to the south of it.

SC Alma 27 20 Alma 27 21 Alma 27 22 Alma 27 23 Alma 27 24 Alma 27 25Jershon means the Land of the expelled, or of the strangers. We think it altogether probable that this significant name was given it at the time it was set off for the habitation of these expatriated Lamanites, as it defines their condition as exiles, and their relation to the Nephites as strangers. The name is not mentioned before this event, and would possibly be the only local name by which it was known to the compiler of the Book of Mormon. Before the date of the exodus of the Anti-Nephi-Lehies, it was, we think, considered a part of the Land of Zarahemla.

SC Alma 27 20 Alma 27 21 Alma 27 22 Alma 27 23 Alma 27 24 Alma 27 25The only condition imposed on them by the Nephites upon giving up this vast area to the Christian Lamanites was that the newcomers should help maintain the army which was necessary to protect them by imparting a portion of their "substance" to assist in carrying on.

SC Alma 27 20 Alma 27 21 Alma 27 22 Alma 27 23 Alma 27 24 Alma 27 25With this cheering news Ammon, accompanied by Alma, returned into the Southern Wilderness, to the place where his people were awaiting the decision of the Nephites. There the Anti-Nephi-Lehies were ministered to and comforted by Alma and others. After a short period of preparation in which both bodies and minds of the travelers were strengthened, they resumed their journey to the land set apart for their future abode.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30Verses 26-30

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30And they went down into the Land of Jershon. The Anti-Nephi-Lehies, after a further long journey to Jershon, occupied that land, and set to work making it another center of Nephite productiveness.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30In honor of Ammon, who was their leader, the Anti-Nephi-Lehies took upon themselves his name, and thereafter were called the People of Ammon. Also from that time forth they were considered to be part of the Nephite Nation, and were numbered among the "people who were of the Church of God."

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30It was a requirement of the Saints then, as it is now, to have their names written in the books of the Church. Thus they were numbered among its members. This was, we may be sure, an ancient Israelitic custom which was an inspired institution among them. The Nephites had inherited this custom from the Jews who were their ancestors. We read more often that names of transgressors were blotted out. [^2] Their names were taken from the number of those who remained faithful, and in this manner a record was kept of all who continued in fellowship one with the others.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30Moroni, the last writer in the Book of Mormon, describes fully the reasons for and the qualifications of those who by their actions proved themselves worthy of being numbered with the members of God's Church:

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30And now I speak concerning baptism. Behold, elders, priests, and teachers were baptized; and they were not baptized save they brought forth fruit meet that they were worthy of it.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30Neither did they receive any unto baptism save they came forth with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, and witnessed unto the Church that they truly repented of all their sins.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30And none were received unto baptism save they took upon them the Name of Christ, having a determination to serve Him to the end.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30And after they had been received unto baptism, and were wrought upon and cleansed by the power of the Holy Ghost, they were numbered among the people of the Church of Christ; and their names were taken, that they might be remembered and nourished by the good Word of God, to keep them in the right way, to keep them continually watchful unto prayer, relying alone upon the merits of Christ, who was the Author and the Finisher of their faith. ( Moro. 6:1-4 )

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30Although the foregoing was written nearly 500 years after the account of the Ammonites was recorded, the words of Moroni, though he did not mention them therein, speak eloquently of the spiritual and moral qualities that imbued the Lamanite Saints of God in the days of Alma, the younger. We may be assured that the same requirements have been made of all those who have affiliated themselves with the Church of God in every generation of its adherents.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30The Sacred Record says of the Ammonites, we presume it is a comment made by Mormon the abridger of Alma's record:

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30"And they were also distinguished for their zeal towards God, and also towards men; for they were perfectly honest and upright in all things; and they were firm in the faith of Christ, even unto the end."

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30The hardened ways of the Lamanites, their savage and ferocious nature, their bloodthirsty desires, upon which from childhood the Ammonites had been nurtured, were now all swallowed up in their views and hopes in Christ, for they saw in Him an everlasting and glorious victory over death. They neither flinched when death approached, nor did they fear it. Again the Sacred Record says that when threatened with death they awaited its coming calmly, and even joyously. (Read Alma 23-25 ) "They never did look upon death with any degree of terror."

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30Now, in this generation of mankind, when the world and the things of the world threaten to crowd all thoughts of God from our hearts, it seems to be the proper time to consider well the story of the Ammonites told in the Book of Mormon; their fidelity to God, and their integrity to righteous principles. "Too many of us, day by day, go our way forgetting His wisdom and guidance," The tasks and trials of life, its pursuits and pleasures, absorb us, and we have little time or thought for else than "What shall we eat, or what shall be drink, or wherewithall shall we be clothed?" However, the satisfaction of those demands is not the aim or the end of our actions. It is not the true objective of life! The real purpose of our existence, the ideal life, has been revealed by God to all His children everywhere. That is a life in Christ. None of His Children have been forgotten. He revealed to the Ammonites, through His Nephite servants, enough to establish in them the hope in Christ which they cherished and from which they never fell away. Their belief in Him was a great bulwark in their defense when the powers of Satan sought their destruction. This is true and real life has also been revealed to us! The birth of Christ, His death and resurrection, are revelations of divine love which we can no more ignore than we can the air we breathe. The Ammonites made this life of which we speak, their life.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30David in his 23rd Psalm likens life unto a valley through which all must pass; death is its end. And that from birth the travelers there through are continually overshadowed by a coming woe which they cannot escape. Now what are our thoughts of death? If we thought of it at all, it was with fears, and tears, and trembling. Many think of death as a cold and dark chasm along the highway of life where despair and anguish take possession of our souls. This is a wrong conception of this wonderful experience. With Christ in our hearts, it should be the reverse. It is, notwithstanding the sorrow caused at passing, the brightest incident of life. For as we approach that land where the poet says, "All have gone and all must go:" we see emblazoned upon the very portals of Eternal Life, the words of our Lord and Savior, Jesus of Nazareth: "I am the resurrection and the life: he that believeth in Me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: And whosoever liveth and believeth in Me shall never die." ( John 11:25-26 ) No doubt Ammon and his fellow missionaries had taught this very same doctrine, though in different words, to the believing Lamanites.

SC Alma 27 26 Alma 27 27 Alma 27 28 Alma 27 29 Alma 27 30"Therefore," the sacred historian says of the Ammonites, "They would suffer death in the most aggravating and distressing manner which could be inflicted by their brethren, before they would take the sword or cimeter to smite them. And thus they were a zealous and beloved people, a highly favored people of the Lord."

Chapter 27

The Indian word Quichua corresponding to anti is, we are assured, anta, which Garcilasso de la Vega tells us means copper. (Royal Commentaries, Book 5, Chapter 14) From anta the magnificent mountain chain that forms the backbone of South America was called the Andes, possibly because of the abundance of metals, especially copper, found in these mountains.

In the Book of Mormon, anti means a mountain or hill. When it is used to denote a country it probably means a hilly or mountain country, and when the name is applied to a city, it may indicate its location in a mountain region. In the same way Anti-Nephi-Lehies may mean that they were located in a hilly or mountainous country. As applied to a piece of money, the word would indicate that they were made of an alloy in which copper formed a considerable part.

Anti appears in Antisuyu, the name given by the Peruvians to the eastern part of their vast domain, that is, to the part that is traversed by the loftiest ridges of the Andes Mountains. That proves, beyond question, that the Peruvians used the word exactly as we find it used in the Book of Mormon.

Antipas is a name of a mount or hill on the summit of which Lamanite armies on one occasion had gathered themselves for battle. ( Alma 47:7 Alma 47:7 ) This is a genuine Indian word. On the mountain slopes of the Cordilleras, in the upper Amazon Basin, there is, according to Dr. Brinton (The American Race, p. 284), a tribe of Indians, of the Jivaro linguistic stock, known as the Antipas. They are described as "rather tall, or light color, with thin lips, aquilline noses, straight eyes, prognatic jaws, hair black or with reddish tint."

Blotted out Numbered

---
Notas:
[^1] Anti. There are several words in the Book of Mormon in which anti is one of the component parts, as for instance, Ani-Anti, the name of an Amalekite village in which Aaron, Muloki, and Ammah, preached the Gospel. ( Alma 21:11 Alma 21:11 ) Anti-Nephi-Lehi, the name of a king and also of a people. ( Alma 24:1 Alma 24:1-5 ) Antion, a piece of gold used as money. ( Alma 11:19 Alma 11:19 ) Antipas, the name of a mountain. ( Alma 47:7 Alma 47:7 ) All are instances, with others, that denote that the word was in common use among the people of Nephi.
[^2] Blottd out. Following is a complete concordance of the term, as it is used in the sense that there is something taken from; it means to cancel, expunge, efface.
