Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 28

Alma 28 1 Verse 1

Alma 28 1 The armies of the Lamanites had followed their brethren into the wilderness. No sooner had the Ammonites taken up their refuge in the Land of Jershon, and had established a Church of God therein, and notwithstanding that the Nephite armies had ringed them about with protective strength, the armies of the Lamanites came upon the Ammonites intent upon destroying their former brethren who had escaped their wrath in the Land of Nephi. But the Nephites had been made ready. Not only were the forces of the Nephites deployed around the Ammonites' new home in Jershon, but the Nephites expecting a general assault by the Lamanites upon all their settlements both far and near, posted their warriors "in all the borders round about the Land of Zarahemla." The Nephites did this to anticipate any sudden raid by the Lamanite hordes in any district whatsoever, and to ready themselves for the coming conflict which promised to be fierce and decisive.

Alma 28 2 Verse 2

Alma 28 2 Thus there was a tremendous battle. The Nephites and the Lamanites joined battle. It was bloodthirsty and cruel. The Lamanites made furious charges to inspire terror within the ranks of their less malignant and menacing brethren. But the Nephites stood their ground. They did not falter or yield to their ferocious foes. Never before, even since the forefathers of their race had inhabited the land, had such a devastating and "tremendous battle" been fought between the enlightened descendants of Nephi and their dark skinned brethren, the savage Lamanites. In a general statement the Sacred Record says that "tens of thousands of the Lamanites were slain and scattered abroad."

Alma 28 3 Verse 3

Alma 28 3 Yea, and also there was a tremendous slaughter among the people of Nephi. Notwithstanding the gallant and successful defense of their homeland by the Nephites many of their men, women, and children, were destroyed by the inhuman tactics of the barbarous Lamanites. Yet in the end of hostilities the Lamanites were driven out of the Nephite lands, and as has been said, were scattered abroad, presumably into spent remnants of a once powerful host. The Nephites, then, when peace once more ruled their lives, returned to their own lands to again care for their flocks and herds, and again raise crops of corn and barley which was the greater part of their sustenance, and their main standard of value. Their money being valued by a measure of barley.

SC Alma 28 4 Alma 28 5 Alma 28 6Verses 4-6

SC Alma 28 4 Alma 28 5 Alma 28 6Now this was a time that there was a great mourning . . . among all the people of Nephi. In spite of the fact that the Nephites were victorious in the dread conflict with the Lamanites, they were themselves sorely tried. Upon their return to the homes they had established throughout the Land of Zarahemla the Nephite defenders of their sod found many of their crops ruined, their flocks and herds scattered, and what was worse yet, that numbers of their loves ones and their neighbors had been slain by the hands of the wicked Lamanites. Not only that, but the returning warriors, in many cases, did not bring home with them a father, or a son, a husband or a brother, who had gone forth together in a band to defend their sacred religion and their home land which, too, was sacred to them.

SC Alma 28 4 Alma 28 5 Alma 28 6Day after day as the widows and orphans awaited the return of their husbands and fathers who did not come, and parents their sons and sisters their brothers, whose existence only a short time previously had presaged for the Nephites a grand and glorious future, the realization that their loved ones would not come back turned their joy into sorrow and their laughter into mourning "for their kindred who had been slain." "Now this was a time that there was a great mourning and lamentation heard throughout all the land, among all the people of Nephi." (v. 4)

SC Alma 28 4 Alma 28 5 Alma 28 6Mormon, the abridger of Alma's record, reasserts in verse six the sorrow that was almost universal among the Nephites at this time. He says it was a day of "solemnity," and we may judge for ourselves the suffering caused by the loss of dear ones which loss left many women and children without adequate means of support. If it had not been for their reliance upon a merciful God in Whom they had been taught to trust they might have been overwhelmed. But in Him they lived, and by Him they were sustained. Almost as one they invoked His holy Name, and almost as one they received from Him succor according to the hour and power of their need. He did not forsake them, nor leave them in their grief. We shall see as we progress further in our study of this Branch of the House of Israel, that as long as Nephi's descendants kept the commandments of the Lord a Providential care enfolded them about, and by their enemies they were never overcome.

Alma 28 7Verse 7

Alma 28 7End of the Fifteenth Year. Mormon here notes that the Judges had ruled the people of Nephi for a continuous period reaching back from when the Republic was rounded by King Mosiah to the present time which then was 76 years Before Christ.

Alma 28 8Verse 8

Alma 28 8This is the account of Ammon and his brethren. This verse is a resumé of the account previously given by Mormon, himself, of the mission to the Lamanites by the Sons of King Mosiah. In it he reiterates, or calls to our attention their vast travels in the Land of Nephi among the Lamanites; he notes the afflictions which they endured, the sorrows which no doubt purified and strengthened them, and their almost "incomprehensible joy" at the end of the mission which they, with the help of the Lord, had so gloriously performed. Mormon also notes "the reception and the safety" of the converted Lamanites in Jershon which was a land set aside by the Nephites as the Land of the Ammonites' inheritance. He ends this part of the summary he made with a prayer that the Lord, the Redeemer of all men, would bless the souls of the missionaries forever.

SC Alma 28 9 Alma 28 10 Alma 28 11 Alma 28 12Verses 9-12

SC Alma 28 9 Alma 28 10 Alma 28 11 Alma 28 12And the fifteenth year of the reign of the Judges is ended. Mormon, the abridger, saw in retrospect the vast amount of suffering that had befallen the Nephites during the fifteen years that had transpired since King Mosiah had established a republic as the Nephite form of government. He saw in these years where the teachings and influence of Nehor had led many of his brethren to destruction. He saw where priestcraft had entered into the worship of Nehor's followers. He saw where brethren had been turned against brethren, and where strife and angry passion had mocked divine guidance. He also saw where the ambitions of Amlici had been frustrated, but not without the loss of many lives. Mormon, in making the abridgment of Alma's record had read over and over again Alma's and Amulek's account of the wickedness that abounded in Ammonihah, and where that City with all its iniquitous people had been destroyed by the Lamanites. All in all he saw in the first fifteen years of the Reign of the Judges "an awful scene of bloodshed," and that therein those years had "brought to pass the destruction of many thousand lives." The annals of those times revealed to him the depravity into which some of the Nephites had fallen.

SC Alma 28 9 Alma 28 10 Alma 28 11 Alma 28 12May we imagine the sorrow, and in fact, the indignation that filled Mormon's breast as he contemplated the appalling destruction that had taken place among his forebears, many of whose dead bodies, he read from the Larger Plates of Nephi, lay strewn about the battlefields on which they had fought and bled that righteousness should prevail, and that God alone should be their King. He saw in it all the awful penalties of disobedience to God's laws, wherein men had chosen to follow darkness instead of that which cometh from the light. Alma recorded, and Mormon thought it was important to include in his abridgment, that there were at least two important conclusions drawn by the Nephites of this period: First, that many of the dead, because of unbelief, had been "consigned to a state of endless wo." Therefore they feared for the future of their loved ones who had not kept God's commandments. They remembered the "promises of the Lord" in which the warning was given that all such ones would suffer as if tortured in a "lake of fire and brimstone." Then, too, there were the Lamanites who had refused to accept the light when it was placed before them. It must be kept in mind when studying the Nephite Records that the children of Nephi always regarded the Lamanites as brethren, and saw in them the victims of a corruption that had been foisted upon them by a wicked ancestry. The Nephites therefore truly mourned for the Lamanites who had been slain, they seeing no redemption for their fallen brethren. Secondly, according to the same promises that had been made to the wicked, those who had died in Christ were assured of a grand and glorious hereafter. The Sacred Record says, "Many thousands of others truly mourn for the loss of their kindred, yet they rejoice and exult in the hope, and even know, according to the promises of the Lord, that they are raised to dwell at the right hand of God, in a state of never-ending happiness."

SC Alma 28 13 Alma 28 14Verses 13-14

SC Alma 28 13 Alma 28 14And thus we see how great the inequality of man is because of sin and transgression. No lesson presented in the Nephite Record is more vividly shown or as frequently given than the one here that Mormon emphasizes. He stresses the point that it is "sin and transgression, and the power of the devil" that divides men into class and class distinction. We may trace many Nephite woes to pride and self-anointed righteousness. The ambition of Amlici to be king of the Nephites is an example of what we mean. His desire to exercise unrighteous authority over his brethren started with pride which in turn had its beginning in the things of the world which he and his followers had accumulated. His wicked aim was to destroy the Republic which was God-inspired. Satan put it into Amlici's heart to aspire to kingship, and thereby overthrow the Work of the Lord. In this way the Nephites were divided into two classes: Those who hoped to profit by Amlici's wicked venture, and those who stood fast with Alma in upholding the law of the land. The evil intent of Amlici not only divided the Nephites into two great groups, but it resulted in open warfare in which internecine strife thousands of Nephites on both sides were slain. 'The "cunning plans" which Satan put into Amlici's heart failed to thwart the purposes of God.' Mormon saw in the experiences of these fifteen years that God will not forsake His people, nor as the Psalmist says, "Leave them in their grief," when they earnestly seek to do His will. In other words, there is nothing that equalizes men more than does righteous behavior. We all stand before God as equals, save those who do and those who do not, obey His words. There is nothing that equalizes men more than by them walking together with the Lord. Again, how often this truth is made known to us when we study the Nephite Scriptures!

SC Alma 28 13 Alma 28 14That righteousness abound and wickedness be brought to naught, that all His enemies be subdued and men dwell together in unity and peace, is the triumphant call that goes forth to every God-serving man to labor in the Lord's Vineyard that all the people of the Earth shall rejoice in the mercies of Christ, that in Him death is not the end, but only a narrow corridor which leads to a life that is eternal.

SC Alma 28 13 Alma 28 14Mormon's rejoicing, even though sorrow for his forebear's folly dulled his song of triumph, gives us exceeding cause to exult with him "because of the light of Christ unto life."
