Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 29

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 Verses 1-2

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 O that I were an angel. (In theology, an angel is a messenger of God.) This entire chapter (29) is a discourse made by Alma to himself, when in solitude, he contemplated the glory with which all mankind would be crowned when they yield to God's command to repent. It is a soliloquy which finds Alma talking to Alma when none but God was near. It is a song of praise in which he exults in God's goodness and mercy. It is an unselfish prayer for the welfare of each and all. In it Alma expresses the innermost desire of his heart: "To cry repentance unto every people." "O that I were an angel," he entreated, "that I might deliver this message to all the world." "O that my voice would be as the sound of God's trump"; that it be like thunder, the reverberations of which would shake the earth. Alma's burning desire was that the Gospel of Jesus Christ should be proclaimed to every nation under Heaven; that it should be preached in power to every kindred, tongue, and people. That he should be an instrument in God's hands to that end was the prayer he uttered.

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 It is the opinion of the authors hereof that when Mormon, the abridger of Alma's record, saw this prayer that Alma had engraved upon the Larger Plates of Nephi, he, after reading it time and time again, copied it word for word, or nearly so, in the abridgment of the Nephite Records he was making, and which translated is the Book of Mormon. Thus we have preserved to us what we believe to be a full copy of Alma's prayer.

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 In the 65th Section of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants is recorded another prayer which when read in conjunction with this one of Alma's will illumine much that we now see as through a glass darkly, and makes clear many things that seem distorted and confused because of the imperfect glass above mentioned.

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 Alma saw, in the bitter contentions that rise between the forces of evil and the righteousness of the righteous, a never ending source of sorrow which eventually, like a flood of water, would inundate all peoples, bond and free, good and bad, male and female, alike. If he had, for so he yearned, a voice of thunder, his words, he mused, would penetrate even the most formidable barriers, and would therein summon all men to "repent and come unto our God, that there might not be more sorrow upon all the face of the Earth."

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 Alma, imbued as he was with wisdom from On High, reasoned gently with himself that when all men should invoke God's Holy Name, sorrow would disappear, hatred would be no more, and peace, God's most precious gift, would cover the Earth. Happiness and peace would then take the place of sorrow and mourning. He thought of the words of Isaiah that Nephi had engraved upon his Smaller Plates: "And it shall come to pass in that day that the Lord shall give thee rest, from thy sorrow, and from thy fear . . . " (2 1 Ne. 24:3 2 Ne. 24:3 ) Other words of the Prophet Isaiah undoubtedly came to his mind, and in them Alma rejoiced for all the Nephites delighted in the Prophet's words. (See 2 1 Ne. 25:5 2 Ne. 25:5 ) Thinking of the words of Isaiah he remembered that on an occasion the Lord, Himself, in comforting Israel referred to that day spoken of by Isaiah, and caused the Prophet to promise that then "all thy children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy children." ( Isa. 54:13 ) Alma, with bands stronger than iron, tied-together peace and the cause for which he hoped: "no more sorrow upon all the face of the Earth." He also remembered the words of the Psalmist that were written upon the Brass Plates of Laban. In singing praises to the Creator, who was the King of all, David, Judah's king, exclaimed, "Great peace have they which love thy law . . . " ( Ps. 119:165 ) Peace and gladness, Alma knew were inseparable as were sorrow and travail. He wanted peace that sorrow would be expelled. But not, we imagine, any and every peace. He wanted the peace of which King David spoke: Peace rounded upon truth, upheld and sustained by righteousness. Any peace in opposition to this he profoundly meditated is, "Peace, peace, when there is no peace." ( Jer. 6:14 ) The thought ran through his head: How can there be peace if sorrow prevails? And again, How can there be sorrow when peace is established? He thought of peace, and rest from sorrow through Christ, the Prince of Peace. He would enlist all men under His Royal Banners. Alma pondered over and over again that blessed day when sorrow would disappear, and hatred would be no more, and even its prospects brought him joy and gladness. Again he thought of sorrow and fear, also of the promised peace and rest. O what a gap between them! These last, Alma concluded were the marks of God's presence, His power, and His great purposes.

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 As Presiding High Priest of God's Church, Alma had in his possession the Smaller Plates of Nephi, and of their contents he was closely acquainted. About 500 years earlier than Alma's time, Nephi, the son of the Prophet Lehi,—when the plates of which we have spoken were quite new—engraved a remarkable statement made to him by an angel from Heaven. This explanation of what the Lord will do is of exceeding great importance to every Latter-day Saint as it was no doubt to Alma. In its fulfillment he saw the fruition of his hopes:

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 For the time cometh, saith the Lamb of God, that I will work a great and a marvelous work among the children of men; a work that shall be everlasting, either on the one hand or on the other—either to the convincing of them unto peace and life eternal, or unto the deliverance of them to the hardness of their hearts and the blindness of their minds unto their being brought down into captivity, and also into destruction, both temporally and spiritually, according to the captivity of the devil, of which I have spoken. (1 1 Ne. 14:7 1 Ne. 14:7 )

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 Peace and Life Eternal go hand in hand.

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 All in all, Alma saw that by keeping the commandments of the Lord peace would be established, and Christ's Millennial reign will be begun. It is the work of righteousness, ever, to establish peace and eliminate all sorrow. Peace, the Lord's peace, is our portion. It is the source from whence springs our fulness of joy, and our gladness; our happiness and content; our love for God's law, and again we repeat the Psalmist: "Great peace have they which love Thy law."

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 And still again Alma thought of that day when sorrow shall disappear, and peace will cover the Earth. Silently Alma meditated long in prayer; fervently he inscribed these words upon the Larger Plates of which he was custodian:

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 "O that I were an angel, and could have the wish of mine heart, that I might go forth and speak with the trump of God, with a voice to shake the earth, and cry repentance unto every people."

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 This wish of Alma's had its inception in his own experience. In his conversion, when in gaiety he with the sons of King Mosiah went about persecuting the Saints of God, an angel from the Courts of Glory stopped them on their way, and with a voice of thunder which shook the earth upon which they stood, commanded them to no more follow the wicked course they then pursued, but to repent and serve the Lord thereafter. Alma remembered the awful sense of his guilt, and to save others from the fate to which he and his companions were headed, prayed for the same power as the angel's that he might lead all mankind to glorify the Name of the Eternal Father.

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 We need go no farther back than Alma's words recorded in the preceding chapter to sense the terrific anxiety for the welfare of God's Kingdom which imbued him, and caused him to write: "O that I were an angel, . . . "

SC Alma 29 1 Alma 29 2 And thus we see the great call of diligence of men to labor in the vineyards of the Lord; and thus we see the great reason of sorrow, and also of rejoicing—sorrow because of the death and destruction among men, and joy because of the light of Christ unto life. ( Alma 28:14 )

SC Alma 29 3 Alma 29 4 Alma 29 5 Alma 29 6Verses 3-6

SC Alma 29 3 Alma 29 4 Alma 29 5 Alma 29 6But behold, I am a man. Almost immediately Alma saw and recognized the impropriety of his wish. The Lord of the Vineyard wherein Alma labored had in wisdom obtained a choice field, and it had produced much good fruit. Its Master had provided husbandmen to care for the trees and preserve them. To some was given the task of preparing the soil; to others to dig about the roots of the trees, and still others to water, and to nurture, and to gather in the precious crop when harvest time should come. A special commitment was given to every workman. Each one had a duty to perform. All worked together that the trees should abundantly bring forth good fruit. Alma was one of these workmen.

SC Alma 29 3 Alma 29 4 Alma 29 5 Alma 29 6Its Owner had given to Alma particular charge of His Vineyard in Zarahemla. That sacred duty was a trust in which Alma delighted. The Head Keeper of the Vineyard had watched over Alma as if Alma, himself, was a watered garden. He had hedged Alma about; He had placed watchmen over him that none should despoil or ravage the tender flowers that blossomed in his heart. Angels from Heaven had ministered unto him. The Holy Spirit had sustained him in time of need. Knowledge from On High had guided his footsteps. Alma knew good and evil; he also had the power to choose right and wrong. Alma's mission was in Zarahemla. There, with his own people he could lead and counsel them. However, in spite of the great work God had allotted him, Alma sought world-wide service: "to cry repentance unto every people." But a sudden change came over Alma. To do well the work that God had assigned him was the thing he wanted most to do. To labor in that part of the Lord's Vineyard wherein he had been called became uppermost in his mind. "Now seeing that I know these things, why should I desire more than to perform the work to which I have been called?" In his mind he undoubtedly recalled the words of Jacob, the Prophet Nephi's brother, "Wherefore, brethren, seek not to counsel the Lord, but to take counsel from His hand. For behold, ye yourselves know that He counseleth in wisdom, and in justice, and in great mercy, over all His works." ( Jacob 4:10 )

SC Alma 29 7 Alma 29 8Verses 7-8

SC Alma 29 7 Alma 29 8Why should I desire that I were an angel? Only in different words, a Jewish concept of Jacob's sentiment is expressed thusly: In every part of the Earth and in all ages of the World, God has raised up men and women to struggle and endure that His word should be preached to all people, that in the end every nation, kindred, tongue, and people should hear His voice.

SC Alma 29 7 Alma 29 8To the thoughtful student of religious history especially as it is outlined in the written annals of the Restored Church of Jesus Christ (L.D.S.), the thoughts expressed by Alma are being borne out by factual experience. Except for a time when the Gospel was being introduced in the several nations of the Earth, men of that nation have been raised up to teach the word of the Lord in wisdom "all that He seeth fit that they should have." Thus we see, for example, the Lord is now raising up Chinese to declare His word among that people; Japanese are being prepared by Him to carry the Gospel Message to the Nipponese, and Polynesians to them that inhabit the Islands of the Pacific. "The Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach His word."

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Verses 9-10

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10I know that which the Lord hath commanded me, and I glory in it. These words of Alma's bring to our minds similar words of his intrepid father when in the Land of Helam his followers clamored for him to be their king. The student will recall that Alma, the elder, was commanded of the Lord to gather up the righteous in the Land of Nephi, where many Nephites had emigrated, that they might possess again the land of their father's first inheritance. Under their leader, Zeniff, they became a great and mighty people. Upon Zeniff's death, his son, Noah, became king, and the people were led by him into all manner of iniquities

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Alma's father did as he was commanded, and with him several hundred members of Christ's Church, which was established by him, escaped the clutches of wicked King Noah, and journeyed through the wilderness until they came to a suitable spot in which they set up a community that at length prospered far beyond that for which they had hoped. It was then they desired that the elder Alma should be their king. He refused their request, saying:

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10 . . . Behold, it is not expedient that we should have a king; for thus saith the Lord: Ye shall not esteem one flesh above another, or one man shall not think himself above another; therefore I say unto you it is not expedient that ye should have a king.

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Nevertheless, if it were possible that ye could always have just men to be your kings it would be well for you to have a king.

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10But remember the iniquity of King Noah and his priests; and I myself was caught in a snare, and did many things which were abominable in the sight of the Lord, which caused me sore repentance;

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Nevertheless, after much tribulation, the Lord did hear my cries, and did answer my prayers, and has made me an instrument in His hands in bringing so many of you to a knowledge of His truth.

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Nevertheless, in this I do not glory for I am unworthy to glory of myself. ( Mosiah 23:7-11 )

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Alma's thoughts were like those expressed by Jeremiah who prophesied to the Jews about the same time Father Lehi left Jerusalem, and who, it appears, was personally acquainted with him:

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Thus saith the LORD, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches:

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the Lord which exercise loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the earth: for in these things I delight, saith the LORD. ( Jer. 9:23-24 )

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10We need only turn back to the account of the mission performed by the sons of King Mosiah. At the conclusion thereof the joy experienced by Ammon and his brethren knew no bounds. Alma took great comfort in the words of Ammon:

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Yea, I know that I am nothing; as to my strength I am weak; therefore I will not boast of myself, but I will boast of my God, for in His strength I can do all things; yea, behold, many mighty miracles we have wrought in this land, for which we will praise His Name forever.

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Behold, how many thousands of our brethren has He loosed from the pains of hell; and they are brought to sing redeeming love, and this because of the power of His word which is in us, therefore have we not great reason to rejoice?

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Yea, we have reason to praise Him forever, for He is the Most High God, and has loosed our brethren from the chains of hell.

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Yea, they were encircled about with everlasting darkness and destruction; but behold, He has brought them into His everlasting light, yea, into everlasting Salvation; and they are encircled about with the matchless bounty of His love; yea, we have been instruments in His hands of doing this great and marvelous work.

SC Alma 29 9 Alma 29 10Therefore, let us glory, yea, we will glory in the Lord; yea, we will rejoice, for our joy is full; yea, we will praise our God forever. Behold, who can glory too much in the Lord? Yea, who can say too much of His great power, and of His mercy, and of His long-suffering towards the children of men? Behold, I cannot say the smallest part which I feel. ( Alma 26:12-16 )

SC Alma 29 11 Alma 29 12 Alma 29 13Verses 11-13

SC Alma 29 11 Alma 29 12 Alma 29 13Yea, and I also remember the captivity of my fathers. Directed by his thoughts which were guided by the Holy Spirit within him, Alma took a retrospect of his past life, and gloried in the God of all goodness Whom he served, and to Whom he offered praise and thanksgiving. Alma's joy was unbounded as he prayerfully contemplated the long-suffering of the Lord and His mercy.

SC Alma 29 11 Alma 29 12 Alma 29 13Had not the Lord God, the Mighty Father of all men, Alma asked himself, delivered his earthly fathers from the sore bondage of the Lamanites in the Land of Nephi; also the righteous of his brethren from the wicked grasp of King Noah? Again Alma meditated on the power and the purposes of the Lord God, and saw in them the wisdom of a higher Judge than he to bring about the eternal Plan of Salvation. For, he knew it was by the grace of God alone that through his fathers' delivery from the bitter gall of afflication that His Church, "Yea," the Church of "the Lord God, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob," was established by his intrepid father.

SC Alma 29 11 Alma 29 12 Alma 29 13Going back still further in the recesses of his mind, Alma remembered the Children of Israel, that they had been delivered from Egyptian bondage by the power of that same God Who had only recently severed the bands of Lamanitish serfdom that had held his fathers in its unyielding malignity. Alma's fathers, both far and near, had experienced the working of God's power, His glory and dominion, in their preservation. Now, in humility, Alma reasoned that the same God Who had worked such marvelous works among his fathers had also called him "to preach the word unto this people, and hath given me much success, in the which my joy is full." Alma's success in bringing souls to Christ reminds one that to do so is the greatest work of the angels in Heaven, or of men on Earth. Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints have a similar duty as did Alma. "The Lord has called us to His service, and has found us worthy to be His witness to the peoples of the Earth. May we receive grace to fulfill this mission with zeal tempered with wisdom and guided by a regard for other men's faith. May our lives prove the strength of our belief in the things we proclaim. May our bearing toward our neighbors, our constancy in defeat or triumph, our faithfulness in every sphere of duty, our compassion for the suffering, our patience under trial, show that He Whose laws we obey is the God of all goodness and the loving Father of all men; that to serve Him is our greatest freedom, and to worship Him the soul's purest happiness."

SC Alma 29 14 Alma 29 15 Alma 29 16 Alma 29 17Verses 14-17

SC Alma 29 14 Alma 29 15 Alma 29 16 Alma 29 17My joy is more full because of the success of my brethren, who have been up to the Land of Nephi. Alma's joy in being in the service of the Lord was rendered even greater when he, almost in exultation, contemplated the marvelous work that was performed by the sons of King Mosiah and the other missionaries who went with them, and for fourteen years had labored among the Lamanites in the Land of Nephi preaching the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

SC Alma 29 14 Alma 29 15 Alma 29 16 Alma 29 17 Alma thought of the missionaries' faithfulness in every sphere of duty; of their patience under trial; of their compassion for their dark skinned brethren who then suffered in ignorance of the Plan of Salvation. He thought of the long years they had labored as husbandmen in the Lord's Vineyard, and we are constrained to say that their lives proved the strength of their belief in the things they proclaimed, and that the God Whom they served was indeed the loving Father of all men. (See Comments on previous verse.) Behold, Alma noted, they had labored exceeding, almost unceasingly, that when harvest time came round, and the field which was left in their care yielded its meat, the gathering thereof would be bounteous and its fruit good. "How great shall be their reward."

SC Alma 29 14 Alma 29 15 Alma 29 16 Alma 29 17 Alma now closed his humble prayer, which was a song of thanksgiving and praise to God for His mercy, with an added supplication to the Almighty Father that "these my brethren, that they may sit down in the Kingdom of God; yea, and also all those who are the fruit of their labors that they may go no more out, but that they may praise Him forever. And may God grant that it may be done according to my words, even as I have spoken. Amen."

A complete concordance of the word glory, or any of its modifications is hereby appended; also the word wisdom:

Query Link Glorified Glorify Glorious Glory Great Glory His Glory My Glory Glory Wisdom Wise
