Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 33

SC Alma 33 1 Alma 33 2 Verses 1-2

SC Alma 33 1 Alma 33 2 Behold, ye have said that ye could not worship your God because ye are cast out of your synagogues. No doubt Alma paused for a moment's rest between portions of his lengthy sermon, of which rest the throng that had gathered there were quick to take advantage. Alma's message met with a deep response among them. It is true many did not understand the meaning of his words, but they nevertheless took them to be good. Some wanted to know more of God; their belief in Him and whether or not He was just one, or many different Beings. Alma had spoken to them of a certain kind of precious fruit which they might pluck from a tree planted as a seed in their hearts. Behold, he told them that if they would water and nurture such a seed, that it would swell and sprout, and that they would feel it grow, and then they "must needs know that the seed is good." By caring for the seed planted in their hearts, they would show by doing so that they had begun to exercise their faith. Concerning these things, and many others, they wanted Alma to speak further.

SC Alma 33 1 Alma 33 2 Reverting in his mind, Alma remembered the lament of one of their number, apparently their leader, who, in his anguish, had reached the depths of despair, because, not only he but also his fellows, had been cast out of their synagogues and therefore had no place in which to worship God. ( Alma 32:5 ) They were poor in the things of the world, and could contribute little of earthly goods to the priests and leaders of the church. One is reminded of Jacob's words, the Prophet Nephi's brother: But wo unto the rich, who are rich as to the things of the world. For because they are rich they despise the poor, and they persecute the meek, and their hearts are upon their treasures; wherefore, their treasure is their God. And behold, their treasure shall perish with them also. (2 1 Ne. 9:30 2 Ne. 9:30 ) Thus the Zoramites regarded their poorer brethren.

SC Alma 33 1 Alma 33 2 However, Alma, himself, was quick to carry home his message of forbearance. "Ye do greatly err," he said unto them, "if ye suppose that ye cannot worship God" without synagogues or sanctuaries. Search the Scriptures, it may be, perchance, ye have not understood them when they speak of houses of worship.

SC Alma 33 3 Alma 33 4 Alma 33 5 Alma 33 6 Alma 33 7 Alma 33 8 Alma 33 9 Alma 33 10 Alma 33 11Verses 3-11

SC Alma 33 3 Alma 33 4 Alma 33 5 Alma 33 6 Alma 33 7 Alma 33 8 Alma 33 9 Alma 33 10 Alma 33 11What Zenos, the prophet of old, has said concerning prayer or worship. Copies of the Hebrew Scriptures were quite common among the Nephites, and Alma, taking foreknowledge of their wide distribution, called upon the throng standing before him to look for themselves in them and see what two of the ancient prophets said about prayer and worship. Alma cited Zenos and Zenock. He quoted Zenos. That they would find in the prophet's words a complete answer to the problem that perplexed them, Alma told them.

SC Alma 33 3 Alma 33 4 Alma 33 5 Alma 33 6 Alma 33 7 Alma 33 8 Alma 33 9 Alma 33 10 Alma 33 11 Alma read to them what Zenos said: Thou art merciful, O God, for Thou hast heard my prayer, even when I was in the wilderness; yea, Thou wast merciful when I prayed concerning those who were mine enemies, and Thou didst turn them to me. Yea, O God, and Thou wast merciful unto me when I did cry unto Thee in my field; when I did cry unto Thee in my prayer, and Thou didst hear me. And again, O God, when I did turn to my house Thou didst hear me in my prayer. And when I did turn unto my closet, O Lord, and prayed unto Thee, Thou didst hear me. Yea, Thou are merciful unto thy children when they call unto Thee, to be heard of Thee and not of men, and Thou wilt hear them. Yea, O God, Thou hast been merciful unto me, and heard my cries in the midst of Thy congregations. Yea, and Thou hast also heard me when I have been cast out and have been despised by mine enemies; yea, Thou didst hear my cries, and wast angry with mine enemies, and Thou didst visit them in Thine anger with speedy destruction. And Thou didst hear me because of mine afflictions and my sincerity; and it is because of Thy Son that Thou hast been thus merciful unto me, therefore I will cry unto Thee in all mine afflictions, for in Thee is my joy; for Thou hast turned Thy judgments away from me, because of Thy Son.

SC Alma 33 12 Alma 33 13 Alma 33 14 Alma 33 15 Alma 33 16Verses 12-16

SC Alma 33 12 Alma 33 13 Alma 33 14 Alma 33 15 Alma 33 16Do ye believe these scriptures which have been written of old? After having read the words of Zenos, Alma not only was confident that the question which troubled the anxious multitude was therein answered, but furthermore, the message of Christ's Salvation was also made plain. "Thou hast turned away Thy judgments because of Thy Son," reveals to us that the entire meaning of the Plan of Life and Salvation was known to the worthies of old, as it is now understood by us. Besides Zenos, Zenock also prophesied concerning the coming of the Son of God to Redeem His people. Alma also read Zenock's words which were written on the Brass Plates of Laban: Thou art angry, O Lord, with this people, because they will not understand Thy mercies which Thou hast bestowed upon them because of Thy Son.

SC Alma 33 17 Alma 33 18Verses 17-18

SC Alma 33 17 Alma 33 18Zenos and Zenock were not the only ones who have spoken concerning the Son of God. Alma gave the information that because Zenock testified of the Son of God, and further that the people among whom he prophesied would not "understand his words," they put him to death in a most ignominous manner. Besides these two already mentioned, Alma called forth other prophets to testify to the Son of God.

SC Alma 33 19 Alma 33 20 Alma 33 21 Alma 33 22Verses 19-22

SC Alma 33 19 Alma 33 20 Alma 33 21 Alma 33 22Behold, He was spoken of by Moses. When Moses and the Children of Israel were wandering in the Wilderness of Arabia, the Plan of the Messiah was only rudely understood by all except the great leader, himself. To awaken them to a lively interest in things spiritual, and establish among them something to constantly remind them of the responsibility they bore as God's chosen people—at the same time bring them blessings that was part of their heritage—a type of the Messiah, or a thing regarded as a symbol of Him who was yet to come, was placed in the midst of Israel that all who looked upon It obtained the gifts and promises that come through obedience. Look upon, we believe to mean observe and keep the ordinances and testimonies of the Messiah, whom the type mentioned portrayed, or represented. "Many did look and live."

SC Alma 33 19 Alma 33 20 Alma 33 21 Alma 33 22Because of "the hardness of their hearts" many of the Children of Israel did not understand what was meant by the Type established pertaining to what they looked forward. Others of them, more hardened than they, refused to abide by the laws God gave them through Moses. Some would not even look, because, Alma offered the explanation that their faith was insufficient to make themselves believe that they would be "healed" of their infirmities.

SC Alma 33 19 Alma 33 20 Alma 33 21 Alma 33 22Alma, now made a direct appeal to the assembled throng. The first principle of the Gospel of Jesus Christ had been the theme of his sermon. Faith in Him was a simple, yet effective, measure which was to be taken by all who desired to know the mind and will of God. Some fifty years earlier than Alma's time, King Benjamin, in Zarahemla, taught faith in God as a necessary principle, and belief in His power of redemption as a saving grace for all mankind: Believe in God; believe that He is, and that He created all things, both in Heaven and in Earth; believe that He has all wisdom, and all power, both in Heaven and in Earth; believe that man doth not comprehend all the things the Lord can comprehend. And again, believe that ye must repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that He would forgive you; and now, if you believe all these things see that ye do them. And again I say unto you as I have said before, that as ye have come to a knowledge of the glory of God, or if ye have known of His goodness and have tasted of His love, and have received a remission of your sins, which causes such exceeding great joy in your souls, even so I would that ye should remember, and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and His goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the Name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith of that which is to come, which was spoken by the mouth of the angel. And behold, I say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of Him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true. ( Mosiah 4:12 )

SC Alma 33 19 Alma 33 20 Alma 33 21 Alma 33 22If, Alma argued, all that is necessary is to cast your eyes about you, and see for yourselves the marvelous Salvation of the Lord as did the Children of Israel, would "ye not behold quickly, or would ye rather harden your hearts in unbelief?" Would ye rather be "slothful" or indolent, and too lazy, to "cast about your eyes" and therefore perish when all that is required of you is that you see and recognize the great Redemption of the Lord? Yet, it is as easy to believe on the Son of God and have faith in His Atoning Blood, that it "shall bring to pass the resurrection" of the dead and other great and marvelous works, as it was for the Children of Israel to "look" upon the "type" of the Messiah which was raised in their midst. Prepare now by believing in Him, for it is the proper time to make yourselves ready to stand, as all men must, before Him, "to be judged at the Last and Judgment Day, according to their works."

Alma 33 23Verses 23

Alma 33 23May God grant unto you that your burdens may be light, through the joy of His Son. Alma had provided the Zoramites who had gathered about him with the seed which he invited them to plant in their hearts. That seed was the Word of God! If, when you receive that seed and feel it swell within you, then "even so nourish it by your faith," he counseled them. That little seed once it becomes imbedded within a sincere heart, will sprout and send its tender shoots into every part of the body, and will grow and grow until at last it will become a tree whose fruit will be good, and will in turn nourish its keeper, or in other words, will feed the one who has watched over it, guarded it, and maintained a care of it. It will continue to grow and develop into a tree, "Springing up in you unto Everlasting Life."

Alma 33 23In closing his words which he delivered to them, Alma, always cognizant of the burdens carried by any of his people, prayed to God that the load these Zoramites bore would be made light through a belief in the Son of God, and that although they had no synagogue in which to worship Him, they would be enabled to do as did the Prophet Zenos: Worship Him in the wilderness; in their own fields of grain, in their closets at home, among their flocks and herds, and when they, as was he, cast out and was despised by his enemies. In the joy they would receive through obedience to God's will, Alma promised that they could do all these things, and ended his exhortations by a benediction, Amen.
