Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 35

SC Alma 35 1 Alma 35 2 Verses 1-2

SC Alma 35 1 Alma 35 2 The missionaries withdrew themselves . . . and came over to the Land of Jershon. When Amulek had finished his address to the multitude, and in the opinion of Alma the missionaries had done all the good that seemed possible, they, including those who labored elsewhere, withdrew from the Land of Antionum and "came over to the Land of Jershon," thus leaving the apostate Zoramites to tread their own devious way.

SC Alma 35 3 Alma 35 4 Alma 35 5 Alma 35 6 Alma 35 7Verses 3-7

SC Alma 35 3 Alma 35 4 Alma 35 5 Alma 35 6 Alma 35 7The Zoramites were angry because of the word. No sooner had the missionaries left than the more crafty of the Zoramites devised a plan to discover the feelings of the community. They gathered the people together throughout the land and consulted with them concerning that which they had heard preached. In this way they quickly found out those who favored the missionaries' message, and those who rejected it. Finding that the poor and uninfluential were those who received it, they resorted to persecution and plunder. They drove the believers from their homes and out of the land. Most of these fled to the Land of Jershon, whither Alma and his associates had preceded them.

SC Alma 35 3 Alma 35 4 Alma 35 5 Alma 35 6 Alma 35 7The Land of Jershon was inhabited by the People of Ammon. They also had left home and country for truth's sake, and now that others were suffering from the same cause, they received them with open arms as it were. They fed and clothed them, and gave them lands whereon they might build up new homes.

SC Alma 35 8 Alma 35 9 Alma 35 10 Alma 35 11 Alma 35 12 Alma 35 13Verses 8-13

SC Alma 35 8 Alma 35 9 Alma 35 10 Alma 35 11 Alma 35 12 Alma 35 13The Zoramites were angry with the people of Ammon. When the wicked Zoramites heard of the kind reception their injured fellow-citizens had received in Jershon they were greatly angered. They were not content to spoil them themselves, but they wanted to make them fugitives and vagabonds on the face of the whole earth. Their leader, a very wicked man, sent messengers to the Ammonites, desiring them to expel the refugees, adding many threats of what would follow should his cruel demand not be complied with. But the Ammonites were a brave people; they had already suffered unto death for the cause of God; and they were not of the kind to desert their afflicted brethren.

SC Alma 35 8 Alma 35 9 Alma 35 10 Alma 35 11 Alma 35 12 Alma 35 13The refusal of the Ammonites to drive them out, or to force the converted Zoramites to abandon their newly found homes in their midst, further angered their haughty antagonists from the south to all kinds of depredations. The hatred of the apostate Zoramites knew no bounds. They began to incite the cruel Lamanites to again make war on the peaceful Ammonites. Nevertheless, the Ammonites remained firm in their resolve not to bow to the demands made of them to be unfaithful to their trust. Rather than do so, they would again forsake their homes and find in some other region a land of peace: for we must remind our readers that the Ammonites had entered into covenant with God never again to bend the bow, or draw the sword to take human life. They therefore withdrew to the Land of Melek, and the armies of the Nephites occupied the Land of Jershon that they might better contend against the combined forces of the Lamanites and the wicked Zoramites.

SC Alma 35 14 Alma 35 15 Alma 35 16Verses 14-16

SC Alma 35 14 Alma 35 15 Alma 35 16 Alma . . . returned to the Land of Zarahemla. After ministering to the needs of the Ammonites in the Land of Jershon, Alma and Ammon and their fellow missionaries, returned to their homes in Zarahemla. The results of their labors were indeed great, for they had carried the Gospel Message to a great many of the Zoramites who had accepted it, and had in every way complied with its requirements.

SC Alma 35 14 Alma 35 15 Alma 35 16Wishing not to be disrupted in their desire to continue on in their easy-going way of life, the leaders and the priests of the apostate Zoramites resolved that to be rid of the believing ones among them would be the simplest way to carry on their nefarious, or impiously wicked, teachings without any hindrance whatsoever. Those who accepted the truth and repented of the folly that had ensnared them in the fowlers' net, were driven "out of their land," but, however, in the Land of Jershon they were made welcome and given lands which under their religious laws—the Law of Moses—were to be theirs for a permanent inheritance. The new homes they established in Jershon made it their homeland, and to defend it from attack by any erstwhile friends now turned enemies became an obligation to their wives and children that quickly turned peaceful adverents of the Gospel into warlike avengers of the atrocities that had been perpetrated upon them.

SC Alma 35 14 Alma 35 15 Alma 35 16Alma's mission whereunto he had been called to preach the Gospel was not ended when he returned to Zarahemla. Instead, it seems to have been the reverse. With a doubled zeal he went to every city and among all people and declared to all who would listen to his words the great truths of Life Eternal. But gradually, we conceive, with a heart bowed down with anxiety for God's cause, he became aware that the people were not observing the Law as they had been taught. Prosperity had again hardened their hearts and again it was enfeebling their efforts in the advancement of God's Kingdom. He sought new ways to infuse fresh efforts in the attempt to stop the decline in the rapidly deteriorating moral and spiritual fibre of the Nephite people which to him was apparent.

SC Alma 35 14 Alma 35 15 Alma 35 16As before time was done by many of the prophets and teachers of old, he called his sons to him and charged them concerning the things of righteousness. Separately, one by one, he admonished them pertaining to what the Lord required of them, and with a father's blessing on each, he solemnly pronounced the Lord's blessings.
