Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 38

The Commandments of Alma to His Son, Shiblon

SC Alma 38 1 Alma 38 2 Alma 38 3 Verses 1-3

SC Alma 38 1 Alma 38 2 Alma 38 3 I say unto you, even as I said unto Helaman. In blessing his son, Shiblon, Alma repeated what he beforetime had promised Helaman when that worthy pronounced a father's blessing upon the head of his eldest son. To bless his sons, when age made uncertain the length of time a patriarch would dwell with his children here below, was a sacred rite which had been inherited by the Nephites from their forefathers, the Israelites who dwelt in the Land of Jerusalem. This promised blessing was first made by the Lord, Himself, to the Prophet Nephi and to all those who would keep the commandments of God, and it was oft repeated by His servants. It was that "inasmuch as ye shall keep the commandments of God ye shall prosper in the land; and inasmuch as ye will not keep the commandments of God ye shall be cast off from My presence." ( Jarom 9 ; Omni 6 ; Mosiah 1-7 )

SC Alma 38 1 Alma 38 2 Alma 38 3 The aged Alma, feeling that his time upon Earth was getting short, took delight, and great satisfaction in acknowledging to Shiblon that his integrity and faithfulness unto God brought his father unmeasurable joy. Shiblon was yet very young, but notwithstanding his youth, he evinced remarkable steadiness. His devotion to duty, his bearing toward those among whom he labored, his compassion for the afflicted, his patience under trial, his long-suffering when persecution threatened to rob him of his faith in God and in his calling, filled his father's heart with gladness. That Shiblon would always remain faithful in keeping the Lord's commandments was Alma's heartfelt desire, for he said, "Blessed is he that endureth to the end." Alma, a short time before this father-son episode, took Shiblon to Antionum to preach the Gospel of Christ to the Zoramites, and there he had seen manifest the rather uncommon qualities in Shiblon's character that made of him a great preacher of righteousness.

Alma 38 4 Verse 4

Alma 38 4 I know that thou wast in bonds. What seemed to crown with God's favor, Shiblon's determination to serve the Lord completely, was Shiblon's fixed conclusion to walk undaunted in the path of duty and fidelity to his Maker even though it might cost him all that was near and dear to him. Imprisonment could not deter him in the fulfillment of his commitment to declare the Word of the Lord; and when stoned because of his testimony of Christ, he bore all obloquy with patience and never, in spite of threats, retracted his words. When Shiblon's mission among the apostate Zoramites was ended, and he, in retrospect, viewed again the scenes of his travail among them, he rendered thanks unto God, his Preserver, for he knew that no power but the Lord's kept and delivered him from the hatred of such blood-thirsty men as those who had forsaken the truth, and now were seeking to destroy the Church of God.

Alma 38 5Verse 5

Alma 38 5Put your trust in God. As He had in the past, so in the future, God will deliver you out of your trials if you put your trust in Him. Just as in the exact ratio of the fear of Him that animates your being, just so will be the help and strength you will receive at His hands. "Ye that fear the Lord, trust in Him," is an old Jewish proverb, "He will not forsake you, nor leave you in your grief." This thought Alma impressed upon the youthful mind of Shiblon, and promised that whatsoever might come upon him the Spirit and power of God would deliver him and lead him "out of your trials, and your troubles, and your afflictions, and ye shall be lifted up at the Last Day."

SC Alma 38 6 Alma 38 7 Alma 38 8Verses 6-8

SC Alma 38 6 Alma 38 7 Alma 38 8It is the Spirit of God . . . which maketh these things known to me. Not of himself, but by the Holy Spirit of God which was in him, and therein guided him into all truth, Alma emphasized, did he know these things. The old and perhaps well-known account of his father's miraculous conversion was again cited by Alma to his son, Shiblon. It was this: a dramatic change had suddenly come into Alma's life. When before he had been rebellious, had rejected the truth, and even persecuted the righteous because of their righteousness, now all was changed. There was a change without, therefore there was a change within. The things Alma before had loved, he now hated, and what he once despised he now drew close to his bosom. Alma now loved the Lord, and sought with all his might to do His bidding. He was a different man, a new man. If he had been energetic in his wrong-doing, he was yet more active in his works of restitution. He testified to Shiblon "for if I had not been born of God I should not have known these things." (See Chapter 36:5-24, Book of Alma)

Alma 38 9Verse 9

Alma 38 9There is no other way or means whereby man can be saved, only in and through Christ. Alma, personally, as father to son, testified to Shiblon the great truth that only through Christ, can man's salvation be wrought. "He is the life and the light of the world. Behold, He is the Word of Truth and Righteousness," he said, painting a vivid picture in Shiblon's mind of the greatness and the majesty of the Lord, thereby connoting, stirring, arousing, inspiriting and inspiring thoughts that all through life would lead Shiblon along wisdom's way. "That ye may learn of me" shows the intense confidence each (that is father and son) had in the word of the other.

Alma 38 10Verse 10

Alma 38 10I would that ye continue to teach. Shiblon's decorum in the mission field among the Zoramites was ample proof to his father that Shiblon was prepared to continue the work of the ministry in teaching and admonishing unto righteousness. "Be diligent and temperate in all things"; by that Alma meant be zealous in your work, but temper your fervor in the things you proclaim with wisdom, "and be guided by regard for other men's faith."

SC Alma 38 11 Alma 38 12 Alma 38 13 Alma 38 14 Alma 38 15Verses 11-15

SC Alma 38 11 Alma 38 12 Alma 38 13 Alma 38 14 Alma 38 15See that ye are not lifted up in pride. Alma's exhortations to Shiblon recorded in these next verses were based upon instructions Alma was prepared to give to Corianton, one of his other sons. Many of Corianton's failings are here noted, not as faults in Corianton's behavior, but as things of such as Shiblon should beware. (See Chapter 39:1-2)

Shiblon, Son of Alma

Shiblon "was a just man, and he did walk uprightly before God, and he did observe to do good continually, to keep the commandments of the Lord his God." Such is the high encomium passed upon the character of this son of Alma by the sacred historian of the Book of Mormon.

Shiblon, like his brothers Helaman and Corianton, is first mentioned in the sacred pages of the Book of Mormon in connection with the Zoramite mission of his father. Of his birth and his childhood we know nothing, but he was yet in his youth when his father called him to be one of the missionaries to the Land of Antionum. (75 B.C.)

Like the rest of his fellow-servants of the Lord, he received the Holy Spirit under the hands of his father, and then went forth in the spirit and might of his calling to proclaim the Gospel to the misguided and stiff-necked Zoramites. He labored in their midst with energy, faith, and patience, much to the joy of his father, Alma, who in the commandments he afterwards gave to his sons, commended Shiblon's course in the following language: "I say unto you, my son, that I have had great joy in thee already because of thy faithfulness and thy diligence, and thy patience, and thy long-suffering among the people of the Zoramites. For I know that thou wast in bonds; yea, and I also knew that thou wast stoned for the Word's sake; and thou didst bear all these things in patience, because the Lord was with thee; and now thou knowest that the Lord did deliver thee." These words of Alma are the only intimation that we have of the persecutions and sufferings endured by Shiblon at the hands of the followers of Zoram. The life of Shiblon appears to have been almost constantly occupied with the duties of his Priesthood. We do not read of him acting in any secular capacity, though it is presumable that like his father and the rest of his brethren, he labored with his hands to sustain himself during the short periods that intervened between his numerous missions. After the death of his father he was intimately associated with his elder brother Helaman and appears to have stood next to him in authority in the Church. We have no account of his taking part as a military officer (as did Helaman in the long-continued war that succeeded the apostasy of Amalickiah, but after the war was ended (60 B.C.) he ably seconded Helaman's efforts to re-establish the Church and set it in order. At Helaman's death Shiblon took possession of the "sacred things" (57 B.C.). These he held until his death which happened four years afterwards (53 B.C.), shortly before which event he conferred them upon his nephew Helaman, the son of his older brother.

The four years preceding Shiblon's death are principally noteworthy for the commencement of the Nephite migration to the northern continent. It was during this period that Hagoth established his ship-building yards on the borders of the Land Bountiful.

In the year that Shiblon died the Lamanites made another incursion into the lands of the Nephites but were quickly driven back to their own country after suffering great loss.

Shiblon must have died a comparatively young man. He was styled a youth when he went with his father to labor among the Zoramites and died twenty-two years after.
