Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 39

The Commandments of Alma to His Son, Corianton

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8Verses 1-8

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8And now, my son, I have somewhat more to say unto thee than what I said unto thy brother. Corianton, Alma's youngest son, had been sent on a mission to the apostate Zoramites along with several others including his father and older brother, Shiblon, and had been led into abandoning his obligations there as one of God's servants to follow the meretricious charms of a harlot named Isabel who lived in the Land of Siron on the borders of the Lamanites.

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8He had left his field of labor in spite of the "good example" set him by his brother, who proved by his actions to be a steadfast and a faithful worker in that part of the Lord's Vineyard, and who also manifest the integrity of his heart by keeping the Lord's commandments.

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8We may seek to excuse and palliate Corianton's behavior in doing so by hiding the facts, and by offering apologies and pretexts which we may reinforce with arguments of his youth, but, nevertheless, the impetuosity of youth does not lead us to believe that his years is anything but a pretext to cloak the real condition of his mind. Corianton, not only erred, but boasted in doing so. In the strength of his youth he went about exaggerating his prowess, and sought to impress others with his wisdom. All the time Corianton was thus indulging in self-heroics, Shiblon was undoubtedly taking care of the work of the ministry, humbly and unselfishly.

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8Corianton's infidelity not only brought infamy to himself, but public disgrace to his father and his missionary companions. The Zoramites, among whom they labored, were quick to grasp any and every reason to excuse their own actions, and therefore they seized upon his illicit relations with a prostitute as a ground on which to disclaim and deny his father's words. This attitude of the Zoramites toward his message caused great sorrow in Alma's heart, and in all likelihood hastened the missionaries' withdrawal from among them.

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8The enormity of Corianton's moral offense was pictured to him by his father who spared no words in impressing upon his youthful mind the extent to which he had been misguided. "Know ye not," Alma said to him, "that these things are an abomination in the sight of the Lord; yea, most abominable above all sins save it be the shedding of innocent blood or denying the Holy Ghost?"

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8When once the Holy Ghost has had place in you, or has imbued one with the knowledge of Its divine powers, it is unpardonable to deny those same powers. After that great Spirit has witnessed in the heart of man that Jesus is Christ, the knowledge of His divinity cannot wilfully be denied. That conviction, born of the Third Member of the God-head will remain forever a testimony, even to the humblest, that He, who was born in Bethlehem of Judea was, indeed, the Savior and the Redeemer of the world. To deny the truth after such a Witness has given evidence of it, makes one a liar, and the truth is not in him; a liar cannot enter the Kingdom of Heaven, therefore the sin is unpardonable.

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8And, again, whosoever may commit murder wherein one slays another, and does so despite the light and understanding of God which he has received through God's Spirit, can be forgiven only by Him Who is the Creator of the life he has taken. Murder, wherein innocent blood is shed, and sinning against the Holy Ghost, are sins not surpassed in enormity, or in exceeding wickedness, by any other transgression of God's laws. Next to those two offenses in greatly exceeding all bounds of iniquity is the occasion of Corianton's sin. It is most abominable in God's sight, and like murder, it is a child of hell.

SC Alma 39 1 Alma 39 2 Alma 39 3 Alma 39 4 Alma 39 5 Alma 39 6 Alma 39 7 Alma 39 8A father's love for his children, even though the child concerned was at the present time wayward and loathe to take instruction, or prone not to accept wisdom, those divine qualities of tenderness and long-suffering evinced by most fathers are very deeply to be seen in this dialogue between the father, Alma, and his son, Corianton. There is no doubt that as Alma understood and realized the import of God's laws, and that they could not be broken with impunity, his sensibilities regarding any infraction of them were keen, and his feelings most poignant. "I would to God that ye had not been guilty of so great a crime," father Alma expressed his sorrowing judgment of Corianton's waywardness, but made a solemn promise to his son that only would he dwell upon his sins, not to (harry) persecute him by constant repetition or ill-treatment and annoyance, but would, for Corianton's own good, impress upon him the utter folly of the vain things he had sought. As many do today, Corianton evidently hoped to keep his actions secret, and by so doing withhold from the Great Judge at the Last Day all knowledge of his wrongdoing. "But, behold, ye cannot hide your crimes from God," Alma insisted to imprint upon Corianton's mind; your deeds are all known to Him, and unless a sincere repentance of them is made, they will stand as a witness against you when on that Judgment Day you shall appear before the Bar of God to be judged of Him for all you did while here on Earth.

SC Alma 39 9 Alma 39 10 Alma 39 11Verses 9-11

SC Alma 39 9 Alma 39 10 Alma 39 11Now my son, I would that ye should repent and forsake your sins. The thought that Corianton's youth excused his actions found no place in Alma's heart, so he called upon his son to exercise the knowledge of good and evil he had received and thereafter choose the good. Repent and forsake sin, he entreated Corianton; follow no more "the lusts of your eyes," deny yourself the spurious joys and the follies of life. Seek happiness by doing the will of the Lord. "For except ye do this ye can in no wise inherit the Kingdom of God."

SC Alma 39 9 Alma 39 10 Alma 39 11 Alma also urgently petitioned Corianton to seek the counsel of "your elder brothers in your undertakings." Rely not upon your own wisdom and understanding; boast no more of thy strength for it is weakness when compared with God's. The experiences of his youth, his father implied, have been insufficient to make Corianton stand alone, but sustained by his elder brothers his weakness would become strength, and his understanding great. Therefore, Alma said, "Give heed to their counsel."

SC Alma 39 12 Alma 39 13 Alma 39 14Verses 12-14

SC Alma 39 12 Alma 39 13 Alma 39 14Command thy children to do good. Alma being the Presiding High Priest of God's Church in Zarahemla, his children were looked upon to lead others in serving the Lord and keeping His commandments. The infidelity of which Corianton was guilty brought some of the Nephites to a place where they excused themselves in doing much wrong, and where they offered many pretexts in so doing.

SC Alma 39 12 Alma 39 13 Alma 39 14In speaking to Corianton of this unjustified departure from Church discipline Alma warned his son that by committing whoredoms and other grievous sins, he had caused the Zoramites to reject his message. To quote Alma exactly: For when they saw your conduct they would not believe my words.

SC Alma 39 12 Alma 39 13 Alma 39 14The sorrow in Alma's heart caused by Corianton's wilful behavior in its turn brought him comfort from above. How to meet this painful and perplexing problem had been a matter of prayer, and in answer to them the answer came to Alma: Command thy children to do good lest they lead away the hearts of many people to destruction. In obedience to God's command Alma ordered Corianton thusly: Therefore I command you, my son, in the fear of God, that ye refrain from your iniquities; That ye turn to the Lord with all your mind, might, and strength; that ye lead away the hearts of no more to do wickedly; but rather return unto them, and acknowledge your faults and that wrong which ye have done. Seek not after riches nor the vain things of this world; for behold, you cannot carry them with you.

SC Alma 39 15 Alma 39 16Verses 15-16

SC Alma 39 15 Alma 39 16And now, my son, I would say somewhat unto you concerning the coming of Christ. At this period of his life Corianton appears to have been afflicted with a failing somewhat common to youth. He had an inflated idea of his own worth, an inordinate estimate of his strength and wisdom. Along with these weaknesses, he was inclinied to scepticism, if not infidelity. He was a doubter of everything except his own supposed abilities. He marvelled that the assurance of the coming of the Messiah should be given to men so long before His advent. His mind was worried concerning the resurrection of the dead, the restoration of all things, the eternal punishment of the sinner and other points of Gospel doctrine. He denied the justice of God in the condemnation of the evil doer, and sought to justify himself in sinning, on the plea of God's mercy.

SC Alma 39 15 Alma 39 16Seeking to enlighten Corianton's mind concerning these things, Alma began a comprehensive explanation of them. He, first of all, spoke to Corianton of Christ: One who should surely come "to take away the sins of the world; yea, He cometh to declare glad tidings of Salvation unto His people."

SC Alma 39 15 Alma 39 16 Alma stressed upon Corianton's mind that to declare these glad tidings to the Zoramites was the ministry unto which he with his brothers had been called. His mission was to declare Christ's coming so that the people there would be prepared for that great event, and that their children also should be made ready "to hear the word at the time of His coming."

SC Alma 39 17 Alma 39 18 Alma 39 19Verses 17-19

SC Alma 39 17 Alma 39 18 Alma 39 19And now I will ease your mind somewhat on this subject. The words contained in these verses are so plain that they need no comments. We will only say what we have said before that the Saints living before His advent looked forward to Christ's coming. We look backward. Both visions are equally efficacious.

Corianton, Son of Alma

Of Corianton's birth and death we have no record. With his brothers, he is first mentioned in the Book of Mormon at the time of the Zoramite apostasy, when, though young and inexperienced, his father took him on a mission to that people. At this period of his life Corianton appears to have been afflicted with a failing common to youth—an inordinate estimate of his own strength and wisdom and an inclination to scepticism, if not infidelity. He was a doubter of everything except his own supposed abilities. He marvelled that the assurance of the coming of the Messiah should be given to men so long before his advent. His mind was worried concerning the resurrection of the dead, the restoration of all things, the eternal punishment of the sinner and other points of doctrine. He denied the justice of God in the condemnation of the evil doer and sought to justify himself in sinning, on the plea of God's mercy. Possessed of such a frame of mind as this, no wonder that he sinned. Notwithstanding that, Alma had imparted the Holy Spirit to him, like unto the rest of the brethren, when they started out to reclaim the Zoramites from their sin-satisfying apostasy, he deserted his field of labor and went over to the borders of the Lamanites to enjoy the sinful embraces of Isabel, of Siron, a harlot, whose meretricious charms had led many away from the paths of virtue. As might reasonably be expected this iniquitous conduct of Corianton placed a stumbling block in the way of his fellow laborers and caused many of the Zoramites to reject the light of the Gospel. Alma, in his "commandments" to Corianton, severely chided him for his sinful conduct, pointed out the awful criminality of his course and entered into a lengthy explanation of the doctrines Corianton doubted or denied.

From the tenor of Corianton's after life we judge that he sincerely repented of his youthful follies and unbelief. We find that during his father's lifetime he accompanied him on his missionary travels, and after Alma's death he labored under the direction of his brother Helaman. He survived both his elder brothers and at the time of Shiblon's death (53 B.C.) was in North America, whither he had gone in a ship to carry provisions to the settlers. This is the last time his name is mentioned in the sacred pages.

We infer from the manner in which the statement is made, that if Corianton had been in Zarahemla at the time of Shiblon's death, the latter would have transferred the records and other sacred things to his charge, instead of to their nephew, Helaman; if this be so, it is evident that by his later life he had proved himself worthy of such a high honor.
