Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 40

Alma 40 1 Verse 1

Alma 40 1 I perceive thy mind is worried concerning the resurrection of the dead. Among the many teachings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ which we bear to the world, there are none that have created more speculation, or we might say, that have caused men to ponder a subject in its different aspects and relations, as much as has the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. The fact that there is a resurrection of the dead is plainly noted by every believer in Christ, but the metaphysics of how our bodies will be raised from the grave has brought forth many arguments both pro and con. Skeptics delight to twist and turn every promise made to us concerning the certainty of this grand and remarkable experience. Believers exultingly proclaim it, the incredulous, with equal fervor, deny it. We may imagine that Paul in preaching it to the Corinthians introduced his paean in praise to God for this great triumph over death by declaring it thusly: You may wonder at it, ye sophists of Greece and you incredulous of Rome, but this poor body that you see, with all its certain traces of death, shall be swallowed up in everlasting and glorious victory. "O death," he said, "where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" And then, in a most triumphant voice, he shouted, "Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ." (1 1 Cor. 15:55 1 Cor. 15:55-57 ) (See Commentary on the Book of Mormon, Vol. 3, p. 179 ff.)

Alma 40 1 We imagine that there was in the time of Alma, as there is today, a group of individuals who deny and deride everything that is not discernible by the senses which they limit to five.

Alma 40 1 We may be pardoned if we quote from the above reference:

Alma 40 1 Among the many teachings of the Savior's Gospel which modern Christian philosophy has surrounded with mysticism is the resurrection of man's mortal body from the grave. Men do not agree on even the most fundamental reasoning. One say one thing, another something else; what one denies, others affirm most emphatically. And so on, until at present, all who listen to the pros and cons of debate are drawn into a labyrinth of inconsistent and opposing doctrine. The confusion caused by these divergent opinions, and the perplexity of mind this disunity creates, are affected by men who refuse to accept the truths set forth in their own Bibles. They wrest each passage of scripture to suit their personal ideas. They give theory superiority over fact, and allow supposition to dominate eternal truth. Of such a course there can be but one general result. The late President Brigham H. Roberts of the First Council of the Seventy, in his book, The Gospel, points to it: "Death to belief in the Bible; death to it as the inspired and revealed word of God."

Alma 40 1 Many of the critics of Christian doctrines are professional skeptics, or hypocrites, who love to find fault with our established beliefs and doctrines. They attack our most sacred heritage. To dignify their diatribes they say that if we explain to them the several questions which they, themselves, have created, then they will believe our dogmas; that then they will regard the doctrine of Christ's Atonement, which encompasses the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, as acceptable to them.

Alma 40 1 What they ask us to do—we who believe by faith—they, themselves, Cannot do in their religion which, they boast, is rounded upon sight.

Alma 40 1 Before they demand from us a complete analysis of our beliefs, let them, first, explain to us many of the phenomena that abound today in natural religion of any kind. Let them explain, "What is life." There are manifestations that it exists all about us. We experience it; we see its effects; we hope for it. Yet, what it is, we do not know. Perhaps they will tell us, "What is death?" or, explain that little corridor that divides the living from the dead. Perhaps, too, they will explain why it is that two plants placed side by side in a field, each produce, the one wheat, the other barley. Their roots intermingle in the same coarse sand; the same raindrops refresh the parched earth in which they grow; the same sunbeams warm the delicate leaves of both. Yet, one produces wheat, the other barley. How is it? Again, we do not know. But we would think it strange; we would think him deranged who would refuse to eat the beautiful white loaf, because, forsooth, he does not understand why that plant should eventually make a wheatcake instead of a barley loaf.

Alma 40 1 But that is just what the skeptic desires. He asks us to reject the doctrine of the resurrection because we cannot explain completely, its workings. He asks for what he does not offer. Truly, we cannot explain how the resurrection will take place; neither can we explain the metaphysics of how God forgives us our transgressions, nor can we say how He answers our prayers. Yet we know He does! To reject the fact would be foolishness; and to deny it would be folly. The skeptic, however, urges us so to do. He forgets that there is a power beyond our ken in which men are lifted to heights where things merely hoped for, become realities. It is so with our belief in the resurrection of the dead.

Alma 40 1 Notwithstanding our inability to prove the idea of man's coming forth from the tomb—for proof is a mental conclusion—we are aided by many who have suggested, what to us is an unanswerable argument—"We can reason from analogy!" They say, "When poison has been taken into the system, and ended in death, the chemist is able, through his knowledge of chemical reactions, to separate every element of that poison no matter how it may have been mixed with a thousand different ingredients, and bring it out and place it before a court of justice." The logical conclusion to this noteworthy comparison is the question we ask, "Is it presumption to suppose that the great Chemist of the Universe can separate every atom of my scattered dust and reconstruct it into a perfectness of such as, perhaps, we at this time, have very little idea?"

Alma 40 1 We can sum it all up in these words, "There is enough in revealed and natural religion to establish beyond any doubt, the hope in Christ which we cherish, and we can leave the solution of the mystery to that day when the things we know not now, we shall know hereafter." (See John 13:7 ) "We can trust in a wisdom we cannot fathom, and we can lean upon an omnipotence we cannot grasp."

Alma 40 1 There is no doubt in our minds that Corianton, to whom Alma addressed these words, was of a brilliant mind. He, however, pondered only briefly the things he proclaimed, but after his father had thus talked to him, his life proved the strength of his belief in them. But now, tossed about by the opinions of those who "were worldly wise," and relying on his own wisdom which in his youth he thought was great, he became afflicted with an inordinate estimate of his own strength and wisdom, and an inclination to skepticism, if not infidelity. He was a doubter of everything but his own supposed abilities. He marvelled that the assurance of the coming of the Messiah should be given to men so long before His advent. His mind was worried concerning the resurrection of the dead, the restoration of all things, the eternal punishment of the sinner, and many other points of doctrine. His father, Alma, perceiving this, sought to bring peace and stability to Corianton's troubled mind.

SC Alma 40 2 Alma 40 3 Alma 40 4 Alma 40 5Verses 2-5

SC Alma 40 2 Alma 40 3 Alma 40 4 Alma 40 5No resurrection . . . until after the coming of Christ. Corianton lived with his father and brothers in Zarahemla about 73 B.C. The doctrine of the Resurrection of man from the dead had been proclaimed by all the holy prophets, both Nephite and Jewish, and in their ecstasy Alma's people looked forward to it but, however, they did not know when it would take place.

SC Alma 40 2 Alma 40 3 Alma 40 4 Alma 40 5For many generations the people of the Earth had been told that the bodies of all the dead would be raised from the grave; that in this great event, which they called the Resurrection, their bodies would put on immortality, and they would no more see corruption. The day by prophets long foretold would be a happy one; no more pain, and to the righteous, no more sorrow. The coming of that day had been long deferred. Waiting for it, and it not coming, caused a sort of disappointed pride in the hearts of many who mourned the loss of loved ones. Delay, anxiety and uncertainty, had filled them with despair. Hopelessness began to mock the words of the prophets. This manner of thought imbued Corianton. Therefore, and in the spirit of prophecy, Alma, sensing the need of greater enlightenment in Corianton's mind concerning the Resurrection, had gone before the Lord in mighty prayer, seeking knowledge of its truth that he, himself, might know of a surety whereof he spoke; that in the process of making the doctrine clear to his understanding, only God-inspired verities should be presented to Corianton's comprehension.

SC Alma 40 2 Alma 40 3 Alma 40 4 Alma 40 5The Lord answered Alma's prayer! There shall be no resurrection "until after the coming of Christ." It is through Christ, Alma noted, that men will be resurrected, and through Him only will it come to pass. And Alma offered Corianton the definite assurance "the Resurrection is not yet." Christ is the first fruit of the Resurrection, or the first of all men to come forth from the tomb. Until then all those who have lived and died before Him, must await that glorious victory which He, as the Redeemer of mankind, shall bring about.

SC Alma 40 2 Alma 40 3 Alma 40 4 Alma 40 5Many mysteries, known only to God, Alma told Corianton, surround the facts that have been revealed to man concerning the Resurrection. When it shall be, at that time which was about three-quarters of a century before Christ, only God knew, but Alma said that all men shall rise from the dead.

SC Alma 40 6 Alma 40 7 Alma 40 8Verses 6-8

SC Alma 40 6 Alma 40 7 Alma 40 8Now there must needs be a space betwixt the time of death and the time of the Resurrection. Even as all men are not born and die at the same time, it makes no difference whether they are raised from the dead all at once. There is a period of time which begins when the body of flesh and blood is separated from man's spirit that lasts down until they are reunited again in the Resurrection. In verse six a fact is noted which undoubtedly perplexed Corianton. But Alma's explanation is easily apprehended: All is as one day with God, and time only is measured unto man.

SC Alma 40 6 Alma 40 7 Alma 40 8That Alma understood there is only one resurrection may be judged from the explanations he offered his son. Corianton had no doubt listened to many discussions concerning the Resurrection, its extent and its effect upon mankind. But the arguments given to sustain the different views therein stated served only to give him further reign to his doubts and passions.

SC Alma 40 6 Alma 40 7 Alma 40 8In God's Plan of Redemption there is only one Resurrection, but the Resurrection itself may extend over what is to us a long dispensation the continuity of which seems broken by relatively long periods of time, thus in the minds of many, making of one thing several integral parts or portions. Alma, however, was sure that a time was appointed by God for man to be raised from the dead. Now, he interposed, "Whether there is more than one time appointed for man to rise it mattereth not," and his logical conclusion heretofore stated: all is as one day with God . . . is a complete commentary thereon.

SC Alma 40 9 Alma 40 10 Alma 40 11Verses 9-11

SC Alma 40 9 Alma 40 10 Alma 40 11Now, concerning the state of the soul between death and the resurrection. The time when all men shall rise from the dead is known only to God Who has appointed it, and there is a space of time between death and the Resurrection are facts which have been established by Alma. Now, he asked, during that "space of time, what becometh of the souls of men." Alma informed Corianton that he had inquired diligently of the Lord to know, and the Lord answered his prayer, "and this is the thing which I do know."

SC Alma 40 9 Alma 40 10 Alma 40 11An angel from the Courts of Glory had visited him in answer to his prayers, and had made it known to him, Alma said, "that the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God Who gave them life." They return to that place whence they came, not to God's actual presence, but to that home in the world of spirits where they once dwelt and where they grew from their spirit birth to when in God's wisdom they developed and progressed enough to become mortals.

SC Alma 40 12 Alma 40 13 Alma 40 14Verses 12-14

SC Alma 40 12 Alma 40 13 Alma 40 14The spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness. There, as it is here, the righteous find no pleasure in mingling with the wicked, and in justice will not be forced to. The righteous and the wicked are segregated; the righteous, because of their righteousness, seek companionship with the righteous, and a place is provided for them called Paradise where they can mingle with their own kind, those who, too, are righteous. Paradise, according to Alma, is "a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care, and sorrow."

SC Alma 40 12 Alma 40 13 Alma 40 14The wicked, also, have a place prepared for them. It is a place where spiritual darkness prevails, because the inhabitants thereof "have no part nor portion of the Spirit of the Lord; for behold, they chose evil works rather than good; therefore the spirit of the devil did enter into them, and take possession of their house—and these shall be cast out into outer darkness." The wicked there await the "fiery indignation of the wrath of God" to be executed upon them because of their iniquity. A fearful expectation, or an awful looking forward for a just punishment, is continually before them, and "thus they remain in this state, as well as the righteous in Paradise, until the time of their resurrection."

SC Alma 40 15 Alma 40 16 Alma 40 17 Alma 40 18Verses 15-18

SC Alma 40 15 Alma 40 16 Alma 40 17 Alma 40 18And behold, again it hath been spoken, that there is a first resurrection. . . . In the uncertainty caused by the lack of revealed word, many personal ideas became the special points of discussion among the Nephites. Some supposed one thing, others something else. There were a number who understood that the segregation of the righteous from the wicked was "a first resurrection"; the spirits of the righteous being raised to a pre-eminent condition of peace, rest, and happiness, while those of the wicked were consigned to a state of misery and wretched expectancy. Alma admitted to his son that this "may be termed a resurrection," but such is not the Resurrection of which all the holy prophets had spoken. Alma's expression may be termed a resurrection shows the various meanings a word may have. The word resurrection as used in this sense was almost meaningless to Alma's introspection, and its true prophetic meaning—the coming forth of men from the grave—was lost to him in a maze of uninspired thinking. By twisting and turning its evident sense the word was used by the advocates of that idea to designate the rising of the soul, the righteous to higher levels of peace and tranquility, and the spirits of the wicked to greater misery and unhappiness. This, they contended, was really a resurrection. Of this usage, Alma said, "It may be termed a resurrection," but, he continued, the resurrection "of the souls and their consignation to happiness or misery. Ye cannot suppose that this is what it meaneth," when the resurrection was spoken of by the holy prophets.

SC Alma 40 15 Alma 40 16 Alma 40 17 Alma 40 18Now, those who understand that the rising of the spirits of the dead—the righteous to a state of happiness and the wicked to a state of misery—before their resurrection from the grave, were misguided in their thinking that it was a "first resurrection." It was not! If and when we speak of a first resurrection, thus implying a second or a third, etc., we divide the Resurrection into parts, and make the gift of God a series of occurrences. We do as man does when he divides the day of twenty-four hours into A.M. and P.M. It, nevertheless, remains the same day. There are first hours of the day, but their continuity extends over them all. It is as one day with the Lord. The Resurrection began with Christ coming forth from the tomb. It will continue until all men are raised by the power of the Resurrection.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21Verses 19-21

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21Now, whether the souls and the bodies of those of whom has been spoken shall all be reunited at once, the wicked as well as the righteous, I do not say. Alma was careful not to imply that the wicked as well as the righteous would come forth from the grave at the same time. He spoke of those who died before the Resurrection of Christ.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21The Prophet Abinadi who ministered to the People of Zeniff in the Land of Nephi and whose words were recorded by Alma, the father of Alma who later became the Presiding High Priest of God's Church, and whose occupancy of that position we are now discussing: But behold, the bands of death shall be broken, and the Son reigneth, and hath power over the dead; therefore, He bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21And there cometh a resurrection, even a first resurrection; yea, even a resurrection of those that have been, and who are, and who shall be, even until the resurrection of Christ—for so shall He be called.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21And now, the resurrection of all the prophets, and all those that have believed in their words, or all those that have kept the commandments of God, shall come forth in the first resurrection; therefore, they are the first resurrection.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21They are raised to dwell with God Who has redeemed them; thus they have Eternal Life through Christ, Who has broken the bands of death.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21And these are those who have part in the first resurrection; and these are they that have died before Christ came, in their ignorance, not having Salvation declared unto them. And thus the Lord bringeth about the resurrection of these; and they have a part in the first resurrection, or have Eternal Life, being redeemed by the Lord. ( Mosiah 15:20-24 )

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21In verse 20, Alma gives as his opinion that only the spirits of the righteous shall be resurrected at the time when Christ, Himself, shall rise from the dead, and shall ascend into Heaven.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21When we speak of a first resurrection it is best not to imagine that the term refers to a separate and distinct period of time in which some who are chosen will come forth from the dead. Unless the chosen are the righteous ones, the words, themselves, provoke misconceptions in considering the prophetic understanding of the Resurrection as a definite continuous period during which all men will be raised from the dead. First resurrection is better understood as not referring principally to time, but as a reward for righteous living. First resurrection is a resurrection of the just. "The resurrection of Christ and of the righteous who died before His coming is not, however, all that is meant by the "first resurrection" as indicated by the promises which are yet being made to the living. Moroni, who lived long after the time of Christ, was nevertheless of the "first resurrection." The problem is somewhat clarified if we use the terms "resurrection of the just" and "resurrection of the unjust." The resurrection of the just, whenever it may occur precedes the resurrection of the unjust and is hence a "first resurrection." So resurrections of the righteous, yet to take place, are a "first resurrection" as contrasted with the last resurrection which shall take place at the end of the Millennium. The promise is repeatedly found in Scripture that, at the second coming of Christ, the righteous dead who have not previously been resurrected, will arise from their graves and dwell on the earth during the Millennium. This resurrection, being definitely a resurrection of the "just," is also a "first resurrection," and it is the promise of this resurrection which is used in temple ordinances and patriarchal blessings in our day. (William E. Berrett, Teachings of the Book of Mormon, p. 58)

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21And again we bear record—for we saw and heard, and this is the testimony of the gospel of Christ concerning them who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just—

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21They are they who received the testimony of Jesus, and believed on his name and were baptized after the manner of his burial, being buried in the water in his name, and this according to the commandment which he has given—

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21That by keeping the commandments they might be washed and cleansed from all their sins, and receive the Holy Spirit by the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power;

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21And who overcome by faith, and are sealed by the Holy Spirit of promise, which the Father sheds forth upon all those who are just and true.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21They are they who are the church of the Firstborn.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things—

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory;

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21And are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God—

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21Wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21And they shall overcome all things.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21Wherefore, let no man glory in man, but rather let him glory in God, who shall subdue all enemies under his feet.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These shall dwell in the presence of God and his Christ forever and ever.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These are they whom he shall bring with him, when he shall come in the clouds of heaven to reign on the earth over his people.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These are they who shall have part in the first resurrection.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These are they who shall come forth in the resurrection of the just.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These are they who are come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly place, the holiest of all.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These are they who have come to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of Enoch, and of the Firstborn.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These are they whose names are written in heaven, where God and Christ are the judge of all.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These are they who are just men made perfect through Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, who wrought out this perfect atonement through the shedding of his own blood.

SC Alma 40 19 Alma 40 20 Alma 40 21These are they whose bodies are celestial, whose glory is that of the sun, even the glory of God, the highest of all, whose glory the sun of the firmament is written of as being typical. (Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 76:50-70 )

Query Link Resurrection of the Dead First Resurrection Of the Resurrection Resurrection

SC Alma 40 22 Alma 40 23 Alma 40 24Verses 22-24

SC Alma 40 22 Alma 40 23 Alma 40 24Yea, this bringeth about the restoration . . . The Resurrection with its universal benefits to man, bringeth to pass every promise made by the holy prophets that the bodies of all men should be raised from the dead. The spirits of men, once separated from their tabernacles of flesh and blood, shall again be restored one to the other as it was in mortality. Every limb, every joint, even every hair of the head, shall be restored as it was in the beginning to "their proper and perfect frame." Every particle of our scattered dust, no matter how through the years it may have been mixed with a thousand different ingredients will be raised in the Resurrection to a beauty and perfectness, of such as, perhaps, we, at this time, have very little idea.

Alma 40 25Verse 25

Alma 40 25And then shall the righteous shine forth in the Kingdom of God. Here we will only quote two passages from the Scriptures: First from Matthew: The Son of Man shall send forth His angels, and they shall gather out of His Kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity; And shall cast them into a furnace of fire . . . And then shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. ( Matt. 13:41-43 ) Again: And many of them that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, some to Everlasting Life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever. ( Dan. 12:3 )

Alma 40 26Verse 26

Alma 40 26An awful death cometh upon the wicked. Notwithstanding God's mercy and His long-suffering, the wicked have no place in His Kingdom. Their deeds while on Earth were evil, therefore, they "have no part nor portion" of His Spirit with them. They prefer darkness to light in the hope that their actions are obscured; their hope is in vain because darkness does not abide where God lives. "They are unclean," Alma noted, "and no unclean thing can inherit the Kingdom of God. They are cast out, and consigned to partake of the fruits of their labors or their works, which have been evil; and they drink the dregs of a bitter cup."
