Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 41

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Verses 1-2

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 And now my son, I have somewhat to say concerning the restoration of which has been spoken. Restoration means the act of re-establishing, or putting back to its original state, a former thing or condition, unimpaired. Also, it sometimes means to bring back to a healthy state, or to reinstate in a former favorable position something that has been abused or degraded. To give back again, as in Gen. 20:14 ; Judg. 11:13 . To bring back to the first state or condition, Gen. 40:13 ; Isa. 1:13 ; Acts 1:6 . To recover, or get again, 2 Kgs. 14:25 . To heal or cure, Matt. 12:13 .

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 But to begin the discussion of the term, restoratoin, let us not limit its meaning to a dictionary definition, nor confine its objective to the prescribed area of material things. It has a deep significance in the spiritual world if but seen by us and accepted will make known to us many things that otherwise we would see only "as through a glass darkly."

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Since the very first, opposition to His righteousness has endured in the hearts of some of God's children. In every generation and among all peoples there have been those who preferred the pseudo-joys and follies of the world to keeping His laws and testimonies. They have sought for the world's goods instead for that "which maketh truly rich." They have not searched for their Father's Kingdom, but instead have bartered away their birthright for husks which are given to swine. Some have wandered far, and are in a strange land.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Their Father, in the meantime, has prepared for them, the rings, the robes, the shoes, and has sent His messengers looking for them that they might be found and their heritage renewed. The holy prophets are His messengers. Likewise, in every age of the world, even before Israel was established as the Lord's Chosen People, the Lord God repeatedly sent His holy servants to proclaim forgiveness, and the restoration of all the blessings which had been promised the righteous since the world began. The Nephites had a record of these promises written upon the Brass Plates of Laban which they had brought out of Jerusalem when first they left the Land of their father's inheritance. What were these promises? In spite of the plainness with which God speaks to His children, and notwithstanding His mercy and His grace, many among the Nephites twisted and turned the plainest of His teachings into misshapen and conflicting statements which could not be understood by even the wisest. Like many others, they excused themselves in doing that which was most to be eschewed. They offered pretexts and apologies for the things they did, knowing all the time that their actions needed defending because they were contrary to the Word of the Lord.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 In order that we may approach the subject under discussion—restoration—in a proper frame of mind, let us refer the student to several passages of both Nephite, Hebrew, and Latter-day Saint Scriptures. In the first place, a description of those who wrest the Scriptures: They wear stiff necks and high heads; yea, and because of pride, and wickedness, and abominations, and whoredoms, they have all gone astray save it be a few, who are the humble followers of Christ; nevertheless, they are led, that in many instances they do err because they are taught by the precepts of men. (2 1 Ne. 28:14 2 Ne. 28:14 ) And also, O the wise, and the learned, and the rich, that are puffed up in the pride of their hearts, and all those who preach false doctrines, and all those who commit whoredoms, and pervert the right way of the Lord, wo, wo, wo be unto them, saith the Lord God Almighty, for they shall be thrust down to hell. (Ibid. 28:15) Again: And there shall also be many which shall say: Eat, drink, and be merry; nevertheless fear God—He will justify in committing a little sin, yea, lie a little, take the advantage of one because of his words, dig a pit for thy neighbor; there is no harm in this; and do all these things, for tomorrow we die; and if it so be that we are guilty, God will beat us with a few stripes, and at last we shall be saved in the Kingdom of God. Yea, and there shall be many which shall teach after this manner, false and vain and foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts, and shall seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall be in the dark. (Ibid. 28:7-9)

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Now, listen to David, King of the Jews:

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Have mercy upon me, O God, according to Thy loving-kindness: according unto the multitude of Thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in Thy sight: that Thou mightest be justified when Thou speakest, and be clear when Thou judgest.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Behold, Thou desireth truth in the inward parts: and in the hidden part Thou shalt make me know wisdom.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall be clean! wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the bones which Thou hast broken may rejoice.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Hide Thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Cast me not away from Thy presence; and take not Thy holy Spirit from me.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation; and uphold me with Thy free Spirit. ( Ps. 51 )

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 In our own generation the Lord has said through the Prophet Joseph Smith:

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 This is wisdom in Me; wherefore, marvel not, for the hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the Earth, and with Moroni, whom I have sent unto you to reveal the Book of Mormon, containing the fulness of My everlasting Gospel, to whom I have committed the keys of the record of the Stick of Ephraim;

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 And also Elias, to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days. ( D&C 27:5-6 )

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Now, among the Nephites, there were many who believed, as many among us now believe, that for His glory God will look with forbearance upon evil, or will refrain from enforcement of His laws and commandments. That is not true; He will not, and cannot. He is merciful and long-suffering, but to any evil, however little we may conceive it to be, He stands adamant. His Kingdom is rounded upon obedience to His commands; it is upheld and sustained by the righteousness of His children everywhere. Evil is the enemy of all truth and of that which is just. God, whom we worship, is the Father of truth and justice, and until all evil and error are conquered and brought into subjection to Him, His Kingdom will not fill the Earth, and in just the same ratio His will done in Heaven will not be done here below. May we in all humility insert here the full prayer offered by the Prophet Joseph Smith at Hiram, Ohio, October 1831. "The Prophet designates this revelation as a prayer.—Commitment of the keys of the Kingdom of God unto man.—The Kingdom of God and the Kingdom of Heaven named separately.—Supplication that the Kingdom of God, already on Earth, may go forth that the Kingdom of Heaven may come." (Heading)

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Hearken, and lo, a voice as of one sent down from On High, Who is mighty and powerful, whose going forth is unto the ends of the Earth, yea, Whose voice is unto men—Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make His paths straight.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 The keys of the Kingdom of God are committed unto man on Earth, and from thence shall the Gospel roll forth unto the ends of the Earth, as the stone which is cut out of the mountain without hands shall roll forth, until it has filled the whole Earth.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Yea, a voice crying—Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, prepare ye the supper of the Lamb, make ready for the Bridegroom.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Pray unto the Lord, call upon His Holy Name, make known His wonderful works among the people.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Call upon the Lord, that His Kingdom may go forth upon the Earth, that the inhabitants thereof may receive it, and be prepared for the days to come, in the which the Son of Man shall come down in Heaven, clothed in the brightness of His glory, to meet the Kingdom of God which is set up on the Earth.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Wherefore, may the Kingdom of God go forth, that the Kingdom of Heaven may come, that Thou, O God, mayest be glorified in Heaven so on Earth, that Thine enemies may be subdued; for Thine is the honor, power and glory, forever and ever. Amen. (Doctrine and Covenants, D&C 65 )

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 Alma recognized the evil existing among the Nephites—that in spite of the inspired teachings of the prophets who had ministered among their forefathers, and notwithstanding that now they were guided by men who were sent of God, many well-meaning and righteous people "had gone astray" because of false teachings. Some of their teachers and leaders had put into the Scriptures, by wresting them, otherwise by twisting and turning them, meanings that were not true. Corianton's mind had become perplexed along with others because "of this thing." Errors and foolishness had dulled his gifts and abilities to discern the truth. His father, Alma, perceived in Corianton's demeanor that he was also influenced by this "loose thinking." But, Alma said, "I will explain it unto thee," he meaning the restoration of all things.

SC Alma 41 1 Alma 41 2 God, who is just in all His Ways, has decreed that all things here below shall return to their normal state in the which they were in their very beginning. Justice requires it so to be. If it were not so, then repentance and forgiveness, for example, would consitute an empty show of faith; a sacrifice with no meaning; a scale having no harmony. These Gospel principles—repentance and forgiveness—would have no place in God's Plan of Life and Salvation. His divine purposes would be "as a mill without a miller, continually grinding and grinding, but grinding out no meal for His hungry children." It is requisite to the promise He has made—that the Earth shall be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory. "The Earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof," . . . and we are readily assured that before He claims it as His own, its goodness and its purity will be restored as it was when He created it. Restoration "to their proper order" is something required by the very nature of things; it is necessary, or a thing demanded to bring to pass the end of His work which He has in view. And as long as one soul, or a thing, remains an enemy of His, or its desires are unrighteous, His work will not be finished. Through the power of Christ's resurrection not only will the mortal body and the spirit of man be restored one to the other, but also it made possible that all things, both good and bad, evil and righteous, should return to their place of origin, or to where they were born. It is impossible for such opposites to dwell together eternally. Goodness will be restored to the good, and evil to the realm of Satan.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Verses 3-5

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5It is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works. God's justice, which is an attribute of His divinity, demands that all things created by Him perform their allotted tasks. We were placed upon the earth by the Lord Jehovah, and appointed to do His bidding. Often times we forget His wisdom and guidance and go our way day after day relying upon our own understanding. "All thoughts of God are crowded from our hearts." The world and the things of the world are idols to which we bow down and worship. We have no time or thought for else than "What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithall shall we be clothed?" (3 1 Ne. 13:31 3 Ne. 13:31 ) When these questions present themselves to our minds, it is then we should remember the words of the Savior, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God." ( Matt. 4:4 ) By His words our thirst is slaked, and we hunger no more. They are meat and drink to our souls; they feed us with knowledge and understanding from above, and the words of His servants, whether they be of Abraham, or of Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, or of Moses, the great leader of Israel, or of the Hebrew prophets, or of the Nephite servants of God in this land, or the apostolic message of the Twelve, "Jesus is the Son of God, or the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ as proclaimed by the Prophet Joseph Smith in our generation, we must remember that Jesus Christ said, "For I am He Who speaketh." ( Ether 4:8 ) Christ's words and the words of His servants reveal a vivid picture of our Father's Plan of Salvation, and, too, have a permanent authority about them that all may recognize who desire to know the mind and will of God.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5It is requisite with the Justice of God that men should be judged according to their works. We are given discernment by which we know good and evil and also the power to choose right or wrong. In every dispensation of the Gospel, the Lord God has, through the prophets of old and the seers of our own time, made known what is required of men that they may be saved at the Last Day and be exalted in the Kingdom of Heaven. The Way has been made known and the Path marked out. Some men are more steadfast in keeping the commandments of the Lord than are others; some pursue the Path of righteousness with greater diligence than do their brethren. "The Light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world" burns more brightly in some than in others. In other words, among men there are different degrees of integrity as shown by obedience to righteous principles just as there are different degrees of glory for which the righteous strive. David, the Psalmist, had this fact in his mind when he exclaimed: Teach me, O Lord, the way of Thy statutes and I will keep it at every step. Give me understanding that I keep Thy law and observe it with my whole heart. Make me to tread in the path of Thy commandments; for therein do I delight. Incline my heart unto Thine testimonies, and not to covetousness. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity, and quicken me in Thy ways. Confirm unto Thy servant Thy word, which pertaineth unto the fear of Thee. Turn away my reproach which I dread, for Thine ordinances are good. Behold, I have longed after Thy precepts; quicken me in Thy righteousness . . . ( Ps. 119 . Jewish Rendition)

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Those whose works were good in mortal life and who also desired that goodness and purity should prevail by keeping God's commandments shall mingle only with those, who like themselves, sought the Kingdom of God and its righteousness. They will be put beyond the reach of all evil, which is Eternal Salvation. It is Everlasting Life in the Kingdom of our Father, where all that is good and just and pure, enter unrestrained, and where joy and gladness reign supreme. Unto us, in the Kingdom of Heaven, there will be re-established or renewed our highest ideals, and their satisfaction will there be known to us. In our goodness and purity the things we once loved when "nurtured by His side," and perhaps now have forgotten, will be restored unto us again.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5"On the one hand as on the other" those whose works were evil, and who sought not that justice and righteousness prevail, shall inherit "the kingdom of the devil." In Satan's dominion they will find that for which they strived on Earth to obtain. You cannot with any measure of justice place the wicked, or those who love evil, in a place of contentment and happiness, or with the just, the pure in heart, and with those who love the Lord. That will not be done! The little corridor that divides the living and the dead does not make in a single night, a saint of a sinner, neither does it instill in the sinner's heart a desire to walk in the right path. Evil seeks evil, and the heart that yearns for evil will find it ensconced in the realm of the evil one. By choice that is where he will go, and there he will dwell eternally with the devil and his angels. In the Day of Judgment, Justice demands that those who do wickedly and those who have been righteous shall be rewarded according to their works; the righteous shall be righteous still, and the wicked cast out to dwell with him whom they served. Men will be rewarded in the same ratio as have been their righteous endeavors. If their actions here below have been good, their reward will be good, and transversely so, if their deeds were evil, their reward will be evil, or it will be relatively less according to their hardness of heart. In other words, men will be punished for their own transgressions; if they reject the truth, truth will not abide in them; if they love not the pure, then impurity is their standard. Guile, envy, and pride, are the motives that fixed their earthly desires. Worldly goods they cannot take with them, but what follows them and remains to constitute their station in the life to come are the qualities that guided them here on Earth. What we do here conditions us for the life to come. The wicked who on Earth sought for evil, or sowed it, shall reap that which they planted, while the righteous will have restored to them the beautiful harmonies of the Gospel of Jesus Christ which are peace, contentment, freedom from fear and sorrow, joy and gladness, and above all else, the love of Jesus Christ will be in their hearts.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Concerning this very subject, it is well to note what the Prophet Abinadi proclaimed to the Nephites about 150 years before the birth of the Savior in Bethlehem of Judea:

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5He is the Light and the Life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Even this mortal shall put on immortality, and this corruption shall put on incorruption, and shall be brought to stand before the Bar of God, to be judged of Him according to their works whether they be good or whether they be evil—

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5If they be good, to the resurrection of endless life and happiness; and if they be evil, to the resurrection of endless damnation, being delivered up to the devil, who hath subjected them, which is damnation—

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Having gone according to their own carnal wills and desires; having never called upon the Lord while the arms of mercy were extended towards them; for the arms of mercy were extended towards them, and they would not; they being warned of their iniquities and yet they would not depart from them; and they were commended to repent and yet they would not repent. ( Mosiah 16:9-12 )

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Almost six hundred years before the advent of the Savior, Lehi, who led his little colony to the Promised Land which the Lord had promised him, in blessing his son, Jacob, said:

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Wherefore, how great the importance to make these things known unto the inhabitants of the Earth, that they may know that there is no flesh that can dwell in the presence of God, save it be through the merits, and mercy, and grace of the holy Messiah, who layeth down His life according to the flesh, and taketh it again by the power of the Spirit, that He may bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, being the first that should rise.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Wherefore, He is the firstfruits unto God, inasmuch as He shall make intercession for all the children of men; and they that believe in Him shall be saved.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And because of the intercession for all, all men come unto God; wherefore, they stand in the presence of Him to be judged of Him according to the truth and holiness which is in Him. Wherefore, the ends of the law which the Holy One hath given, unto the inflicting of the punishment which is affixed, which punishment that is affixed is in opposition to that of the happiness which is affixed, to answer the ends of the Atonement—

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5For it must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things. If not so, my first born in the wilderness, righteousness could not be brought to pass, neither wickedness, neither holiness or misery, neither good nor bad. Wherefore, all things must needs be a compound in one; wherefore, if it should be one body it must needs remain as dead, having no life neither death, nor corruption nor incorruption, happiness nor misery, neither sense nor insensibility.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Wherefore, it must needs have been created for a thing of naught; wherefore there would have been no purpose in the end of its creation. Wherefore, this thing must needs destroy the wisdom of God and His eternal purposes, and also the power, and the mercy, and the justice of God. (2 1 Ne. 2:2 2 Ne. 2:2-12 )

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Almost half a century after his father's blessing, Jacob, whose inspired understanding brought into our vision many of the most sublime teachings of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, declared to his brethren:

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Yea, I know that ye know that in the body He shall show Himself unto those at Jerusalem, from whence we came; for it is expedient that it should be among them; for it behooveth the great Creator that He suffereth Himself to become subject unto man in the flesh, and die for all men, that all man might become subject to Him.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfil the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the Fall; and the Fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite Atonement—save it should be an infinite Atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5O the wisdom of God, His mercy and grace! For behold, if the flesh should rise no more our spirits must become subject to that angel who fell from before the presence of the Eternal God, and became the devil, to rise no more.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And our spirits must have become like unto him, and we become devils, angels to a devil, to be shut out from the presence of our God, and to remain with the father of lies, in misery, like unto himself; yea, to that being who beguiled our first parents, who transformeth himself nigh unto an angel of light, and stirreth up the children of men unto secret combinations of murder and all manner of secret works of darkness.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5O how great the goodness of our God, Who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and spirits of men will be restored one to the other; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand, the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave must deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh, save it be that our knowledge shall be perfect.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Wherefore, we shall have a perfect knowledge of all our guilt, and our uncleanness, and our nakedness; and the righteous shall have a perfect knowledge of their enjoyment, and their righteousness, being clothed with purity, yea, even with the robe of righteousness.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And it shall come to pass that when all men shall have passed from this first death unto life, insomuch as they have become immortal, they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel; and then cometh the judgment, and then must they be judged according to the holy judgment of God.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And assuredly, as the Lord liveth, for the Lord God hath spoken it, and it is His eternal word, which cannot pass away, that they who are righteous shall be righteous still, and they who are filthy shall be filthy still; wherefore, they who are filthy are the devil and his angels; and they shall go away into everlasting fire; prepared for them; and their torment is as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever and has no end. (2 1 Ne. 9:5 2 Ne. 9:5-16 )

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Alma, who was the Presiding High Priest of the Church of God, said unto the Saints residing in their Capital City of Zarahemla:

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the Church, have ye been spiritually born of God? Have ye received His image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Do ye exercise faith in the redemption of Him Who created you? Do ye look forward with an eye of faith, and view this mortal body raised in immortality, and this corruption raised in incorruption, to stand before God to be judged according to the deeds which have bean done in the mortal body? ( Alma 5:15 )

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5As Alma's missionary companion to the wicked Ammonihahites, Amulek in preaching to them gave some of the most easily understood instructions regarding the reunion, or the restoration, of the spirit and the body:

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And He shall come into the world to redeem His people; and He shall take upon Him the transgressions of those who believe on His name; and these are they that shall have Eternal Life, and Salvation cometh to none else.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God, and be judged according to their works.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Now, there is a death which is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the bands of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from this temporal death.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And the spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost, but everything shall be restored to its perfect frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be arraigned before the Bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the Holy Ghost, which is one Eternal God, to be judged according to their works, whether they be good or whether they be evil.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5Now, behold, I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption. ( Alma 11:40-45 )

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5The Prophet Mormon, near the close of a life which was dedicated to the welfare of his people who were sometimes very slothful in keeping the commandments of God, and who towards the end of their national existence grew exceedingly wicked, wrote to them hoping that someday they might read his words:

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5O ye fair sons and daughters, ye fathers and mothers, ye husbands and wives, ye fair ones, how is it that ye could have fallen?

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5But behold, ye are gone, and my sorrows cannot bring your return.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5And the day soon cometh that your mortal must put on immortality, and these bodies which are now moldering in corruption must soon become incorruptible bodies; and then must stand before the Judgment-seat of Christ to be judged according to your works; and if it so be that ye are righteous, then are ye blessed with your fathers who have gone before you.

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5O that ye had repented before this great destruction had come upon you. But behold, ye are gone, and the Father, yea, the Eternal Father of Heaven, knoweth your state; and He doeth with you according to His justice and mercy. ( Morm. 6 : 19-22)

SC Alma 41 3 Alma 41 4 Alma 41 5In the light of day when man can work, if he works for happiness, so will his happiness be when day is ended; and if in that day his desires were for good, he will be raised to that which is good. On the other hand, if man chooses to do evil all his days and does not repent, and furthermore, desires that evil be his portion, when the night comes and he cannot work, "he will be raised to evil according to his desires for evil." In the Resurrection the righteous shall be raised to everlasting happiness proportionately as they served the Lord, and the wicked and those who chose to do evil to "endless misery to inherit the kingdom of the devil," where all that is evil abides. There they will be with their kind, to dwell with those whom they loved and with those whom they served.

Alma 41 7Verse 7

Alma 41 7These are they that are redeemed of the Lord. Those who walked in the right path, and, also, those who saw their faults and follies and repented thereof with sincere hearts, are those who are redeemed of the Lord. Repent with a sincere heart means that thereafter the life of a man will prove the strength of his determination to keep God's commandments and hate instead of love evil. "These are they," the Sacred Record says, "Who are taken out." Out of what? Out of the prison that has held them bound with the bands of death and the chains of hell. In other words, hell and the grave. They are The Redeemed of the Lord who are delivered from "that endless night of darkness" which enshroud the wicked because they, and only they, refuse to come forth into the light. We can always remember that they who may have been wicked, as soon as they repent of their sins and serve the Lord, "Light will come forth unto them out of darkness." Man, when he stands before the great Judge at the Last Day, will be his own accuser; he will stand before Him, naked, without a thing to hide his actions here below. He will assist in the judicial decree handed down by the High Tribunal before which he will stand. He will be his own judge whether his actions were good or evil. "Therefore, let us walk in the light of the Lord," for "In Thy light do we see light."

SC Alma 41 8 Alma 41 9 Alma 41 10Verses 8-10

SC Alma 41 8 Alma 41 9 Alma 41 10The decrees of God are unalterable. Men are not to be judged by a capricious God, or by One who may change His requirements to obtain Life Eternal in His Kingdom to suit a whim or a fanciful notion. What He demands from one, He will demand from all, the same yesterday, today, and forever. He will not change! The edicts of God do not vary; He will not change them into something else. Their meanings are plain so that all may understand.

SC Alma 41 8 Alma 41 9 Alma 41 10 Alma cautioned his son, Corianton, not to make the mistake of thinking that God, in His mercy, will overlook and not visit with a penalty any infraction of divine law. Or will He look with any degree of tolerance upon the continued course of evil. In the end, when all is said and done, wickedness will be its own paymaster, and its pay will be after the manner of the service rendered, misery for the wicked. Restoration implies that all things shall be returned to their former state, or their natural state; good unto good, and evil unto evil, misery unto misery, and happiness unto happiness. But a sinful person whose actions have brought him only misery, will not have happiness restored to him in his evil desires.

Alma 41 10Verse 10

Alma 41 10Wickedness never was happiness. Alma's conclusion, "wickedness never was happiness," was based upon his understanding of men's weaknesses, and their mental and moral choices which were exhibited in the history of the preceding 4,000 years.

Alma 41 10 Alma had in his possession the Brass Plates of Laban. He had read them and re-read them. They contained the Hebrew Scriptures. He had read therein of the Fall of Man, and of the sorrow and misery Adam's transgression brought upon all his sons and daughters. Alma also read how the descendants of Patriarch Jacob were made slaves by the Egyptians and were forced to do the bidding of relentless taskmasters.

Alma 41 10Moreover, a history of the Jews down to the reign of King Zedekiah was engraved upon these plates. In reading it Alma became acquainted with the many follies and faults of the Jews. He learned how prone they were to heed the adversary. Time and time again, they had rejected God's holy Word which was proclaimed to them by the holy prophets. Wickedness had dulled their sense of what was just and true. To the prophets the Jews gave little heed.

Alma 41 10The Jews were God's Chosen People, but in that lofty height they had fallen. They preferred "darkness rather than light because their deeds were evil." ( John 3:19 ) Wickedness weakened them and they became the prey of other powerful nations. Coalitions were formed against them and allied armies came upon them. We may assume, and rightly so, that because of their waywardness and backsliding, God did not quickly deliver them from the predatory assaults of their ambitious neighbors.

Alma 41 10It appears that the Jews could not long dwell in peace. "There is no peace, saith the Lord, unto the wicked." ( Isa. 48:22 ) However, the relatively short periods of peace which the Jews enjoyed, coupled with their rich heritage and the geographical location of their Sacred City, Jerusalem, brought them great material wealth. To the Jews the Lord gave much and much was expected, yet, they became proud and stiffnecked. They forgot God who had delivered their fathers from cruel bondage, and besides, they did not hesitate to change the requirements of the Torah (Law) to excuse the wicked designs of willful and evil-minded men.

Alma 41 10As a nation they plowed and sowed iniquity and they reaped sorrow. "They drank deeply of the cup of bitterness and ate the bread of tears." To the Jews, it seemed to be unending that they were the victims of foreign oppression and the servants of foes who showed no pity.

Alma 41 10We, like Alma, must conclude that neglect of God's laws and failure to abide them are unfailing signs that mark bitter servitude—the slavery of men's souls. By the expression souls, we mean the body which we can see and the spirit that inhabits it. There is no happiness to be had in wickedness. These departures from the paths of holiness constitute man's greatest weakness and his utmost folly. It was ever so. Alma knew it, and therefore he sought to impress it upon the mind of his son, Corianton.

Alma 41 10The Prophet Jeremiah, who lived in Jerusalem at the same time as did the Prophet Lehi, the scholarly ancestor of both the Nephites and the Lamanites, exclaimed, "How long shall the land mourn . . . for the wickedness of them that dwell therein?" ( Jer. 12:4 ) Also, he said, "Judah mourneth, and the gates thereof languish . . . and the cry of Jerusalem is gone up." ( Jer. 14:2 ) In spite of the words of warning uttered ceaselessly by the prophets, the Jews spasmodically continued in wickedness. At length the anger of the Lord was inflamed against them, and again His voice came to them through His holy prophets, "Thou hast forsaken Me . . . thou art gone backward: therefore will I stretch out My hand against thee, and destroy thee; I am weary with repenting." ( Jer. 15:6 ) In another place the Lord said, "I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy." (Ibid. 13:14)

Alma 41 10When the Lord said, "I am weary with repenting," He meant just this: Often He had stayed His hand in punishing His Chosen People because they promised to turn from their wicked ways and seek Him. Just as often their promises were vain. They continued in the wicked course they pursued. Now the Lord had proved their perfidy and now He refused longer to withhold His anger. His patience with them was exhausted.

Alma 41 10 Alma saw in all these things the sorrow which each imposed, but he still had further proof that wickedness never was happiness in the experiences of his own people. He had also in his possession the Record of Zeniff. Although he was, at that time, very young, he remembered the words of his intrepid father as he told of the wickedness of King Noah. Noah who was the son of Zeniff was king of the Nephites who lived in the Land of Lehi-Nephi. The record of Zeniff's people told how wicked King Noah led his subjects into all manner of sin. Noah's wanton practices became examples for his people to follow. Although at first the debaucheries of his court brought seeming pleasure to many of his followers, they ended in sorrow, in fierce bondage to the Lamanites in which murder, pillage, rapine, theft, and every cruelty which the ingenuity of their masters could suggest or evil power achieve was made part. The story of Zeniff's people under King Noah is one of the blackest pages in Book of Mormon history. Its whole nature is a composite of crime and cruelty. It is a mystery. We cannot understand it. Alma's argument is unanswerable. The experience of ages proves it true—wickedness never was happiness.

Alma 41 10Many people have the idea that to get the most happiness out of life they must feed the hunger caused within them by "foolish and extravagant passions." They feel that they should satisfy every fleshly desire. They plunge deeply into "the pseudo-joys and follies of the world." They are quickly submerged in the unclean waters of iniquity. They mire knee-deep in the muck left by others who believed as they do. Yet a little while and their dreams of happiness are ended. Their laughter is turned into mourning, their joy into sorrow. They "sought for happiness in doing iniquity." ( Hel. 13:38 ) They shall never find it!

Alma 41 10Listen to the words of Nephi, the son of Nephi, who was one of the Disciples of Christ:

Alma 41 10And it came to pass that there was no contention in the land, because of the love of God which did dwell in the hearts of the people.

Alma 41 10And there were no envyings, nor strifes, nor tumults, nor whoredoms, nor lyings, nor murders, nor any manner of lasciviousness; and surely there could not be a happier people among all the people who had been created by the hand of God. (4 1 Ne. 15:1 4 Ne. 15-16 )

Alma 41 10We recall what David, the father of King Solomon, said, "Yea, happy is that people, whose God is the LORD." ( Ps. 144:15 ) and there comes to our minds more of the Holy Scriptures: "Happy are they that are upright in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord." "Happy are they that keep His testimonies, that seek Him with the whole heart." "Happy are they that keep justice, that do righteousness at all times." "Happy is everyone that feareth the Lord, that walketh in His ways." "Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the LORD his God." ( Ps. 146:5 )

Alma 41 10Always let us think of the words of the Prophet Lehi to his son, Jacob, spoken nearly 600 years before the advent of our Lord: "And if there be no righteousness there be no happiness." (2 1 Ne. 2:13 2 Ne. 2:13 )

Alma 41 10Let us conclude as did Alma, "Wickedness never was happiness."

Alma 41 10Also, as did Paul, "The wages of sin is death." ( Rom. 6:23 ) And remember, too, that in that death, which is the death of the spiritual man, there is no happiness.

Alma 41 10And moreover, I would desire that ye should consider on the blessed and happy state of those that keep the commandments of God. For behold, they are blessed in all things, both temporal and spiritual; and if they hold out faithful to the end they are received into heaven, that thereby they may dwell with God in a state of never-ending happiness. O remember, remember that these things are true; for the Lord God hath spoken it. (King Benjamin, Mosiah 2:41 )

Alma 41 10Although the comparison we make is very imperfect, we bring our comments upon this verse to an end by quoting poems written by two of England's greatly loved men. The first was written by Lord Byron, a man of whom it has been said, "was blessed beyond measure in genius, but destitute more than many of grace." Upon the very verge of the tomb he told in his own beautiful but unhappy words, the experiences of his life:

Alma 41 10Though gay companions o'er the bowl Dispel awhile the sense of ill, Though pleasure fill the maddening soul, The heart, the heart is lonely still. Ay, but to die, and go, alas! Where all have gone, and all must go, To be the nothing that I was Ere born to life and living woe. Count o'er the joys thine hours have seen, Count o'er thy days from anguish free And know, whatever thou hast been, 'Tis something better not to be. Nay, for myself, so dark my fate Through every turn of life hath been, Man and this world so much I hate, I care not when I quit the scene.

Alma 41 10Contrast this "bitter sarcasm" with the following description of a poor, but happy, peasant woman, who loves God, lives rightly, and does justly; O what a gap between them! The one shows waywardness, the other, happiness.

Alma 41 10Yon cottager, who weaves at her own door, Pillow and bobbins all her little store, Content though mean, and cheerful if not gay, Shuffling her threads about the livelong day, Just earns a scanty pittance, and at night Lies down secure, her heart and pocket light; She, for her humble sphere by Nature fit, Has little understanding, and no wit, Receives no praise, but though her lot be such (Toilsome and indigent), she renders much; Just knows, and knows no more, her Bible true— A truth the brilliant Frenchman never knew, And in that Charter reads with sparkling eyes Her title to a treasure in the skies. O HAPPY peasant! O UNHAPPY bard! His the mere tinsel, hers the rich reward; He praised, perhaps, for ages yet to come, She never heard of half a mile from home: He lost in errors his vain heart prefers, She safe in the simplicity of hers. —Unidentified

Alma 41 11Verse 11

Alma 41 11All men that are in a state of nature, or . . . in a carnal state, are in the gall of bitterness. The nature of God is immortality and happiness; "He is the light and the life of the world; yea, a light that is endless, that can never be darkened; yea, and also a life which is endless, that there can be no more death." Mosiah 18:9 ) But, by the Fall of Adam, man's nature became carnal, that is subject to death, the opposite to God's nature. Man became mortal, or subject to the flesh. The Fall of Adam, often called the Fall of Man, is the fall from a higher plane to one of lower estate. It represents a descent from immortality to mortality; from a never-ending life where there is no death, to the bitterness and gall of a certain destruction. Being guided by fleshy desires, and being prone to suffer temptation, man in this carnal state is bound with bands strong as iron. They represent what we sometimes regard as the joys of everyday life, but they more often are the foolishness and follies of men. They bind with ever-increasing severity. Man's nature while on Earth is directly opposite to the nature of God, "and never the twain shall meet." Therefore, mortal man is without God while he endures this earthy estate. By the Fall man went contrary to "the nature of God," which nature is happiness; or went into a nature incompatible with happiness.

SC Alma 41 12 Alma 41 13 Alma 41 14 Alma 41 15Verses 12-15

SC Alma 41 12 Alma 41 13 Alma 41 14 Alma 41 15What is the meaning of the word restoration? Alma explains to Corianton that restoration does not mean that what is evil will be received into the good, or that a thing will be placed "in a state opposite to its nature." To restore good where once it dwelt, or "bring back again" to man, his desire and his opportunity to live it; to justify him in seeking heavenly rewards or treasures, and to place the Earth in the Celestial glory it once, when first created, was, is the correct meaning of Restoration.

SC Alma 41 12 Alma 41 13 Alma 41 14 Alma 41 15The great lesson of man's bearing to his neighbor was placed before Corianton to impress on him the necessity of being just, merciful, and kind, to all others. Corianton had been enormously provocative in his morals, and to give further reign to his debased nature, he abandoned the mission field and followed after the charms of a harlot. He repented of his sin, and sought to make amends. His father, by using the same qualities as he hoped to find Corianton develop, urged his son "to be merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually." In so doing he promised that mercy would be shown unto him again, and that justice would be renewed unto him again; or that he would be forgiven of his sins, and all that was good would be restored again unto what would be a new man. Corianton's reward would be great as was his desires for righteousness. "What you do unto others shall be done unto you," or "What you meet out unto others shall be meeted out again to you." "Bread cast upon the waters shall return unto you again." "Forgive and ye shall be forgiven." These and other familiar sayings express what is meant by restoration when used to relate to the individual. Therefore, if forgiveness comes to one who forgives another, then we may say that he has restored unto him the innocence that was his before a sin was committed; also that when forgiveness is so easy to obtain, then it condemneth the sinner not to obtain it.
