Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

CHAPTER 44

Alma 44 1 Verse 1

Alma 44 1 We do not desire to be men of blood. That they were brothers always permeated the thinking of the Nephites when the Lamanites were considered by them in a practical way. They both had the same ancestor, the venerable Lehi, and both therefore were of the House of Israel. Lehi was of the Tribe of Manasseh, but had dwelt in Jerusalem all his days. That was a tie that bound them, and the righteous Nephites of every generation considered it such. Time and time again the Nephites refused to destroy the Lamanites although to do so would have been a simple end to many problems that perplexed them. The greatest of these was the fear of the Lamanite incursions into outlying communities when in their savage glee they murdered and debauched the peaceful Nephites. The Nephite Armies by destroying the Lamanite Armies could thereby enfeeble their barbarous tactics.

Alma 44 1 Moroni was true to this high ideal. When he saw the confusion among the armies of the Lamanites and the terror that struck them, he withdrew his soldiers from the face to face conflict that engulfed them. Seeking out Zerahemnah, their leader, he proposed terms of surrender to him after reminding this self-same commander that in coming to battle with him, his (Moroni's) purpose was not to gain power by shedding blood, as was Zerahemnah's, nor to put into bondage those who were overcome by any treachery or strategem. "Ye know," Moroni warned Zerahemnah, "that ye are in our hands, yet we do not desire to slay you." Not only was Zerahemnah ambitious to obtain the former of these things, but he was also imbued with the hatred that usually fills the hearts of apostates. Zerahemnah was a member of that apostate group who called themselves Zoramites, after their founder, Zoram, and who hated Christianity, the religion of the Nephites.

Alma 44 1 It is good that in our hearts we can note the difference between the ideals which God inspired in Moroni, and those which hatred and selfishness infused in the soldiers of Zerahemnah. He and his warriors sought power by purchasing it with blood; they hoped that with victory to enslave their opponents. On the other hand, Moroni denied that he nor his men were anxious for reprisal. The triumph of their arms was not an accident, but solely a gift of God. Our faith in Him and our sacred religion has delivered us from the snare you set to destroy us, and what is still more, "Ye see that God will support, and keep, and preserve us, so long as we are faithful unto Him, and unto our faith, and our religion; and never will the Lord suffer that we shall be destroyed except we should fall into transgression and deny our faith." Moroni now commanded Zerahemnah to cease his wicked ways, and deliver up to Moroni's men all his "weapons of war" and promise not to come again "to war against us." This command was given to Zerahemnah in the Name of God Who had preserved Moroni's armies, and "in the sacred support which "We owe," Moroni said, "to our wives and children, by that liberty which binds us to our lands and our country; yea, and also by the maintenance of the sacred Word of God, to which we owe all our happiness; and all that is most dear to us."

SC Alma 44 8 Alma 44 9Verses 8-9

SC Alma 44 8 Alma 44 9We do not believe that it is God that has delivered us into your hands. Zerahemnah, cruel, relentless, and hardhearted, without a human sympathy, and that certainly without a divine one, listened impatiently to Moroni's words, and agreed only in part to them. He readily offered to surrender his sword and cimeter, his bows and arrows, as a token of surrender to Moroni, but he declined to take an oath unto Moroni, Zerahemnah said, "Which we know that we shall break." But he was willing to deliver up his weapons of war providing that his warriors were allowed to depart "into the wilderness, otherwise we will retain our swords, and we will perish or conquer."

SC Alma 44 8 Alma 44 9The haughtiness which Zerahemnah displayed in answering Moroni's appeal for peace was characteristic of the victor, not the vanquished. He appeared contemptuously proud, or disdainful of the battle's outcome. He abjured the faith of the Nephites, and disclaimed Moroni's declaration that God "has delivered you into our hands." But your cunning in battle and your shields and breastplates have kept you from injury and destruction by us, he boldly asserted.

SC Alma 44 10 Alma 44 11Verses 10-11

SC Alma 44 10 Alma 44 11Behold, we will end the conflict. Whereupon Moroni seeing Zerahemnah's stubbornness, that the Lamanite leader would not accept the defeat that had come upon him although he was completely vanquished, resolved to end the conflict then and there. Moroni returned to Zerahemnah his personal armaments warning the commander of the combined forces of Zoramites and Lamanites that "Now as ye are in our hands we will spill your blood upon the ground, or ye shall submit to the conditions which I have proposed."

SC Alma 44 12 Alma 44 13 Alma 44 14 Alma 44 15Verses 12-15

SC Alma 44 12 Alma 44 13 Alma 44 14 Alma 44 15Zerahemnah was angry with Moroni. Zerahemnah saw that Moroni was not equivocal and therefore would not bend himself to the selfish demands made of him by the Lamanites. Zerahemnah became very angry with his opponent, and attempted to kill him. He rushed forward and with his sword raised in angry protest, sought Moroni's life. "But as he raised his sword, behold, one of Moroni's soldiers smote it even to the earth, and it broke by the hilt." We can imagine that many of the Nephite soldiers rushed to Moroni's defense, but this one in particular trained in the strength of battle, was more than equal to the savage attack of Zerahemnah. He also, with one blow, struck off Zerahemnah's scalp and it fell to the earth." Zerahemnah thereupon made a hasty retreat to where his soldiers were gathered en masse.

SC Alma 44 12 Alma 44 13 Alma 44 14 Alma 44 15Almost prophetic was this soldier of Moroni's as he cried to Zerahemnah's men; picking up Zerahemnah's scalp by the long blood-matted hair and placing it upon the point of his sharp sword, shouted, "Even as this scalp has fallen to the earth, which is the scalp of your chief, so shall ye fall to the earth except ye will deliver up your weapons of war and depart with a covenant of peace."

SC Alma 44 12 Alma 44 13 Alma 44 14 Alma 44 15When the Lamanites saw what had taken place, and heard the warning of one of Moroni's bodyguards that they, too, would meet a like fate as did Zerahemnah's scalp if they failed to comply with Moroni's demands, many of them came forward and threw their weapons down at Moroni's feet, and at the same time covenanted with him that they no more would come to battle against his forces as he required that the treaty of peace should provide.

SC Alma 44 16 Alma 44 17 Alma 44 18Verses 16-18

SC Alma 44 16 Alma 44 17 Alma 44 18Zerahemnah was exceeding wroth; and Moroni, too, was angry because of the stubbornness of the Lamanites. Both commanders of the opposing forces, Nephite and Lamanite, waxed increasingly angry, the one because of disappointed pride, which of all the passions that occupy the human heart, is the most bitter and malignant. The other commander, Moroni, grew angry "because of the stubbornness of the Lamanites." After all attempts for a peaceful settlement were discarded; and when all else had failed to accomplish that result, Moroni commanded his men to "fall upon them and slay them."

SC Alma 44 19 Alma 44 20 Alma 44 21 Alma 44 22 Alma 44 23 Alma 44 24Verses 19-24

SC Alma 44 19 Alma 44 20 Alma 44 21 Alma 44 22 Alma 44 23 Alma 44 24And thus ended the eighteenth year of the reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi. Now Zerahemnah and some of the other captains of the Lamanites urged their warriors to renewed resistance. So the battle recommenced with unabated fury. At last the faith and valor of the Nephites prevailed; many of the Lamanites surrendered and when they did so they entered into a covenant of peace as Moroni had demanded of them. Even Zerahemnah, himself, wounded and scalped, to prevent the total annihilation of his armies, at last consented to the proposed terms and entered that binding agreement. So great were the losses on both sides, especially of the Lamanites, that the dead were not counted.

SC Alma 44 19 Alma 44 20 Alma 44 21 Alma 44 22 Alma 44 23 Alma 44 24Thus ended the war, but not the Zoramite heresy, for we read in the history of later wars between the two nations, of certain Lamanite captains being of the Zoramites. Foiled in their attempts to destroy their former brethren and to overthrow the Church of God, they still adhered to their false faith, and in every way and on every possible occasion, made manifest their undying hatred to those whose only offense was that they would not join them in their crimes nor consent to the destruction of the liberties of the people.

SC Alma 44 19 Alma 44 20 Alma 44 21 Alma 44 22 Alma 44 23 Alma 44 24"And thus ended the eighteenth year of the Reign of the judges over the people of Nephi. And thus ended the record of Alma, which was written upon the Plates of Nephi."
