Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

THE WOMEN OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

THE WOMEN OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

It is somewhat noticeable how little prominence is given to womenkind in the historical narrative of the Book of Mormon, and unfortunately when mention is made of them it too frequently grows out of man's sins and their misfortunes. Of all the descendants of Lehi and Sariah, but two women are mentioned by name; one, Abish, a converted waiting woman to a queen of the Lamanites; the other, Isabel, a harlot of the Land of Siron whose meretricious charms seduced Corianton, the son of Alma, from the work of the ministry among the Zoramites.

Although we have but few individual characters standing out in relief from the historical background, yet from many incidental references to women as the story of the Nephites is unfolded, we are led to the conclusion that women among the Book of Mormon peoples enjoyed a much greater degree of liberty and wielded a more powerful influence than women did among contemporary Gentile nations on the Eastern Continents—say in Babylon, Persia, or Greece. We deem it mainly to two causes, first, the Israelitic origin of the race; and again, the power and grace with which the principles of the Gospel were preached by a long succession of prophets, who almost uninterruptedly ministered to the seed of Nephi. That this later cause had much to do with women's pleasing condition among that people is evident, for we find out from the historical narrative that whenever they turned from the Lord it was then that tribulation and oppression came upon their wives and daughters, and they suffered from the iniquities of their husbands and the fury of their enemies. With regard to the first named cause, it is generally admitted that the Hebrew women of antiquity enjoyed greater liberty and possessed more privileges than did those of the surrounding pagan nations of the same period. Let the Bible and the history of contemporary nations be compared and the difference is therein apparent.

The Nephites lived in a dispensation when women were bound to sterner requirements than they are today. They observed the Law of Moses, to which was added the higher code of the Gospel of Christ. Our readers know how well both these standards protect the rights of women, and how sacreally they guard the marriage covenant. Infidelity to that sacred bond of union being regarded, whether in the man or in the woman, as a most heinous offense, and worthy of the severest penalties.

At the commencement of the Nephite national life, when they were few in numbers, they seem for a time to have been tainted with some of the social vices of the degenerate people from whom the Lord had separated them. They committed great immoralities and took wives for utterly unworthy purposes, and without the fear of the Lord before their eyes. After they had taken them, they frequently abused them or neglected them, until their suffering cries came up before the Eternal One, and therefore Heaven forbade any man among them taking more than one wife, but added this proviso: "For if I will, saith the Lord of Hosts, rise up seed unto Me, I will command My people; otherwise they shall hearken to these things." This injunction, we are of the opinion, was afterwards removed, and the foreshadowed command given, as it is evident from the later history of the Nephites that in a better era of their national life polygamy was sanctioned by the law and was practiced among them, and that, indeed, by the men most favored of God. As an example, we will cite the Prophet Amulek, the devoted friend of Alma, the younger, and his zealous fellow laborer in the mission field. Amulek was the only man in the vast City of Ammonihah unto whom an angel was sent, and in whose behalf mighty miracles were wrought. In giving the wicked Ammonihahites an account of his conversion ( Alma 10:11 Alma 10:11 ), Amulek specifically mentions his women, and as he expressly does so he places them next to himself and before his children, his father and all his other kinsfolk and kindred, and nowhere does he use the word wife or wives, it is evident that his wives were meant and not serving-women. No one, surely, would argue that he would give to the latter the place of honor in his address to his fellow-citizens, before his parents and his children. As another instance, the great number of Chief Judge Pahoran's sons is incidentally mentioned.

It was during the brighter days of the rule of the Judges that women, more than at any time before the appearance of the Messiah on this Continent, seem to have been most highly regarded and esteemed. The Nephites were then living under that excellent code of laws drawn up by the inspired King Mosiah, which bear evidence of having been most admirably adapted to a people worthy of a large amount of liberty. This age was adorned with the presence of such men as Alma, Moroni (the prophet-general of the Nephite armies), Ammon and the other sons of King Mosiah, Helaman, Amulek, and others conspicuous for their devotion to the laws of God and the rights and liberties of the people. General Moroni, than whom a more devoted man to the cause of truth and humanity never lived, is especially conspicuous in his untiring efforts for the safety and happiness of the wives and little ones of his people. On the standard to which he rallied the patriot warriors of the Republic, which he named the Title of Liberty, he inscribed, "In memory of our God, our religion and freedom, and our peace, our wives and our children." This seems to have been his watchword throughout the long and sanguinary succeeding campaigns in which he defended the Nephites from the savage onslaughts of their Lamanitish foes. Again and again we find him rallying the hosts of Nephi with the soul-stirring cry, and under the ardor it wrought in their hearts it carried triumph to their banners and freedom to their land.

One series of events that occurred during this long war sheds a most pleasing light upon the inner life of the faithful among the Nephites. It is found in the story of Helaman and his 2000 striplings, who, very young, were so full of faith implanted in their hearts by the wise counsels of their loving and God-fearing mothers, that in the might of Jehovah they went forth against the enemies of their adopted country (for they were Lamanites by birth), and no power could withstand them. Their mother's teachings and their mother's prayers were weapons of destruction to their foes and shields of defense to themselves. They went forth conquering and to conquer, and only the All-seeing One knows how much the teachings of those saintly women effected towards the preservation of the Nephite Commonwealth from imminent destruction.

And what shall we say of the condition of women in that blessed Sabbatic era succeeding the glorious appearing of the Redeemer on this western land, when for nearly 200 years this continent enjoyed undisturbed and heavenly peace; when all men devoutly worshiped the Lord, and dealt justly with their fellows—men or women. It was an age in which no woman was wronged, no deserted children pined in the streets, no abused wives mourned in secret, or lifted their sorrowing hearts in anguish to the Great Father of all mankind. No brazen courtesans flaunted their wares on the broad highways, or ruined maidens hid their sorrow and shame wherever seclusion was the most profound. The inspired historian tells us that if ever there was a happy people on this earth, there they were found. And most happy must have been the gentler ones who bear in the stubborn battles of life so large a share of its sorrows and misfortunes.

But this golden age was soon followed by its opposite, when every virtue seems to have been supplanted by a vice, and all good was turned into evil. At almost lightning speed, the people having once taken the downward track, the nation rushed to ruin, until this continent became one vast field of carnage, rapine, and misery, over which devils gloated and hell enlarged itself, Indeed, the whole land seemed peopled with a race of demons who perpetrated cruelties that could alone be conceived in the hearts of the damned. During these lengthened years of untold horrors the fair daughters of the land suffered unspeakable barbarities. Life, virtue, everything was the plaything of the victor, be he Nephite or Lamanite, until in the hate of a revenge that never was satisfied and the fury of despair, they joined their leaders on the battlefield, and with their husbands, sons, and brothers, dyed their hands in the blood of the foe. Nor did they alone arm themselves, but they put weapons into the hands of their children, and inflamed their young minds with the savage love of slaughter. The war was not one of supremacy alone; it was one for national and individual existence. In the midst of carnage, unparalleled on any land save ours, the Nephite Nation was swept out of existence, leaving scarcely a trace behind, a most terrible instance of divine mercy scorned and divine laws abused.
