Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 4 ( 1959)

DOMESTIC LIFE AMONG THE NEPHITES

DOMESTIC LIFE AMONG THE NEPHITES

From the casual references found in the historic portions of the Book of Mormon, 'we are led to infer that the domestic life of the Nephites was patterned, as it very naturally would be, after the manners and customs of their forefathers in the Land of Jerusalem, modified, of course, by time and their surroundings. The changed material conditions, the absence of older though co-existent people and powers, the new and sometimes strange animal and vegetable productions, etc., all had an influence in the formation and growth of their civilization; trivial, perhaps, when considered separately, but when taken together, and working for centuries, had a marked effect on their public polity and home life.

It is, however, necessary to explain that the details of the latter are very meager, and only obtained incidently, as they may form a link in the chain of some historic narrative, or be introduced as an illustration in some doctrinal or prophetic warning.

In the midst of a people guided or reproved through their entire national life by an almost continuous succession of inspired teachers, it is but reasonable to conclude that the domestic virtues were assiduously cultivated, and all departures therefrom severely rebuked. Industry, economy, thrift, prudence, and moderation in dress, were evidently as much the subject of the prophet's condemnation then as in these latter days. Zeniff and others directly refer to the labors and toils of the Nephite women in spinning and making the material with which they clothed themselves and their households; and the same fabrics which delight the modern daughters of Israel also appear to have pleased the eyes of their Nephite sisters in the long ago. We must, however, say to the praise of these ancient worthies, the mothers of Mosiah, Alma, Moroni, Helaman, and of the 2000 striplings who loved to call Helaman father, that the beauty of their apparel was the workmanship of their own hands. Electric looms, spinning jennys, and their like, were unknown, so far as we can learn, to the enterprising, vigorous, God-blessed race that for nearly a thousand years filled the American Continent with the favored seed of Jacob's much-loved son.

The materials of which the clothing of this race were made are frequently mentioned in the inspired record. Fine silks, fine twined or twisted linen, and cloth of every kind are often spoken of. In one place good homely cloth is mentioned. By the word homely, we must not understand the writer to mean ugly. The word as used in the Book of Mormon is evidently applied in its original significance as it is used today in England for homelike or fit for home. Such material as was suited to the every day life of an industrious, hard-working people.

The love for ornaments has ever been a characteristic of Abraham's chosen race. The golden earrings and bracelets that gladdened the eyes of Rebecca when she was sought as the wife of the patriarch's son, have had their counterpart in many a modern instance. It was so with Sariah's myriad daughters. Time again we have read of pride and vanity entering the hearts of the people, and of their affections being set upon their costly apparel and their ornaments of gold, of silver, of pearls, of precious things (gems), their bracelets, ringlets, etc.

Nor would it be just to convey the idea that the gentler sex were alone guilty of these extravagances. The Sacred Record admits of no such conclusion. We cannot judge by the sober drabs, greys, and browns, with which the civilized gentlemen of today clothes himself, of the colors, the styles, or the fashions of the raiment of the Nephite beaux. The only safe conclusion that can be drawn is that they probably copied to some extent the gorgeousness of tropical nature by which they were surrounded. Nor is it reasonable to suppose that a single description would apply to the styles in the days of Lehi, of Benjamin, and of Mormon, any more than the varied fashions of the days of Williams, the Edwards, the James, and the Georges of English history could all be condensed into one sentence. It is not conceivable that dress, or anything else, remained entirely unchanged throughout a thousand years, though it is quite possible that those changes were nothing like so sudden, or so radical as have been those that have taken place among the leading nations of western Europe. On these points, however, so far as the record of Mormon is concerned, we can simply surmise, as the military accoutrements, armor, etc., of the warriors are the only habiliments with regard to which he gives any particular details. It is this poverty of information on this and kindred subjects that makes it so difficult for our artists to illustrate with any assurance of approximate correctness, scenes, and incidents from Book of Mormon history.

Nor can we learn much more with regard to their residences than we can concerning their dress. The most detailed account given of any man's home is that of Nephi, the son of Helaman. His house was situated on the main highway which led to the chief market place of the City of Zarahemla. In front of his house was a garden, and near the gate opening upon the highway was a tower, upon the top of which the prophet was accustomed to pray. These towers, from the numerous references made of them, either as private property or attached to their places of worship, as watch towers, or as a part of their system of fortifications, must have formed quite a conspicuous feature in the Nephite landscape.

The residences of the rich were elegant and spacious, adorned with exceedingly fine woodwork, carvings, etc., and with ornaments of gold, silver, copper, steel, and other metals. From the importance attached to the fact that but little timber existed in the northern continent when the Nephites began to spread over it, and consequently that the immigrants had to build their houses of cement, it is presumable that wood entered largely into the composition of the buildings. This idea is strengthened by the frequently mentioned skill with which the artisans in woodworking had developed, and also the excellence they had attained in refining the ores and the manufacturing of metal ornaments for their houses and persons. Regarding one monarch it is written: King Noah built many elegant and spacious buildings: and he ornamented them with fine works of wood, and of all manner of precious things, of gold, and of silver, and of iron, and of brass, and of ziff, and of copper; and he also built him a spacious palace and a throne in the midst thereof, all of which was of fine wood, and was ornamented with gold and silver, and with precious things. And he also caused that his workmen should work all manner of fine work within the walls of the temple, of fine wood, and of copper, and of brass, etc. This was in the Land of Nephi.

We next turn to the food of this people. Here also we are without definite information, but we can measurably judge of their staple articles of diet by noticing the grains they cultivated most extensively: to wit, wheat, corn, and barley, the latter appearing to have been the standard by which they gauged the price of other commodities. Great attention was also given to the planting of fruit trees and grape vines. From the fruit of the grape abundance of wine was manufactured of which (we think that we do the Nephites no injustice by saying it) they were as fond of it as were the generality of mankind. They were not as attached to a meat diet as were the Lamanites who were great meat-eaters, but they apparently kept large flocks and herds as a food supply, as well as for wool, leather, etc., and to provide for the numerous sacrifices enjoined by the Law of Moses, which they carefully observed until the offering of that greatest of all sacrifices on Mount Calvary, of which all the rest were but types and shadows.

Thus we may conclude that bread made from corn, wheat or barley, the flesh of their flocks and herds, together with that of wild animals caught in the chase, fruit, wine, milk and honey, formed the basis of their daily food, differing no doubt in details according to the location, climate, and other circumstances.

Their method of locomotion and modes of transportation are not described in the Book of Mormon. They were very rich in the ownership of horses, and doubtless made use of them as beasts of burden. The fact that large bodies of this people made extensive journeys in their various migrations and colonizings, is beyond dispute. From one family they filled a continent, or more properly, two continents. The use of ships is not mentioned until the middle of the last century before the Christian Era. These were then used for conveying immigrants, lumber, provisions, etc., to the northern continent; the first ship-building, of which we have an account, having been done at the settlements near the Isthmus of Panama, to which good roads had by that time been constructed. In the earlier history of the Nephites it is probable that most of their material was transported on pack animals, as is done today in the regions then inhabited by them. In the dense tropical vegetation of the wilderness, and along the mountain slopes of the Andes, road-making was difficult and expensive, and packing on the backs of animals was the most convenient way of transportation for a comparatively poor and small people. Chariots are mentioned but seldom. The Lamanite monarch, Lamoni, had his horses and chariots, to which reference is more than once made; and in after years, when the Nephites gathered all they possessed into one place to defend themselves against the Gadianton Robbers (A.D. 17), they removed their provisions, grain, etc., by means of vehicles called chariots. These are the only instances which the writers remember where vehicles of any kind are mentioned in the Book of Mormon in connection with the inhabitants of this continent.
