Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Introduction

Shortly after Great Britain declared war against Nazi Germany in 1939, her king broadcast a message of hope and encouragement to the British Empire. In that speech he quoted from a dialogue between a man and the Keeper of the Gate of the Year:

I said to the man who stood at the gate of the year, "Give me a light that I may tread safely into the unknown," and he replied, "Go out into the darkness, and put your hand in the hand of God. That shall be to you better than a light, and safer than the known way."

During the height of World War II when the United States was engaged heavily in combat in Europe and the Pacific, when thousands of young members of the Church were in the fierce areas of battle, Elder Harold B. Lee referred to that quote in an address to the saints during April Conference. He went on to say:

To the Latter-day Saints in this troublous day, when the perils of the earth are round about us, it is well that we take stock as to how we may approach him and what may be our blessings. The Savior himself spoke of the Comforter, which he said would guide into all truth, would bring all things to our remembrance, should show us things to come; and would teach us all things whatsoever the Lord our God had commanded .... So too may we in this day distinguish among the babble of voices that are to be heard on every side, the voice of the true shepherd, that we be not found to be barbarians in the day of our need for direction and guidance. The Apostle Peter declared that way when he said:

We also have a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in dark places, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts .... Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scripture is of any private interpretation. For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." (2 Peter 1:19-21) [^1]

Those days in 1943 were grim and ominous days, days in which men cried for some light to guide them through the coming years. To many, the times in which we presently live are times of equal gravity and uncertainty. Crime abounds, anarchy rages, violence is common fare, and immorality has become a way of life to vast numbers of people. Campus unrest, terrorist bombings, wars and threats of war, racial strife, graft, corruption, kidnappings and assassinations fill the pages and screens of the mass media.

So we, too, of this age stand at the gates of the future, pleading for light to guide us safely into the lowering storm clouds. We, too, as Elder Lee has said, desperately need to distinguish from the babble of voices around us, that voice which will alone lead us safely through the dark night. And that voice in this day, as in 1943 and as in countless years before our own century, is the voice of the Master, as given through "holy men of God who spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." Through their inspired utterances they declare once again to an anguished world that the Lord's all-seeing eye pierces the shrouded gloom, and that his gentle hand is extended to those venturing into the night. Prophecy is the hand of God extended in love to a groping, floundering world.

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints arc taught from early youth that God is ever anxious to guide his children through perilous times, and even today has called prophets who are once more warning, predicting, and testifying to the world. These prophets are also concerned by the lowering clouds in world and national events, but their attitude is one of hope rather than despair. As an example of this, Heber J. Grant, seventh president of the Church, said:

While the world is in a state of commotion and there is perplexity among the nations, the Latter-day Saints have no fears for the future. The signs of the times indicate the near approach of the coming of the Lord, and the work that we are engaged in is a preparatory one for that great event. [^2]

President Jedediah M. Grant, second counselor to President Brigham Young, stated it in this way:

When we see nation stirred up against nation, and on the other hand see nations exerting a powerful influence to bring about negotiations of peace, shall we say they can bring it about? Do we expect they can stay the onward course of war? The Prophet of God has spoken it all, and we expect to see the work go on-and see all things fulfilled as the prophets have declared by the spirit of prophecy in them.

Why is it that the Latter-day Saints are perfectly calm and serene among all the convulsions of the earth-the turmoils, strife, war, pestilence, famine and distress of nations? It is because the spirit of prophecy has made known to us that such things would actually transpire upon the earth. We understand it, and view it in its true light. We have learned it by the visions of the Almighty .... [^3]

Too often, however, this "perfect calmness and serenity" expressed by the prophets is not felt by other members of the Church. Ironically, this is true not because they fail to accept the prophets, but rather because they do. Emotions of fear, anxiety, dread, gloom, and discomfort are prevalent in many people whenever the subject of the future comes up. After a fireside speaker had reviewed some of the prophecies concerning the future of the world, one of the youth present was heard to say with grim sincerity, "I hope I am lucky enough to die before all of these things happen."

Such attitudes are understandable, but tragic nevertheless. These concepts arise from a misunderstanding of the nature of prophecy. These people seem to see God's word, not as the loving message from a concerned Father, but as a curse from a wrathful deity bent on the destruction of all those not willing to toe the mark. To them, it is almost as though God were trying to scare his children into repentance. They are obviously better prepared for future crises than one who rejects the idea of prophecy completely, but they still have not found the comforting clasp of God's hand. To them, prophecy seems more like a clenched, threatening fist, than an open, loving hand.

It is to this end that this book is written, that all who read it may come to see prophecy for what it really is-proof of the loving hand of a deeply concerned Father extended to all who find fear and anxiety in their hearts as the night and the future close in around them.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Jedediah M. Grant, The Improvement Era, Vol. 18, February, 1915, pp. 285, 286. (Italics added)
