Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter 1

A Look at Prophecy

Prophecy-More Than Prediction

Traditionally, people most commonly think of prophecy as being a prediction of future events. The word "prophet" evokes images of men caught up in visions or thundering out promises of destruction upon the wicked. Prediction of future events is an important and essential element of prophecy but is only part of the total concept.

John the Revelator was told by an angel that the spirit of prophecy was "the testimony of Jesus." [^1] Peter implied the same thing when he stated that "To him [Jesus] give all the prophets witness" [^2] Paul taught that the foundation of the early Church was "apostles and prophets," [^3] and yet it is immediately obvious to one reading the New Testament that these men did much more than simply predict future events. John the Baptist announced that he was preparing the way for one mightier than he. Other than that testimony, we have no record of John the Baptist working miracles or uttering great prophetic promises in the normal sense of the word. And yet Christ says of him: "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist .... " [^4] As Peter pointed out, prophecy is better defined as the utterances of "... holy men of God [spoken] as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." [^5]

This larger meaning is carried in the etymology of the word itself. Our English word "prophet" is derived from two ancient Greek words, viz., pro and phanai. Pro is a Greek preposition meaning both "for" and "before." Phanai is the infinitive form of the verb "to speak." Thus, a prophet is one who both speaks for God and also speaks before an event takes place. The Hebrew word nabi, which we translate as "prophet," carries this same wider connotation, meaning simply "one who speaks for God."

Most prophets fulfill three major responsibilities in their callings: first, they testify of the divinity of the Savior; second, they warn the inhabitants of the earth of the things which will result if wrong choices are made; and third, they predict future events that will profoundly affect the destiny of men. This has been the basic message of the prophets since time began. It is this threefold nature of prophecy that has made the voices of the true prophets distinguishable from the babble of voices which arise from the many false prophets and priests of mankind.

It is important to keep this broader concept of prophecy in mind as one discusses the messages of the prophets. The narrower concept of prophecy as prediction may lead one to draw erroneous conclusions, such as that drawn by the seminary student who declared to his teacher that he didn't know if he should sustain President Joseph Fielding Smith as prophet of the Church because he had been unable to find anything that he had "prophesied."

Revelation 19:10.

Acts 10:43. (Italics added)

Ephesians 2:20.

Luke 7:28. (Italics added)

2 Peter 1:21.

The Purposes of Prophecy

Another error that one may fall into when studying prophecies is that of holding too narrow a concept of the purposes of prophecy. As we mentioned above, there are some in the Church who view prophecy primarily as the Lord's "scare technique." It is unquestionable that some of the prophetic utterances foretell grim and horrible things and that these things are frightening-so frightening that they become a source of strong motivation to repent. Because of this, many people see only the warning nature of prophecy and conclude that God seeks to scare us into doing his will.

While it is clear that warning the inhabitants of the earth is one major purpose of prophecy, [^6] the conclusion that the Lord seeks to strike terror into the hearts of his children is unfounded. When a parent describes to his child the pain and suffering that may result from playing with electrical outlets, he may have to use rather ominous predictions and graphically plain terms. But it is plain that this parent is motivated out of love for the child, not out of some desire to see him cowering in fear. So it is with God. At times what he predicts is necessarily terrible to contemplate, but this is so because the choices his children make bring upon themselves terrible consequences.

It should not be forgotten, however, that to warn is only one of the purposes of prophecy. Another important function is to prepare people for the crises in life that will confront them. This is especially true of the signs of the times. The Lord has enumerated them so that when one sees them being fulfilled, he will immediately know that the coming of the Lord is nigh and make the necessary preparations. Jesus told the disciples that these signs were like the leaves appearing on the fig tree. Unlike many other trees, the fig tree of Palestine puts forth its leaves very late in the spring, and thus "When his branch is yet tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh: So likewise ye, when ye shall sec all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors." [^7]

Prophecy is one of the most direct ways that the Lord has for preparing his people. A good example of this is contained in an interesting prophecy concerning the rainbow, given by the Prophet Joseph Smith. It will be remembered that the Lord set the rainbow as a token to Noah of his covenant that the earth would never again be destroyed by flood. [^8] Evidently, this same token will serve as a sign to warn us of the nearness of Christ's coming so that we may make necessary preparations. Said the Prophet:

I have asked of the Lord concerning His coming; and while asking the Lord, He gave a sign and said, "In the days of Noah I set a bow in the heavens as a sign and token that in any year that the bow should be seen the Lord would not come; but there should be seed time and harvest during that year; but whenever you see the bow withdrawn, it shall be a token that there shall be famine, pestilence, and great distress among the nations, and that the coming of the Messiah is not far distant.'" [^9]

It becomes immediately obvious how such a small prophetic bit of information could serve to prepare those aware of it for times which are to come.

In addition to warning and preparation, prophecy serves another vital purpose-that of giving comfort. Even though it seems paradoxical, this may be true of some of the most terrifying of the prophecies. For example, consider a prediction out of the twenty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants. This particular prophecy describes the state of the wicked in the most vivid and gruesome terms. [^10]

How could anyone possibly derive any comfort from such a terrible picture? And yet even such scriptures as this may become a source of comfort. A prominent BYU professor told of reading this particular scripture to his young daughter. In her tenderheartedness, it caused her to weep and she begged her father to stop. But, as he explained, he felt it was better that she should weep now while they were still only words on paper than to wait unprepared for such events and then have, them happen before her eyes. If this were the case, in her tenderheartedness she might falter; but now, knowing of these things, even though horrified, she may take comfort knowing that God had foretold their occurrence so that she could be better prepared for them.

More clearly evident is the comfort that comes to the soul from knowing that God has foreseen the end and has assured us that, no matter how dark the intervening days, eventually his work shall emerge triumphant. The prophetic promises of the new Jerusalem, of the millennial reign, of the absence of war, disease, pain, sorrow, and of course, greatest of all, the promise of eternal life-all of these promises light the lamps of our hopes and brighten the gloom that is deepening all around. The prophets point out to us clearly that, even in crises and disaster, the hand of the Lord may be moving to bring about his greater purposes for the children of men.

Let us not forget that one of the great and significant purposes of the Lord in sharing his vision of the future with us is to give us comfort.

Doctrine and Covenants 1:4.

Matthew 24:32-33.

Genesis 9:11-17.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Doctrine and Covenants 29:17-20.

The True and the False in Prophecy

In a discussion of prophecy and its effect upon one's destiny, one last important consideration is necessary, viz., how can one tell false prophecy from true prophecy? The future has always held a strong fascination for most men. Throughout history there has always been an abundance of those who sought to make a profit from this innate curiosity. Soothsayers, diviners, astrologers, fortune tellers, spiritualists, witch doctors, and self-styled prophets have long thrived in their occupations.

Unfortunately, too often these fraudulent prophets prove to be more successful, in terms of their following, than do those called by God. Typically the money, praise, and adulation of the masses go to the false prophets, while the true prophets are more often ignored, scorned, abused, and perhaps even martyred. One of the true prophets, who himself escaped assassination only through the intervention of the Lord, explained why this is so:

But behold, if a man shall come among you and shall say: Do this, and there is no iniquity; do that and ye shall not suffer; yea, he will say: Walk after the pride of your own hearts; yea, walk after the pride of your eyes, and do whatsoever you desireth-and if a man shall come among you, and say this, ye will receive him, and say that he is a prophet.

Yea, ye will lift him up, and ye will give unto him of your substance; ye will give unto him of your gold, and of your silver, and ye will clothe him with costly apparel; and because he speaketh flattering words unto you, and he sayeth that all is well, then ye will not find fault with him. [^11]

The test for determining what is true and what is false in prophecy was clearly set down for members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In a statement issued in August, 1913, by the First Presidency of the Church (consisting of President Joseph F. Smith, President Anthon H. Lund, and President Charles W. Penrose) one reads:

When visions, dreams, tongues, prophecy, impressions or any extraordinary gift or inspiration conveys something out of harmony with the accepted revelations of the Church or contrary to the decisions of its constituted authorities, Latter-day Saints may know that it is not of God, no matter how plausible it may appear. Also, they should understand that directions for the guidance of the Church will come, by revelation, through the head. All faithful members are entitled to the inspiration of the Holy Spirit for themselves, their families, and for those over whom they are appointed and ordained to preside. But anything at discord with that which comes from God through the head of the Church is not to be received as authoritative or reliable. In secular as well as spiritual affairs, Saints may receive Divine guidance and revelation affecting themselves, but this does not convey authority to direct others, and is not to be accepted when contrary to Church covenants, doctrine or discipline, or to known facts, demonstrated truths, or good common sense .... The Lord's Church "is a house of order." It is not governed by individual gifts or manifestations, but by the order and power of the Holy Priesthood as sustained by the voice and vote of the Church in its appointed conferences. [^12]

If all members of the Church would remember these guidelines when they are tempted to pass on the newest exciting rumor or "prophecy," much of the spurious and false reports could be eliminated. In the General Priesthood Meeting of the Church during April conference of 1970, President Harold B. Lee warned members of the Church against heeding such items of questionable information.

It never ceases to amaze me how gullible some of our Church members are in broadcasting sensational stories, or dreams, or visions, or purported patriarchal blessings, or quotations, or supposedly from some person's private diary.

For instance, there is one vicious story to the effect that one of our General Authorities is allegedly being urged to present himself to lead the Church contrary to the Lord's revelation and to make people think there is some division among the authorities of the Church. Investigations have indicated that the named writer of these forged letters is fictitious and does not exist--can't be found in the records of the Church or anywhere. Addresses given are spurious, and yet the amazing thing is that we find that these spurious writings and some of these purported revelations, which we found upon investigation are absolutely false, are finding their way into our Relief Society meetings, into priesthood quorums, firesides, institutes, and seminaries.

Brethren of the priesthood, you defenders of the faith, we would wish that you would plead with our Saints to cease promoting the works of the devil. Spend your time promoting the works of the Lord, and don't allow these things to be found under your charge, for they are the works of Satan, and we are playing his game whenever we permit such things to be heralded about and repeated and passed about on every side.

One of our brethren is supposed to have had a patriarchal blessing saying that he would preside over the Church when the Savior came. This is, of course, false. Another one among us has been said to have declared that there are some living today who will see the Savior when he comes. This is again fictitious. Well, the Master said that the time of his coming would be as a thief in the night, that of the time of his coming not even the angels of heaven would know. If we would stop to think of it, nobody with any authority would ever say that such a declaration could be authentic.

So we could go on and on. One of our brethren was reported to have said that the people of California should move up to the tops of the Rocky Mountains, that only there would be safety. Contrary to that, we are constantly saying to our people that safety is where the pure in heart are, and that there is just as much safety wherever you are, if you are living and keeping the commandments of God.

Brethren, I repeat, don't allow the works of the devil to be paraded in our midst and become the subject of discourses or lesson materials. Speak of the works of righteousness and the power of the devil will begin to cease among you. [^13]

Helaman 13:27-28. (Italics added)

"A Warning Voice," Official letter of declaration by the First Presidency, quoted by Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, April, 1970, p. 55. (Italics added)

Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, April, 1970, pp. 55-56. (Italics added)

Men of God in Our Midst

In summary, then, as one begins a study of the prophecies relating to the coming of the Lord, several important considerations must be remembered. First, it is essential that prophecy be seen as more than simply the predicting of future events. True prophets do foretell what lies in the future but they also warn the earth's inhabitants of the results of evil living. Most important, they testify to the world of the divinity of the Savior.

A study of prophecy would not be accurate if one did not understand the purposes for which prophecy is given. Many see prophetic statements as the Lord's way of frightening his children into righteous living; but as was shown, warning is only one of the purposes of prophecy. Prophets help us to prepare ourselves for whatever the future may hold, both in this life and the next, by teaching us the principles by which one may achieve the abundant life.

A third important point to remember is that the potential for good which the prophets of God carry for mankind can be negated by our refusal to heed their words. If one does not discriminate carefully between the voices of the chosen servants of God and the other voices that cry loudly for one's allegiance, it may be that the beneficial effect of the prophecy will be lost. Although living prophets provide a great source of potential power for mankind, we may never come to know this power until we can heed the men of God in our midst.

President Harold B. Lee summed the whole matter up most adequately when he said: "We do not need more prophets to speak, we need more ears to listen." [^14]

Harold B. Lee, as quoted by A. Theodore Tuttle, Conference Report, April, 1970, p. 85.
