Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter 2

How Soon the End?

Christ Is Coming

While they beheld, he was taken up; and a cloud received him out of their sight.

And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel;

Which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven. [^1]

With this angelic promise ringing in their cars, the disciples of the Master returned to Jerusalem with a firm hope that the Savior would return again. It is only natural that since that time nearly every generation of Christians has earnestly hoped that theirs would be the generation in which this promise would be fulfilled. The mind thrills at the thought that one might actually see the realization of the millennial dream come true in his own life. And so from the earliest history of Christianity, there have been those who earnestly believed that Christ's second coming was imminent.

Within twenty years of the death of Christ, the Apostle Paul had to rebuke the saints in Thessalonica for being deceived as to the closeness of the return of the Master. Evidently, some of the saints had even quit their occupations to await the great event, and had become little more than "busy bodies.Â [^2] Therefore, Paul clearly explained that such a day could not come before a great falling away had come first. [^3]

Down through the centuries, one reads here and there of groups predicting the day, and sometimes the hour of his coming. For example, in 1818, a farmer by the name of William Miller, in an earnest and sincere search of the Bible became convinced that the return of the Lord would take place in about twenty-five more years. He concluded that the second advent would undoubtedly occur somewhere between March 21, 1843, and March 21, 1844.

Mr. Miller began to tell others of his conclusions with some success. The "Adventist" movement began to sweep the United States and thousands began their preparations for the end. But 1843 came and went with only a comet to temporarily raise their hopes. Miller was deeply disappointed, but one of his disciples recalculated and discovered an "error" in the original figures and announced the new date as October 22, 1844. Again a new wave of hope swept the movement as people quit their jobs, farmers did not plant their winter grain, and the believers gathered to await the end. Again their only reward was bitter disappoinment. [^4]

Such movements down through the history of time naturally raise some questions for members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The belief in the nearness of the Millennium is a central part of Mormon theology. One then could logically ask, "What evidence do you have that you shall not also be disappointed in your hope as have so many others before you? Granted that your scriptures point to the reality of that event; but how can you confidently say that it will be soon? Why could it not still be three, or four, or five hundred years away?" The question is a legitimate one and one that requires careful consideration.

Acts 1:9-11.

2 Thessalonians 3:10-12.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

For an interesting treatment of the early history of the Adventist movement see Francis D. Nichol, The Midnight Cry, (Review and Herald, 1944).

Not Even the Angels of Heaven

When Christ was telling his disciples of the signs that would signal that his second coming was near, he cautioned them:

But of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my Father only....

Watch therefore: for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come. [^5]

Through revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord reaffirmed that this was still the case and will be until the Lord actually comes. "I, the Lord God have spoken it; but the hour and the day no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they know until he comes." [^6] The Latter-day Saints accept the full implication of these scriptures and have been taught to avoid trying to place the date or fix the year of the coming of the Lord.

The Adventist movement was contemporary with the life of Joseph Smith. The predicted date set by William Miller caused some consternation among the early members of the Church, but the Prophet made it clear that this was an error. On March 10, 1844, after referring to the rainbow, he unequivocally stated:

But I will take the responsibility upon myself to prophesy in the name of the Lord, that Christ will not come this year, as Father Miller has prophesied, for we have seen the bow; and I also prophesy in the name of the Lord that Christ will not come in forty years; and if God ever spoke by my mouth, He will not come in that length of time. Brethren, when you go home, write it down, that it may be remembered.

Jesus Christ never did reveal to any man the precise time that He would come. Go and read the Scriptures, and you cannot find anything that specifies the exact hour He would come; and all that say so are false teachers. [^7]

Seven years later, after the majority of the saints had moved west to the valleys of the Great Salt Lake, the First Presidency (consisting of Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, and Willard Richards) issued a general epistle to the membership of the Church. Once again the saints were cautioned against attempting to place the hour or the day of the Lord's advent.

... of the day and the hour of the coming of Christ no man knoweth. It is not yet, neither is it far off; there are prophecies yet to be fulfilled before that event takes place; therefore, let no man deceive the saints with, vain philosophy and false prophecy; for false prophets will arise, and deceive the wicked, and, if possible, the good; but while the wicked fear and tremble at surrounding judgments, the Saints will watch and pray; and, waiting the final event in patience, will look calmly on the passing scenery of a corrupted world, and view transpiring events as confirmation of their faith in the holy gospel which they profess, and rejoice more and more, as multiplied signs shall confirm the approach of the millennial day [^8]

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Matthew 24:36, 42.|f

Doctrine and Covenants 49:7.

Matthew 24:36, 42.|f

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 6, p. 254, March 10, 1844. (Italics added)

"Fifth General Epistle of the Presidency of the Church," issued April 7, 1851, found in Millennial Star, Vol. 13. p. 210, July 15, 1851. (Italics added)

It Is Nigh, Even at Our Doors

The above fact that no one knows the hour or day of his coming does not answer the question as to why the second coming could not yet be a long way off. Indeed, it only seems to lend more credence to the idea that no one can safely say that the Lord will come soon. However, this is not so. It is important to keep in mind that no date can be set, but there is much evidence that the Lord's coming is near.

In a parable to the disciples, Jesus gave the key for knowing when the great day of his return was near. Said he:

Now learn a parable of the fig tree; when his branch is yet tender and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is nigh:

So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors. [^9]

So even though no man may know of the day or the hour, the Lord himself indicated the method for determining when his return was near. Many of the prophets have testified that this parable is now being fulfilled. In the conference of April, 1948, President Joseph Fielding Smith stated:

Surely the signs of the times point to the fact that the great and dreadful day is near, even at our doors. The fig tree, figuratively, is putting forth her leaves. The turmoil, trouble, the war and the bloodshed that we have seen, and which we still see, all point to the fact that this day for the coming of the Son of God is near. [^10]

On another occasion he wrote:

I know that there are many, and even some among the Latter-day Saints, who arc saying just as the Lord said they would say, "The Lord delayeth his coming." (D&C 45:26; 2 Peter 3:3-14) One man said: "It is impossible for Jesus Christ to come inside of three or four hundred years." But I say unto you, Watch.

I do not know when he is going to come. No man knows. Even the angels of heaven are in the dark in regard to that great truth. (Matt. 24:36-37) But this I know, that the signs that have been pointed out are here. The earth is full of calamity, of trouble. The hearts of men are failing them. We see the signs as we see the fig tree putting forth her leaves: and knowing this time is near, it behooves me and it behooves you, and all men upon the face of the earth, to pay heed to the words of Christ, to his apostles and watch, for we know not the day nor the hour. But I tell you this, it shall come as a thief in the night, when many of us will not be ready for it. [^11]

President Heber J. Grant said:

The hour and day of the Lord's future advent is withheld from the knowledge of both men and angels; yet the signs, so definitely specified as harbingers of His coming, are multiplying apace. The prevailing unrest among men and nations, the fury of the elements, widespread destruction by land and sea, the frequency and intensity of volcanic and earthquake disturbances-all tell to the well-tuned ear that the gladsome yet terrible day of the Lord is nigh-aye, even at the doors! [^12]

In 1839, the Prophet Joseph Smith gave a great discourse on priesthood. In that sermon he spoke briefly of prophecy.

Men profess to prophesy. I will prophesy that the signs of the coming of the Son of Man are already commenced. One pestilence will desolate after another. We shall soon have war and bloodshed. The moon will be turned into blood. I testify of these things and that the coming of the Son of Man is nigh, even at your doors. [^13]

On New Year's Day, 1871, Wilford Woodruff, who was at that time a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, stated:

The Savior, when speaking to His disciples of His second coming and the establishment of His kingdom on the earth, said the Jews should be scattered and trodden under foot until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. But, said He, when you see light breaking forth among the Gentiles, referring to the preaching of His gospel amongst them; when you see salvation offered to the Gentiles, and the Jews-the seed of Israel-passed by, the last first and the first last; when you see this you may know that the time of my second coming is at hand as surely as you know that summer is nigh when the fig tree puts forth its leaves; and when these things commence that generation shall not pass away until all are fulfilled.

We are living in the dispensation and generation to which Jesus referred-the time appointed by God for the last six thousand years, through the mouth of all the prophets who have lived and left their sayings on record.... [^14]

On the one hundred and thirty-sixth anniversary of the organization of the Church, President Joseph Fielding Smith, then president of the Quorum of the Twelve, summarized many of the signs that had already been fulfilled, indicating the closeness of the second coming.

Many things have taken place during the past one hundred and thirty-six years to impress faithful members of the Church with the fact that the coming of the Lord is near. The gospel has been restored. The Church has been fully organized. The priesthood has been conferred upon man. The various dispensations from the beginning have been revealed and their keys and authorities given to the Church. Israel has been and is being gathered to the land of Zion. The Jews are returning to Jerusalem. The gospel is being preached in all the world as a witness to every nation. Temples are being built, and ordinance work for the dead, as well as for the living, is performed in them. The hearts of the children have turned to their fathers, and the children are seeking after their dead. The covenants which the Lord promised to make with Israel in the latter days have been revealed, and thousands of gathered Israel have entered into them. Thus the work of the Lord is advancing, and all these things are signs of the near approach of our Lord. [^15]

Exactly six years prior to that address by President Smith, Elder George Q. Morris, of the Council of the Twelve, discussed three major signs given by the Lord to warn the world that his second advent was near.

I thought I would like to mention three signs that the Lord gave that we might observe and know when we saw them that he had set his hand again to accomplish final preparatory work for the coming of the millennium.

The first of these was to be the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ. That has already occurred, and it occurred 130 years ago. The Church speaks for itself. Its literature, its scriptures, its martyrs, over a million testimonies from lips and lives of members of the Church speak to the world and bear witness that this thing has been accomplished that the Lord has set his hand to do, and it is evident that it is spreading all over the world today ....

Another sign of great importance was the rise of an evil power. Brother [Ezra Taft] Benson had already very impressively referred to it-communism ....

It is that point that I think is very significant. The Savior recognized the domination of Satan over the world generally, and called him the prince of the world, but in a special way-in the way that Brother Benson has referred to-he has entered into the politics of the world among the nations of the world, and already subjugated about one billion people of the world, and by a dire, sanguinary, and deadly philosophy has brought death to millions and has brought slavery to almost a billion people ....

A third item is God's promise that he would gather Jews to Jerusalem, and I think perhaps we may well now not continue the saying the Jews are going to gather in Jerusalem. I think now we may well say they have gathered. [^16]

It is significant that all three signs are fulfilled or in the process of fulfillment.

Many other statements by the prophets could be quoted to further support the concept that the fig tree is indeed "putting forth its leaves" and that the coming of the Lord is nigh, "even at the doors." But there are other evidences to consider which bear equal testimony to this fact.

Matthew 24:32-33.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Conference Report, April, 1948, p. 132.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956) pp. 52-53. (Italics in original)

Heber J. Grant, Millennial Star, Vol. 91, p. 34, January, 1929. (Italics added )

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, p. 390, July 2, 18:39. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 14, p. 5, January 1, 1871. ( Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, "The Signs of the Lord's Coming," The Improve-went Era, June, 1966, p. 499. (The entire sermon is excellent on the signs of the times and their fulfillment.)

George Q. Morris, Conference Report, April, 1960, pp. 100-101. (Italics added )

The Savior Comes Tomorrow

Once, when he was asked if he knew when the Lord's coming would be, President Joseph Fielding Smith gave a startling answer. Said he:

I answered, Yes; and I answer, Yes, now. I know when he will come. He will come tomorrow. We have his word for it. Let me read it:

"Behold, now it is called today until the coming of the Son of Man, and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned at his coming. (Now there is a discourse sufficient on tithing.) For after today cometh the burning-this is speaking after the manner of the Lord -for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of Hosts; and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon." (D&C 64:93-24)

So the Lord is coming, I say, tomorrow. Then let us be prepared. Elder Orson F. Whitney used to write about the Saturday Evening of Time. This is the sixth day now drawing to its close. When the Lord says it is today until his coming, that, I think is what he has in mind, for he shall come in the morning of the Sabbath, or seventh day of the earth's temporal existence, to inaugurate the millennial reign.... [^17]

That this is the last day of the earth's normal existence is clearly explained in scripture. In 1832, while working on the revision of the Bible, Joseph Smith recorded some questions and answers dealing with the Book of Revelation.

Q. What are we to understand by the book which John saw, which was sealed on the back with seven seals?

A. We are to understand that it contains the revealed will, mysteries, and works of God; the hidden things of his economy concerning this earth during the seven thousand years of its continuance, or its temporal existence ....

Q. What are we to understand by the sounding of the trumpets, mentioned in the 8th chapter of Revelation?

A. We are to understand that as God made the world in six days, and on the seventh day he finished his work, and sanctified it, and also formed man out of the dust of the earth, even so, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years will the Lord God sanctify the earth, and complete the salvation of man, and judge all things, and shall redeem all things, except that which he hath not put into his power, when he shall have sealed all things, unto the end of all Â· things; and the sounding of the trumpets of the seven angels are the preparing and finishing of his work, in the beginning of the seventh thousand years-the preparing of the way before the time of his coming. [^18]

It is commonly accepted by most scholars that there were approximately 4,000 years from Adam to Christ, and of course, just under 2,000 years have passed since. The scholars disagree on exactly how many years the earth has undergone since the Fall of Adam, however, so it cannot be said that the Millennium will occur in the year 2,000 A.D. (as some enthusiastic interpreters of the scriptures would like to conclude). But the scriptures and the prophets make it clear that this is the "last day" before the Millennium, using Peter's definition that a day with the Lord is as a thousand of our years. [^19] Not only is it the last day but we are now in the final stages of that day, according to the Lord. "For the field is white already to harvest; and it is the eleventh hour, and the last time that I shall call laborers into my vineyard." [^20] The Lord indicates in several different places in the Doctrine and Covenants that this is the last time he will call missionaries to the work. [^21] This is why Orson F. Whitney called it "the Saturday Evening of Time." Brigham Young said:

Do you know that it is the eleventh hour of the reign of Satan on the earth? Jesus is coming to reign, and all you who fear and tremble because of your enemies, cease to fear them and learn to fear to offend God .... [^22]

President Wilford Woodruff said:

We are living at the commencement of the Millennium, and near the close of the 6,000th year of the world's history. Tremendous events await this generation. You can read an account of them in the revelations of St. John; the opening of the seals; the blowing of the trumpets; the pouring out of the plagues; the judgments of God which will overtake the wicked when Great Babylon comes in remembrance before God, and when the sword that is bathed in heaven shall fall on Idumea, or the world, who shall be able to abide these things? Here we are living in the midst of these tremendous events [^23]

Elder Charles W. Penrose wrote:

In answer to questions put by his Apostles, Jesus spoke of certain events which were to be taken as signs of his advent. These things are now taking place: therefore we are living in the day of his coming. [^24]

Joseph Fielding Smith, Conference Report, April, 1935, p. 98. (Italics added )

Doctrine and Covenants 77: 6, 12. (Italics added)

2 Peter 3: 8.

Doctrine and Covenants 33:3. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 6: 3-4; 11: 3; 21: 9; 31: 4-5; 39: 17; 43: 28; 95: 4.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 10, p. 250, October 6, 1863.

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 25, p 10, January 15, 1884. (Italics added)

Charles W. Penrose, "The Second Advent," Millennial Star, Vol. 21, p. 583, September 10, 1859. (Italics in original)

This Generation Shall Not All Pass Away

There is another set of evidence which indicates that the return of the Savior as King of kings and Lord of lords is very close. Wilford Woodruff, as already quoted above, noted that although we do not know the hour or the day, the Lord has pointed out the generation in which his coming should take place. Elder Woodruff then stated plainly: "We are living in the dispensation and generation to which Jesus referred...." [^25]

This concept is plainly taught both in the scriptures and by the words of the prophets. In the Doctrine and Covenants, under date of September 22nd and 23rd, 1832, the word of the Lord stated that the temple in the city of Zion, or New Jerusalem, would be reared in this generation.

Verily this is the word of the Lord, that the city New Jerusalem shall be built by the gathering of the saints, beginning at this place, even the place of the temple, which temple shall be reared in this generation.

For verily this generation shall not all pass away until an house shall be built unto the Lord, and a cloud shall rest upon it, which cloud shall be even the glory of the Lord, which shall fill the house. [^26]

In the History of the Church under date of October 15, 1843, Willard Richards recorded a sermon given by the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo. In that sermon Joseph said:

I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God of Israel, anguish and wrath and tribulation and the withdrawing of the Spirit of God from the earth await this generation, until they are visited with utter desolation. [^27]

Wilford Woodruff testified on other occasions that our generation was the one in which Christ would come. In the Millennial Star under date of April 21, 1879, he wrote:

My testimony is unto all men and nations, that you live in the day and the hour of the judgments of God Almighty. You live in the day and generation when the God of Israel has set his hand to perform his work, his strange work in the latter days. You live in the age in which God will bring to pass the fulfillment of that word of prophecy and prediction which has been spoken by all the prophets since the world began, which stands recorded in the sacred books of divine truth, and the fulfillment of these revelations will involve the destiny of the whole world, Jew and Gentile, rich and poor, high and low, saint and sinner, Babylon and Zion. [^28]

Just how many years are required to make up a generation is not known. It cannot even be safely said that it is a definite number of years. Elder Orson Pratt spoke of this difficulty in 1877. (In passing it should be noted that Elder Pratt was given the specific charge by the Lord to prophesy. "Therefore prophesy, and it shall be given by the power of the Holy Ghost." [^29]) Referring to Doctrine and Covenants 84:5-6, Elder Pratt said:

As regards the number of years by which a generation shall be measured, we have no specific definite period given to us by revelation; the Lord speaks in terms that are general in relation to generations. Among the Nephites, immediately after Christ's appearance to them a generation was a hundred years, and in the fourth generation they were destroyed, as a nation; except some few who went over to the Lamanites. We find generations numbering from father to son, and from son to grandson, etc., and when we come to average generations, according to the statistics of nations, we find them to be about thirty years to a generation; but when the Lord speaks in general terms, and says, This generation shall not pass away, until a House shall be built to his name, as is given in this "Book of Covenants," and a cloud should rest upon it; in that case I do not think he is limited to any definite period, but suffice it to say that the people living in 1832, when the revelation was given, will not all pass away; there will be some living when the house spoken of will be reared, on which the glory of God will rest. Already forty-five years have passed away since that revelation was given, concerning the building of that House. [^30]

Before discussing the implications of his statement, however, another important point needs to be substantiated.

The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times

President Woodruff said that Christ had indicated the generation and dispensation in which he was to come. Here, too, the evidence is persuasive that this dispensation is the last one and the one which is to usher in the millennial reign of the Savior. This dispensation is called the dispensation of the fulness of times, for in this dispensation a fulness of the gospel and the blessings held down through time will be gathered together in one great whole. [^31] It is the dispensation which will therefore have the power to complete the preparations necessary for the coming of the Lord.

President Joseph Fielding Smith explained it this way:

The Lord has declared by his own voice and by revelation to his servants, the prophets, that we are living in the last days. When we speak of the last days, we do not mean that this is the end of the earth, that it shall cease presently to exist. We mean that we are living in that period of time known, n as the dispensation of the fulness of times, in which the Father has promised to gather all things together in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth. (Ephesians 129-10; Doctrine and Covenants 27:12-13) We mean that we are living in the day when unrighteousness shall cease, when wickedness shall no longer be found on the face of the earth, when this earth shall be turned over, according to the promise the Lord made to Daniel the Prophet, to the saints of the Most High, who shall possess it forever and ever. [^32]

In October general conference of 1911, President Charles W. Penrose of the First Presidency, discussed the dispensation of the fulness of times.

We are living in the dispensation of the fulness of times, and in this dispensation-the grandest and greatest of all, will be gathered in one all things that are in Christ, not only His people gathered from the various nations to Zion to build it up, to prepare the place for His feet, but the hosts that have passed away, whom He will bring with Him. Not only are the people to be gathered together, but the glorious truths which have been made manifest in the ages that are past will all be brought forth in the dispensation in which we are living, and things kept hid from the foundations of the world will be made manifest; for the Lord has promised it, and His promises never fail of fulfillment. [^33]

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 14, p. 5. (Italics added) (For the entire quote, see footnote No. 14 above.)

Doctrine and Covenants 84:4-5.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 6, p. 58. October 15, 1843. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Millennial Star, Vol. 41, p. 241, April 21, 1879. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 34:10.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 19, p. 215, December 9, 1877.

Doctrine and Covenants 128:18.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956), p. 14. (Italics added)

Charles W. Penrose, Conference Report, October, 1911, pp. 48-49.

Whose Eyes Shall Not Be Closed in Death

Now to return to the remarkable statement by Orson Pratt made in 1877, wherein he gave his opinion that there were those then living upon the earth who would still be alive when the temple was reared in Jackson County, Missouri. It has been nearly 100 years since that statement was made and yet the Church still looks forward to the fulfillment of that prophecy. Since there is not an abundance of people left who were alive when Orson Pratt made that statement, some have concluded that it was simply his opinion and obviously in error. If this were an isolated statement, that explanation would carry more weight, but it is not. Statements by the prophets similar to the statement by Orson Pratt are another of the great evidences we have that the second coming is near at hand. For example, in the 1967 October Priesthood Conference of the Church, Eider Hugh B. Brown of the First Presidency, said:

It seems to me that of all the signs of the times (and they are ominous and on every side) this is one of the significant signs of the times-that the Church of Jesus Christ, the kingdom of God, is massing its forces, getting ready for that which is to follow ....

I hope that every young man under the sound of my voice will resolve tonight, "I am going to keep myself clean. I am going to serve the Lord. I am going to prepare every way I can for future service, because I want to be prepared when the final battle shall come."

And some of you young men are going to engage in that battle. Some of you are going to engage in the final testing time, which is coming and which is closer to us than we know. [^34]

In a great discourse to the saints assembled in general conference in 1898, President Wilford Woodruff spent some time recalling some experiences he had been privileged to enjoy with the Prophet Joseph Smith. He told of meeting with the Prophet in a log cabin in preparation for the organization of Zion's Camp. Some of the brethren spoke and bore their testimonies. When they finished, Joseph told them they were limited in their vision of what was to come. He told of the time when the saints would go to the Rocky Mountains and do a great work there. Then he said, according to President Woodruff:

This people will go into the Rocky Mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there, and the Latter-day Saints who dwell in these mountains will stand in the flesh until the coming of the Son of Man. The Son of Man will come to them while in the Rocky Mountains.

Then President Woodruff went on to say:

...I never expected to see the Rocky Mountains when I listened to that man's voice, but I have, and do today. I will say here that I shall not live to see it, [President Woodruff died five months later, before the next General Conference of the Church] you may not live to see it; but these thousands of Latter-day Saint children that belong to the Sabbath schools, I believe many of them will stand in the flesh when the Lord Jesus Christ visits the Zion of God here in the mountains of Israel. [^35]

Ten years earlier, President Woodruff had echoed this same feeling at a stake conference held in Grantsville, Utah.

Many of these young men and maidens that are here today will, in my opinion, if they are faithful, stand in the flesh when Christ comes in the clouds of heaven. These young people from the Sabbath schools and from the Mutual Improvement Associations, will stand in the flesh while the judgments of the Almighty sweep the nations of the earth as with a besom of destruction, in fulfillment of the revelations of God, and they will be the very people whom God will bless and sustain. Therefore, I say, our young men cannot begin too quickly to qualify themselves by treasuring up wisdom and calling upon God and getting the Holy Priesthood; for they have got to stand in holy places while these judgments are poured out upon the earth. [^36]

President Joseph Fielding Smith, then a member of the Council of the Twelve, expressed his opinion of the same truth in April conference, 1936.

The day of the coming of the Lord is near. I do not know when. I am not looking, however, upon the coming of the Son of Man . . . as something that may come in some far distant time-because I sincerely believe it will come in the very day when some of us who are here today will be living upon the face of the earth. That day is close at hand. [^37]

Hugh B. Brown, Conference Report, October, 1967, p. 115. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Conference Report, April, 1898, p. 57. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, given at Tooele Stake Conference (at Grantsville, Utah) July 29, 1889. Reported in Millennial Star, Vol. 51, p. 595. (Italics added)

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

The Times of the Gentiles

In the forty-fifth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, we are told that when the "times of the Gentiles" are fulfilled, "... there shall be men standing in that generation, that shall not pass until they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land. [^38] Many other judgments were then listed as happening also. Thus, the fulfilling of the times of the Gentiles is a key in determining how close the coming of the Lord is. In the same section the Lord gives us the key for knowing when the times of the Gentiles shall be completed:

And this I have told you concerning Jerusalem; and when that day shall come, shall a remnant be scattered among all nations;

But they shall be gathered again; but they shall remain until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. [^39]

The Savior taught the same thing to his apostles when he said, "... And Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." [^40] It is only in recent years that this prophecy has come to see its fulfillment. As recently as 1967, the city of Jerusalem was taken completely into Jewish power and dominion, for the first time in nearly two thousand years. President Joseph Fielding Smith clearly states that the times of the Gentiles are nearly fulfilled. In an editorial in the Church News in 1931, he said:

We all know that from the time of the destruction of Jerusalem in the year 70 A.D. until near the close of World War I, Jerusalem was trodden down of the Gentiles, and during all of that time the Jews were scattered and almost without privileges in the Holy Land. The Lord said they should remain scattered among the nations until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. Moroni said the times of the Gentiles were about to be fulfilled. Today we are living in the transition period; the day of the Gentiles has come in, and the day of Judah and the remnant of downtrodden Israel is now at hand. The sign for the fulfillment of the prophecy has been given. [^41]

Then in general conference some thirty-five years later, when the world had come to see Israel established as an independent and courageous nation, President Joseph Fielding Smith said:

Jesus said the Jews would be scattered among all nations and Jerusalem would be trodden down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. (Luke 21:24) The prophecy in Section 45, verses 24-29, of the Doctrine and Covenants regarding the Jews was literally fulfilled. Jerusalem, which was trodden down by the Gentiles, is no longer trodden down but is made the home for the Jews. They are returning to Palestine, and by this we may know that the times of the Gentiles are near their close. [^42]

Doctrine and Covenants 45:30-31.

Doctrine and Covenants 45:24-25. (Italics added)

Luke 21: 24

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956), pp. 258-259. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, "The Signs of the Lord's Coming," The Improvement Era, June, 1966, p. 499. (Italics added)

The Angels of Destruction

One last important indication has been given that answers the question, "How can you be so sure that the second coming of the Lord is still not three or four hundred years in the future?" We are indebted to President Wilford Woodruff for this evidence, for it was through his mouth that it was declared. In the summer of 1894., President Woodruff accompanied a group of temple workers on a special outing, and addressed them in the evening. He spoke of the judgments that were going to come upon the nation and its people.

They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury. God has held the angels of destruction for many years, lest they should reap down the wheat with the tares. But I want to tell you now, that those angels have left the portals of heaven, and they stand over this people and this nation now, and are hovering over the earth waiting to pour out the judgments. And from this very day they shall be poured out. Calamities and troubles are increasing in the earth, and there is a meaning to these things. Remember this, and reflect upon these matters. If you do your duty, and I do my duty, we'll have protection, and shall pass through the afflictions in peace and safety. [^43]

The angels to which he referred were those mentioned in the Doctrine and Covenants.

Behold, verily I say unto you, the angels are crying unto the Lord day and night, who are ready and waiting to be sent forth to reap down the fields." [^44]

Three months after his first mention of these angels, Wilford Woodruff again spoke of them.

What is the matter with the world today? What has created this change that we see coming over the world? Why these terrible earthquakes, tornadoes, and judgments? What is the meaning of all these mighty events that are taking place? The meaning is, these angels that have been held for many years in the temple of our God have got their liberty to go out and commence their mission and their work in the earth, and they are here today in the earth. [^45]

Two years later, in general conference, President Woodruff said:

I want to bear testimony to this congregation, and to the heavens and the earth, that the day is come when those angels are privileged to go forth and commence their work They are laboring in the United States of America; they are laboring among the nations of the earth; and they will continue. We need not marvel or wonder at anything that is transpiring in the earth. The world does not comprehend the revelations of God. They did not in the days of the Jews; yet all that the prophets had spoken concerning them came to pass. So in our day these things will come to pass. I heard the Prophet Joseph bear his testimony to these events that would transpire in the earth .... We cannot draw a veil over the events that await this generation. No man that is inspired by the Spirit and power of God can close his ears, his eyes or his lips to these things. [^46]

During World War II, President Joseph Fielding Smith was asked to deliver a series of lectures to the ladies of the Lion House Social Center on the "Signs of the Times." In one of the discussions, he spent some time explaining the parable of the wheat and the tares which makes reference to the angels reaping down the fields. He quoted President Woodruff's statements on the loosing of these angels and then went on to say:

One day while I was sitting in the presence of my father back about 1908 or 9, somewhere in there, I called attention to these statements of President Woodruff, and I said I would like to go over the records from the time of the dedication of the Temple up until now anti see what we can find in regard to calamities, destructions, plagues; and he encouraged me to do it, and so I did. So I went over the newspapers and over the magazines and jotted down year by year tile destructions, the commotions among men, everything in the nature of a calamity, and to my great astonishment each year they increased, and they have been increasing ever since I quit making that record. I was greatly astonished by it....

President Smith referred to a study of wars clone by two sociologists, and then continued:

Out of this study these scientists declare that they have discovered that war has tended to increase over all Europe in the late centuries. They say they have learned that in these countries, war grew from 2.678 in the twelfth century to 13,735.98 in the first twenty-five years of the twentieth century. Their tables show the growth by centuries. Up to the seventeenth century tile wars were comparatively insignificant. Beginning with that century war increased during the eighteenth, with a lull in the nineteenth, yet in that century they were more than 100 times greater than in medieval times.

These then conclude that "all commendable hopes that war will disappear in the near future are based on nothing more substantial than hope of a belief in miracles."

And then I made this prediction:

"If prophecy is to be fulfilled, there awaits the world a conflict more dreadful than any the world has yet seen." (Progress of Man, pp. 402-404).

Now I want to make some comments in regard to the statement by President Woodruff and this parable.

The Lord said that the sending forth of these angels was to be at the end of the harvest, and the harvest is the end of the world. Now, that ought to cause us some very serious reflections. And the angels have been pleading, as I have read it to you, before the Lord to be sent on their mission. Until 1893 the Lord said to them no, and then He set them loose. According to the revelation of President Woodruff, the Lord sent them out on that mission.

What do we gather out of that? That we are at the time of the end. This is the time of the harvest. [^47]

Wilford Woodruff, "The Temple Workers' Excursion," reported by Susan Young Gates, The Young Woman's Journal, Vol. 5, pp. 512-513. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 86:5.

Wilford Woodruff, Millennial Star, Vol. 56, p. 643, October 8, 1894. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Millennial Star, Vol. 58, p. 739, November 19, 1896. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Signs of the Times, (Deseret Book Co.: Salt Lake City, 1952), pp. 116, 120-121. (Italics added)

The End Is Near

In summary, then, when the question is asked, "How soon the end?" it must immediately be said that no one knows. But the evidence of scripture and the statements of the prophets make it clear that the time is close at hand. People may try to rationalize or explain away the signs which are being fulfilled all around them, but the evidence is still clear. There are many things predicted which have yet to come to pass, but the signs of the times manifest themselves with increasing rapidity.

Orson Pratt said he believed that some people living in 1877 would live to see the temple erected in the city of New Jerusalem. Some would dismiss that since it has been nearly 100 years and there is still no temple in Zion. But it should be remembered that, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, Samuel the Lamanite prophesied that the signs of Christ's birth would come in five years. When the five years were nearly up, many began to scoff and even threatened the believers with death if they did not deny their belief. The sign was given on the last night before the five years were finished. [^48] It is true that there are not many people alive today [1971] who were alive when Orson Pratt made his prophecy. But it doesn't take many. It is interesting to note that at the writing of this book, the president of the Church of Jesus Christ, President Joseph Fielding Smith, was alive at the time Orson Pratt spoke this prophecy.

One must be cautious about rejecting the words of the Lord's servants because the full meaning and implications are hidden. President Charles W. Penrose stated the proper attitude most adequately:

Of course, we understand that certain tidings predicted through the Prophet Joseph Smith are to take place before this generation shall pass away, and the Lord will see to it that the generation in which those things were predicted will not all pass away until all shall be fulfilled, but there is no fixed period for a generation, no set time in the revelations of God, no year or date given when these things shall take place, and it is folly for anybody to put a date to it. Leave that in the hands of the Lord and he will take care that his word is fulfilled.... [^49]

3 Nephi 1:1-20.

Charles W. Penrose, Conference Report, April, 1918, pp. 20-21. (Italics added)
