Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Three

A Cry of War

Shortly before the close of 1832, the Prophet Joseph Smith described the conditions that were existent in the world at that time. Cholera was prevalent in many of the large cities, India was experiencing an epidemic of the plague, and the United States had just passed through a serious crisis with the state of South Carolina. Whether it was this close brush with civil war or some other cause that caused the Lord to respond is not known. Joseph Smith says simply, "On Christmas day, I received the following revelation and prophecy on war."1 Then follows one of the most remarkable prophecies ever recorded.

Verily, thus saith the Lord concerning the wars that will shortly come to pass, beginning at the rebellion of South Carolina, which will eventually terminate in the death and misery of many souls;

And the time will come that war will be poured out upon all nations, beginning at this place.

For behold, the Southern States shall be divided against the Northern States, and the Southern States will call on other nations, even the nation of Great Britain, as it is called, and they shall also call upon other nations, in order to defend themselves against other nations; and then war shall be poured out upon all nations ....

And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a lull end of all nations.2

For a time it looked as though Joseph Smith had prophesied prematurely of a crisis that did not occur. President Jackson's firm stand caused South Carolina to back down and the confrontation was avoided. But the prophecy stood, and was fulfilled most remarkably nearly thirty years later when South Carolina again rebelled and fired against Fort Sumter. The great and costly Civil War was the final result and the words of the Lord were once more vindicated before the full view of the world.

Wars and Rumors of Wars

This prophecy has come to be known as "The Civil War Prophecy." However the revelation is even more remarkable for its other prophetic promises. The Lord promised that wars (note the plural) would be shortly coming to pass, and that "beginning" at the rebellion of South Carolina, war would be poured out "upon all nations."

President Joseph Fielding Smith explained that the Civil War was the Lord's sign that the beginning of the end had come.

Based upon what the Lord says in this Section 87 of the Doctrine and Covenants-the Section on war which I read-I place the time of the beginning of the end at the rebellion of South Carolina. I say I place it there. I beg your pardon. The Lord places it there because it says beginning at this place these things would take place. [^1]

When the Savior was outlining the events that would transpire before his return, he intimated that war would become a natural phenomenon of the last days. "And they shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars. Behold I speak for mine elect's sake; for nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; there shall be famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes, in divers places." [^2] War is one of the signs of the times. It has become so much a part of modern-day life that it is almost taken for granted. One has only to list such names as The Congo, Biafra, Pakistan, Peru, Korea, Argentina, Viet Nam, Brazil, Hungary, Berlin, Greece, Egypt, India, Red China, Israel, Cambodia, Cuba, and a hundred others. Each evokes a mental picture of war, overthrown governments, civil chaos, or invasion. This century has seen cold and hot wars; civil, religious, racial and revolutionary wars; aerial, naval, trench and guerrilla warfare; chemical, biological, and atomic warfare. Little wonder that Joseph Smith said: "Some may have cried peace, but the Saints and the world will have little peace from henceforth." [^3]

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Joseph Smith 1:28-29.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, p. 390, July 2, 1839.

War upon All Nations

In the prophecy on war previously cited, the Lord stated that war would be poured out upon all nations "until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations." [^4] The prophets of this dispensation have abundantly testified that the nations of the world will be broken up in preparation for the coming of the King of kings when there shall be only one government in the world, the Kingdom of Christ. War is the means by which this end will be brought about. The following is just a sampling of what the prophets of today have told us concerning the fulfillment of the Lord's words concerning war.

In an article written in the Millennial Star, Elder Charles W. Penrose stated:

Through the rejection of this Gospel, which "Shall be preached to all the world as a witness" of the coming of Christ, the world will increase in confusion, doubt, and horrible strife. As the upright in heart, the meek of the earth, withdraw from their midst, so will the spirit of God also be withdrawn from them. The darkness upon their minds in relation to eternal things will become blacker, nations will engage in frightful and bloody warfare, the crimes which are now becoming so frequent will be of continual occurrence, the ties that bind together families and kindred will be disregarded and violated, the passions of human nature will be put to the vilest uses, the very elements around will seem to be affected by the national and social convulsions that will agitate the world, and storms, earthquakes, and appalling disasters by sea and land will cause terror and dismay among the people; new diseases will silently cat their ghastly way through the ranks of the wicked; the earth, soaked with gore and defiled with the filthiness of her inhabitants, will begin to withhold her fruits in their season; the waves of the sea will heave themselves beyond their bounds, and all things will be in commotion; and in the midst of all these calamities, the masterminds among nations will be taken away, and fear will take hold of the hearts of all men. [^5]

Lorenzo Snow stated that these wars would help bring people to the Church for protection:

By and by the nations will be broken up on account of their wickedness, the Latter-day Saints are not going to move upon them with their little army, they will destroy themselves with their wickedness and immorality. They will contend and quarrel with one another, state after state and nation after nation, until they are broken up, and thousands, tens of thousands and hundreds of thousands will undoubtedly come and seek protection at the hands of the servants of God. [^6]

The wars of destruction and change were a constantly recurring theme in Elder Orson Pratt's discourses. For exam-pie, in 1879 he stated:

...When that day shall come there shall be wars, not such wars as have come in centuries and years that are past and gone, but a desolating war. When I say desolating, I mean that it will lay these European nations in waste. Cities will be left vacated, without inhabitants. The people will be destroyed by the sword of their own hands. Not only this but many other cities will be burned; for when contending armies are wrought up with terrible anger, without the Spirit of God upon them, when they have not that spirit of humanity that now characterizes many of the wars amongst the nations, when they are left to themselves, there will be no quarter given, no prisoners taken, but a war of destruction, of desolation, of the burning of the cities and villages, until the land is laid desolate. That is another thing that will come before the coming of the Son of Man. [^7]

In a letter written to the nation of Great Britain in 1857, Elder Orson F. Whitney said:

But if you will not, as a nation, repent, and unite yourselves with God's kingdom, then the days are near at hand, woe unto you when that day shall come! For it shall be a day of vengeance upon the British nation; and your armies shall perish; your maritime forces shall cease; your cities shall be ravaged, burned, and made desolate, and your strongholds shall be thrown down: the poor shall rise against the rich, and their storehouses and their line mansions shall be pillaged, their merchandise, and their gold, and their silver, and their rich treasures, shall be plundered; then shall the Lords, the Nobles, and the merchants of the land, and all in high places, be brought down, and shall sit in the dust, and howl for the miseries that shall be upon them; and they that trade by sea shall lament and mourn; for their traffic shall cease. And thus shall the Lord Almighty visit you, because of your great wickedness in rejecting His servants and His kingdom.... [^8]

Orson Hyde, the apostle who dedicated the land of Palestine for the return of the Jews, made a startling prediction which has been literally fulfilled in this century. He prophesied:

You have scarcely yet read the preface of your national troubles. Many nations will be drawn into the American maelstrom that now whirls through the land; and after many days, when the demon of war shall have exhausted his strength and madness upon American soil, by the destruction of all that can court or provoke opposition, excite cupidity, inspire revenge, or feed ambition, he will remove his headquarters to the banks of the Rhine. [^9]

The Rhine, of course, refers to the Rhine River, one of the most prominent rivers of Germany. In both of this century's great wars, Germany has been a prime protagonist.

A year after the conclusion of World War II, President George Albert Smith prophesied that even greater catastrophes would come than that great global war if people did not repent.

I fear that the time is coming... unless we can call the people of this world to repent of their ways, the great war that has just passed will be an insignificant thing, as far as calamity is concerned, compared to that which is before us. And we can avoid it if we will; if we will each do our part, it can be prevented. [^10]

A statement made by President David O. McKay may have bearing on this struggle, for he prophesied that Communism must be overthrown so that the gospel could be preached to the peoples in those countries.

A new religious freedom must come. God will overrule it [Communism], for that people must hear the truth and truth in simplicity. Truly there is much for the Church to do in the coming century. [^11]

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Charles W. Penrose, Millennial Star, Vol. 21, p. 582, September 19, 1859.

Lorenzo Snow, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 14, p. 309, January 14, 1872.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Orson F. Whitney, Millennial Star, Vol. 19, pp. 680-681, October 24, 1857.

Orson Hyde, Millennial Star, Vol. 24, p. 274, May 3, 1862. (Italics added)

George Albert Smith, The Improvement Era, November, 1946, p. 763. (Italics added)

David O. McKay, Church News, May 28, 1960.

Peace Is Taken from the Earth

All of these prophetic promises only support what the Lord said in his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants. "For I am no respecter of persons, and will that all men shall know that the day speedily cometh; the hour is not yet, but is nigh at hand, when peace shall be taken from the earth, and the devil shall have power over his own dominion." [^12] President Joseph Fielding Smith has testified that that hour has now come.

One year after the organization of the Church, peace could not have been taken from the earth, in justice, but the Lord said the time would speedily come. That time has come. Peace has departed from the world. The devil has power today over his own dominion. This is made manifest in the actions of men, in the distress among the nations, in the troubles that we see in all lands, including this land which was dedicated to liberty. [^13]

Doctrine and Covenants 1:35. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Conference Report, April, 1937, p. 59. (Italics added)

More Than War

As if the wars were not terrible enough in and of themselves, they will be accompanied with other calamities so great that men's hearts shall fail them. The Lord has warned his people to remain clean until his coming so that these things could be avoided. In the revelation known as the "Olive Leaf," the Lord said:

For not many days hence and the earth shall tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man; and the sun shall hide his face, and shall refuse to give light; and the moon shall be bathed in blood; and the stars shall become exceedingly angry and shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig-tree.

And after your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the people.

For after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shall not be able to stand.

And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds.

And all things shall be in commotion; and surely men's hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people. [^14]

A year and a half earlier, the Lord had explained how both war and calamities would be found together.

And there shall be earthquakes also in divers places, and many desolations; yet men will harden their hearts against me, and they will take up the sword, one against another, and they will kill one another. [^15]

In places other than scriptures, the prophets have testified of the other distresses besides war which will precede the second coming of the Lord. John Taylor wrote in one of the Church's newspapers about a year after the Prophet's death:

So, knowing that there are other judgments in store for the whole earth, we will venture a prediction, and that there shall be storm and hail enough to cause a famine, and show the whole of the earth that Jesus Christ, and not the Mormons, vexes the nation. Enough of the present generation shall see, hear, and feel it, to be witnesses that the servants of God tell the truth. [^16]

President Wilford Woodruff also said:

The Lord is not going to disappoint either Babylon or Zion, with regard to famine, pestilence, earthquake or storms, he is not going to disappoint anybody with regard to any of these things, they are at the doors .... Lay up your wheat and other provisions against a day of need, for the day will come when they will be wanted, and no mistake about it. We shall want bread, arid the Gentiles will want bread, and if we are wise we shall have something to feed them and ourselves when famine comes. [^17]

Doctrine and Covenants 88:87-91. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 45:33. (Italics added)

John Taylor, Nauvoo Neighbor, August 6, 1845. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 121, September 12, 1875. (Italics added)

A New Kind of Sermon

The plagues, the famines, the thunderings and lightnings, the hail and the earthquakes are all necessary, for the children of men will not otherwise heed the warning voice of the Lord. In these times of chaos and catastrophes which are coming, the missionaries of the Church will be called home, and the Lord will preach his own sermons to the people.

Both Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young taught that the calling home of the missionaries was a literal event and one of the signs of the times.

The judgments of God will be poured out upon the wicked to the extent that our elders from far and near will be called home. Or, in other words, the gospel will be taken from the Gentiles and later on will be carried to the Jews. [^18]

Do you think there is calamity abroad now among the people? Not much. All we have yet heard and all we have experienced is scarcely a preface to the sermon that is going to be preached. When the testimony of the Elders ceases to be given, and the Lord says to them, "Come home; I will now preach my own sermons to the nations of the earth," all you now know can scarcely be called a preface to the sermon that will be preached with fire and sword, tempests, earthquakes, hail, rain, thunders and lightnings, and fearful destruction. What matters the destruction of a few railway cars? You will hear of magnificent cities, now idolized by the people, sinking in the earth, entombing the inhabitants. The sea will heave itself beyond its bounds, engulfing mighty cities. Famine will spread over the nations, and nation will rise up against nation, kingdom against kingdom, and states against states, in our own country and in foreign lands. [^19]

Orson Pratt also taught the same doctrine.

When God has called out the righteous, when the warning voice has been sufficiently proclaimed among tile Gentile nations, and the Lord says, "It is enough," he will also say to his servants-"O, ye, my servants, come home, come out from the midst of these Gentile nations, where you have labored and borate testimony for so long a period; come out from among them, for they are not worthy; they do not receive the message that I have sent forth, they do not repent of their sins, come out from their midst, their times are fulfilled. Seal up the testimony among them and bind up the law." [^20]

And yet, according to Melvin J. Ballard, even these testimonies of the elements themselves will go largely unheeded by men.

The Lord said they would not heed that warning voice no more than they had heeded the warning voice of his servants. But I want to call the attention of the Latter-day Saints, and indeed if I had the power, the attention of all the world to the fact that God is speaking through the elements. The earthquakes, the sea heaving itself beyond its bounds, bringing such dire destruction as we have seen are the voice of God crying repentance to this generation, a generation that only in part has heeded the warning voice of the servants of the Lord. [^21]

Heber C. Kimball, Deseret News, Church Department, May 23, 1931, p. 3. ( Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 8, p. 123, July 15, 1860. (Italics added )

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 64, July 25, 1875. (Italics added) See also Doctrine and Covenants 43:21-22.

Melvin J. Ballard, Conference Report, October, 1923, p. 31. (Italics added)

In Zion and Her Stakes

"But is there to be no hope in such dark times?" one cries out. "How can anyone escape such destruction and warfare?" The words of the prophets once again offer hope in the midst of approaching darkness; once more we are shown the hand of God that will lead us through the deepening gloom.

In July, 1839, the Prophet Joseph Smith met with the Twelve who were departing on missions for Great Britain and addressed them. He spoke of the coming wars and pestilences that would come upon the world. His words were grim and foreboding, but they also explained how the righteous could escape from these disastrous events.

There will be here and there a Stake [of Zion] for the gathering of the Saints. Some may have cried peace, but the Saints and the world will have little peace from henceforth. Let this not hinder us from going to the Stakes; for God told us to flee, not dallying, or we shall be scattered, one here, and another there. There your children shall be blessed, and you in the midst of friends where you may be blessed....

I prophesy that that man who tarries after be has an opportunity of going, will be afflicted by the devil· Wars are at hand; we must not delay; but are not required to sacrifice. We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object. When wars come, we shall flee to Zion .... The time is soon coming, when no man will have any peace but in Zion and her stakes. [^22]

Orson Pratt also testified:

. . . By and by the Spirit of God will entirely withdraw from these Gentile nations, and leave them to themselves. Then they will lind something else to do besides warring against the Saints in their midst-besides raising their sword and fighting against the Lamb of God; for then war will commence in earnest, and such a war as probably never entered into the hearts of men in our age to conceive of. No nation of the Gentiles upon the face of the whole earth but what will be engaged in deadly war, except the Latter-day Kingdom. [^23]

The Lord specifically told the Prophet Joseph in a revelation that the city of New Jerusalem would be a place of refuge and safety and a land of peace for the Saints of the Lord. So great will be its glory that it will strike terror into the hearts of the wicked so that they dare not come up to battle against it. And those who will not take up the sword against their neighbor will flee to Zion for safety. [^24] So to those who trust in the hand of the Lord for guidance during the dark hours, there will be a place of hope and comfort.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, pp. 390-391. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 7, p. 188, July 10, 1859. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 45:68.

The Chastening Hand of the Lord

But even with this hope, it is not a pleasant task to contemplate the terrible events predicted by the Lord's servants. They are so appalling in their destruction that the mind pales at the implications. At first glance they seem to indicate a harshness on the part of the Lord, an eagerness to punish his children when they have erred. Many people find it hard to reconcile such full-scale war and widespread catastrophes with the tender mercies of a loving Father. But the scriptures and the words of the servants of the Lord are abundantly clear. He must take vengeance upon the wicked because they will not repent. [^25] However, this vengeance comes only after he pleads over and over for them to forsake their evil ways and come unto him.

O, ye nations of the earth, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, but ye would not!

How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of earthquakes, and great hailstorms, and by the voice of famines, and pestilences of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment, and by the voice of mercy all the day long, and by the voice of glory and honor and the riches of eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting salvation, but ye would not!

Behold, the day has come, when the cup of the wrath of mine indignation is full. [^26]

The wrath of his indignation is full because we are so easily turned to evil, and it seems as though it is only through the chastenings of trouble and tribulation that we turn to him.

And thus we see that except the Lord doth chasten his people with many afflictions, yea, except he doth visit them with death and with terror, and with famine and with all manner of pestilence they will not remember him. [^27]

And yet, even in spite of our eagerness to turn from him, he still patiently and lovingly seeks to warn us of future destruction so that we can repent and turn his judgments aside.

I stand here without any fear and say without any danger of anybody successfully being able to prove the contrary, that if the warning voice of the Prophet Joseph Smith and the elders of this Church had been heeded by the nations of the earth, we would not have seen the dreadful calamity of war through which we have passed, that these problems could have been solved and averted.

The means was provided, and the means was rejected, and then when our Father has done this, though he be God, is yet limited to law, by obedience to which he became God, and he must honor the same, he cannot step beyond those limitations and set aside the law. The law must take its course, and when men refuse the offer and tender the Lord has given by which they may be saved, they cannot blame the Lord if calamities, judgments and destructions come upon them. The Lord cannot avert it, it must take its course, and yet our Father in his kindness and mercy has offered the way and the means of escape. [^28]

The choice is given to us freely and it is ours to make. However, if we make the unwise decision, God has no choice but to let fall the judgments which our acts produce.

Doctrine and Covenants 29: 17.

Doctrine and Covenants 43:24-26. (Italics added)

Helaman 12:3. (Italics added)

Melvin J. Ballard, Conference Report, October, 1923, p. 31. (Italics added)
