Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter 4

The United States in Prophecy

As one reviews the destiny of the nations of the earth and the prophecies concerning the great struggles and universal warfare which is foretold by the prophets, the question naturally comes to mind: "And what of the United States of America? What of this nation, one of the most wealthy and powerful civilizations ever in the unrolling scene of world history? Have the prophets also spoken concerning this land?"

A Land Choice Above All Others

As early as several thousand years before the birth of the Savior, the land which is now called America was designated as a land to be preferred above all others. Both to the Jaredites, who were led out of central Asia at the time of the confusion of tongues, and to the family of Lehi who left Jerusalem about six hundred years before Christ's birth, the Lord testified that the land to which they were going was the promised land, a land so abundant in wealth that all who lived there in righteousness would prosper. Indeed, it was a land which was "choice above all other lands." [^1] The millions who have come to this country in this age have found it to be just as the Lord promised.

But such a land was not to be had without some conditions. A land choice above all other lands requires a people choice above all other peoples. The Lord made it very clear that this land was reserved only for a people willing to serve him and keep his commandments. If the people refused to meet those conditions they necessarily would have to lose the privilege of dwelling in the promised land.

And he had sworn in his wrath unto the brother of Jared, that whoso should possess this land of promise, from that time hence. forth and forever, should serve him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fulness of his wrath shall come upon them.

And now, we can behold the decrees of God concerning this land, that it is a land of promise; and whatsoever nation shall possess it shall serve God, or they shall be swept off ....

For it is the everlasting decree of God. And it is not until the fulness of iniquity among the children of the land, that they are swept off [^2]

That is the everlasting decree of God for all who possess this land. And the Book of Mormon records the literal fulfillment of this promise to two great and mighty nations. One has only to read the final destruction of both the Jaredite and Nephite nations to know that God's decree is not one to be set aside.

The Wickedness of This Generation

In his preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord warned the people living in our time that the level of wickedness was rising, and would soon bring the divine promise into play once again if they did not repent. [^3]

If the generation which now inhabits the promised land does not serve the only true and living God they too shall be swept off when their iniquity is full. The outlook is not very optimistic, for the prophets have been testifying that the wickedness in this age is rampant. As early as 1833, the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

The nations of the Gentiles are like the waves of the sea, casting up mire and dirt, or all in commotion, and they are hastily preparing to act the part allotted them, when the Lord rebukes the nations, when He shall rule them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potter's vessel. The Lord declared to His servants, some eighteen months since, that He was then withdrawing His Spirit from the earth; and we can see that such is the fact, for not only the churches are dwindling away, but there are no conversions, or but a very few: and this is not all, the governments of the earth are thrown into confusion and division; and Destruction, to the eye of the spiritual beholder, seems to be written by the finger of an invisible hand, in large capitals, upon almost every-tiling we behold. [^4]

Then in a sermon preached to the saints in Nauvoo a few months before his death, the Prophet explicitly declared the state of this generation.

I prophesy, in the name of the Lord God of Israel, anguish and wrath and tribulation and the withdrawing of the Spirit of God from the earth await this generation, until they are visited with utter desolation. This generation is as corrupt as the generation of the Jews that crucified Christ; and if He were here today, and should preach the same doctrine He did then, they would put Him to death. [^5]

Presidents John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff both testified that the wickedness that prevails in the earth is one of the factors leading to its destruction.

A terrible day of reckoning is approaching the nations of the earth; the Lord is coming out of his hiding place to vex the inhabitants thereof; and the destroyer of the gentiles, as prophesied of, is already on his way Already combinations are being entered into which are very ominous for the future prosperity, welfare, and happiness of this great republic. The volcanic fires of disordered and anarchical elements are beginning to manifest themselves and exhibit the internal forces that are at work among the turbulent and unthinking masses of the people. [^6]

The angels of God are waiting to fulfill the great commandment given forty-five years ago, to go forth and reap down the earth because of the wickedness of men. How do you think eternity feels today? Why, there is more wickedness a thousand times over, in the United States now, than when that revelation was given. The whole earth is ripe in iniquity; and these inspired men, these Elders of Israel, have been commanded of the Almighty to go forth and warn the world, that their garments may be clean of the blood of all men. [^7]

The wickedness committed today in the Christian world in twenty-four hours is greater than would have been committed in a hundred years at the ratio of fifty years ago. And the spirit of wickedness is increasing, so that I no longer wonder that God almighty will turn rivers into blood; I do not wonder that He will open the seals and pour out the plagues and sink great Babylon, as the angel saw, like a millstone cast into the sea, to rise no more forever. I can see that it requires just such plagues and judgments to cleanse the earth, that it may cease to groan under the wickedness and abomination in which the Christian world welters today. [^8]

This state of wickedness among the children of men who live upon the promised land must of necessity bring God's judgments upon them, and they will be swept off unless they repent. This was borne out on another occasion, when President Woodruff was shown a vision of what would result from this nation's unwillingness to serve God. He had been visiting the Saints in Northern Utah and had camped in a tent some distance from Brigham City. His biographer, Matthias Cowley, quotes from his journal:

"I went to bed filled with prayer and meditation. I fell asleep and remained in slumber until about midnight, when I awoke. The Lord then poured out His spirit upon me and opened the vision of my mind so that I could comprehend in a great measure the mind and will of God concerning the nation and concerning the inhabitants of Zion. I saw the wickedness of the nation, its abominations and corruptions and tile judgments of God and the destruction that awaited it...." The revelation was submitted to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles just prior to the April conference of that year. It was accepted by that body as the word of the Lord, according to Elder Woodruff's journal, under date of April 4th, 1880. [^9]

Ether 2:7; 1 Nephi 2:20.

Ether 2:8-10. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 1:11-16.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 23, p. 62, April 9, 1882. (Italics added) In light of today's society, President Taylor's remarks seem especially prophetic.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 14, p. 3, January 1, 1871.

Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, History of His Life and Labors (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1964), pp. 530-531.

To Vex This Nation

This general state of wickedness violates the decree of God that all who would possess the land must do so in righteousness, and will bring upon all the nations of the promised land swift destruction if they do not repent. But the United States of America, as a government, added a specific crime to their general state of wickedness which will especially add to the fulfillment of the divine promise.

Early in the history of the Church, many of the members of the Church were eager to ascertain the location of the land of Zion. When Joseph Smith indicated through revelation that its center place was in Jackson County, Missouri, thousands of the saints moved there. But it soon became evident that to live in Zion was not to live without problems. The Missourians who lived around Independence were soon expressing open hostility toward the new settlers. Harassment and insults escalated into open mob violence until the saints were finally driven from their homes in the winter of 1833-34. Across the Missouri River and into the northern counties of Missouri, the exiled saints sought new homes where they could live in peace.

It is hard now to imagine the feelings of those saints thus driven from the land of Zion. It had been designated by the Lord as the site of the New Jerusalem, yet now they had been driven off. Many troubled prayers were sent heavenward asking for guidance in such dark hours. In addition to the comfort and explanations, coming in response to those prayers, the Lord gave the Church some instructions on their responsibilities in seeking redress from the United States government.

Let them importune at the feet of the judge;

And if he heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the governor;

And if the governor heed them not, let them importune at the feet of the president;

And if the president heed them not, then will the Lord arise and come forth out of his hiding place, and in his fury vex the nation. [^10]

In response to the commandment, the Prophet Joseph Smith had a list compiled of all the crimes committed against the saints, and petitions were drawn up and sent to Congress. However, before the lists were completed, new problems had arisen. The move to Northern Missouri seemed to solve the conflict between Mormon and non-Mormon for a time, but soon the old problems began to creep in again. After the great apostasy of the Church in Kirtland in 1837, the remaining faithful moved to Missouri. By the summer of 1838 there were nearly fifteen thousand Mormons living in Northern Missouri. To the Missourians it looked as though they would soon be inundated by the hated Mormons. Once again open warfare became the order of the day, and into Church history came such phrases as "The Haun's Mill Massacre," "The Battle of Crooked River," "Governor Lilburn W. Boggs and his Infamous Extermination Order," "The Betrayal at Far West," and "Liberty Jail." With the help of the government of the state of Missouri, the mob drove fifteen thousand saints from their homes in the winter of 1838-39, and Zion was left temporarily in the hands of the enemies of righteousness.

With these new crimes against the Church, the Prophet determined to carry his petitions to the government in person. It was in the lack of response to these petitions that the government of the United States sealed her destiny upon the land of promise.

Journeying to Washington, D.C., late in October, 1839, the Prophet presented the petition of the saints to both the Congress and the President of the United States. In his journal, he reports the disappointing results of his efforts.

During my stay I had an interview with Martin Van Buren, the President, who treated me very insolently, and it was with great reluctance he listened to our message, which, when he had heard, he said: "Gentlemen, your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you;" and "If I take up for you I shall lose the vote of Missouri." His whole course went to show that he was an office-seeker, that self-aggrandizement was his ruling passion, and that justice and righteousness were no part of his composition. I also had an interview with Mr. John C. Calhoun, whose conduct towards me very ill became his station. [Calhoun was a member of the Senate.] I became satisfied there was little use for me to tarry, to press the just claims of the Saints on the consideration of the President or Congress, and stayed but a few days .... [^11]

Although Elias Higbee was left to continue to plead the cause of the saints, no action to redress the saints was ever taken. The Senate Judiciary Committee stated in their final report of the matter: "... the case presented for their investigation is not such a one as will justify or authorize any interposition by this government." [^12] The Church had fulfilled the command of the Lord, and the word of the Lord now stood: "And if the president heed them not, then will the Lord arise and come forth out of his hiding place, and in his fury, vex the nation." [^13]

Joseph Smith made it clear that this decision on the part of the government would result in its eventual destruction. When he arrived home in March of 1840, the Prophet wrote in his journal:

I arrived safely at Nauvoo, after a wearisome journey, through alternate snow and mud, having witnessed many vexatious movements in government officers, whose sole object should be the peace and prosperity and happiness of the whole people; but instead of this, I discovered that popular clamor and personal aggrandizement were the ruling principles of those in authority; and my heart faints within me when I see, by the visions of the Almighty, the end of this action, if she continues to disregard the cries and petitions of her virtuous citizens, as she has done, and is now doing. [^14]

Two years later, in his now famous conversation with Judge Stephen A. Douglas, the Prophet said:

I prophesy in the name of the Lord God of Israel, unless the United States redress the wrongs committed upon the Saints in the state of Missouri and punish the crimes committed by her officers that in a Jew years the government will be utterly overthrown anD wasted, and there will not be so much as a potsherd left .... [^15]

Then once again, late in 1843, another petition was sent to Congress asking for redress. The Prophet commented on that petition.

While discussing the petition to Congress, I prophesied by virtue of the holy Priesthood vested in me, and in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that if Congress will not hear our petition and grant us protection, they shall be broken up as a government. [^16]

To this day no action has ever been taken by the government of the United States, and thus these clear and prophetic promises stand awaiting their fulfillment.

Doctrine and Covenants 101:86-89. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 4, p. 80, February 6, 1840. (Italics in original)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 4, p. 91, March 4, 1840.

Doctrine and Covenants 101:89.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 4, p. 89, March 4, 1840. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 5, p. 394, May 18, 1843. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 6, p. 116, December 16, 1843. (Italics added)

The Future Destiny of the United States

Joseph Smith was not the only one to testify of the coming destruction of this nation. Many of the apostles and prophets have also borne witness to this fulfillment of God's promises. Brigham Young told of hearing the Prophet speak of the coming destruction of the United States.

The whole government is gone; it is as weak as water. I heard Joseph Smith say nearly thirty years ago, "They shall have mobbings to their hearts' content, if they do not redress the wrongs of the Latter-day Saints." Mobs will not decrease but will increase until the whole government becomes a mob, and eventually it will be State against State, city against city, neighborhood against neighborhood, Methodists against Methodists, and so on. [^17]

In 1881, sixteen years after the close of the Civil War, President John Taylor said:

Do I not know that a nation like that in which we live, a nation which is blessed with the freest, the most enlightened and magnificent government in the world today, with privileges which would exalt people to heaven if they lived up to them-do I not know that if they do not live up to them, but violate them and trample them under their feet, and discard the sacred principles of liberty by which we ought to be governed-do I not know that their punishment will be commensurate with the enlightenment which they possess? I do. And I know I cannot help but know-that there are a great many more afflictions yet awaiting this nation [^18]

President Wilford Woodruff was another who often spoke of the destruction that is to come upon the United States. In his history of the Church he wrote:

I warn future historians to give credence to my history; for my testimony is true, and the truth of its record will be manifest in the world to come. All the words of the Lord will be fulfilled upon the nations, which are written in this book. The American nation will be broken in pieces like a potter's vessel, and will be cast down to hell if it does not repent-and this, because of murders, whoredoms, wickedness and all manner of abominations, for the Lord has spoken it. [^19]

In 1880, in an address to the saints, he said:

I ask myself the question, "Can the American nation escape?" The answer comes, "No." Its destruction, as well as the destruction of the world is sure; just as sure as the Lord cut off and destroyed the two great and prosperous nations that once inhabited this continent of North and South America, because of their wickedness, so will He them destroy, and sooner or later they will reap the fruits of their own wicked acts, and be numbered among the past....

There are changes awaiting us, they are even nigh at our very doors, and I know it by the visions of heaven; I know it by the administrations of angels, and I know it by the inspiration of heaven, that is given to all men who seek the Lord; and the hand of God will not stay these things. We have no time to lose [^20]

Elder Orson Pratt foretold the destruction and chaos yet coming upon the United States.

If it be asked, why is America thus to suffer? The answer is, because they have rejected the kingdom of God, and one of the greatest divine messages ever sent to man; because they have sanctioned the killing of the Saints, and the martyrdom of the Lord's Prophets, and have suffered his people to be driven from their midst, and have robbed them of their houses, and homes, and land, and millions of property, and have refused to redress their wrongs. For these great evils, they must suffer; the decrees of Jehovah have gone forth against them; the sword of the Lord has been unsheathed, and will fall with pain upon their devoted heads. Their great and magnificent cities are to be cut off. New York, Boston, Albany, and numerous other cities will be left desolate. Party will be arrayed in deadly strife against party; State against State; and the whole nation will be broken up; the sanguinary weapons of the dreadful revolution will devour the land. Then shall there be a fleeing from one city to another, from one State to another, from one part of the continent to another, seeking refuge, from the devastations of bandits and armies; then shall their dead be left unburied, and the fowls of heaven shall summer upon them, and the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them. Moreover, the Lord will visit them with the deadly pestilence which shall sweep away many millions by its ravages; for their eyes shall fall from their sockets, and their flesh from their bones, and their tongues shall be stayed in their mouths, that they shall not be able to blaspheme against their Maker. And it will come to pass, that the heavens will withhold their rains and their fruitful fields be turned into barrenness, and the waters of their rivers will be dried up, and left in standing pools, and the fish therein will die; and the Lord will send forth a grievous plague to destroy the horses and cattle from the land. Thus by the sword and by pestilence, and by famine, and by the strong arm of the Almighty, shall the inhabitants of that wicked nation be destroyed. [^21]

Brigham Young, Deseret News, Vol. 9, p. 2, May 1, 1861.

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 22, p. 141, July 3, 1881. (Italics added )

Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, History of His Life and Labors (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1964), p. 500. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 21, p. 301, August 1, 1880. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Millennial Star, Vol. 28, pp. 633-634 October 6 1866. (Italics added)

The Constitution by a Thread

One of the things that has made the United States of America unique in the annals of government is its Constitution. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints teaches that such a document is too unique to have come solely from the minds of men. The Lord has stated clearly in his revelations that he established the Constitution by raising up wise men for that very purpose. [^22] These principles of government by the people for the preservation of freedom are divinely inspired, and the wars and destruction that are coming will not make them any less so. But the prophets have indicated that these principles established in the Constitution will be forsaken by the country in general and that this will be an important factor in bringing about the destruction of the United States.

Many of the prophets have referred to the time when the constitutional principles would be in danger, and it has been clearly prophesied that these principles would be saved or found only in the Church. Brigham Young reported that Joseph Smith was the first to teach this doctrine. In an Independence Day celebration speech Brigham Young said:

Will the Constitution be destroyed? No: it will be held inviolate by this people; and, as Joseph Smith said, "The time will come when the destiny of the nation will hang upon a single thread. At that critical juncture, this people will step forth and save it from the threatened destruction." It will be so. [^23]

Early in the spring of the following year, Brigham Young intimated that the holders of the priesthood would be the ones to save the Constitution.

When the Constitution of the United States hangs, as it were, upon a single thread, they will have to call for the "Mormon" elders to save it from utter destruction; and they will step forth and do it. [^24]

Some people have argued that such a critical threat was posed to the Constitution during the Civil War and this is what the Prophet Joseph meant. However, this would not account for the "elders of the Church" saving it, for the Civil War passed over the Church with relatively minor effect. In addition, three years after the Civil War was over, Brigham Young again referred to this prophecy as yet being in the future .

How long will it be before the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith will be fulfilled? He said if the Constitution of the United States were saved at all it must be done by this people. It will not be many years before these words come to pass." [^25]

Elder Orson Hyde of the Council of the Twelve was also present when Joseph Smith made that prophecy, but he made a slight variation in his report.

It is said that brother Joseph in his lifetime declared that the Elders of this Church should step forth at a particular time when the Constitution would be in danger, and rescue it, and save it. This may be so; but I do not recollect that he said exactly so. I believe he said something like this-that the time would come when the Constitution and the country would be in danger of an overthrow; and said he, "If the Constitution be saved at all, it will be by the elders of this Church." I believe this is about the language, as nearly as I can recollect it.

The question is whether it will be saved at all, or not. I do not know that it matters to us whether it is or not; the Lord will provide for and take care of his people, if we do every duty, and fear and honour him, and keep his commandments; and he will not leave us without a Constitution." [^26]

President John Taylor spoke of it as a saving of the constitutional principles rather than the actual government itself.

When the people have torn to shreds the Constitution of the United States the Elders of Israel will be found holding it up to the nations of the earth and proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men, and extending the hand of fellowship to the oppressed of all nations. This is part of the program, and as long as we do what is right and fear God, he will help us and stand by us under all circumstances. [^27]

Orson Pratt felt that although the United States would lose the power to govern in the chaos that will be present, the spirit of the Constitution would be preserved in the government set up by the members of the Church.

. . .He will speedily fulfill the prophecy in relation to the overthrow of this nation, and their destruction. We shall be obliged to have a government to preserve ourselves in unity and peace; for they, through being wasted away, will not have power to govern; for state will be divided against state, city against city, town against town, and the whole country will be in terror and confusion; mobocracy will prevail and there will be no security, through this great Republic, for the lives or property of the people. When that time shall arrive, we shall necessarily want to carry out the principles of our great constitution and, as the people of God, we shall want to see those principles magnified, according to the order of union and oneness which prevails among the people of God. [^28]

President J. Reuben Clark, Jr., issued a solemn warning about the costs of sacrificing the principles of the Constitution.

Brethren, let us think about that, because I say unto you with all the soberness I can, that we stand in danger of losing our liberties, and that once lost, only blood will bring them back; and once lost, we of this church will, in order to keep the church going forward, have more sacrifices to make and more persecutions to endure than we have yet known, heavy as our sacrifices and grievous as our persecutions of the past have been. [^29]

President David O. McKay said on more than one occasion that the maintenance of constitutional principles was one of the most important tasks that members of the Church had before them. In an editorial in The Instructor in 1956, he said: "Next to being one in worshipping God there is nothing in this world upon which this Church should be more united than in upholding and defending the Constitution of the United States." [^30]

So it seems evident from what the prophets have said that the Constitution of the United States of America will be severely threatened in the crises that are to come, but its principles will be preserved by the members of the Church. In view of such developments as the flag burnings, "peace" marches and slogan chanting of the seventies, President John Taylor's remarks of ninety years ago are particularly appropriate.

It is our duty [to defend human rights] that our families demand of us; it is a duty that the honest in this nation demand of us, and that God demands of us; and we will try to carry it out, God being our helper. And if other people can afford to trample under foot the sacred institutions of this country, we cannot. And if other people trample upon the Constitution and pull it to pieces, we will gather together the pieces and rally around the old flag, or what is left of it, and proclaim liberty to the world, as Joseph Smith said we would. [^31]

In this day of anarchy, bombings, violence and assassinations, it is not too difficult to see the conditions fermenting which could topple the stable government of this nation.

George Q. Cannon also spoke of the day when such factions would rend the government, and there would be no stability outside of the members of the Church.

. . . The day will come-and this is another prediction of Joseph Smith's-I want to remind you of it, my brethren and sisters, when good government, constitutional government-liberty-will be found among the Latter-day Saints, and it will be sought for in vain elsewhere; when the Constitution of this land and republican government and institutions will be upheld by this people who are now so oppressed and whose destruction is now sought so diligently. The day will come when the Constitution, and free government under it, will be sustained and preserved by this people. [^32]

Doctrine and Covenants 101:77, 80.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 7, p. 15, July 4, 1854. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 2, p. 182, February 18, 1855.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 12, p. 204, April 8, 1868.

Orson Hyde, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6, p. 152, January 3, 1858. (Italics added)

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 21, p. 8, August 31, 1879. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Deseret Evening News, Vol. 8, no. 265, October 2, 1875. (Italics added)

J. Reuben Clark, Jr., The Improvement Era, May, 1944, p. 337. (Italics added)

David O. McKay, The Instructor, February, 1956, p. 34.

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 23, p. 239, August 20, 1882.

George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 23, p. 104, November 20, 1881. (Italics added)

The Seeds of Destruction

It is hard to believe that a nation as large and as prosperous and as powerful as the United States is today could lose the power to govern. Even though there are serious problems in this country today, it still has a great governing power and is a world leader in its influence. What conditions could bring such a nation to the brink of destruction? What kinds of crises could strike with such power as to destroy the United States? Although there is much that is not known concerning the specific events that will bring the Lord's prophecies to fulfillment, he has given several indications of what is to come.

In a scripture quoted in the previous chapter, the Lord said that when the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled, there would be men standing in that generation which would not pass away until they saw an "overflowing scourge cover the land." [^33] The Lord often spoke of this scourge coming upon the people, and the devastating results of what would follow. In March of 1829, even before the Church was organized, he said:

For a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming. [^34]

Webster defines a scourge as "an instrument of punishment or criticism; a cause of widespread or great affliction." [^35] This scourge seems to involve many forms of terrible calamities, including great hailstorms, [^36] tempests, [^37] plagues, pestilence, and war. [^38] Such terrible disasters will be such that they will lay to waste those who fight against God and will actually leave mighty cities desolate of their populations. The Lord warned some specific cities, particularly Boston, New York and Albany, of the desolation awaiting them if they did not repent. [^39]

Doctrine and Covenants 45:30-31.

Doctrine and Covenants 5: 19.

Webster's Seventh New Collegiate Dictionary, (G.&C. Merriam Co., Springfield, Mass., 1965) p. 773.

Doctrine and Covenants 29:16.

Doctrine and Covenants 88: 90.

Doctrine and Covenants 97: 26.

Doctrine and Covenants 84: 96-97.

Other Nations to Come Against Us

It is not clear from the scriptures whether these various calamities which all go to make up the desolating scourge will come together or at various times. Perhaps, as so often in the past, war will bring with it its attendant evils of disease, famine, starvation, pestilence and the like. This is a distinct possibility, for the Prophet Lehi told his son that if a nation upon the promised land did not serve the Lord, it would result in other nations coming against it.

. . . If the day shall come that they will reject the Holy One of Israel, the true Messiah, their Redeemer and their God, behold, the judgments of him that is just shall rest upon them. Yea, he will bring other nations unto them, and he will give unto them power, and he will take away from them the lands of their possessions, anti he will cause them to be scattered and smitten. Yea, as one generation passeth to another there shall be bloodsheds, and great visitations among; them [^40]

President John Taylor, on several different occasions stated very clearly that the United States would have other nations conic against her in war, and that she would see warfare in her own land.

Were we surprised when the last terrible war took place here in the United States? No. Good Latter-day Saints were not, for they had been told about it. Joseph Smith had told them where it would start in South Carolina. But I tell you today the end is not yet. You will see worse things than that, for God will lay his hand upon this nation, and they will feel it more terribly than even they have done before. There will be more bloodshed, more ruin, more devastation than ever they have seen before. Write it down! You will see it come to pass; it is only just starting in. And would you feel to rejoice? No; I would feel sorry. I knew very well myself when this last war was commencing and could have wept and did weep, over this nation; but there is yet to come a sound of war, trouble and distress, in which brother will be arrayed against brother, father against son, son against father, a scene of desolation and destruction that will permeate our land until it will be a vexation to hear the report thereof. [^41]

In 1876, speaking of the nations that would come against Jerusalem and the tribulations the Jews would experience, President Taylor said: "They [the Jews] will in due time be gathered together to their own lands as we are gathered here; and nations will go up against them, and then too will certain nations come against us." [^42] Then in 1883 he stated:

The world, as I have said, is full of confusion, and there will be worse confusion by and by. We had a great war upon this continent some years ago; but there will yet be wars pass through these United States, and through other nations, until it will be mournful to hear the report of the bloodshed, the sorrow and the trouble that will be caused thereby .... [^43]

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 20, p. 318, October 6, 1879. (Italics added)

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 281, November 5, 1876. (Italics added)

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 24, p. 200, June 18, 1883. (Italics added)

City Against City

Nor are these wars to involve simply our struggle against other nations. Many of the prophets have clearly predicted conditions of war that would finally bring the United States to destruction. The war, pestilence, famines, hailstorms, etc., etc., mentioned by so many of the prophets shall evidently cause such chaos in America that ordered government shall cease and the nation shall be wracked by mob violence more terrible than normal warfare. President Taylor, as just cited above, spoke of the time when family members would be fighting against each other and a scene of desolation would permeate the land.

The Prophet Joseph Smith was the first of the modern prophets to speak of this coming terror. In 1833 he said:

And now I am prepared to say by the authority of Jesus Christ, that not many years shall pass away before the United States shall present such a scene of bloodshed as has not a parallel in the history of our nation; pestilence, hail, famine, and earthquake will sweep the wicked of this generation from off the face of the land, to open and prepare the way for the return of the lost tribes of Israel from the north country. [^44]

Six years later, after the saints had been driven from the state of Missouri, the Prophet returned to the same theme in a discourse to the Twelve.

I saw men hunting the lives of their own sons, and brother murdering brother, women killing their own daughters, and daughters seeking the lives of their mothers. I saw armies arrayed against armies. I saw blood, desolation, fires. The Son of Man has said that the mother shall be against the daughter, and the daughter against the mother. These things are at our doors. They will follow the Saints of God from city to city. Satan will rage, and the spirit of the devil is now enraged. I know not how soon these things will take place; but with a view of them, shall I cry peace? No; I will lift up my voice and testify of them. How long you will have good crops, and the famine be kept off, I do not know; when the fig tree leaves, know then that summer is nigh at hand. [^45]

Elder Jedediah M. Grant, who was very close to the Prophet Joseph during his lifetime, told of Joseph's vision of warfare that would come upon the United States.

The Prophet stood in his own house when he told several of us the night the visions of Heaven were opened to him, in which he saw the American continent drenched in blood, and he saw nation rising up against nation. He also saw the father shed the blood of the son and the son the blood of the lather; the mother put to the death the daughter, and the daughter the mother; and natural affection forsook the hearts of the wicked; for he saw that the Spirit of God should be withdrawn from the inhabitants of the earth, in consequence of which there should be blood upon the face of the whole earth except among the people of the Most High. The prophet gazed upon the scene his vision presented, until his heart sickened, and he besought the Lord to close it up again. [^46]

Unquestionably, that prophecy was partially fulfilled during the great and terrible Civil War, but others of the prophets have indicated that much of it is yet to be fulfilled.

Elder Orson Pratt very explicitly described the conditions of anarchy and mobocracy that would sweep the nation to its destruction.

What then will be the condition of that people, when this great and terrible war shall come? It will be very different from the war between the North and the South. Do you wish me to describe it? I will do so. It will be a war of neighborhood against neighborhood, city against city, county against county, state against state, and they will go forth destroying and being destroyed, and manufacturing will, in a great measure, cease, for a time, among the American nation. Why? Because in these terrible wars, they will not be privileged to manufacture; there will be too much blood-shed-too much mobocracy-too much going forth in bands and destroying and pillaging the land to suffer people to pursue any local vocation with any degree of safety. What will become of millions of the farmers upon that land? They will leave their farms and they will flee before the ravaging armies from place to place; and thus will they go forth burning and pillaging the whole country; and that great and powerful nation, now consisting of some forty millions of people, will be wasted away, unless they repent. [^47]

Elder Pratt also spoke of the city of New York and its future in such chaos.

For instance the great and populous city of New York, that may be considered one of the greatest cities of the world, will in a few years become a mass of ruins. The people will wonder while gazing on the ruins that cost hundreds of millions to build, what has become of its inhabitants. Their houses will be there, but they will be left desolate. So saith the Lord God. That will be only a sample of numerous other towns and cities on the face of this continent. [^48]

So terrible will such conditions be that he speaks of people being grateful simply for the privilege of fleeing from city to city.

. . . The time will come when there will be no safety in carrying on the peaceable pursuits of farming or agriculture. But these will be neglected, and the people will think themselves well off if they can flee from city to city, from town to town and escape with their lives. Thus will the Lord visit the people, if they will not repent. Thus will He pour out His wrath and indignation upon them .... [^49]

As already noted, Brigham Young also spoke of the time when the United States would have mobbings to their hearts' content. He said:

Mobs will not decrease but will increase until the whole government becomes a mob, and eventually it will be State against State, city against city, neighborhood against neighborhood, Methodists against Methodists, and so on It will be the same with other denominations of professing Christians, and it will be Christian against Christian, and man against man, and those who will not take up the sword against their neighbors, must flee to Zion. [^50]

On another occasion, President Young compared the future of the United States to the collapse and destruction of the Jaredite nation.

Famine will spread over the nations, and nation will rise up against nations, kingdom against kingdom, and state against states, in our own country and in foreign lands; and they will destroy each other, caring not for the blood and lives of their neighbors, or their families, or for their own lives. They will be like the Jaredites who preceded the Nephites upon this continent, and will destroy each other to the last man, through the anger that the devil will place in their hearts, because they rejected the words of life and are given over to Satan to do whatever he listeth to do with them. You may think that the little you hear of now is grievous; yet the faithful of God's people will see days that will cause them to close their eyes because of the sorrow that will come upon the wicked nations. The hearts of the faithful will be filled with pain and anguish for them. [^51]

That is a particularly foreboding prediction, for it will be remembered that the final destruction of the Jaredites is a most vivid description of what happens to a people when the Spirit of the Lord ceases to strive with them.

The Prophet Ether records that the struggle of his people had been so great and devastating that the whole face of the land was covered with the bodies of the dead and the "scent thereof went forth upon the face of the land." [^52] With the smell of death strong in their nostrils one would expect that people would then turn from the evil ways that were destroying them, but such was not the case with the Jaredites. Instead, the people spent some four years gathering their armies together for a last great struggle. So filled were their hearts with hatred and the desire for revenge, that even women and children were armed and prepared for the battle. [^53]

Thus it was that millions of men, women, and children gathered at the Hill Ramah, later called by the Nephites, Cumorah, to begin the final act of destruction. It is hard for the mind to comprehend the awfulness of that final scene; great armies struggling bitterly all clay and retiring to their tents at night to rend the air with wailing cries for their dead. But as the Prophet records, even such scenes were not enough to bring them to repentance, for says he: "... The Spirit of the Lord had ceased striving with them, and Satan had full power over the hearts of the people . . .wherefore they went again to battle." They were so drunken with anger they would exhaust themselves by day but sleep on their swords by night so that they could continue the battle the next day. [^54] The battle continued until only the two commanders remained alive-both wounded and faint from loss of blood-and finally the one gained enough strength to decapitate the other, and then he, too, fainted. [^55]

A civilization of millions fighting down to the last man is more than today's world can comprehend, and yet Brigham Young said that such scenes would be repeated in our own age. It is a chilling possibility and sobering to the mind.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 1, p. 315-316, January 4, 1833.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, p. 391, July 2, 1839. (Italics added)

Jedediah M. Grant, The Improvement Era, February, 1915, pp. 286-287. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 20, p. 151, March 9, 1879. (Italics added )

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 12, p. 344, December 27, 1868.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 12, p. 344, December 27, 1868. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Deseret News, Vol. 9, p. 2, May 1, 1861. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 8, p. 123, July 15, 1860. (Italics added)

Ether 14: 21-23.

Ether 15: 15.

Ether 15:19-22.

Ether 15:23-32.

To Repent or to Be Swept off

War, calamities, pestilence, famine, destruction of our own and other nations-all of these things are startling and stagger the mind. It is little wonder that the coming days strike fear and anxiety into the hearts of men. These times predicted so often by the prophets of the Lord will be grim ones indeed. But it is precisely for this reason that the Lord has given us warning of their coming. When they come upon the world, those saints who have been looking forth to the signs of the times and making preparations, in terms of their own personal righteousness, will then have strength to endure.

In our own day, the fulfillment of these predictions can be seen coming to pass. War is a common world-wide occurrence; violence, anarchy, and crime abound. Joseph Smith, for example, predicted that the time was coming when "natural affection" would forsake the hearts of the wicked. [^56] And today one reads in the paper such items as:

More children under 5 years old are killed by their own parents each year than die of disease, a University of California medical educator reported today. Severe beatings and tortures account for several hundred deaths and thousands of serious injuries to youngsters and the national toll of child abuse is conservatively estimated at 60,000 annually, Dr. James S. Apthorp told in an address to faculty and students of USC's Delinquency Control Institute. [^57]

These signs and the other signs of wickedness that arc so prevalent in today's world are indications that mankind is losing the guidance of the Spirit of the Lord. In fact, a little over a year after the Church was organized, the Lord said that he was holding back his Spirit from the world because of the wickedness of its inhabitants. [^58] This is so not because the Lord wishes to leave his children without light and guidance, but rather because they will not have his Spirit in their lives. Christ does not withdraw from men; men withdraw from him, and it is in consequence of this that the inhabitants of this country and the other nations of the world are racing into the maelstrom of destruction.

This land is still a land choice above all others, and it will be a land of liberty and peace for as long as its peoples serve the God of the land, Jesus Christ. However, as they forsake him and turn to their own gods of material wealth and human learning, the divine decree will once again be invoked, and they, too, "shall be swept off."

Joseph Smith, as quoted by Jedediah M. Grant, see footnote 46 in this chapter.

San Gabriel Valley [California] Tribune, March 12, 1970, p. C8.

Doctrine and Covenants 63:32.
