Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Five

Upon My House Shall It Begin

Upon the Wicked

Over and over in the discussion thus far, the phrase "upon the wicked" has been used. The plagues and pestilences shall come "upon the wicked"; wars will sweep "the wicked" off the land; destruction shall come "upon the wicked" if they do not repent; and so on. It is such a common part of any treatment of prophecy that it becomes natural to use it without thinking. However, one must stop and examine that phrase to determine if it is valid to use it so freely, and if so, what implications it has.

Just what is meant by those designated as "the wicked"? How evil must a person be to fall into this "doomed class"? What correlation is there between members of the Church and those who are "righteous"? If one is a member of the Church, or at least an "active" member, will he avoid the great calamities which are to befall "the wicked"? If this is so, just what, or more specifically, who is meant by "the Church"? These and many other questions come to mind in any serious study of prophecies concerning the last days. And they are pertinent questions, for the very nature of the terrible judgments discussed in the previous two chapters are such as to motivate a person to do all that he can to avoid their consequences. It is only natural that one becomes concerned about his personal rating on the scale of righteous and evil behavior, if that behavior is to become the criteria for determining who shall escape these judgments.

Judgments on the House of God

To a member of the Church who is anxiously seeking to prepare himself for the coming of the Lord, one of the most disturbing of all revelations is one given to Thomas B. Marsh in 1837, at the time when he was president of the Quorum of the Twelve. The Lord spoke of the condition of darkness which was covering the earth and the resulting day of vengeance which it would bring upon the world.

Then comes the prophetic promise which is so disturbing to members of the Church.

And upon my house shall it begin, and from my house shall it go forth, saith the Lord:

First among you, saith the Lord, who have professed to know my name and have not known me, and have blasphemed against me in the midst of my house, saith the Lord. [^1]

It seems to be a natural human tendency to avoid painful and unpleasant images about one's own self. No one likes to think that they are actually part of that group defined by the Lord as "the wicked." But the Lord makes it clear that some of those so defined are found in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

When the saints first moved into Jackson County, Missouri, and the other lands of the area, they were warned that they must live up to their covenants if they were to possess the land of Zion.

It was less than a year later that the mob spirit in Missouri boiled over and the saints were driven from Jackson County. Shortly thereafter, the Lord revealed that this suffering had come upon them because of their transgression.

Behold, I say unto you there were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore, by these things they polluted their inheritances.

They were slow to hearken unto the voice of the Lord their God; therefore, the Lord their God is slow to hearken unto their prayers, to answer them in the day of their trouble. [^2]

A few months before that revelation was given, the Lord had defined Zion as the pure in heart [^3]and then he went on to explain what Zion (or the pure in heart) must do if they are to escape the wrath and vengeance of God that is coming upon the wicked.

Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her.

But if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works, with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, with devouring fire. [^4]

So it is evident that the members of the Church who are not observing the commandments of the Lord in this day will likewise experience the wrath of God. This chastening will serve a valuable purpose in helping the Church prepare the world for the coming of the Lord. Many great tasks await the Lord's people if the world is to be ready for the return of the Savior. These chastening judgments will tend to weed out the wicked and unfaithful membership of the Church so that the Lord will have a people who will carry out his will in all things.

Many of the prophets have testified that the judgments of God would come upon the Church because some of its members do not keep their covenants. Joseph F. Smith, who later became sixth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, bore witness to this fact in a general conference address in 1880.

. . . I further testify, that unless the Latter-day Saints will live their religion, keep their covenants with God and their brethren, honor the Priesthood which they bear, and try faithfully to bring themselves into subjection to the laws of God, they will be the first to fall beneath the judgments of the Almighty, for his judgment will begin at his own house. [^5]

In an editorial in The Improvement Era, after becoming the prophet of the Church, President Smith discussed the great earthquake which had recently struck in San Francisco. He explained the Latter-day Saint view of the judgments, both for themselves and for the world.

We believe that his judgments are poured out to bring mankind to a sense of his power and his purposes, that they may repent of their sins, and prepare themselves for the second coming of Christ to reign in righteousness upon the earth ....

We firmly believe that Zion-which is the pure in heart-shall escape, if she observes to do all things whatsoever God has commanded; but in the opposite event, even Zion shall be visited "with sore affliction, with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, and with devastating fire." (D&C 97:26) All this that her people may be taught to walk in the light of truth, and in the way of the God of their salvation. [^6]

In 1879 President John Taylor spoke of the judgments coming upon the house of God.

But the judgments will begin at the house of God. We have to pass through some of these things, but it will only be a very little compared with the terrible destruction, the misery, and suffering that will overtake the world who are doomed to suffer the wrath of God. It behooves us, as the saints of God, to stand firm and faithful in the observance of his laws, that we may be worthy of his preserving care and blessing. [^7]

President Daniel H. Wells, second counselor to Brigham Young, explained that the saints had been gathered out from the midst of the wicked so they could better keep the commandments of God.

Now, we are here in obedience to a great command, a command given by the Almighty to his Saints to gather out from Babylon, lest they be partakers of her sins and receive of her plagues. But if we are going to partake of her sins in Zion, and to nourish and cherish the wicked and ungodly, what better shall we be for gathering? Shall we escape her plagues by so doing? No, there is no promise to that effect, but if we practice the sins and iniquities of Babylon here in Zion, we may expect to receive of her plagues and to be destroyed. [^8]

Elder Orson Pratt, of the Quorum of the Twelve, often spoke of the judgments upon the house of God and explained that the Latter-day Saints will escape them only if they keep the commandments.

If we will not keep the commandments of God, and if our rising generations will not give heed to the law of God and to the great light which has shone from Heaven in these latter days, but turn their hearts from the Lord their God and from the counsels of His priesthood, then we shall be visited like the wicked, then we shall have the hand of the Lord upon us in judgment; then that saying that the Lord has delivered in the Book of Doctrines and Covenants will be fulfilled upon us, "that I will visit Zion, if she does not do right, with sore afflictions, with pestilence, with sword, with famine and with the flame of devouring fire." [^9]

Doctrine and Covenants 112:25-26. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 101:6-7. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 97:21.

Doctrine and Covenants 97:25-26. (Italics added)

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Daniel H. Wells, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 98, October 7, 1875. ( Italics added )

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 12, p. 345, December 27, 1868. (Italics added )

The Saints to Be Tried

President Joseph Fielding Smith wrote in one of his works of how these judgments will be withheld from the Church if its members would faithfully keep their commandments.

All of these things will be withheld while the nations are being punished, if the members of the Church will keep faithfully their commandments. If they will not, then we have received the warning that we, like the rest of the world, shall suffer His wrath in justice. [^10]

President Heber C. Kimball, who knew the Prophet Joseph Smith well, and who was first counselor to President Brigham Young for many years, spoke of when Salt Lake City would become one of the wicked cities of the world as the saints turned their hearts to worldly wealth. He prophesied of the trials that would come upon them.

Our sons and daughters must live pure lives so as to be prepared for what is coming.

After a while the gentiles will gather by the thousands to this place, and Salt Lake City will be classed among the wicked cities of the world. A spirit of speculation and extravagance will take possession of the Saints, and the results will be financial bondage.

Persecution comes next and all true Latter-day Saints will be tested to the limit. Many will apostatize and others will be still not knowing what to do ....

Before that day comes, however, the Saints will be put to tests that will try the integrity of the best of them. The pressure will become so great that the more righteous among them will cry unto the Lord day and night until deliverance comes. [^11]

Brigham Young spoke of the problems that would come upon the saints if they did not remain faithful.

If the Latter-day Saints do not desist from running after the things of this world, and begin to reform and do the work the Father has given them to do, they will be found wanting, and they, too, will be swept away and counted as unprofitable servants. [^12]

Some years earlier, while touring Davis, Weber, Box Elder and Cache Counties in Utah, President Young had spoken of the majority of people being righteous in the Church and the effect it would have.

There is one principle I would like to have the Latter-day Saints perfectly understand-that is, of blessings and cursings. For instance, we read that war, pestilence, plagues, famine, etc., will be visited upon the inhabitants of the earth; but if distress through the judgments of God comes upon this people, it will be because the majority have turned away from the Lord. Let the majority of the people turn away from the Holy Commandments which the Lord has delivered to us, and cease to hold the balance of power in the Church, and we may expect the judgments of God to come upon us; but while six-tenths or three-fourths of this people will keep the commandments of God, the curse and judgments of the Almighty will never come upon them, though we will have trials of various kinds, and the elements to contend with-natural and spiritual elements .... [^13]

Perhaps one last citation from another president will serve to conclude the array of evidence about the judgments of God coming upon his own house. President Wilford Woodruff summed it up very briefly and yet very succinctly, when he said:

Zion is not going to be moved out of her place. The Lord will plead with her strong ones, and if she sins he will chastise her until site is purified before the Lord. I do not pretend to tell how much sorrow you or I are going to meet with before the coming of the Son of Man. That will depend upon our conduct. [^14]

Joseph Fielding Smith, The Progress of Man, (Genealogical Society of Utah: Salt Lake City, 1936), p. 467. (Italics added)

Heber C. Kimball, Deseret News, Church Department, p. 3, May 23, 1931. (Italics added )

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 262, October 8, 1876. ( Italics added )

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 10, p. 335, June 22 to 29, 1864. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Millennial Star, Vol. 51, p. 547, 1889. (Italics added)

Power and Protection to the Righteous

There seems to be little doubt that the judgments of God shall fall upon those defined as "the wicked" as the world is prepared for the second coming of the Lord. It is likewise clear that if the members of the Church do not walk in obedience to the commandments, they, too, shall feel the chastening hand of God. Therefore, it is important that a determination be made of what is necessary to escape these judgments. What is it that makes either the Church or an individual worthy enough so that these terribly destructive calamities will pass over them?

Here, too, the prophets of the Lord have spoken clearly and abundantly to indicate the way of escape. In a most straightforward manner, Joseph Smith outlined the steps necessary to avoid the judgments of God in a letter written to a newspaper editor dated January 4, 1833.

I will proceed to tell you what the Lord requires of all people, high and low, rich and poor, male and female, ministers and people, professors of religion and non-professors, in order that they may enjoy the Holy Spirit of God to a fulness and escape the judgments of God, which are almost ready to burst upon the nations of the earth. Repent of all your sins, and be baptized in water for the remission of them, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and receive the ordinance of the laying on of the hands of him who is ordained and sealed unto this power, that ye may receive the Holy Spirit of God .... [^15]

Nearly ten years later, writing in his journal, Joseph referred to an editorial in the Times and Seasons, the Church newspaper published in Nauvoo. He does not say who wrote it, but it was evidently important enough that he included it in his journal. Part of that editorial reads:

We have been chastened by the hand of God heretofore for not obeying His commands, although we never violated any human law, or transgressed any human precept; yet we have treated lightly His commandments, and departed from His ordinances, and the Lord has chastened us sore, and we have felt His arm and kissed the rod; let us be wise in time to come and ever remember that "to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams." [^16]

After the expulsion of the saints from Jackson County, Missouri, the Lord himself gave the key as to how the saints could triumph over their enemies from that very hour. [^17] Evidently that key was not heeded, for a few years later they were once again driven from their homes.

Both Brigham Young and Wilford Woodruff spoke of learning to yield to the direction of the Holy Spirit and the counsel of the servants of God.

There is not another people on the earth whose faith and works are directed for the accomplishment of good like the Latter-day Saints. But we do not obey counsel as we should. Yet when we look at them and at others on the face of the earth, we have reason to say we are proud of the Latter-day Saints. But are we all we should be? No. We must learn to listen to the whispering of the Holy Spirit, and the counsels of the servants of God, until we come to the unity of the faith. [^18]

There are certain events awaiting the nations of the earth as well as Zion; and when these events overtake us we will be preserved if we take the counsel that is given us and unite our time, labor and means, and produce what we need for our own use; but without this we shall not be prepared to sustain ourselves and we shall suffer loss and inconvenience thereby. [^19]

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 1, p. 314, January 4, 1833. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 5, p. 65, July 15, 1842.

Doctrine and Covenants 103: 1-10.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 12, p. 241, July 25, 1868. (Italics added )

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 17, p. 70, May 8, 1874. (Italics added)

Not All Suffering Comes from Wickedness

Thus far in this discussion, the prophets have testified in many different ways that the people who do not keep the commandments of God, whether in or out of the Church, shall be made to suffer the wrath of the Almighty God. And an important point it is. But one must be cautious lest he think that all suffering is reserved for the individual who violates the commandments. Joseph Smith made it very clear that this is not so.

I explained concerning the coming of the Son of Man; also that it is a false idea that the Saints will escape all the judgments, whilst the wicked suffer; for all flesh is subject to suffer, and "the righteous shall hardly escape;" still many of the Saints will escape, for the just shall live by faith; yet many of the righteous shall fall a prey to disease, to pestilence, etc., by reason of the weakness of the flesh, and yet be saved in the kingdom of God. So that it is an unhallowed principle to say that such and such have transgressed because they have been preyed upon by disease or death, for all flesh is subject to death; and the Savior has said, "Judge not, lest ye be judged." [^20]

Obviously, man is subject to natural law. If a man steps off a cliff, he will fall to his death, whether he is righteous or not, whether he did it deliberately or unknowingly. If an innocent child drinks insecticide, it will kill him, even though he thought it was something harmless. When war sweeps a nation, some righteous will be caught up in that phenomenon and suffer because of it. (This does not imply that divine intervention cannot be made in each of these cases through the power of faith and priesthood. At such times, higher laws that we do not understand are brought into play and "miracles" are wrought.) God does not shield the righteous from all pain and sorrow, for this is the very purpose of our existence. [^21] Hothouse plants are beautiful to behold but they have no durability to weather the heat and cold of everyday life.

In addition to natural law, the Savior taught that the very fact that one makes a commitment to the gospel may bring suffering and persecution upon him.

Remember the word that I said unto you, The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they wilt also persecute you .... [^22]

He then went on to warn his disciples that the time would come when men would kill them and think they were doing God a senvice. [^23] Down through history, the true follower of Christ has often brought suffering upon himself.

President Joseph Fielding Smith suggested another factor that may bring suffering upon the righteous, namely, the wickedness of those mingled with the righteous.

Beccause of our disobedience and our failure to keep the commandments of the Lord, the righteous, as in times past, may be called upon to suffer with the unrighteous among them. [^24]

President Smith's father, Joseph F. Smith, in the editorial previously mentioned dealing with the San Francisco earthquake, explained that the judgments sometime fall upon both the righteous and the wicked but both may be benefited therefrom.

. . . Judgment is not an end in itself. Calamities are only permitted by a merciful Father, in order to bring about redemption. Behind the fearful storms of judgment, which often strike the just and the unjust alike, overwhelming the wicked and the righteous, there arises bright and clear the dawn of the day of salvation .... What he permitted to occur seems clearly to have been for the purpose of calling attention, by the finger of his power, to the wickedness and sins of men-not alone to the sins of the people of the stricken city, for there are many elsewhere who are just as evil minded, but to the transgressions of all mankind, that all may take warning and repent. Men who stand in the way of God's wise purposes, whether they be good or evil, must suffer in the turmoil. Thus it is that often the righteous suffer for the unrighteous; and it is not satisfactory to the thinking mind to say that therefore God is unjust. The perfect Christ suffered, the lust for the unjust .... [^25]

Even though the suffering may come upon a person as a result of someone else's wickedness, it still serves to bring him to greater depths of faith and humility. As the Lord suggested to the Missouri saints: "... and all things wherewith you have been afflicted shall work together for your good, and to my name's glory, saith the Lord." [^26]

Brigham Young prophesied that the very kingdom of God would continue to come under attack from the world as it has so often in the past.

If we live, we shall see the nations of the earth arrayed against this people; for that time must come in fulfillment of prophecy. Tell about war commencing! Bitter and relentless war was waged against Joseph Smith before he had received the plates of the Book of Mormon; and from that time till now the wicked have only fallen back at times to gain strength and learn how to attack the Kingdom of God. [^27]

In conclusion, then, one must not assume that suffering is necessarily a mark of wickedness, although there seems little question that often it is a result of unrighteous living.

"But," says one, "what good then is the righteous life if it is not guarantee of protection in the dark days ahead?" The first obvious answer to such a question is that there is a joy and satisfaction in obedience to gospel principles which would, in and of itself, justify the Christ-like life. Second, as Joseph Smith suggested, even if the righteous should fall prey to the weaknesses of the flesh, they will be saved in the kingdom of God. In the span of eternity, this life is but for a moment and the eternal reward is of much deeper significance than a brief flash of comfort and painlessness in mortality.

The third answer to such a question is simply this: Although the righteous have no guarantee of escape, the wicked have no hope. It is true that some of the righteous will suffer, but all of the wicked will, and without the assurance of an eternal reward which the righteous have.

Elder Orson Pratt spoke of the promise of the Lord that the judgments of God would come upon the wicked and then said:

Let the righteous among this people abide in their righteousness, and let them cleave unto the Lord their God; and if there are those among them who will not keep his commandments, they will be cleansed out by the judgments of which I have spoken. But if the majority of this people will be faithful, the Lord will preserve them from their enemies, from sword, pestilence and plague, and front every weapon that is lifted against them. [^28]

Brigham Young expressed his belief that the righteous never suffer as much as the wicked, even though they sometimes bring suffering upon themselves.

"But," says one, "I thought that we were to suffer persecution for righteousness' sake." I would to God that all our persecutions were for righteousness' sake, instead of for our evil doings. Still, as I have often remarked, I never believed that the righteous have ever suffered as mitch as the wicked. Jesus Christ said to his disciples, "These things I have spoken unto you, that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but be of good cheer: I have overcome the world." I admit that the Saints anciently "were stoned, they were sawn asunder, were tempted, were slain with the sword; they wandered about in sheep skins, and goat skins; being destitute, afflicted, tormented; they wandered in deserts, and in the mountains, and in dens, and caves of the earth .... "Yet in all this suffering and persecution, they were blessed and comforted and rejoiced though in tribulation. [^29]

To sum it up in terms of the coming judgments of God, the person who seeks diligently to live the obedient life has nothing to lose, and everything to gain. And this is how it always will be in our relationship with the Lord. The Christlike life is not a burden but a blessing.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 4, p. 11, September 29, 1839. (Italics added)

2 Nephi 2:11.

John 15:20.

John 16:2.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Conference Report, April, 1937, p. 60. (Italics added )

Joseph F. Smith, The Improvement Era, June, 1906, p. 650. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 98:3.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 5, p. 339, October 18, 1857. (Italics added )

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 15, p. 362, March 9, 1873. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, p. 274, December 23, 1866. ( Italics added)

The Chastening Hand of God

One other important point needs to be made to complete a discussion of the great judgments which are coming upon the world and the Church. It is very hard for some people to overcome the idea that God's judgments are the expressions of an angry, revengeful deity. They still cannot grasp the principle discussed above by President Joseph F. Smith that behind God's judgment lies his deep desire to bring about the redemption of man. In that same editorial, President Smith concluded:

But we believe that these severe, natural calamities are visited upon men by the Lord for the good of His children, to quicken their devotion to others, and to bring out their better natures, that they may love and serve him. We believe, further, that they are the heralds and tokens of his final judgment, and the schoolmasters to teach the people to prepare themselves, by righteous living, for the coming of the Savior to reign upon the earth, when every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ. [^30]

On several occasions, the Lord, himself, explained the purpose for the chastening of his people, pointing out that it is part of the preparation for those who wish to be sanctified. [^31]

Wilford Woodruff had caught the fuller vision of the positive benefits of the Lord's chastisement when he said:

It matters not what the minds and feelings of men are, the Lord is determined to raise up a people that will worship Him; and if He has to whip, and scourge, and drive us through a whole generation, He will chastise us until we are willing to submit to righteousness and truth, or until we are like clay in the hands of the potter. The chastisements we have had from time to time have been for our good, and are essential to learn wisdom, and carry us through a school of experience we never could have passed through without. I hope, then, that we may learn from the experience we have had to be faithful, and humble, and be passive in the hands of God, and do His commandments [^32]

Strange as it may seem at first glance, these judgments are the work of a loving Father, deeply concerned about the eternal and temporal welfare of his children. If the children are wise, they shall heed the warning signs and diligently apply themselves to the task of ordering their lives in accordance with the plan laid down by the Father and his Divine Son. Only in this way will any person be sure that when the judgments start upon the house of God, he will not be in that part of the house that needs to be swept clean.

Joseph F. Smith, The Improvement Era, June, 1906, p. 654. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 95:1; 101:4-5; 105:6.

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 2, p. 198, February 25, 1855. ( Italics added)
