Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Six

Refuge in the Midst of Terror

A Saturday Night Bath

From the discussion of the last several chapters, it should be quite evident that the United States and the rest of the world will see great disasters and severe chaos before the millennial reign of the Savior begins. War, pestilence, mob-ocracy, famine, storms, earthquakes and other judgments of the Lord will sweep the wicked of this generation from the face of the earth. These judgments of the Almighty are necessary to cleanse the earth in preparation for the coming of the Lord. Elder Sterling W. Sill, an Assistant to the Quorum of the Twelve, compared the coming judgments to a ritual common in the earlier history of the United States, viz., "the Saturday night bath."

But the next one-thousand year period will be the earth's sabbath. This will be the period when the earth will rest and enjoy its sanctified state. For this period the earth will be renewed and regain its former status as a terrestrial sphere, with all of its paradisiacal beauty, glory, and righteousness fully restored. But first the earth must be cleansed. During its long history of sin and trouble our earth has become soiled and dirty. And it must have its "Saturday night bath," and be dressed in fresh clean clothing in which it can appropriately live its best 1,000 years. [^1]

It should also be apparent that the righteous will generally be preserved and protected from these judgments, even though some suffering will naturally come upon them. But how is this to be done when chaos and mobocracy become so rampant that the United States government will be brought to collapse? How will the Lord preserve his people in such widespread disorder? The Lord has told us that conditions will be so terrible that "fear shall come upon every man." [^2] What means will be provided for the escape of the Saints? It is to these questions that we shall now turn our attention.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Doctrine and Covenants 63:33.

Gathering for Deliverance

In the scripture just cited, the Lord went on to indicate the key by which he would deliver his saints from the wrath which is to come. That key was the gathering to Zion before the judgments were poured out in full measure. [^3]

The Lord clearly testified that he will protect and watch over his people in these coming calamitous times, and they will prevail. Wilford Woodruff, who was at that time president of the Quorum of the Twelve, also bore witness to this fact. Said he: "The Lord is going to make a short work in the earth, and he will defend his anointed, his prophets, his Zion and his people. This is the decree of Almighty God." [^4] And the means by which he will do it seems to be the gathering of his people. In April, 1838, the Lord spoke through the Prophet Joseph and said:

Verily I say unto you all: Arise and shine forth, that thy light may be a standard for the nations:

And that the gathering together upon the land of Zion, and upon her stakes, may be for a defense, and for a refuge from the storm, and from wrath when it shall be poured out without mixture upon the whole earth. [^5]

Joseph Smith taught the importance of gathering on other occasions. For example, in 1834 he said:

. . . Without Zion, and a place of deliverance, we must fall; because the time is near when the sun will be darkened, and the moon turn to blood, and the stars fall from heaven, and the earth reel to and fro. Then, if this is the case, and if we are not sanctified and gathered to the places God has appointed, with all our former professions and our great love for the Bible, we must fall; we cannot stand; we cannot be saved; for God will gather out his Saints from the Gentiles, and then comes desolation and destructions, and none can escape except the pure in heart who are gathered. [^6]

John Taylor, in a work entitled, The Government of God, explained that the gathering of the righteous to Zion would be one way the Lord would use to help establish his government.

Before the Lord destroyed the old world, he directed Noah to prepare an ark; before the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, he told Lot to "flee to the mountains"; before Jerusalem was destroyed, Jesus gave his disciples warning, and told them to "flee out of it;" and before the destruction of the world a message is sent; after this, the nations will be judged, for God is now preparing his own kingdom for his own reign, and will not be thwarted by any conflicting influence, or opposing power. The testimony of God is first to be made known, the standard is to be raised, the Gospel of the kingdom is to be preached to all nations, the world is to be warned, and then come the troubles. The whole world is in confusion, morally, politically, and religiously; but a voice was to be heard, "Come out of her, my people, that you partake not of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues." [^7]

In 1877, Joseph F. Smith, son of the patriarch Hyrum Smith, and later president of the Church, preached that the gathering is as necessary to the people of this dispensation as are the first principles of the gospel.

In this dispensation there is a principle or commandment peculiar to it. What is that? It is the gathering of the people to one place. The gathering of this people is as necessary to be observed by believers, as faith, repentance, baptism, or any other ordinance. It is an essential part of the Gospel of this dispensation, as much so as the necessity of building an ark by Noah for his deliverance, was a part of the Gospel in his dispensation. Then the world was destroyed by a flood, now it is to be destroyed by war, pestilence, famine, earthquakes, storms, and tempests, the sea roiling beyond its bounds, malarious vapors, vermin, disease, and by fire and the lightnings of God's wrath poured out for destruction upon Babylon. [^8]

Doctrine and Covenants 63:32-37.

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 116, September 12, 1875.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Joseph F. Smith, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 19, p. 192, September 30, 1877. (Italics added)

Faithfulness and Unity Required of Those Who Gather

It is not meant to imply, of course, that one simply has to gather to Zion to be saved. It will be remembered from a scripture quoted in the previous chapter that the Lord defined Zion as the pure in heart. [^9] If those who gather are not pure in heart, they obviously have not come to Zion.

In the section of the Doctrine and Covenants quoted above in which the Lord spoke of saving his people by gathering them, it should be noted that the Lord said it was his will that the people assemble upon the land of Zion and that "every man should take righteousness in his hands and faithfulness in his loins." [^10]

Brigham Young explained that the gathering of the saints is for the purpose of building God's kingdom. Any other motivation is not acceptable.

. . . We are gathered together expressly to become of one heart and of one mind in all our operations and endeavors to establish Christ's spiritual and temporal kingdom upon the earth, to prepare for the coming of the Son of Man in power and great glory. [^11]

Doctrine and Covenants 97: 21.

Doctrine and Covenants 63: 36-37.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 12, p. 153, January 12, 1868.

No Peace but in Zion and Her Stakes

This gathering of the righteous will take place so that they may escape the wars and desolation that are coming upon the earth. The Lord has told his people that the conditions will be so bad that there will not be peace anywhere on the face of the whole earth except among his people. The City of Zion, also known as the New Jerusalem, will become a city wherein the righteous can find refuge from the wrath and judgments of God. Early in March of 1831, the Lord told the saints to begin gathering there, so they could escape the wrath to come.

And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God;

And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come unto it, and it shall be called Zion. [^12]

Two years later Joseph also spoke of that city as a place of refuge.

The city of Zion spoken of by David, in the one hundred and second Psalm, will be built upon the land of America. "And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads" [Isaiah 35:10); and then they will be delivered from the overflowing scourge that shall pass through the land .... [^13]

Thousands of the early members of the Church flocked to the location of the city of Zion in Jackson County, Missouri, only to be driven out a few years later due to their unwillingness to keep the commandments of God. When they were driven completely out of the state of Missouri in the winter of 1838-39, it looked as though there was no more hope for the redemption of Zion. But the Lord explained in a later revelation to the Prophet that Zion would not be moved out of her place notwithstanding the scattering of the saints, and that no other place would be appointed in its stead. [^14]

Evidently, however, the Lord has set up other places of refuge and protection for the saints until the redemption of Zion is complete and the city is constructed. It was only a few months after the expulsion from Missouri that the Prophet Joseph again spoke of escaping the judgments of God by fleeing to Zion and her stakes.

There will be here and there a Stake (of Zion) for the gathering of the Saints. Some may have cried peace, but the Saints and the world will have little peace from henceforth. Let this not hinder us from going to the Stakes; for God has told us to flee, not dallying, or we shall be scattered, one here, and another there. There your children shall be blessed, and you in the midst of friends where you may be blessed. The Gospel net gathers of every kind.

I prophesy, that the man who tarries after he has an opportunity of going, will be afflicted by the devil. Wars are at hand: we must not delay; but are not required to sacrifice. We ought to have the building up of Zion as our greatest object. When wars come, we shall have to flee to Zion. The cry is to make haste. The last revelation says, Ye shall not have time to have gone over the earth, until these things come. It will come as did the cholera, war, fires, and earthquakes; one pestilence after another. until the Ancient of Days comes, then judgment will be given to the Saints. [^15]

The stakes shall be places of refuge and are, as can be seen, an important part of the gathering to Zion.

In 1941, George Albert Smith said essentially the same thing.

He has told us in great plainness that the world will be in distress, that there will be warfare from one end of the world to the other, that the wicked shall slay the wicked and that peace shall be taken from the earth. And he has said, too, that the only place where there will be safety will be in Zion. Will we make this Zion? Will we keep it to be Zion because Zion means the pure in heart? . . . [^16]

Doctrine and Covenants 45:66-67.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 1, p. 315, January 4, 1833.

Doctrine and Covenants 101:17-20.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, pp. 390-391, July 2, 1839. (Italics added)

George Albert Smith, Conference Report, October, 1941, p. 99.

The Rocky Mountains

When the saints were forced to rice Nauvoo after the martyrdom of the Prophet and his brother and eventually found a home in the valleys of the Rocky Mountains, many people saw this as a fulfillment of the Lord's promise to provide a place of shelter and protection. Two years before his death, the Prophet Joseph had predicted the removal of the main body of the Church to the Rocky Mountains. On August 6, 1842, while the saints were still in a period of relative peace and prosperity in Nauvoo, Joseph said:

I prophesied that the Saints would continue to suffer much affliction and would be driven to the Rocky Mountains, many would apostatize, others would be put to death by our persecutors or lose their lives in consequence of exposure or disease, and some of you will live to go and assist in making settlements and build cities and see the Saints become a mighty people in the midst of the Rocky Mountains. [^17]

Wilford Woodruff bore witness just prior to his death that Joseph Smith had foreseen the destiny of the Church in the Rocky Mountains even earlier than 1842. In 1834 when the saints had been driven out of Independence, Missouri, the Prophet organized an army to bring about the redemption of Zion. Some two hundred young men gathered together and under the leadership of the Prophet marched to Missouri. This army became known as "Zion's Camp." Wilford Woodruff was one of the young men who accompanied the Prophet on that march. As the preparations were going forward for that great rescue effort, Joseph met with some of the men in a log cabin just prior to their departure. Many of the brethren stood and bore testimony to the truthfulness of the work. It was then that the Prophet Joseph responded with some rather startling predictions. In the words of Wilford Woodruff:

... The Prophet said, "Brethren, I have been very much edified and instructed in your testimonies here tonight, but I want to say to you before the Lord, that you know no more concerning the destinies of this Church and kingdom than a babe upon its mother's lap. You don't comprehend it." I was rather surprised. He said, "It is only a handful of Priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America-it will fill the world." Among other tidings he said, "It will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints who will be gathered in the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the gospel and their endowments and the blessings of God. This people will go unto the Rocky Mountains; they will there build temples to the Most High. They will raise up a posterity there, and the Latter-day Saints who dwell in these mountains will stand in the flesh until the coming of the Son of Man. The Son of Man will come to them while in the Rocky Mountains."

. . . I never expected to see the Rocky Mountains when I listened to that man's voice, but I have, and do today. I will say here that I shall not live to see it, you may not live to see it; but these thousands of Latter-day Saint children that belong to the Sabbath schools, I believe many of them will stand in the flesh when the Lord Jesus Christ visits the Zion of God here in the mountains of Israel. [^18]

The succeeding hundred and thirty years have proven the great prophetic wisdom of the remarkable Joseph Smith. The great wave of apostasy which came upon the Church after the martyrdom, the subsequent expulsion from Nauvoo and the now-famous crossing of the plains and colonization of the Great Basin all bear witness that there indeed was a prophet of God.

Later history also showed that the removal to the Rocky Mountains was an important step in providing the saints with a place of refuge. Had they still been in the state of Missouri during the Civil War, they would no doubt have had to endure much suffering, for the fighting in Missouri was bitter and devastating.

Brigham Young described the mountains as the most ideal location for the saints in the entire world. He was speaking shortly after the outbreak of the Civil War.

We are not now mingling in the turmoils of strife, warring, and contention-that we would have been obliged to have mingled in, had not the Lord suffered us to have been driven to these mountains-one of the greatest blessings that could have been visited upon us. It has been designated, for many generations, to hide up the Saints in the last days, until the indignation of the Almighty be over ....

We are blessed in these mountains; this is the best place on the earth for the Latter-day Saints. Search the history of all the nations and every geographical position on the face of the earth, and you cannot find another situation so well adapted for the Saints as are these mountains. Here is the place in which the Lord designed to hide his people· Be thankful for it; be true to your covenants, and be faithful, each and every one. [^19]

Elder Melvin J. Ballard also spoke of these valleys as being places of refuge from previous and future storms.

Do you not know, my brethren and sisters, that God knew what was coming; that he brought this people into these mountain valleys as a place of refuge when the storm shall come. We only hear the beginning of that storm. Dismal and distressful as has been its approach, while its thunders and its flashings have filled our hearts with terror, it is but the beginning of the storm. Oh, that it were passed, and that it were gone; but it is not, it is not! [^20]

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 5, p. 85, August 6, 1842.

Wilford Woodruff, Conference Report, April, 1898, p. 57. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Deseret Evening News, Vol. 11, May 1, 1861, p. 1. (Italics added)

Melvin J. Ballard, Conference Report, October, 1922, p. 59. (Italics added)

Other Places of Refuge

Unquestionably, the valleys of the Rocky Mountains have provided a place for the Church to be protected from some of the judgments and also to grow into a world-wide organization. The present state of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints amply testifies that the prophecies have been fulfilled in that respect. One of the things that made this phenomenal growth possible was the fact that thousands upon thousands of faithful saints from all over the world gathered to Utah and its surrounding areas to help in the building of the kingdom.

After arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, the call went out from the headquarters of the Church over and over to come and join with the main body of the Church. This great gathering resulted in the building of a western empire and the expansion of the Church into spheres of world influence.

However, after the turn of the century, the needs of the Church gradually changed. Members of the Church all over the world were no longer encouraged to leave their homes, but rather to stay and build the Church in their own localities. It was still to be a gathering of the saints, but now they were to gather together wherever they lived. It was this foresighted decision by the leadership of the Church that has made possible the Church today, a Church with stakes, wards, and branches virtually all over the free world.

For some reason, however, the idea still persists in the minds of some people that as conditions worsen in the United States and other countries, the members of the Church will be called back to Utah for peace and safety. People anxiously wonder if they should leave the confines of "Mormon Territory" for better job opportunities, schooling, or various other reasons, if they may have to "return to Utah when things really get bad." Statements by early prophets in this dispensation are read which stress the importance of being close to the heart of the Church, and these are interpreted to mean that safety in the crises to come lies only in the environs of Salt Lake City.

Such conclusions are the result of two basic errors: First, some do not realize that the times of the Church and its needs' have changed. Second, they disregard the true spirit of the gathering that is to take place in preparation for the coming of the Lord. The prophets of this dispensation, both those early in the history of the Church and those today have explained that the gathering to places of refuge is much more than a simple relocation of the saints to Utah.

In a reference previously cited, Joseph Smith warned that the time was coming when there would be no peace on the earth except in Zion AND HER STAKES! He said:

There will be here and there a Stake (of Zion) for the gathering of the Saints. Some may have cried peace, but the Saints and the world will have little peace from henceforth. Let this not hinder us from going to the Stakes; for God has told us to flee, not dallying, or we shall be scattered, one here, and another there. There [Where? In the stakes of Zion!] your children shall be blessed .... [^21]

In the general conference just before his death, Joseph Smith made another important proclamation.

You know there has been great discussion in relation to Zion-where it is, and where the gathering of the dispensation is, and which I am now going to tell you. The prophets have spoken and written upon it; but I will make a proclamation that will cover a broader ground. The whole of America is Zion itself from north to south, and is described by the Prophets, who declare that it is the Zion where the mountain of the Lord should be, and that it should be in the center of the land. When Elders shall take up and examine the old prophecies in the Bible, they will see it ....

I have received instructions from the Lord that from henceforth wherever the Elders of Israel shall build up churches and branches unto the Lord throughout the States, there shall be a stake of Zion. In the great cities, as Boston, New York, etc., there shall be stakes. It is a glorious proclamation.... [^22]

Brigham Young often spoke of the mountains as being a place of refuge, but he also said: "The time is nigh when every man that will not take up his sword against his neighbor must needs flee to Zion. Where is Zion? Where the organization of the Church of God is. And may it dwell spiritually in every heart; and may we so live as to always enjoy the Spirit of Zion!" [^23]

President Joseph Fielding Smith quoted a prophecy by Wilford Woodruff wherein he said that the time was coming when Utah would be a pretty good place in which to live. Then President Smith said:

Now, I can't take time to read more of it, but he raised this warning voice, and I believe Utah will be a pretty good place to live in, and other stakes of Zion, for I don't believe President Woodruff intended to confine this to the borders of Utah, but to the stakes of Zion. But the judgments of the Almighty are being poured out, and they shall continue, for the Prophet of God has said it. We shall not escape unless we repent, turn to the Lord, honor our Priesthood and our membership in this Church, find be true and faithful to our covenants. [^24]

Elder John A. Widtsoe put it this way:

. . . There is safety wherever the people of the Lord live so worthily as to claim the sacred title of citizens of the Zion of our Lord. Otherwise the name Zion is but an empty sound. The only safety that we can expect in this or any other calamitous time lies in our conformity to gospel requirements. [^25]

President Harold B. Lee has spoken several times against the false assumption that the only place of safety in the last days will be in the Rocky Mountains. During the great calamity of World War II he spoke of the anxiety some members of the Church had about living away from "Zion."

I was down in Kelsey, Texas, last November, and I heard a group of anxious people asking, "Is now the day for us to come up to Zion, where we can come to the mountain of the Lord, where we can be protected from our enemies?" I pondered that question, I prayed about it. What should we say to those people who were in their anxiety? I have studied it a bit, I have learned something of what the Spirit has taught, and I know now that the place of safety in this world is not in any given place; it doesn't make so much difference where we live; but the all-important thing is how we live, and I have found that the security can come to Israel only when they keep the commandments, when they live so that they can enjoy the companionship, the direction, the con, fort, and the guidance of the Holy Spirit of the Lord, when they are willing to listen to these men whom God has set here to preside as His mouthpieces, and wen we obey the counsels of the Church. [^26]

Five years later President Lee expanded the idea of the importance of giving heed to those men God has chosen to guide his people through times of trouble. After speaking of "gathering places" he said:

The spirit of gathering has been with the Church from the days of that restoration. Those who are of the blood of Israel have a righteous desire after they are baptized, to gather together with the body of the Saints at the designated place ....

After designating certain places in that day where the Saints were to gather, the Lord said this:

"Until the day cometh when there is found no more room for them; and then I have other places which I will appoint unto them." (D&C 101: 21 )

Thus, clearly, the Lord has placed the responsibility for directing the work of gathering in the hands of the leaders of the Church to whom he will reveal his will where and when such gatherings would take place in the future. It would be well before the frightening events concerning the fulfillment of all God's promises and predictions are upon us, that the Saints in every land prepare themselves and look forward to the instruction that shall come to them from the First Presidency of this Church as to where they shall be gathered and not be disturbed in their feelings until such instruction is given to them as it is revealed by the Lord to the proper authority. [^27]

This is, of course, in exact agreement with what Joseph Smith meant when he said, after speaking of gathering to the stakes of Zion, "You must make yourselves acquainted with those men who like Daniel pray three times a day toward the house of the Lord. Look to the presidency and receive instruction." [^28]

In his great address in general conference of 1970 President Lee again taught this same idea.

One of our brethren was reported to have said that the people of California should move up to the tops of the Rocky Mountains, that only there would be safety. Contrary to that, we are constantly saying to our people that safety is where the pure in heart are, and that there is just as much safety wherever you are, if you are living and keeping the commandments of God. [^29]

It is possible that in the calamitous times to come, some may gather to the main headquarters of the Church in Utah, but it is evident that this is not necessarily the expected course for all members of the Church. The important thing is for a person to so live that when the instructions come from the Lord through his servants, he will be ready to heed them and to gather to the designated places, be it Salt Lake City, the outlying stakes, or wherever.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, p. 390, July 2, 1839. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 6, pp. 318-319, April 8, 1844. (Italics in original)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 8, p. 205. October 8, 1860. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Conference Report, April, 1937, p. 62. (Italics added )

John A. Widtsoe, Conference Report, April, 1942, p. 33. (Italics added)

Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, April, 1943, p. 129. (Italics added)

Harold B. Lee, The Improvement Era, June, 1948, p. 320. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, p. 391, July 2, 1839. (Italics added)

Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, April, 1970, p. 56. (Italics added)

Like a Flowing Stream

Another assumption that is often made that should be avoided is that only members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will be protected and saved from the judgments of God. Several prophecies already cited have indicated that many who will not participate in the bloodshed and mobocracy will flee to Zion for peace and safety. This, of course, seems to indicate others besides members of the Church. Many of the prophets have told of the time when thousands of the "Gentiles" would come to us for protection. They seem to indicate that the crises in the nation will tend to shut off the Church from the rest of the United States, and thus leave us with the only peaceful organization in the world. For example, Brigham Young spoke of the time when there would be a great gulf between the righteous and the wicked.

By and by there will be a gulf between the righteous and the wicked so that they can not trade with each other, and national intercourse will cease. [^30]

Heber C. Kimball, first counselor to President Young for many years, described it as being like a curtain which would drop between the Church and the United States.

Lay up your stores, and take your silks and fine things, and exchange them for grain and such things as you need, and the time will come when we will be obliged to depend upon our own resources; for the time is not far distant when the curtain will be dropped between us and the United States. When the time comes, brethren and sisters, you will wish you had commenced sooner to make your own clothing. I tell you, God requires us to go into home manufacture; and, prolong it as much as you like, you have got to do it. [^31]

On two different occasions President Kimball also described the conditions that would prevail when the people came to the Church for protection. Speaking of the recent arrival of some handcart companies, he said:

Is this the end of it? No; there will be millions on millions that will come much in the same way, only they will not have hand carts, for they will take their bundles under their arms, and their children on their backs, and under their arms, and flee; and Zion's people will have to send out relief to them, for they will come when the judgments come on the nation [^32]

The day will come when the people of the United States will come lugging their bundles under their arms, coming to us for bread to eat. [^33]

Orson Pratt also spoke about these future tinges on several different occasions. For example, in 1855 he spoke of the time when the Gentiles would come to the Church as a flowing stream, not because they will want to join the Church but simply to escape the disastrous conditions that will prevail in the world.

Now how do we know, but when the gates of Zion shall be open to the nations, that the Gentiles will come flocking in, like a flowing stream? A flowing stream is one that runs continually; and the Gentiles will, in that day, come to us as a flowing stream, and we shall have to set our gates open continually, they will come as clouds and as doves in large flocks ....

Those nations are trembling and tottering and will eventually crumble to ruin, and those men of wealth will come here, not to be baptized, but many of them will come that have never heard the servants of God; but they will hear that peace and health dwell among us, and that our officers, and our tax-gatherers men of righteousness. [^34]

George Q. Cannon explained that the non-members would flock to the Church in those trying times so that they could enjoy a peaceful government.

We are not alone in the thought that the republic is drifting steadily in that direction; that we are leaving the old constitutional landmarks, and that the time is not far distant when there will be trouble in consequence of it, when there will be civil broils and strife; and, to escape them, we believe, men will be compelled to flee to the "Mormons," despised as they are now. [^35]

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 12, p. 284, October 8, 1868. ( Italics added)

Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 5, p. 10, July 5, 1857. (Italics added)

Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 4, p. 106, September 28, 1856. (Italics added)

Heber C. Kimball, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 5, p. 10, July 5, 1857. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 3, p. 16, May 20, 1855.

George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 10, April 8, 1875. (Italics added)

God Watches Over His Own

The times which are coming will, indeed, be such that many wonder how anyone could survive. But as was pointed out in the introduction to this book, the Lord has extended his hand to us so that we may walk through the times of darkness with confidence and assurance that his will will prevail. He has abundantly testified that one of the great works which he will accomplish will be to gather his children into places of refuge so that they may be sheltered from the storms of his wrath.

The primary task of each member of the Church today is to make sure that he has placed his own hand in the hand of God. Only thus will a person be guided into those places of safe harbor. Zion is the place of refuge, and Zion is the pure in heart. For those who can truly qualify as "living in Zion" there will be no terror in the days to come.

President Brigham Young summed up the proper attitude most adequately in an address to the Quorum of the Twelve in Boston (the minutes of which Joseph Smith included in his History of the Church):

The Lord does not require every soul to leave his home as soon as he believes. Some may be wanted to go to the isles of the sea, and some to go north, and some south. But He does require them to hearken to counsel, and follow that course which He points out, whether to gather or stay to do some other work ....

Perhaps some of you are ready to ask, "Cannot the Lord save us as well where we are as to gather together?" Yes, if the Lord says so. But if He commands us to come out and gather together, He will not save us by staying home.... [^36]

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 6, p. 12, September 9, 1843. (Italics added)
