Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Seven

Faces Eastward

A Holy City

Many years before Christ, one of the great prophets to the nation of the Jaredites foresaw much of the destiny of the land on which his people dwelt. He saw the days of Christ, and far beyond them into our own dispensation. Moroni, the final scribe for the Book of Mormon, records the words of the Prophet Ether and his startling prediction concerning a city to be built upon this land. That city was to be called the New Jerusalem. [^1]

It is not hard to imagine the excitement such a prophecy caused among the early members of the Church as they read this part of the Book of Mormon. John, the Revelator, had also spoken of the New Jerusalem, [^2] but no one had ever dared suppose that it would be built here in America. The saints became eager to know of its location so that they might have a part in the building of this great city. In response to their questions and to his own, Joseph Smith asked the Lord for revelation that they might know where this remarkable city was to be built. In September, 1830, the Lord made it clear that no one knew yet where the city (also called the city of Zion) was to be located, but finally, in July, 1831, the Lord revealed that the center place for the city of Zion was in the small town of Independence, Jackson County, Missouri. [^3]

Although the Prophet Joseph and many of the saints were by that time settled in Kirtland, Ohio, many other members of the Church earnestly desired to live in the city so long promised by the Lord, and as a consequence moved their families to Zion. But their hopes of living in the holy city of Zion were frustrated, for history proved that the saints were not yet ready to establish the New Jerusalem. They were driven first from Jackson County and later from Missouri altogether. After all of the divine promises that had been made concerning the great destiny of this special city, the expulsion of the saints must have caused much consternation. However, the Lord made it clear that no change in location had been made, but only that the redemption of Zion would have to wait for a season, evidently until he had a people worthy to build and possess a city of such special nature. [^4]

Ether 13:4, 6, 8.

Revelation 21:2.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Salt Lake City Not the Permanent Headquarters

In the thirteen decades that have followed the abandonment of the land designated by the Lord as the land of Zion, the Church moved west, colonized hundreds of cities in the western half of the North American Continent, and grew into a world-wide organization with a membership of three million. From that first hot day when the pioneers entered the valley of the Great Salt Lake to the present when thousands of chapels, seminaries, temples, welfare farms and other Church properties dot the Intermountain West, Salt Lake City has been the headquarters of the Latter-day Saints. The vast, global organization which at the end of 1970 included some 537 stakes, 4,800 wards and branches and 93 missions, [^5] has all been administered from the site laid out by Brigham Young a few days after arriving in Salt Lake Valley.

The amount of capital investment the Church has in the West is enough to stagger the mind, but even more impressive is the realization of the tremendous cost in human toil and sacrifice it has taken to move the Church from the barren existence of 1847 to its present stature. It is inconceivable that after so much investment of time, labor, and money that the Church should ever want to leave its headquarters. And yet, during the one hundred thirty years that the Church has been exiled from the lands of Jackson County, Missouri, the saints have ever been taught that Jackson County, not Utah, is to be their final, permanent headquarters.

Elder George Q. Cannon explained that this longing for Zion is not due to a dissatisfaction with the lands in which the saints presently find themselves, for Utah and its environs have been a happy home for the saints.

We do not wish to leave this land, because it is not fertile, or because it is not a favoured land. We appreciate the home that God has given us here, so fruitful in blessings to the Saints; but we look forward to that land with indescribable feelings, because it is the place where God has said His City shall be built. [^6]

Orson F. Whitney stated the case in the most explicit terms:

Will our mission end here (in Utah)? Is the State of Utah the proper monument of the Mormon people? No . . . the monument to Mormonism will stand in Jackson County, Missouri. There the great city will be built: There Zion will arise and shine, "the joy of the whole earth," and there the Lord will come to his temple in his own time, when his people shall have made the required preparation. [^7]

In his three-volume work, Doctrines of Salvation, President Joseph Fielding Smith also clearly stated the belief of the Church that Missouri is to be the location of the city of Zion.

We accept the fact that the center place where the City New Jerusalem is to be built, is in Jackson County, Missouri. It was never the intention to substitute Utah or any other place for Jackson County. But we do hold that Zion, when reference is made to the land, is as broad as America, both North and South-all of it is Zion. [^8]

President Lorenzo Snow cautioned the saints against feeling that the return to Jackson County was so close that they should not try and build up the area in which they were presently living, but he made it clear that the day was coming when the worthy members of the Church would return to build the city there.

The time is speedily coming-we do not want to talk very much, though, about going to Jackson County, Missouri, because through our weakness we would not care anything about building houses and making ourselves comfortable here. I know when we first started a colony in Brigham City, the people generally thought it was nonsense, perfectly useless, to plant peach trees, currant bushes and the like, because we were going to Jackson County so speedily; and it was with the utmost effort that we were enabled to discourage them of this idea. We are not going tomorrow, nor next day, this week or next week; but we are going, and there are many-hundreds and hundreds within the sound of my voice that will live to go back to Jackson County and build a holy temple to the Lord our God .... [^9]

President Brigham Young spoke of a vision he had received before the saints were driven from Missouri. In the vision he saw the members of the Church scattered in every direction, but saw them returning to Jackson County from the west. Said he: "When this people return to the Center Stake of Zion, they will go from the west." [^10] On another occasion, President Young said:

Suppose we are ready for it, and a great Temple is built at the central point, in Jackson County. Gentlemen, don't be startled; for if we don't go back there, our sons and daughters will; and a great Temple will be built upon the consecrated spot, and a great many more besides that. [^11]

Orson Pratt also spoke at some length on our future destiny.

Is God limited to this little narrow spot, called the great basin of North America? Why, no. It is only for the present, for the time being that we dwell here. Where will we dwell in the future? What is our future destiny? It is not on the Sandwich Islands, it is not in New Zealand, it is not in Australia, it is not in any of the islands of the sea, but I will tell you the future destiny of this people in a very few words. Not many years hence-I do not say the number of years-you will look forth to the western countries of the State of Missouri, and to the eastern counties of the State of Kansas, and in all that region round about you will see a thickly populated country, inhabited by a peaceful people, having their orchards, their fruit trees, their fields of grain, their beautiful houses and shade trees, their cities and towns and villages. And you may ask - Who are all these people? And the answer will be-Latter-day Saints. [^12]

Church News, December 26, 1970, p. 7.

George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, pp. 336-337, March 3, 1867. (Italics added)

Orson F. Whitney, An address given in Salt Lake City, April 9, 1916. Recorded in Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (Deseret Book Co.: Salt Lake City, 1967), p. 14-7. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956) p. 72. (Italics in original)

Lorenzo Snow, Conference Report, April, 1898, p. 64. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, p. 17, December I I, 1864.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6, p. 296, August 15, 1852.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 21, p. 135, September 7, 1879. (Italics added )

The Center "Place" of Zion

The reader may have noticed that the site for the city of Zion or the New Jerusalem is variously referred to by some Church authorities as the "Center Stake of Zion" and by others as the "center place of Zion." The former term was more often used by earlier members of the Church, and as Elders Smith and Sjodahl explain, it is not as accurate as the latter. In a footnote to a quotation from Brigham Young wherein he calls it the "Center Stake of Zion," they say:

It has become customary to speak of the "Center Stake of Zion." It might, therefore, be well to remember that no Stake was ever organized in Jackson County. Following the figure given by Isaiah Ch. 33:20 and 54:2, we cannot speak of a "center stake of Zion." The term "Stake of Zion" was first used in a revelation given in November, 1831. (Sec. 68) It is a comparison to the stakes which bind a tent. Isaiah says: "Look npon Zion, the city of our solemnities; thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken." Again, "Enlarge the place of thy tent and let them stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations; spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes." Zion is the tent, and how can the tent be a stake? [^13]

It is not a serious error but the difference is worth noting since both phrases will be found in the statements of various Church leaders in this and following chapters.

Hyrum M. Smith and Janne M. Sjodahl, Doctrine and Covenants Commentary (Deseret Book Co.: Salt Lake City, 1967), p. 189.

Not All Shall Return

"But," says one, "why then does the Church continue to build up the areas around Utah if we are just going to desert them?" The answer to that question is twofold. First, and most obvious, the call to return to Jackson County has not been given to the Church as yet; until it is the Church is expected to build Zion in the hearts of its people wherever they are located. This could not be done if further growth and development of the Church was curtailed in anxious anticipation of the call to Missouri. No one yet knows exactly when the call will come; until it does come the Church will continue to build Zion and the kingdom of God in that location in which they find themselves. For only in this way will they be prepared to build up the center place of Zion.

However, that still leaves a second and more important reason. The investment in time, energy, and money which the Church and its members have made in the building up of the Western Empire is not simply to be abandoned. When one considers the massive expenditures which have recently gone into the new temples in Utah, the new Church office building, the granite vaults in Little Cottonwood Canyon, the new Visitors' Center and many other new buildings and programs inaugurated by the leaders of the Church, it would indeed seem tragic to abandon the present headquarters of the Church.

Such will not be the case, for the prophets have amply testified that although the majority of the Church will move to Missouri, that in no way implies that every member will. Just a few years after coming to Utah, President Brigham Young said:

Remarks have been made as to our staying here in the Rockies. I will tell you how long we shall stay here. If we live our religion, we shall stay here in these mountains for ever and for ever, worlds without end, and a portion of the Priesthood will go and redeem and build up the Center Stake of Zion. [^14]

Shortly before his death, President Young put it even more clearly:

Are we going back to Jackson County? Yes. When? As soon as the way opens up. Are we all going? Oh no! Of course not. The country is not large enough to hold our present numbers. When we do return there, will there be any less remaining in these mountains than we number today? No, there may be a hundred then for every single one that there is now. It is folly in men to suppose that we are going to break up these our hard earned homes to make others in a new country. We intend to hold our own here, and also penetrate the north and the south, the east and the west, there to make others and to raise the ensign of truth. [^15]

In his conference address to the Church in 1900 concerning the return to Zion, President Lorenzo Snow described it as "a large portion" who would return.

Now the time is fast approaching when a large portion of the people that I am now addressing will go back to Jackson County. Â� A large portion of the Latter-day Saints that now dwell in these valleys will go back to Jackson County to build a holy city to the Lord, as was decreed by Jehovah and revealed through Joseph Smith. [^16]

Orson Pratt made it evident that it was his belief that some would remain in the areas already organized and built up by the Church.

We expect that these mountains will not be the residences of all the Latter-day Saints; we expect that the great majority of the people will emigrate. [^17]

All of the efforts of building and the great sacrifices that have been made down through the years are not simply to be left behind. As Zion expands to encompass all of North and South America the great building effort of generations of saints will be put to valuable use. However, the work of the Lord and his kingdom will be headquartered in the city of Zion which will be built in Jackson County, Missouri. It is for this reason that the Church still looks to the east.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, p. 16, December 11, 1864. ( Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, pp. 355-356, April 6, 1877. (Italics added)

Lorenzo Snow, Conference Report, October, 1900, p. 61.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 24, p. 23, October 26, 1879. (Italics added )

The Army of the Lord

As one contemplates this great return to the center place of Zion, many questions flood into the mind. Who will go? How soon will it be? What will conditions be like? What mode of transportation will be used? Will there be any problems en route which will hinder the return? These and many other intriguing problems cry for an answer. Of course, not all of the answers are known. The Lord has left some of these questions as yet unanswered, but from all that he has revealed through his prophets it can be safely said that the return to the east will be a marvelous manifestation of the Lord's power. Those privileged to be in that great company will have much to tell their children and grandchildren.

When the saints were driven from Jackson County in the last months of 1833, the Lord revealed to Joseph Smith what has now become the 101st section of the Doctrine and Covenants. He explained that the saints were driven out because of transgression but were reassured of God's love and concern for them. Other stakes of Zion were promised. Then the Lord gave an interesting parable in order that the Church would know his will concerning the redemption of Zion. [^18] In the parable, a nobleman sent his servants to a "very choice" spot of land to plant some olive trees. They were commanded to set watchmen around the grove and to build a tower to guard against enemics coining in to destroy the trees. At first the servants were faithful and planted the trees and set watch-men over them, but soon they began to be slothful and rationalized concerning their duties, failing to complete the tower. During the night, the enemy broke down the hedge of the grove and destroyed the trees.

When the nobleman heard of what had happened he was understandably wroth with his servants and rebuked them severely for their slothfulness. Then a most significant part of the parable follows. The nobleman called one of his servants and gave him special instructions, telling him to gather an army to reclaim the vineyard from the enemy. [^19]

With the perspective of history, the meaning of the first part of the parable is quite clear. The choice piece of land chosen by the Lord for his work was Zion-Independence, Missouri, and its surrounding areas. The Lord's people were sent there with the instructions to build up a great work unto the Lord, but with a special caution to be particularly watchful so that the enemy did not destroy the work. But the saints were slothful in keeping the Lord's commandments in Zion. They were selfish, petty, eager to follow their own counsel over that of Joseph's, and thus they were not watchful and were driven from the choice land.

At first, it looked as though the last part of the parable would have its fulfillment in the small army Joseph Smith organized and started toward Missouri to redeem Zion. But "Zion's Camp" as it was called, was disbanded before it ever reached Jackson County and the mission was not completed. The saints moved to the northern counties of Missouri and then eventually left the state completely, so this part of the parable dealing with the redemption of Zion still awaits fulfillment.

Other scriptures and statements by the prophets indicate that the redemption of Zion must indeed come by power as the parable said. In February, 1834, the Lord spoke of the future redemption of Zion, and said:

Behold, I say unto you, the redemption of Zion must needs come by power;

Therefore, 1 will raise up unto my people a man, who shall lead them like as Moses led the children of Israel.

For ye are the children of Israel, and of the seed of Abraham, and ye must needs be led out of bondage by power, and with a stretched-out arm.

And as your fathers were led at the first, even so shall the redemption of Zion be. [^20]

Of the man "like unto Moses" more shall be said later in the chapter, but the entire promise is a thrilling one, for what power can withstand the power of the Lord?

Four months after this revelation was given, the Lord again spoke of the redemption of Zion, but explained that his "army" was not yet worthy to do so. He spoke of the time when the army would be sanctified and thus in their righteousness become terrible to behold. [^21]

The use of the term "army" invokes pictures of great battles and actual combat in the redemption of Zion but this does not seem to be the case here. The Lord's "army" is an army of an unusual nature. In 1831, the Lord warned the saints that they must purchase the land of Zion and not obtain it through the shedding of blood, for if they did shed blood they would be scourged from city to city. [^22] President Lorenzo Snow referred to this scripture in speaking of the redemption of Zion.

We will not take possession of the land of Zion by force. If we should do, it would turn out to us as it did with the people who were upon the land of Zion when this revelation was given. As the Lord here tells us, there are only two ways in which we can come in possession of that land. One way is by purchase, "and if by purchase, behold you are blessed." The other way is by blood, "and if by blood, as you are forbidden to shed blood, Io, your enemies are upon you, and ye shall be scourged from city to city and from synagogue to synagogue, and but few shall stand to receive an inheritance." These are the words of God. [^23]

In section 103 of the Doctrine and Covenants the Lord spoke of his presence going up before his people. Orson Pratt described this presence as being the thing that would strike terror into the hearts of the people.

We shall go back to Jackson County. Not that all this people will leave these mountains, or all be gathered together in a camp, but when we go back there will be a very large organization consisting of thousands, and tens of thousands, and they will march forward, the glory of God overshadowing their camp by day in the form of a cloud, and a pillar of flaming fire by night, the Lord's voice being uttered forth before his army ....

Will not this produce terror upon all the nations of the earth? Will not armies of this description, though they may not be as numerous as the armies of the world, cause a terror to fall upon the nations? The Lord says the banners of Zion shall be terrible. If only one or two millions of this people were to go down and build the waste places of Zion, would it strike the people of Asia and Europe with terror? Not particularly, unless there was some supernatural power made manifest. But when the Lord's presence is there, when his voice is heard, and his angels go before the camp, it will be telegraphed to the uttermost parts of the earth and fear will seize upon all people, especially the wicked, and the knees of the ungodly will tremble in that day, and the high ones that are on high, and the great men of the earth. [^24]

Another testimony of the divine protection to be given to that group on their way to Jackson County came during the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. During that great spiritual occasion many members of the Church had marvelous experiences. Joseph Smith spoke of some of these and then told of a vision which his scribe had.

Many of my brethren who received the ordinance with me saw-glorious visions also. Angels ministered unto them as well as to myself, and the power of the Highest rested upon us, the house was filled with the glory of God, and we shouted Hosanna to God and the Lamb. My scribe also received his anointing with us, and saw, in a vision, the armies of heaven protecting the Saints in their return to Zion, and many things which I saw. [^25]

Doctrine and Covenants 101:43-62.

Doctrine and Covenants 10l:55-62.

Doctrine and Covenants 103: 15-18.

Doctrine and Covenants 105:29, 32.

Doctrine and Covenants 63: 29-31.

Lorenzo Snow, Conference Report, October, 1900, p. 63. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 15, p. 364, March 9, 1873. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 2, p. 381, January 21, 1836. (Italics added)

Not So Much as a Yellow Dog

There seems to be another reason why the saints will not have to redeem the land of Zion by actual combat and warfare. It must be remembered that the United States will see great chaos and destruction in the form of mobs and anarchy. It is not clear from the prophecies just exactly when the return to Missouri will take place in relationship to this time of civil destruction, but Heber C. Kimball spoke of a prophecy made by President Brigham Young in which he said that upon the return of the saints there would be no inhabitants in that area of Missouri to plague the Church.

The western boundary of the State of Missouri will be swept so clean of its inhabitants that as President Young tells us, when you return to that place, there will not be left so much as a yellow dog to wag his tail. [^26]

One can only speculate on how such devastation might come about. In any case, this desolation would allow the saints to possess the land without having to contest for it. Two separate statements by Orson Pratt also suggest that the return would be after or at least during this great period of chaos. In 1875 he said:

Well then, to return to the prophesying, when the time shall come that the Lord shall waste away this nation, he will give commandment to this people to return and possess their own inheritance which they purchased some forty-four years ago in the state of Missouri. [^27]

Then four years later he told the saints:

Now, there are a great many cities in the United States that will not be totally destroyed when the inhabitants are swept off the surface of the earth. Their houses, their desolate cities will still remain unoccupied until Zion in her glory and strength shall enlarge the place of her tents, and stretch forth the curtains of her habitations. That is the destiny of this nation, and the destiny of the Latter-day Saints. [^28]

Although the saints may not have to fight to reclaim the center place of Zion, this does not imply that they will necessarily return in peace. If anarchy and mobs are still sweeping the nation when the Church returns there will certainly be problems in moving a group of people as large as the prophecies indicate without some conflict. In a most interesting sermon by Joseph F. Smith, this is substantiated. His statement is also significant for it is one of the few prophecies that talks about the transportation on the way back to the East.

. . . When God leads the people hack to Jackson County, how will he do it? Let me picture to you how some of us may be gathered and led to Jackson County. I think I see two or three hundred thousand people wending their way across the great plain, enduring the nameless hardships of the journey, herding and guarding their cattle by day and by night, and defending themselves and little ones from foes on the right hand and on the left, as when they came here. They will find the journey back to Jackson County will be real as when they came out here. Now, mark it. And though you may be led by the power of God "with a stretched-out arm," it will not be more manifest than the leading the people out here to those that participate in it. They will think there are a great many hardships to endure in this manifestation of the power of God, and it will be left, perhaps to their children to see the glory of their deliverance, just as it is left for us to see the glory of our former deliverance, from the hands of those that sought to destroy us. This is one way to look at it. It is certainly a practical view. Some might ask, what will become of the railroads? I fear that the sifting process would be insufficient were we to travel by railroads. We are apt to overlook the manifestations of the power of God to us because we are participators in them, and regard them as commonplace events. But when it is written in history-as it will be written it will be shown forth to future generations as one of the most marvelous, unexampled and unprecedented accomplishments that has ever been known to history. [^29]

Destruction or collapse of the great transportation network of the United States could easily be the result of widespread war and mobocracy. Unquestionably, the return of the saints to Jackson County, Missouri, will require the power of the Lord, both in the preparation of the area round about and also in the actual journey itself.

Heber C. Kimball, Deseret News, Church Department, May 23, 1931, p. 3. ( Italics added )

Orson Pratt, Deseret Evening News, Vol. 8, No. 265, October 2, 1875, p. I. (Italics added )

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 24, pp. 31-32, October 26, 1879.

Joseph F. Smith, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 24, pp. 156-157, December 3, 1882. (Italics added)

A Man Like unto Moses

As was mentioned earlier, when the Lord spoke of the redemption of Zion coming by power, he promised that he would "raise up unto my people a man, who shall lead them like as Moses led the children of Israd." [^30] This promise has caused a great deal of speculation in the Church since that time. Many people wondered just who that man might be. Brigham Young was a man very much like Moses in his leading of the saints to Utah and some have speculated that this passage might have referred to him. Some have also felt that Joseph Smith would be resurrected and return to lead the people back. The great prophecy by Joseph of Egypt, as recorded in Nephi's writings, referred to Joseph Smith as a man like unto Moses. [^31] The Lord also compared Joseph to Moses in Section 28 of the Doctrine and Covenants. [^32]

Orson Pratt discussed this man "like unto Moses" at some length in a sermon delivered to the saints in 1873.

Whether that man is now in existence, or whether it is some one yet to be born; or whether it is our present leader who has led us forth into these valleys of the mountains, whether God will grant unto us the great blessing to have his life spared to lead forth his people like a Moses, we perhaps may not all know.... But be this as it may, whether he [Joseph Smith] is the man, whether President Young is the man, or whether the Lord shall hereafter raise up a man, for that purpose, we do know that when that day comes the Lord will not only send his angels before the army of Israel, but his presence will also be there. [^33]

One of the most definitive statements on the "man like unto Moses" is that given by Elder John A. Widtsoe in his work, Evidences and Reconciliations. In answer to the question, "Who is the man like unto Moses?" he writes:

There have been many conjectures concerning this statement. There have even been misguided men who have declared themselves to be this man "like as Moses." Yet, the meaning as set forth in the scriptures, is very simple. In modern revelation the President of the Church is frequently compared to Moses. Soon after the organization of the Church, the Lord said, "no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses" (D.&C. 28:2). In one of the great revelations upon Priesthood, this is more specifically expressed: "the duty of the President of the office of the High Priesthood is to preside over the whole church, and to be like unto Moses" (D.&C. 107:91).

The discussion of this question among the Saints led to the following statement in the Times and Seasons (6:922) by John Taylor, then the editor: "The President (of the Church) stands in the Church as Moses did to the children of Israel, according to the revelations."

The man like unto Moses in the Church is the President of the Church. [^34]

The important fact to remember is that there will be a mighty prophet of God, raised up by the Lord to deliver his people back to the site of the New Jerusalem.

Doctrine and Covenants 105: 16.

Nephi 3: 9.

Doctrine and Covenants 28:2.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 15, pp. 362-363, March 9, 1873. (Italics added)

John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1943), p. 197. (Italics added)

Only the Worthy

One last important consideration remains in the discussion of the return to Jackson County, viz., who will be allowed to go and on what basis will the determination be made? The answer, of course, is the same as the answer to such questions as how one avoids the judgments of God, how one escapes from the desolating scourge that is to come, and so on. The answer is simply this: Only the worthy will be called on to return to build up that great city.

Brigham Young said:

Now, it is for you and me to prepare to return back again; not to our fatherland, in many cases, but to return east, and by-and-by to build up the Centre Stake of Zion. We are not prepared to do this now, but we are here to learn until we are of one heart and of one mind in things of this life. [^35]

Joseph F. Smith said that the return to Missouri could not come before the people were prepared to go.

. . . No man, so far as I know, can foretell the day or the hour, the month or the year when the people of God are prepared to go back, and not before. Whether it be in this generation or in the next generation, it matters not; it will only be when the people have prepared themselves to do it by their faithfulness and obedience to the commands of God. I prophesy to you, in the name of the Lord, that when the Latter-day Saints have prepared themselves through righteousness to redeem Zion, they will accomplish that work; for the Lord has said it shall be done, and it will be done in the due time of the Lord, when the people are prepared for it. [^36]

On another occasion Brigham Young warned that the Church must hasten its preparation or the Lord would be ready for the return before the saints were.

Just as soon as the Latter-day Saints are ready and prepared to return to Independence, Jackson County, in the State of Missouri, North America, just so soon will the voice of the Lord be heard, "Arise now, Israel, and make your way to the centre stake of Zion."

Do you think there is any danger of our being ready before the Lord prepares the other end of the route? Do you believe that we, as Latter-day Saints, are preparing our own hearts, our own lives, to return to take possession of the centre Stake of Zion, as fast as the Lord is preparing to cleanse the land from those ungodly persons who dwell there? You can read, reflect, and make your own calculations. If we are not very careful, the earth will be cleansed from wickedness before we are prepared to take possession of it. We must be pure to be prepared to build up Zion. To all appearance, the Lord is preparing that end of the route faster than we are preparing ourselves to go there. [^37]

Wilford Woodruff explained that the Lord will give us power to accomplish his work just as fast as we prepare ourselves to receive his aid.

We are called upon to work with the Lord just as fast as we are prepared to receive the things of his kingdom. But I am satisfied there has got to be a great change with us in many respects before we are prepared for the redemption of Zion and the building up of the New Jerusalem. I believe the only way for us is to get enough of the Spirit of God that we may see and understand our duties and comprehend the will of the Lord. [^38]

And Lorenzo Snow asked:

Do you suppose that the Lord would ever send you and me back to Jackson County until He could feel perfectly assured that we would do those things which the people of Jackson County failed to do for lack of experience and faith? [^39]

Worthiness-first, last and always--is the criteria for serving the Lord and enjoying the great blessings he has prepared for his children.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, p. 324, February 10, 1867. ( Italics added )

Joseph F. Smith, Millennial Star, Vol. 56, p. 385, June 18, 1894. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 9, p. 137, July 28, 1861. (Italics added )

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 16, p. 36, April 7, 1873.

Lorenzo Snow, Conference Report, October, 1900, p. 62.

All That I Have Is Thine

However, in the case of the saints turning their faces eastward and returning to Jackson County, a special kind of worthiness will be required. When the members of the Church were first sent to inhabit the land of Independence, Missouri, they were also given a law to live that was to prepare them to be a "Zion people" in a "Zion place." This law was the Law of Consecration and Stewardship, sometimes also called the United Order. It was a law designed to provide for God's children in such a way that poverty would be eliminated and all members would live together in perfect harmony and brotherhood.

To enter this order, a member of the Church had to make solemn covenants to consecrate everything to the Lord. It was evidently a failure on the part of the saints to live up to these covenants that made them unworthy to stay and build up the city of Zion. [^40]

Therefore, as Lorenzo Snow stated in the reference cited above, before the saints today can expect to return they must be willing to do more than those early saints did. In other words, anyone returning to Jackson County must be able and willing to live the principles of the Law of Consecration. This is testified to abundantly by many of the leaders of the Church. The following is just a sampling of those testimonies.

We have had a great deal said about the United Order, and about our becoming one. And some people would wish-Oh, how they do wish, they could get around that principle, if they could! But you Latter-day Saints, you cannot get around it; you cannot dig around it; it will rise before you every step you take, for God is determined to carry out his purposes, and to build up his Zion; and those who will not walk into line he will move out of the way and no place will be found for them in Israel. Hear it, you Latter-day Saints for I say to you in the name of Israel's God that it is a revelation from the Most High, and you cannot get around it. [^41]

But when shall I be prepared to go there? Not while I have in my heart the love of this world more than the love of God. Not while I am possessed of that selfishness and greed that would induce me to cling to the world or my possessions in it, at the sacrifice of principle or truth. But when I am ready to say, "Father, all that I have, myself included, is Thine; my time, my substance, everything that I possess is on the altar, to be used freely, agreeable to Thy holy will, and not my will, but Thine, be done," then perhaps I will be prepared to go and help to redeem Zion. For Zion can only be built up by the law that God revealed for that purpose, which is the law of consecration-not the law of tithing ....

It behooves us, therefore, my brethren and sisters, to look to ourselves, turning the eye of scrutiny in upon our own souls, and to ask ourselves, "Am I preparing to help redeem Zion and to build up the waste places thereof?" "Am I shaping my conduct so that when the Lord shall call upon the people to do this, I will be one that will be chosen for the work?" [^42]

These are things for the Latter-day Saint and for every man and woman to think about, and we should commence to prepare and fit ourselves for the United Order. As far as spiritual things are concerned we are pretty well united, but when it comes to temporalities we often differ. But you will see the day, if you live properly, observe the Word of Wisdom and do that which is required, you will go back to Jackson county, many of you whom I am addressing this afternoon. I am sure of this. [^43]

You may ask, in what respect we shall differ in settling up those countries when we go there to fulfill the commandments of the Lord? I will tell you. No man in those localities will be permitted to receive a stewardship on those lands, unless he is willing to consecrate all his properties to the Lord. [^44]

Jesus will never receive the Zion of God unless its people are united according to celestial law, for all who go into the presence of God have to go there by this law. Enoch had to practice this law, and we shall have to do the same if we are ever accepted of God as he was. It has been promised that the New Jerusalem. will be built up in our day and generation, and it will have to be done by the United Order of Zion and according to celestial law. [^45]

See for example Doctrine and Covenants 97: 21-26; 101: 1-8; 103:4; 104:5-9.

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 20, p. 43, August 4, 1878. (Italics added)

Joseph F. Smith, Millennial Star, Vol. 56, pp. 385-387, June 18, 1894. (Italics added)

Lorenzo Snow, Conference Report, April, 1898, p. 14. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 21, p. 149, November 1, 1879. ( Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 17, p. 250, October 9, 1874. ( Italics added)

Terror or Anticipation?

Up to this chapter, much of the prophecies have dealt with the terrible calamities which are coming upon the world. The days ahead as described by these prophecies are to be grim ones indeed, and it is little wonder that people should look upon the future with dread and uncertainty. The carnage and the bloodshed described so vividly as coming upon the United States and the world are enough to make one cry out for deliverance from such days of terror. The sentiments of the young college girl who stated that she would rather die before Christ comes so that she would not have to endure such times are understandable.

However, these chapters and the foreboding picture that they paint are not the complete story. It is true that the wicked have much reason to fear, if they do not repent. But this chapter and the following ones present the other half of the future scene, viz., the great blessings and experiences that await those who are prepared and waiting for the coming of the Lord. Those saints who qualify in the latter category find that the overwhelming emotion when contemplating the future is not one of terror, but rather that of anticipation.

Some would argue that the most powerful motivating factor which comes from studying the prophecies of the coming of the Lord is fear, but it is hoped that before the complete picture is finished, the reader may come to feel that poignant longing to be worthy enough to participate in the great events of these last days. For this anticipation can be an even stronger motivation than fear.
