Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Eight

"A Land of Peace, a City of Refuge"

We Are the Favored People

What is it about the City of Zion that will inspire the saints to leave comfortable homes, that will thrust the main body of the Church from its present headquarters, that will cause vast numbers of people to risk a long and probably very hazardous journey? What enticement could cause generations of faithful members to keep their sights turned to the east? How could any location initiate such a tremendous expenditure in human toil and sacrifice? Why has the New Jerusalem been so much a part of the dreams of the Church membership for thirteen decades?

Elder George Q. Cannon, later a counselor in the First Presidency to President John Taylor, stated the answer very simply. Speaking of Zion, he said:

We do not wish to leave this land, because it is not fertile, or because it is not a favoured land. We appreciate the home that God has given us here, so fruitful in blessings to the Saints; but we look forward to that land with indescribable feelings, because it is the place where God has said His City shall be built. [^1]

It is hard for the finite mind to comprehend what a magnificent experience it will be to live in the City of God with a people who can be truly classified as the people of Zion-the the pure in heart. Little wonder that the Lord described it in such overwhelming terms when he said:

And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city of refuge, a place of safety for the saints of the Most High God ...

And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy. [^2]

What a special privilege it will be for those so chosen to return to the city of the Most High God and there participate in the great works necessary to prepare the world for the coming of the Lord. How blessed that generation of saints fortunate enough to witness these events. Little wonder that the person who sees prophecy in its fullest scope looks forward to that return to Jackson County with fervent longing rather than with fear or dread.

Let us now turn to the prophetic promises concerning the City of Zion so that we, too, may come to understand this great future heritage of the Church which is yet to unfold.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

The Grandeur of Zion

In the parable of the redemption of Zion discussed in the previous chapter, the Lord spoke of the site for the grove of olive trees as a "very choice piece of land." [^3] In August, 1831, the Prophet Joseph Smith visited the land of Zion in Jackson County, and there dedicated the temple site. In his history he wrote a description of the land as it appeared then, describing the rich soil, mild climate, shrubbery, etc. The Prophet spoke briefly of the disadvantages there, all of which were due to its uncivilized state at that time, and then went on to say:

But all these impediments vanish when it is recollected what the Prophets have said concerning Zion in the last days; how the glory of Lebanon is to come upon her; the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box tree together, to beautify the place of His sanctuary, that He may make the place of His feet glorious. Where for brass, He will bring gold; and for iron, He will bring silver; and for wood, brass; and for stones, iron; and where the feast of the fat things will be given to the just; yea, when the splendor of the Lord is brought to our consideration for the good of His people, the calculations of men and the vain glory of the world vanish, and we exclaim, "Out of Zion the perfection of beauty, God hath shined." [^4]

Elder Orson Pratt also described this "perfection of beauty" that would glorify the city of the Lord.

The cities and temples which we are now engaged in building, we expect to decay; we expect the rock and the various building materials will in time waste away, according to natural laws. But when we build that great central city, the New Jerusalem, there will be no such thing as the word decay associated with it; it will not decay any more than the pot of manna which was gathered by the children of Israel and put into a sacred place in the ark of the covenant. It was preserved from year to year by the power of God: so will he preserve the city of the New Jerusalem, the dwelling houses, the tabernacles, the Temples, etc., from the effects of storms and time. [^5]

And on another occasion, he said:

Therefore, Latter-day Saints, when you return to build up the waste places of Zion, and when you build up the New Jerusalem upon the place that he has appointed, whatever materials shall be used, by the blessing of the Priesthood, which God has ordained, these materials will endure forever: they will continue during the thousand years, without waste, and when they shall be caught up to heaven, when the earth flees away, they will still endure in all their perfection and beauty. When these cities shall descend again upon the new earth, in its immortal and eternal state, they will still be as endurable as the earth itself, no more to be subject to the curse, and therefore, will no more waste; death is gone-everything that is corruptible in its nature has ceased, so far as this habitable globe is concerned, and all sorrow and mourning are done away. [^6]

President David O. McKay, who was then second counselor to President Heber J. Grant, spoke to a Brigham Young University Leadership Assembly on the subject of Zion in 1935. In the address he spoke of building Zion, both spiritually and physically. He suggests from his remarks that the City of Zion will be great, temporally as well as spiritually - a city of scientific and cultural advancement.

If we have in mind the physical Zion, then we must strive for more fertile acres; bring from the mountains gold and silver in abundance; found factories to furnish more employment; extend in length and width our concrete public highways; build banks to protect, or to dissipate, as has been the case recently, the wealth we accumulate; transform our vast coal fields into electricity that will furnish light, heat and power to every family; improve the means of communication until with radio in our pockets we may communicate with friends and loved ones from any point at any given moment.

Is it these physical phases of Zion which we are to build? Certainly it is difficult to picture the City of Zion without at least some-if not all-such modern necessities and luxuries. [^7]

He goes on to indicate that such material conveniences are only one aspect of Zion and will accompany the children of Zion only if they are spiritually prepared.

Doctrine and Covenants 101:44.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 21, p. 153, November 1, 1879. (Italics added )

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Built by Revelation

Obviously, the city thus described by the various prophets will not be standing waiting for the saints to inhabit it, nor will such a city build itself. This is to be one of the great tasks of the saints who are privileged to return to the land of Zion. A city of such marvelous construction cannot be built after earthly patterns and the prophets have made it most evident that the Lord's servants will complete this work through revelation which he gives to them.

President Brigham Young explained that this was one of the basic reasons for the gathering of the saints that has been taking place in the Church. Until they were gathered, they could not prepare themselves to build up Zion in all of its power and glory.

Not a man in all the realms and kingdoms that exist knows how to commence the foundation of the Zion of God in the latter days without revelation. If the people in the world could sanctify themselves and prepare themselves to build up Zion they might remain scattered, but they cannot, they must be gathered together to be taught, that they may sanctify themselves before the Lord and become of one heart and of one mind. [^8]

Elder Orson Pratt also spoke of the important role direct revelation will play in the building of the City of Zion. In a sermon in 1873 he said:

God intends to have a city built up that will never be destroyed nor overcome, but that will exist while eternity shall endure; and he will point out the pattern and show the order of architecture: he will show unto his servants the nature of the streets and the pavement thereof, the kind of precious stones that shall enter into the buildings, the nature of the rock and precious stones that will adorn the gates and the walls of that city; for the gates will be open. continually says the Prophet Isaiah, that men may bring in the force of the Gentiles ....

Suffice it to say that God by revelation will inspire his servants and will dictate to them the order of the buildings of that city-the number and width of the streets, the kind of houses, the character of the Temple that is to be built therein, the kind of rock, timber and the various materials that will have to be brought from a distance to enter into the composition of that beautiful city. [^9]

President John Taylor said essentially the same thing in one of the general conferences of the Church.

The architectural designs of those splendid edifices, cities, walls, gardens, bowers, streets, etc., will be under the direction of the Lord, who will control and manage all these matters; and the people, from the President down, will all be under the guidance and direction of the Lord in all the pursuits of human life, until eventually they will be enabled to erect cities that will be fit to be caught up-that when Zion descends from above, Zion will also ascend from beneath, and be prepared to associate with those from above. [^10]

Part of the design for the city is already known, for it was given through revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1833. The saints in Missouri were sent a city plat which included detailed instructions for laying out the city itself, and also for the building of homes, buildings, etc. [^11] Although the Prophet did not explain in his history how he had received these plans, Wilford Woodruff testified later that they had been given in a vision.

The plan which he presented was given to him by vision, and the future will prove that the visions of Joseph concerning Jackson County, all the various stakes of Zion and the redemption of Israel will be fulfilled in the time appointed of the Lord. [^12]

It is not the purpose of the present study to consider those plans in detail, but a careful scrutiny shows clearly the inspiration behind them. Many of the ideas were later incorporated in the cities of Nauvoo, Salt Lake, and many other towns in the West. When the New Jerusalem is built it is very likely that Joseph's plans will be used once again as the model for its construction.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 12, p. 38, April 14, 1867. ( Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 15, p. 365, March 9, 1873. (Italics added)

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 1, pp. 357-362, June 25, 1833.

Wilford Woodruff, Journal History, April 6, 1837. (Italics added)

Built Through Effort and Obedience

The fact that the city will be built under the inspiration and revelations of God does not in any way imply that there will not be a great labor to perform. A city of such magnificence will not rise of itself. It is for this exact reason that the saints shall return to Jackson County, so that this place of refuge and peace may be built before the Savior returns as Lord of lords and King of kings.

President Young cautioned the saints about expecting the Lord to do the work for them in building this eternal city.

Are we prepared now to establish the Zion that the Lord designs to build up? I have many times asked the questions, "Where is the man that knows how to lay the first rock for the wall that is to surround the New Jerusalem, or the Zion of God on the earth? Where is the man who knows how to construct the first gate of the city? Where is the man who understands how to build up the kingdom of God in its purity and to prepare for Zion to come down to meet it? .... Well," says one, "I thought the Lord was going to do this." So He is if we will let Him. That is what we want; we want the people to be willing for the Lord to do it. But He will do it by means. He will not send His angels to gather the rock to build up the New Jerusalem. He will not send His angels from the heavens to go to the mountains to cut the timber and make it into lumber to adorn the city of Zion. He has called upon us to do this work; and if we will let Him work by, through, and with us, He can accomplish it; otherwise we shall fall short, and shall never have the honor of building up Zion on the earth. Is this so? Certainly. Well, then, let us keep the commandments. [^13]

President John Taylor also spoke in this vein while at a conference in Malad, Idaho, in 1881.

Shall we build up a Zion? We shall; but we shall not, every one of us, have our own way about it. We shall feel that we need the will of God; and we shall feel that we require the Priesthood, under His direction, to guide and direct us, not men who are seeking to aggrandize themselves; but men who are seeking to build up the Church and Kingdom of God upon the earth; men of clean hands and pure hearts, every one honoring his Priesthood and magnifying it. [^14]

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 13, p. 313, April 7, 1870. ( Italics added)

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 26, p. 109, October 20, 1881.

Others to Come to Zion Besides Latter-day Saints

Sometimes as the great worthiness required of those who are to build up Zion is discussed it leaves the impression that only the members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will be privileged to live in Zion. Several statements by the prophets indicate that this is not so. The scripture wherein Zion is described as a place of refuge has already been cited. In that same reference, the Lord indicated that those who would not take up the sword against their neighbor would flee to this place of refuge. [^15]

President Brigham Young described the freedom of religion which would exist after Zion became the ruling power in the world.

They will ask, "If I bow the knee and confess that he is that Saviour, the Christ, to the glory of the Father, will you let me go home and be a Presbyterian?" "Yes." "And not persecute me?" "Never." "Won't you let me go home and belong to the Greek Church? "Yes." "Will you allow me to be a Friend Quaker, or a Shaking Quaker?" "O yes, anything you wish to be, but remember that you must not persecute your neighbors, but must mind your own business, and let your neighbors alone, and let them worship the sun, moon, a white dog, or anything else they please, being mindful that every knee has got to bow and every tongue confess. When you have paid this tribute to the Most High, who created you and preserves you, you may then go and worship what you please, or do what you please, if you do not infringe upon your neighbors." [^16]

President John Taylor spoke of those whose motivation would be to simply find a place where just and equitable laws were administered.

Those who will not take up their sword to fight against their neighbor must needs flee to Zion for safety. And they will come, saying, we do not know anything of the principles of your religion, but we perceive that you are an honest community; you administer justice and righteousness, and we want to live with you and receive the protection of your laws, but as for your religion we will talk about that some other time. Will we protect such people? Yes, all honorable men. When the peoples shall have torn to shreds the Constitution of the United States the Elders of Israel will be found holding it up to the nations of the earth and proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men, and extending the hand of fellowship to the oppressed of all nations. This is part of the programme, and as long as we do what is right and fear God, he will help us and stand by us under all circumstances. [^17]

Doctrine and Covenants 45:68.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 2, p. 317, July 8, 1855

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 21, p. 8, August 31, 1879. (Italics added)

Life in the City of Zion

As one considers the great prophetic promises about the New Jerusalem, one cannot help but wonder what it would be like to live in such a city. Will life consist of the normal day-to-day things which make up existence now? Will we continue to work at occupations? Go to school? Seek recreation? Such fascinating questions have fortunately been answered to some degree by the prophets of our times.

John Taylor described the city as being one of excellence in all respects, a city that would indeed be a joy to its inhabitants.

... We believe that we shall rear splendid edifices, magnificent temples and beautiful cities that shall become the pride, praise and glory of the whole earth. We believe that this people will excel in literature, in science and the arts and in manufacture. In fact, there will be a concentration of wisdom, not only of the combined wisdom of the world as it now exists, but men will be inspired in regard to all these matters in a manner and to an extent that they have never been before, and we shall have eventually, when the Lord's purposes are carried out, the most magnificent buildings, the most pleasant and beautiful gardens, the richest and most costly clothing, and be the most healthy and the most intellectual people that will reside upon the earth. This is part and parcel of our faith. [^18]

In a discourse given in 1879, Orson Pratt explained that education would play a major role in the activities of the New Jerusalem.

We expect to be farmers, a great many of us. We expect to introduce all kinds of machinery and manufactures. We expect to build mills. We expect to have our merchandise and our stores and storehouses in that land. We expect to build a great many hundred school-houses in that country, just the same as we have already done in this country and in the two adjacent Territories, Idaho in the north and Arizona in the south. We do not calculate to neglect our children in regard to their education. We expect to build a great number of academies or the higher schools, and besides a great many school-houses. We expect to erect universities for the still higher branches to be taught. We expect to build many hundreds of meeting-houses, and we expect to be a people very densely located there-not one man taking up six or eight miles of land, and calling it his farm; we don't expect to live in that way, but we expect to settle a very dense settlement in that region of country. [^19]

Such excellence will attract the attention of the learned and wise over all the earth and attract them to Zion according to both Elders Pratt and Taylor. Said President Taylor:

When Zion is established in her beauty and honor and glory, the kings and princes of the earth will come, in order that they may get information and teach the same to their people. They will come as they came to learn the wisdom of Solomon. [^20]

Elder Pratt referred to a prophecy in Isaiah that describes that light that will emanate from the city and the remarkable effect this will have on others.

. . . That true light which is of God will be rendered visible to the eyes of all the inhabitants of that city. And shall I limit it there? No. The light will shine so conspicuously from that city, extending to the very heavens, that it will in reality be like unto a city set upon a hill that cannot be hid, and it will have quite a tendency to strike terror to all the nations of the earth. Will all see it? No, some may be too far off, beyond the ocean, to behold that miraculous light that will shine forth in this city, but I will tell you the effect it will have upon the kings, queens, rulers, congressmen and judges of the earth-they will hear of it by telegraph; the news will be flashed over the civilized nations of the earth, but they will not believe it. They will say, "Let us cross the ocean, and let us see this thing that is reported to us by telegraph; let us see whether it is so or not." Well, when they get within a day or two's journey of the city they will be alarmed. Some of these kings and nobles, when they see the light shining forth like the northern lights in the arctic regions, illuminating the whole face of the heavens-when they see this light shining forth long before they reach the city, fear will take hold of them, says the Psalmist, in the 48th Psalm, they will become weak, and their knees will smite together like the knees of Belshazzar. They will try to haste away from the glory of God and from the power of God, and to get out of the country as soon as possible. Fear and terror will be upon them. It will have an effect upon many other kings and nobles, more pure in heart, more honest, that are willing to receive the truth; it will have a different effect upon them .... [^21]

It will, without question, be a highly privileged people fortunate enough to live in such a city. Little wonder that an editorial quoted by the Prophet Joseph Smith said that the prophets down through history looked upon our own day "with peculiar delight... [^22]

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 10, p. 147, April 6, 1863. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 24, p. 23, October 26, 1879. (Italics added )

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6, p. 169, January 17, 1858.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 24, p. 29, October 26, 1879.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 4, p. 609, May 2, 1842.

Inheritances in the Land of Zion

In the previous chapter it was made clear that the Law of Consecration and Stewardship will be the basic social order lived in New Jerusalem. [^23] When the saints were driven from Jackson County they were forbidden by revelation to sell their inheritances even though they were not permitted to dwell on them at that time. [^24] Not only that, but the saints were commanded to continue to purchase lands there, even after their expulsion. [^25] This, the Lord explained, was so that the armies of the Lord would be justified in reclaiming the land of Zion when the time of its redemption would come.

And after these lands are purchased, I will hold the armies of Israel guiltless in taking possession of their own lands, which they have previously purchased with their moneys, and of throwing down the towers of mine enemies that may be upon them, and scattering their watchmen, and avenging me of mine enemies unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me. [^26]

Thus, evidently an important part of the return to build up Zion will be the assigning out of inheritances to the saints. In section 85 of the Doctrine and Covenants a very unusual prophecy is recorded. The Lord explained the importance of keeping a record of all those who had consecrated their properties and received legal inheritances from the bishop. Those that did not receive their inheritances through consecration were to be blotted from the records and history of the Church. Then follows the prophecy:

And it shall come to pass that I, the Lord God, will send one mighty and strong, holding the scepter of power in his hand. clothed with light for a covering, whose mouth shall utter words, eternal words, while his bowels shall be a fountain of truth, to set in order the house of God, and to arrange by lot the inheritances of the saints whose names are found, and the names of their fathers. and of their children, enrolled in the book of the law of God;

While that man, who was called of God and appointed, that putteth forth his hand to steady the ark of God, shall fall by the shaft of death, like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning. [^27]

Of the "one mighty and strong" more will be said shortly, but note that the inheritances are to be given out by this person to those saints whose names are found written in "the book of the law of God." According to President Joseph F. Smith, those whose names would be written in this book originally were those who were living true to the covenants they had made in the Law of Consecration. However, when the saints did not prove themselves capable of living that order, the Lord substituted the law of tithing, and so those who are now recorded in that book are those who are faithfully paying their tithes. This will be the basis for determining the inheritances in Zion, according to President Smith. He quotes verses 9-12 of section 85 and then states:

This is the position the people will be in when they come to claim an inheritance in Zion, if their names are not found recorded in the book of the law of God. And I want to tell you that this refers directly to the law of tithing. In the first place it referred to the law of consecration, but that law, as has been explained, was not properly kept, and inasmuch as people are under greater condemnation when they keep not the laws that are given them, the Lord in His mercy withdrew from the Latter-day Saints the law of consecration, because the people were not prepared to live it, and as long as it was in force and they kept it not they were under condemnation. The law of tithing was given in its place. [^28]

In general conference the year following President Smith's address, President Lorenzo Snow also spoke of tithing and its relationship to the Law of Consecration and of those who would receive an inheritance in the city of Zion.

Joseph tried to develop them [the saints] so that they would conform to the law of consecration, which is in advance of the law of tithing, and is a principle which, as sure as I am speaking, you and I will one day have to conform to. When that day comes we will be prepared to go to Zion ....

But there is this about it: the Latter-day Saints in these valleys have had an experience that the Saints then didn't have. We have learned that which they did not learn. They were badly persecuted and driven from the land of Zion, and as the revelation says, "But few shall stand to receive an inheritance." There are some perhaps within the sound of my voice who will receive an inheritance in Jackson county, before they pass into the next life. [^29]

For the revelations on the Law of Consecration see especially sections 42, 51, 58, 85, and 104 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Doctrine and Covenants 101:96-101.

Doctrine and Covenants 105:28-29.

Doctrine and Covenants 105:30.

Doctrine and Covenants 85: 7-8.

Joseph F. Smith, Conference Report, October, 1899, p. 42. (Italics added)

Lorenzo Snow, Conference Report, October, 1900, pp. 61-62. (Italics added)

"The One Mighty and Strong"

Perhaps no other scripture has caused so much controversy as verses seven and eight of section 85. Down through the years many men have arisen and claimed they were "the one mighty and strong" who is to "set in order the house of God." Apostasy in the present or past leadership of the Church is generally cited by such individuals as the reason for their "special calling" and they seek to identify various presidents of the Church with the man who is "called of God" who shall "fall by the shaft of death."

Presidents Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, Wilford Woodruff (for issuing the Manifesto banning plural marriages in the Church) and nearly every other president have been identified by such apostate groups as being the fulfillment of that prophecy. Some recent groups have even claimed President McKay to be the one, although they do not explain how a man who was president for nineteen years, lived to be ninety-six, and then died peacefully in his sleep could be described as falling "like a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning."

In 1905, the First Presidency (Joseph F. Smith, John R. Winder, and Anthon H. Lund) issued an official statement explaining the two verses in question. This was first printed in the Deseret News and then was reprinted two years later in The Improvement Era. Such a statement clears up many of the questions that have arisen, and as the beginning paragraph makes it clear, is to be viewed as an authoritative one. Space here will not permit quoting the entire statement but pertinent sections clear up the question of who is "the one mighty and strong."

The following has been issued by the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in explanation of verses 7 and 8 of section 85 of the Doctrine and Covenants, and is to be received as authoritative. [^30]

The two verses are quoted and then the statement goes on:

One would think in such a matter as this that sufficient native modesty would assert itself to restrain a man from announcing himself as the one upon whom such high honors are to be conferred, and who is to exercise such great powers in establishing the Saints in their inheritances; and that even if one suspected, for any reason, that such a position, and such exceptional powers were to be conferred upon him, he would wait until the Lord would clearly indicate to the Church, as well as to himself, that he had indeed been sent of God to do the work of so noble a ministry, as is described in the passage under question. Those, however, who have so far proclaimed themselves as being the one "mighty and strong," have manifested the utmost ignorance of the things of God and the order of the Church. Indeed their insufferable ignorance and egotism have been at the bottom of all their pretensions, and the cause of all the trouble into which they have fallen. They seem not to have been aware of the fact that the Church of Christ and of the Saints is completely organized, and that when the man who shall be called upon to divide unto the Saints their inheritances comes, he will be designated by the inspiration of the Lord to the proper authorities of the Church, appointed and sustained according to the order provided for the government of the Church. So long as that Church remains in the earth-and we have the assurance from the Lord that it will now remain in the earth forever-the Saints need look for nothing of God's appointing that will be erratic, or irregular, or that smacks of starting over afresh or that would ignore or overthrow the established order of things. [^31]

Some discussion is given in the statement of the speculation that has gone on in the Church concerning who the man is, indicating that the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph has led some to suggest that it was he who fell "by the shaft of death." Then the statement explains the context in which the revelation was originally given. It was part of a letter written by Joseph Smith to William W. Phelps who was at that time living in Independence, Missouri. The entire letter to Phelps is quoted and also several revelations that substantiate the fact that Bishop Partridge was the man called to act as the Bishop in the land of Zion. Then the First Presidency continue:

This much, then, we have learned, viz., that Edward Partridge, the Bishop of the Church, was the one "called and appointed, to divide by lot unto the Saints their inheritances." But was Edward Partridge the one in 1832 who was "putting forth his hand to steady the ark," and threatened with falling "by the shaft of death like as a tree that is smitten by the vivid shaft of lightning?" Undoubtedly. [^32]

The First Presidency go to some lengths in discussing Edward Partridge and his calling in Zion. During the Jackson County experience Bishop Partridge went through a period of apostasy, as did many other of the brethren in Missouri during those difficult days of persecution and bitter hatred. Correspondence from Joseph to these brethren attempting to alleviate the strong hostility is quoted in the statement which indicates that it was Bishop Partridge who was "called and appointed" and out of favor with God.

The First Presidency then indicate that Bishop Partridge went on to repent and served a faithful and noble role in the later persecutions in Northern Missouri. This repentance appeased the dissatisfaction of the Lord and the threatened punishment was avoided.

Thus, the First Presidency puts to rest all of the speculation concerning he "who is to fall by the shaft of death." They then turn their attention in this document to the other important aspect of the prophecy, viz., "the one mighty and strong." They first call attention once again to the fact that the section as originally given referred to Edward Partridge. They discuss at some length the possibility that the whole prophecy was set aside upon the repentance of the man to whom it was directed. But then they say:

If, however, there are those who will still insist that the prophecy concerning the coming of "one mighty and strong" is still to be regarded as relating to the future, let the Latter-day Saints know that he will be a future bishop of the Church who will be with the Saints in Jackson county, Missouri, when the Lord shall establish them in that land; and he will be so blessed with the spirit and power of his calling that he will be able to set in order the house of God, pertaining to the department of the work under his jurisdiction; and in righteousness and justice will "arrange by lot the inheritances of the Saints." He will hold the same high and exalted station that Edward Partridge held; for the latter was called to do just this kind of work-that is, to set in order the house of God as pertaining to settling the Saints upon their inheritances ....

This future bishop will also be called and appointed of God as Aaron of old, and as Edward Partridge was. He will be designated by the inspiration of the Lord, and will be accepted and sustained by the whole Church, as the law of God provides. His coming will not be the result of a wild, erratic movement, or the assumption of authority by a sell-appointed egotist seeking power that he may lord it over the people; God's house is one of order, and admits no such irregular procedure.

Certainly this prophecy does not allude in any may to any President of the Church, past, present, or to come. The revelation under consideration does not relate to matters that especially concern the duties of the President of the Church: but to the arranging "by lot the inheritances of the Saints," and that is the whole substance of the revelation, a matter distinctly placed under the jurisdiction of the Bishop of the Church .... [^33]

"One Mighty and Strong," Official statement by the First Presidency The Improvement Era, October, 1907, p. 929. (All italics in this statement are added)

The Improvement Era, October, 1907, pp. 929-931.

The Improvement Era, October, 1907, p. 934.

The Improvement Era, October, 1907, pp. 940-942.

The Great Temple of Zion

Once the saints have returned to the center place of Zion and begin to settle into the routine of living, they will turn their hearts to one of the most remarkable projects ever undertaken by man-the building of the temple of Zion. The privilege of engaging in such a work is enough to make the mind reel, for the task will be completed with the divine help of the Lord. President Wilford Woodruff had an unusual dream in 1877 in which he saw the temple under construction and the divine help given to those engaged in building it.

I saw people coming from the river and from distant places to help build the Temple. It seemed as though there were hosts of angels helping to bring material for the construction of that building. Some were in Temple robes, and the pillar-llke cloud continued to hover over the spot. [^34]

When the Prophet Joseph first sent the plat for the model city of Zion to the brethren in Missouri, he spent some time in describing the temple that would be built. [^35]Actually, a better phrase to use would be "temple complex," for it is a series of buildings, all of which have differing purposes in the work of the Lord. Elder Orson Pratt spoke in greater detail of these various sections described by Joseph Smith.

There will be 24 different compartments in the Temple that will be built in Jackson County. The names of these compartments were given to us some 45 or 46 years ago; the names we still have, and when we build these 24 rooms, in a circular form and arched over the centre, we shall give the names to all these different compartments just as the Lord specified through Joseph Smith .... Perhaps you may ask for what purposes these 24 compartments are to be built. I answer not to assemble the outside world in, not to assemble the Saints all in one place, but these buildings will be built with a special view to the different orders, or in other words the different quorums or councils of the two Priesthoods that God has ordained on the earth. That is the object of having 24 rooms so that each of these different quorums, whether they be High Priests, or Seventies, or Elders, or Bishops, or lesser Priesthood, or Teachers, or Deacons, or Patriarchs, or Apostles, or High Councils, or whatever may be the duties that are assigned to them, they will have rooms in the Temple of the Most High God, adapted, set apart, constructed, and dedicated for this special purpose. Now, I have not only told you that we shall have these rooms, but I have told you the object of these rooms in short, not in full. But will there be any other buildings excepting those 24 rooms that are all joined together in a circular form and arched over the center-are there any other rooms that will be built-detached from the Temple? Yes. There will be tabernacles, there will be meeting houses for the assembling of the people on the Sabbath day. There will be various places of meeting so that the people may gather together: but the Temple will be dedicated to the Priesthood of the Most High God, and for most sacred and holy purposes. [^36]

Elder Alvin R. Dyer also spoke of the temple in Zion and described it as an "administrative temple complex." [^37]

It is evident from the various names given to the 24 compartments or separate buildings of this temple complex that there is yet much to be revealed concerning God's work during this period. But some few hints have been given by the prophets concerning some activities there.

The Prophet Joseph, for example, stated in an article on the priesthood which he wrote in 1840 that one of the things that would be restored in the time prior to Christ's coming would be the law of sacrifice. This is somewhat surprising as many people have long considered sacrifice to be part of the Mosaic law and thus done away with under Christ. But this is not so, according to the Prophet. He quotes Malachi 3:3, and then explains its significance for our day.

These sacrifices, as well as every ordinance belonging to the Priesthood, will, when the Temple of the Lord shall be built, and the sons of Levi be purified, be fully restored and attended to in all their powers, ramifications, and blessings. This ever did and ever will exist when the powers of the Melchizedek Priesthood are sufficiently manifest; else how can the restitution of all things spoken of by the holy Prophets be brought to pass? It is not to be understood that the law of Moses will be established again with all its rites and variety of ceremonies; this has never been spoken of by the Prophets; but those things which existed prior to Moses' day, namely, sacrifice, will be continued. [^38]

Most likely this restoration of sacrifices would center in the temple. Orson Pratt, as another example, spoke of the time when all of the records that Mormon and Moroni had in their trust would be transferred to the temple in Zion.

But the grand depository of all the numerous records of the ancient nations of the western continent was located in another department of the hill, and its contents under the charge of Holy angels, until the day should come for them to be transferred to the sacred temple of Zion. [^39]

Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff History of His Life and Labors, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1964), p. 505. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 1, pp. 359-362, June 25, 1833.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 24, pp. 24-25, October 26, 1879. (Italics added)

Alvin R. Dyer, "The Center Place of Zion," (BYU Press: Provo, 1968), pp. 9-10.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 4, pp. 211-212, October 5, 1840. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Millennial Star, Vol. 28, p. 417, July 7, 1866. (Italics added)

We Shall See Him Face to Face

In the Beatitudes given to the people in Palestine and also to the Nephites on this continent, the Savior said: "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God." [^40] The implications of that scripture have been much discussed in the Church and out, but one of the most exciting implications is brought to mind when that statement is coupled with another of the Lord's. "Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God," and "For this is Zion-THE PURE IN HEART." [^41]

One of the most sublime of all privileges awaiting those worthy enough to participate in the building of Zion is the promise that they shall be visited by the Savior in all of his glory and majesty. What a staggering thought that the saints there might be privileged to see and converse with the Savior! Brigham Young testified that those so blessed, even though they would be comparatively few, would see him face to face.

Jesus has been upon the earth a great many more times than you are aware of. When Jesus makes his next appearance upon the earth, but few of this Church will be prepared to receive him and see him face to face and converse with him; but he will come to his temple. [^42]

Orson Pratt explained that a change would have to be wrought in the faithful before they could endure the presence of Christ, but then they would be able to stand in his presence and behold his face.

. . . All of them who are pure in heart will behold the face of the Lord and that too before he comes in his glory in the clouds of heaven, for he will suddenly come to his Temple, and he will purify the sons of Moses and of Aaron, until they shall be prepared to offer in that Temple an offering that shall be acceptable in the sight of the Lord. In doing this, he will purify not only the minds of the Priesthood in that Temple, but he will purify their bodies until they shall be quickened, renewed and strengthened, and they will be partially changed, not to immortality, but changed in part that they can be filled with the power of God, and they can stand in the presence of Jesus, and behold his face in the midst of that Temple. [^43]

Charles W. Penrose, of the First Presidency, described it as an opportunity which the Lord would use to instruct his faithful saints in the building of his kingdom.

They [the saints] will come to the Temple prepared for him, and his faithful people will behold his face, hear his voice, and gaze upon his glory. From his own lips they will receive further instructions for the development and beautifying of Zion and for the extension and sure stability of his Kingdom. [^44]

President Lorenzo Snow, who had himself seen the Savior in the Salt Lake Temple, spoke of this future appearance as being a most personal and thrilling experience and even suggested that some might be privileged to invite the Master into their homes for a visit. Speaking to a reunion of priesthood authorities of the Weber Stake just a short time before his death, he said:

Many of you will be living in Jackson County and there you will be assisting in building the Temple; and if you will not have seen the Lord Jesus at that time you may expect Him very soon, to see Him, to eat and drink with Him, to shake hands with Him and to invite Him to your houses as He was invited when He was here before. I am saying things to you now, which I know something of the truth of them. [^45]

The Greek word which is translated "blessed" in the New Testament, means literally "happy." And how better could it be summed up than that? Happy are the pure in heart-the people of Zion-for they shall see God.

Matthew 5:8; 3 Nephi 12:8.

Doctrine and Covenants 97:21.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 7, p. 142, May 22, 1859. ( Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 15, pp. 365-366, March 9, 1873. ( Italics added )

Charles W. Penrose, Millennial Star, Vol. 21, pp. 582-583, September 10, 1859. (Italics added)

Lorenzo Snow, Deseret News, June 15, 1901, p. 1. (Italics added)

Seek to Be Found Worthy

Now it becomes more evident why The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints looks to Missouri with eager eyes and joyful hearts. When the blessings of those who dwell in Zion are enumerated, what heart does not long to join with that chosen company? The desire to repent in order to escape the fearful judgments of God is swallowed up in the poignant longing to be found worthy for such distinctive blessings. How accurately the Lord predicts the feelings of the heart when he says: "And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered out from all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with songs of everlasting joy." [^46]

Doctrine and Covenants 45:71.
