Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Nine

The Hour Approaches

As the righteous begin to gather to Zion with songs of everlasting joy and the great city's construction is undertaken, those who are eagerly watching the signs of the times may know that the hour of the coming of the Lord is drawing near. However, the building of the New Jerusalem will not signal the end of the world as we know it, but will only indicate that the final preparations are about to begin. From the prophetic promises which have been given through scripture and the living oracles, it is clear that there are other signs of the times which must also be fulfilled before Christ can come to claim his kingdom.

Of these harbingers, five are of such significance that a large body of prophecy has accrued concerning their eventual fulfillment. Although it is difficult to place any chronological order to their occurrence, the prophets have spoken of them in such a way that it seems apparent that they will take place either during the establishment of Zion or shortly thereafter.

These five important events are (1) the establishment of the kingdom of God, (2) the restoration of the Lamanite peoples, (3) the return of the lost tribes of Israel, (4) the great council that is to take place at Adam-ondi-Ahman, and (5) the last great missionary call to all the world. The order in which they will be treated in this chapter is an arbitrary one and in no way is meant to imply that this will be the order of their fulfillment.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD

Some six hundred years before the Savior came to earth, one of the great Old Testament prophets was called upon to interpret a dream of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon. The king had forgotten what the content of the dream was, and when his astrologers and soothsayers could not tell him he swore in his wrath that all the wise men of Babylon should die. Daniel and three other Hebrew slaves had been especially selected to be trained in the learning of the Babylonians, so they, too, were classed as part of the "wise men" and came under the sentence of death. Daniel appealed to the Lord for help, and then gained audience with the king to reveal the dream and its interpretation. [^1]

The dream is one of great significance, for Daniel was told by the Lord that before the king had gone to sleep that night he had been troubled about what should come to pass in the future. The Lord responded by giving Nebuchadnezzar a dream symbolizing "what shall be in the latter days." [^2] Then Daniel told the king of the great image he had seen in his dream, an image with head of gold, breast and arms of silver, belly and thighs of brass, legs of iron, and feet of iron and clay. Then in the dream the king saw a stone cut out from a mountain without hands that smote the feet of the great image and broke it into pieces. [^3]

Interpreting the dream, Daniel explained that the differing ingredients of the statue represented various kingdoms which would come out of Nebuchadnezzar's own kingdom which was symbolized by the head of gold. [^4] Then Daniel explained to the king the significance of the stone breaking the image into pieces. "And in the days of these kings [represented by the toes of iron and clay] shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever." [^5]

It is one of the beliefs of the Mormon faith that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is that kingdom which Daniel foresaw more than two thousand years ago. Through the restoration of the authority of God through the Prophet Joseph Smith the kingdom was cut out of the mountain "without hands," i.e., it is not man-made, and is rolling forth to fill the whole earth.

The prophets of this dispensation have abundantly testified that the Church is the kingdom of God. At present this kingdom is only ecclesiastical but in the future it will be a political one also. In 1866, for example, President Brigham Young bore witness that the Church is the kingdom which Daniel saw.

It may be asked what I mean by the kingdom of God. The Church of Jesus Christ has been established now for many years, and the kingdom of God has got to be established, even that kingdom which will circumscribe all the kingdoms of this world. It will yet give laws to every nation that exists upon the earth. This is the kingdom that Daniel, the prophet, saw should be set up in the last days. [^6]

In our own time, President Joseph Fielding Smith stated this fact very clearly.

Now, let us speak plainly and clearly in relation to this remarkable vision and Daniel's interpretation.

This great kingdom is verily the Church of Jesus Christ, which has been established in the earth for the last time. It is not to be destroyed but is to continue to endure and increase until it shall fill the earth in the due time of the Lord ....

This remarkable prophetic vision that was interpreted by Daniel is bound to be fulfilled. The Lord set up his kingdom, or divine Church, through the ministry of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The stone cut out of the mountain is indeed The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, which is to endure through all time, or "stand forever." [^7]

On another occasion Brigham Young explained that the political aspects of the kingdom would act as a shield and protection to the ecclesiastical Church.

The Church of Jesus Christ will produce this government, and cause it to grow and spread, and it will be a shield round about the Church. And under the influence and power of the Kingdom of God, the Church of God will rest secure and dwell in safety, without taking the trouble of governing and controlling the whole earth. The Kingdom of God will do this, it will control the kingdoms of the world ....

And you may pile on state after state, and kingdom after kingdom, and all hell on top, and we will roll on the Kingdom of our God, gather out the seed of Abraham, build the cities and temples of Zion, and establish the Kingdom of God to bear rule over all the earth, and let the oppressed of all nations go free. [^8]

In 1859, Charles W. Penrose wrote an article entitled "The Second Advent" wherein he discussed the signs of the times and the coming of the Lord. He spoke of those who would embrace the gospel and be led to forsake the erroneous traditions of their fathers and become part of the people of God. Then he went on to say:

Of necessity some form of government must be set up among them, as they will exist in a national as well as an ecclesiastical capacity. This government will be a theocracy, or, in other words, the kingdom of God. The laws, ordinances, regulations, etc., will be under the direction of God's priesthood, and the people will progress in arts, sciences, and everything that will produce happiness, promote union, and establish them in strength, righteousness, and everlasting peace. [^9]

The kingdom of God was a favorite theme of President John Taylor, and he spoke of it often. He, too, makes it clear that this kingdom will have this dual capacity.

But not only will the everlasting Gospel be again restored, and be preached in its fulness as formerly, and go as a messenger to all the world; not only will there be a spiritual kingdom and organization; but there will also be a literal kingdom, a nation, or nations, a Zion, and the people will gather to that. [^10]

In the same work which he entitled The Government of God, after saying that the kingdom would be literally established on the earth, President Taylor continued:

The Lord will be king over all the earth, and all mankind literally under his sovereignty, and every nation under the heavens will have to acknowledge his authority, and bow to his sceptre. Those who serve him in righteousness will have communications with God, and with Jesus; will have the ministering of angels, and will know the past, the present, and the future. [^11]

Obviously, as President Taylor indicates, such a kingdom will be a marvelous blessing to those so privileged to live under its jurisdiction.

Daniel 2:1-26.

Daniel 2:28-29.

Daniel 2:31-35.

Daniel 2:36-45.

Daniel 2:44..

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, p. 275, December 23, 1866. ( Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, "What Is the Status of the 'Fundamentalists'?", The Improvement Era, February, 1967, p. 4. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 2, p. 317, July 8, 1855. (Italics added)

Charles W. Penrose, "The Second Advent," Millennial Star, Vol. 21, p. 582, September 10, 1859.

John Taylor, The Government of God, (S. W. Richards: Liverpool, England, 1852), p. 97. (Italics added)

John Taylor, The Government of God, (S. W. Richards: Liverpool, England, 1852), pp. 87-88.

The Kingdom of God Will Govern All People

President Taylor spoke of those who served God in righteousness and the blessings that would come to them because of it. This implies that there are some who will not so serve him. Others of the prophets have made it clear that this is true in the spiritual sense, that is, not all people at that time will be members of the Church of Jesus Christ, but all people will be subject to this kingdom in the political sense.

Brigham Young, for instance, made it very explicit that it is an error to suppose that all people will belong to the Church.

If the Latter-day Saints think, when the kingdom of God is established on the earth, that all the inhabitants of the earth will join the church called Latter-day Saints, they are egregiously mistaken. I presume there will be as many sects and parties then as now. Still, when the kingdom of God triumphs, every knee shall bow and every tongue confess that Jesus is the Christ, to the glory of the Father. Even the Jews will do it then; but will the Jews and Gentiles be obliged to belong to the Church of Jesus Christ o£ Latter-day Saints? No; not by any means. [^12]

More recently President Joseph Fielding Smith explained the relationship between the two aspects of the kingdom and how the people of the world would be affected by them.

After Christ comes, all the peoples of the earth will be subject to him, but there will be multitudes of people on the face of the earth who will not be members of the Church; yet all will have to be obedient to the laws of the kingdom of God, for it will have dominion upon the whole face of the earth. These people will be subject to the political government, even though they are not members of the ecclesiastical kingdom which is the Church.

This government which embraces all the peoples of the earth, both in and out of the Church, is also sometimes spoken of as the kingdom of God, because the people are subject to the kingdom of God which Christ will set up; but they have their agency and thousands will not be members of the Church until they are converted; yet at the same time they will be subject to the theocratic rule. [^13]

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 11, p. 275, December 23, 1866. ( Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 1, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1954) p. 229. (Italics are partially in original and partially added)

What Is "The Kingdom of God"?

As President Joseph Fielding Smith pointed out, sometimes both the political kingdom and the ecclesiastical kingdom are called the "kingdom of God," and confusion may result. One of the great scholars of the Church, Brigham H. Roberts, who was also a member of the First Council of Seventy, explained in a footnote to the last volume of the History of the Church that sometimes the scriptures use the terms "Church of God," and "Kingdom of God," interchangeably. However, this does not mean that the Church and the political kingdom are the same, even though they may both sometimes be referred to as the "kingdom of God." Roberts cites George Q. Cannon and then summarizes.

The late President George Q. Cannon while editor of the Juvenile Instructor said: "We are asked, Is the Church of God, and the Kingdom of God the same organization? and we are informed that some of the brethren hold that they are separate.

"This is the correct view to take. The Kingdom of God is a separate organization from the Church of God. There may be men acting as officers in the Kingdom of God who will not be members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. On this point the Prophet gave particular instructions before his death, and gave an example, which he asked the younger elders who were present to always remember. It was to the effect that men might be chosen to officiate as members of the Kingdom of God who had no standing in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The Kingdom of God when established will not be for the protection of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints alone, but for the protection of all men, whatever their religious views or opinions may be. Under its rule, no one will be permitted to overstep the proper bounds or to interfere with the rights of others .... "

However, it is proper to note that sometimes these terms "the Church of Christ," "the Kingdom of God" and "the Kingdom of Heaven" are used interchangeably in the scriptures and hence the confusion in these terms sometimes obtains. [^14]

Part of the confusion arises because the political kingdom grows out of the Church, and is centered around Christ, but as one can see from this note the political kingdom involves more than just the Church. In the same discourse cited above, President Joseph Fielding Smith goes on to make this point evident.

When our Saviour comes to rule in the millennium, all governments will become subject unto his government, and this has been referred to as the Kingdom of God, which it is; but this is the political kingdom which will embrace all people whether they are in the Church or not. Of course, when every kindred, tongue and people become subject to the rule of Jesus Christ such will be in that political kingdom. We must keep these two thoughts in mind. But the kingdom of God is the Church of Jesus Christ, and it is the kingdom that shall endure forever ....

When Christ comes, the political kingdom will be given to the Church. [Here President Smith cites Daniel 7:27] The Lord is going to make an end to all nations; that means this nation as well as any other. The kingdom of God is the Church, but during the millennium, the multitudes upon the face of the earth who are not in the Church will have to be governed, and many of their officers, who will be elected, may not be members of the Church. [^15]

The reader need not be overly concerned with the shades of differences in the various meanings, but should be aware that the terms are used to signify different things at different times, and should be read in context of the quote. The important thing to remember is that the kingdom will be set up, both religiously and politically, and all things will center in Christ, the King.

Note by Brigham H. Roberts, DHC, Vol. 7, p. 382. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 1, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1954) pp. 229-230. (Italics in original)

A Theocracy

In ancient Greece, theos was the word for God, and the infinitive "to rule" was kratein. Thus, the Greeks formed a word-theokratia-which meant, literally, "God rules." That is the present meaning of the word "theocracy" which we borrowed from the Greeks. Once the kingdom of God-in the political sense-is established upon the earth it shall be a true theocracy, a government where God rules. Christ will be the head of the government and all laws will emanate from him. Such a government would incorporate many democratic principles, but the authority will lie in that holy and perfect being who earned, by right of his divine sacrifice and perfect life, the title of "King of kings, and Lord of lords."

President Young described this form of government in glowing terms.

When the kingdom of God is established upon the earth, people will find it to be very different from what they now imagine. Will it be in the least degree tyrannical and oppressive towards any bunyan being? No, it will not; for such is not the kingdom of God.

I believe in a true republican theocracy, and also in a true democratic theocracy, as the term democratic is now used; for they are to me, in their present use, convertible terms.

What do I understand by a theocratic government? One in which all laws are enacted and executed in righteousness, and whose officers possess that power which proceedeth from the Almighty. That is the kind of government I allude to when I speak of a theocratic government, or the kingdom of God upon the Earth. It is, in short, the eternal powers of the Gods. [^16]

When one contemplates the billions of peoples down through history who have wept and suffered and died under the hands of unrighteous and cruel leaders, it is not difficult to comprehend why the setting up of the government of God is one of the great signs of the times and a necessary step for the ushering in of the millennial era.

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6, pp. 346-347, July 31, 1859. (Italics added)

TO BLOSSOM AS THE ROSE

Another of the great signs that will herald the approaching end concerns the restoration of the Lamanite people. Undoubtedly, that work has now been undertaken by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and like the return of the Jews to Palestine, is in the process of being fulfilled.

This great work actually commenced before the Church was organized with the translation of the Book of Mormon. This ancient record was written especially so that it could be brought forth in the latter days to the Lamanite people. Shortly after the work of translation had begun, Joseph Smith foolishly yielded to the pressure of Martin Harris and allowed him to take the 116 pages of manuscript they had completed thus far to show his family and friends. The sacred pages were lost and the young prophet was severely chastised by the Lord. In that message of rebuke, now recorded in section 3 of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord stated that the Book of Mormon was to be a major tool in bringing about the restoration of the Lamanites-a people who had sunk to such a level that they were commonly called "the American Aborigines."

And for this very purpose are these plates preserved, which contain these records-that the promises of the Lord might be fulfilled, which he made to his people;

And that the Lamanites might come to a knowledge of their lathers, and that they might know the promises of the Lord, and that they may believe the gospel and rely upon the merits of Jesus Christ, and be glorified through faith in his name, and that through their repentance they might be saved. [^17]

The very title page of the Book of Mormon states the same purpose and in many other places throughout the book it is reiterated. [^18] As "Gentiles" who have been greatly blessed by the Book of Mormon, members of the Church should recognize that they have a great obligation to help bring about the great promises of the Lord to his people.

The Savior, himself, foretold that the Gentiles would be established in the land of America and be the means of bringing the word to the remnant of Israel left in the land. [^19] And several Book of Mormon prophets described this future work of the Gentiles as being like unto nursing fathers and mothers.

And after our seed is scattered the Lord God will proceed to do a marvelous work among the Gentiles, which shall be of great worth unto our seed; wherefore, it is likened unto being nourished by the Gentiles and being carried in their arms and upon their shoulders. [^20]

The latter-day prophets have abundantly testified of the coming reclamation of this downtrodden remnant of the House of Israel and of the role that the Church of Jesus Christ will play in that restoration. Through the Prophet Joseph Smith, the Lord emphatically declared: "But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose." [^21] Wilford Woodruff recalled the time when Joseph said:

It is only a handful of priesthood you see here tonight, but this Church will fill North and South America-it will fill the world.

It will fill the Rocky Mountains. There will be tens of thousands of Latter-day Saints who will be gathered in the Rocky Mountains, and there they will open the door for the establishing of the gospel among the Lamanites, who will receive the gospel and their endowments and blessings of God. [^22]

On another occasion, the Prophet Joseph said:

. . . One of the most important points in the faith of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, through the fulness of the everlasting Gospel, is the gathering of Israel (of whom the Lamanites constitute a part) that happy time when Jacob shall go up to the house of the Lord, to worship Him in spirit and in truth, to live in holiness .... [^23]

In 1845, the Twelve Apostles wrote a proclamation to all the leaders of the nations of the world. It is a very unusual document and foretells the great destiny of the Church in preparing the world for the coming of the Lord. The future destiny of the Lamanites was foretold by these men in some detail.

He will assemble the natives, the remnants of Joseph in America, and make of them a great, and strong and powerful nation; and he will civilize and enlighten them, and will establish a holy city, and temple, and seat of government among them, which shall be called Zion ....

The despised and degraded son of the forest, who has wandered in dejection and sorrow, and suffered reproach, shall then drop his disguise and stand forth in manly dignity, and exclaim to the Gentiles who have envied and sold him-"I am Joseph; does my father yet live?" or, in other words, I am a descendant of that Joseph who was sold into Egypt. You have hated me, and sold me, and thought I was dead; but lo! I live and am heir to the inheritance, titles, honours, priesthood, sceptre, crown, throne, and eternal life and dignity of my fathers, who live for evermore.

He shall then be ordained, washed, anointed with holy oil, and arrayed in fine linen, even in the glorious and beautiful garments and royal robes of the high priesthood, which is alter the order of the Son of God; and shall enter into the congregation of the Lord, even into the Holy of Holies, there to be crowned with authority and power which shall never end.

The spirit of the Lord shall then descend upon him like the dew upon the mountains of Hermon, and like refreshing showers of rain upon the flowers of Paradise.

His heart shall expand with knowledge, wide as eternity, and his mind shall comprehend the vast creations of his God, and his eternal purpose of redemption, glory, and exaltation, which was devised in heaven before the worlds were organized; but made manifest in these last days, for the fulness of the Gentiles, and for the exaltation of Israel.

He shall also behold his Redeemer, and be filled with his presence, while the cloud of his glory shall be seen in his temple. [^24]

Elder Spencer W. Kimball, an apostle who has labored much among the Lamanite people, spoke of the great improvements that would come upon this people once they began to accept the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Historians have written about your past; poets have sung of your possibilities; prophets have predicted your scattering and your gathering; and your Lord has permitted you to walk through the dark chasms of your ancestor's making, but has patiently waited for your awakening, and now smiles on your florescence, and points the way to your glorious future as sons and daughters of God. You will arise from your bed of affliction and from your condition of deprivation if you will accept fully the Lord, Jesus Christ, and his total program. You will rise to former heights in culture and education, influence and power. You will blossom as the rose upon the mountains. Your daughters will be nurses, teachers, and social workers, and, above all, beloved wives and full-of-faith mothers of a righteous posterity.

Your sons will compete in art, literature, and medicine, in law, architecture, etc. They will become professional, industrial and business leaders, and statesmen of the first order. Together you and we shall build in the spectacular city of New Jerusalem the temple to which our Redeemer will come. Your hands with ours, also those of Jacob, will place the foundation stones, raise the walls, and roof the magnificent structure. Perhaps your artistic hands will paint the temple and decorate it with a master's touch, and together we shall dedicate to our Creator Lord the most beautiful of all temples ever built in his name. [^25]

Doctrine and Covenants 3:19-20. (Italics added)

For examples see Enos 11-18; Jarom 2; 2 Nephi 3:19-20; Mormon 7:1-9; Moroni 1:4.

3 Nephi 21: 4-6.

1 Nephi 22:6, 8. (Italics added) See also 2 Nephi 10:9, 18.

Doctrine and Covenants 49: 24. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Conference Report, April, 1898, p. 57. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 2, p. 357, January 6, 1836. (Italics added)

"Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Ghrist of Latter-day Saints," October 22, 1845, pp. 8-10. Note: This Proclamation is included in Vol. 6 of the Millennial Star at the end of the volume, but the page numbers are separate. (Italics added)

Spencer W. Kimball, "To You, Our Kinsmen," The Improvement Era, December, 1959, pp. 938-939. (Italics added)

Nourished by the Gentiles

As was indicated above, the prophecies in the Book of Mormon speak of the important role the Gentiles will have in bringing about the purposes of the Lord in respect to the remnant of Jacob. Part of that could refer to the role the United States government has played in the care of the American Indian, but a greater part of the prophecies are to be fulfilled by the Church of Jesus Christ and its members. Elder Kimball spoke of when the members of the Church would work side-by-side with the Lamanites to accomplish great works. Earlier presidents of the Church explicitly described the responsibility that rests on the saints to bring about these future conditions. President John Taylor put it most unequivocally when he said: "The work of the Lord among the Lamanites must not be postponed, if we desire to retain the approval of God .... [^26] Wilford Woodruff stated that he was speaking by the power of the Holy Ghost when he said: "Those who will feed and clothe these Lamanites and see to their wants, as our President has told us, they shall be blessed and prosper, while those who despise them shall go down and shall not stand in the kingdom of God." [^27]

This nourishing role of the Church in the restoration of the Lamanites was described by Spencer W. Kimball in a picturesque analogy of a glider plane and a tow plane, the sailplane-the Lamanite-being given the initial lift by the tow plane of the Church and its people. [^28]

It is an exciting concept to see the future of this people who for so long have been despised and rejected; even more fascinating is to imagine one's own possible role in the fulfillment of such prophecies.

John Taylor, Millennial Star, Vol. 44, p. 733, October 18, 1882. (Italics added )

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 9, p. 222, July 15, 1855. (Italics added )

Spencer W. Kimball, "The Lamanites: Their Burden-Our Burden," an address given to the Brigham Young University, April 25, 1967, (BYU Press: Provo, Utah, 1967), pp. 15-16.

As a Young Lion

If, however, the Gentiles do not fulfill their responsibilities to these downtrodden people, another prophetic promise shall come into play, namely, the destruction of the Gentile nations. The Lord made it clear to the Nephites when he visited among them that if the Gentiles did not repent they would be destroyed by a remnant of the people to which he was speaking!

And I say unto you, that if the Gentiles do not repent, after the blessings which they shall receive, after they have scattered my people-

Then shall ye, who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, go forth among them; and ye shall be in the midst of them who shall be many; and ye shall be among them as a lion among the beasts of the forest, and as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goeth through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can deliver. [^29]

In the Doctrine and Covenants the great prophecy on war found in section 87 speaks again of this remnant and their future conflict with the Gentiles. "And it shall come to pass also that the remnants who are left of the land will marshal themselves, and shall become exceedingly angry, and shall vex the Gentiles with a sore vexation." [^30] This remnant may include other parts of the House of Israel besides the descendants of Lehi, but that they are included as part of that group seems clearly indicated. Joseph Smith, for example, in the dedicatory prayer on the Kirtland Temple, spoke of them in terms that clearly suggest the Indian peoples. [^31] And Daniel H. Wells, of the First Presidency under Brigham Young, was even more explicit.

There are some very important portions of this prophecy, [section 87] however, which yet remain to be fulfilled. To add to the sufferings and great calamities of the American nation, they will be greatly distressed by the aborigines, who will "marshall themselves, and become exceeding angry," and vex them "with a sore vexation." This event, we believe, may not take place in its fulness until the nation has been greatly weakened by the death of millions in their own revolutionary battles. To what extent the Indians will have power over the nation is not stated in this revelation; but from what Jesus informed their forefathers at the time of his personal ministry among them, as recorded in the Book of Mormon, they will have power in a great measure of the whole nation .... [He then quotes 3 Nephi 9:8-12 and also cites other Book of Mormon references] .... It appears more improbable, now, to the people of the United States, that the Indians should ever become so powerful an enemy and so dreadful a scourge to them, than it did before the commencement of the rebellion, [the Civil War] that they would ever engage in so dreadful a civil war as that now raging. Yet this will as surely be fulfilled as have the other portions of the prophecy. [^32]

Evidently, this is not the remnant of the Lamanites that are converted to the gospel and participate with the members of the Church in the building up of Zion; rather, they seem to be a majority of the Lamanites which have not yet come into the gospel fold. Orson Pratt explained it in this manner:

Do not misunderstand me, do not think that all the Lamanite tribes are going to be converted and receive this great degree of education and civilization before we can return to Jackson County. Do not think this for a moment, it will only be a remnant; for when we have laid the foundation of that city and have built a portion of it, and have built a Temple therein, there is another work which we have got to do in connection with these remnants of Jacob whom we shall assist in building the city. What is it? We have got to be sent forth as missionaries to all parts of this American continent. Not to the Gentiles, for their times will be fulfilled; but we must go to all those tribes that roam through the cold regions of the north-British America, to all the tribes that dwell in the Territories of the United States, also to all those who are scattered through Mexico, and Central and South America, and the object of our going will be to declare the principles of the Gospel unto them, and bring them to a knowledge of the truth. "Then shall they assist my people who are scattered on all the face of the land, that they may be gathered in to the New Jerusalem." [^33]

Earlier, Elder Pratt stated:

It is true, so says the Book of Mormon, that inasmuch as the Gentiles receive the Gospel, they shall assist my people the remnant of Jacob, saith the Lord, to build the New Jerusalem. And when they have got it built, then we are told that they shall assist my people who are of Jacob to be gathered unto the New Jerusalem.

Only a few thousand or hundreds of thousands, then, are to be engaged in this work, and then, after it is done, we are to assist the Lamanites to gather in; and then shall the powers of heaven be in your midst; and then is the coming of Christ. [^34]

It is a distinct possibility, then, that the descendants of Lehi shall play a major role in the wars and destruction that will rage in the United States and other countries and with such ferocity that they are vividly described as being like a lion rampaging through a flock of sheep. Such is the promise if the Gentiles do not repent.

3 Nephi 20:15-16. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 87: 5.

Doctrine and Covenants 109: 65.

Daniel H. Wells, Millennial Star, Vol. 27, pp. 186-187, March 25, 1865. ( Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 17, p. 301, February 7, 1875. ( Italics added )

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 3, p. 18, May 20, 1855. (Italics added)

Building the City and the Temple with the Lamanites

The statement of the Savior concerning the future of the unrepentant Gentiles is grim, but likewise is the promise a glorious one to those Gentiles who do repent.

But if they will repent and hearken unto my words, and harden not their hearts, I will establish my church among them, and they shall come in unto the covenant and be numbered among this remnant of Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance;

And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also as many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city, which Shall be called the New Jerusalem. [^35]

Several of the prophets quoted above have referred to the partnership of the Lamanites and the Church in building the city of Zion and the temple there. Lorenzo Snow also referred to it in a general conference address shortly before his death. He had been speaking about some of the apostate groups then living in Jackson County, Missouri, and then said:

. . . The time is arriving when that Temple should be built, but it will not be built by that class of people [the Josephites and Hedrickites]. It will be built by the Latter-day Saints in connection with the Lamanites. [^36]

What grand and glorious fulfillment of the promises of the Lord, that this people so long despised of men should have the privilege of engaging in this great work of the last days!

As one reads through the prophecies concerning the "remnant of Jacob" and the future destiny of the Lamanites, there is one point that may be misinterpreted. Many people have assumed that the "remnant of Jacob" spoken of by the Lord during his visit to the Nephites must refer exclusively to the descendants of Lehi which would, of course, be the Lamanites. But as was indicated above, even though the evidence is clear that the Lamanites form a part of this group known as the "remnant of Jacob," that does not imply that they alone constitute the remnant. When the prophets speak of the Church assisting the Lamanites in the building of Zion, some picture, because of this misconception, the members of the Church taking a secondary role once "Israel gets back in the driver's seat."

President Joseph Fielding Smith has discussed the scriptures from which this concept comes. He clearly shows that the intent of these passages is broader than many think. He explains that the whole house of Israel who have been scattered qualify as being a part of the "remnant of Jacob" and will all be gathered in and assist in the building of Zion and the other great works of the last great day of preparation. [^37]The Lamanites constitute a definite part of this promise, but so do members of the Church, according to President Smith.

I take it we, the members of the Church, most of us of the tribe of Ephraim, are of the remnant of Jacob. We know it to be the fact that the Lord called upon the descendants of Ephraim to commence his work in the earth in these last days. We know further that he has said that he set Ephraim, according to the promises of his birthright, at the head. Ephraim receives the "richer blessings," these blessings being those of presidency or direction. The keys are with Ephraim. It is Ephraim who is to be endowed with power to bless and give to the other tribes, including the Lamanites, their blessings. All the other tribes of Jacob, including the Lamanites, are to be crowned with glory in Zion by the hands of Ephraim.

Now do the scriptures teach that Ephraim, after doing all of this is to abdicate, or relinquish his place, and give it to the Lamanites and then receive orders from this branch of the "remnant of Jacob" in the building of the New Jerusalem? This certainly is inconsistent with the whole plan and with all that the Lord has revealed in the Doctrine and Covenants in relation to the establishment of Zion and the building of the New Jerusalem ....

That the remnants of Joseph, found among the descendants of Lehi, will have part in this great work is certainly consistent, and the great work of this restoration, the building of the temple and the City of Zion, or New Jerusalem, will fall to the lot of the descendants of Joseph, but it is Ephraim who will stand at the head and direct the work. [^38]

And what a day of rejoicing it shall be when the descendants of Ephraim join with the descendants of Manasseh and the other tribes to fulfill the great covenants made with their fathers centuries before!

Nephi 21:22-23. (Italics added)

Lorenzo Snow, Conference Report, October, 1900, p. 63. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 2, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1955), pp. 247-250.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 2, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1955), pp. 250-251. (Italics added)

FROM OUT OF THE NORTH

This discussion of the "remnants of Jacob" naturally leads one to inquire of the prophesied destiny of the other tribes of Israel and of the part they shall play in the final scenes of the earth's history. Probably best known of the remaining tribes is the tribe of Judah, or, as they are commonly known in today's world, the Jews. The prophecies concerning Judah are rich and plentiful and will be discussed in the following chapter. But equally fascinating, though more mysterious, is the other great body of Israelites commonly known today as the "Ten Lost Tribes."

They are so named for they were lost to history more than seven centuries before the birth of Christ and have been an enigma ever since. During the reign of King Solomon, the people of Israel grew very weary of the heavy burden of taxation the king had levied on them to finance his fabulously rich empire. At his death the people pleaded with his son, Rehoboam, to lessen the burden or lose their allegiance. Rehoboam arrogantly refused, and the northern tribes split off and formed their own kingdom called Israel, leaving the followers of Rehoboam to form their own kingdom. It was called Judah, for it consisted primarily of the tribe of Judah. The Northern Kingdom of Israel rapidly became a wicked and degenerate people until finally in 721 B.C. they were besieged and conquered by the Assyrians under Shalmaneser and were led away captive to Assyria. [^39] How long the Israelites remained in Assyria is not known. It is likely that some became assimilated into the Assyrian culture; but evidently, some time after the captivity of their kingdom, a group of Israelites left Assyria, traveling northward and were lost to history. [^40] Thus, today they are called the "lost ten tribes."

Down through the centuries there have been innumerable speculations as to where the lost ten tribes are. These speculations have ranged all the way from a planet somewhere in outer space to exotic hidden places under the ice cap of the Arctic regions. Some have speculated that they went into present-day Europe, and became the various present nations of that continent. Some Church members seek to support this latter idea with the fact that many patriarchal blessings state that an individual is of the tribe of Ephraim (one of those lost), and also because of the great gathering of converts that has taken place since the early history of the Church out of the nations of Europe. (Since Europe is north of Palestine and Assyria in latitude, they feel this geographical location qualifies in the sense of being gathered from the lands of the north. )

2 Kings 17:18, 20-23.

The Old Testament makes mention of the scattering of Israel quite frequently and several prophets refer to their being brought back from the "north countries." (See for example Jeremiah 23:8; 31:8; Zechariah 2:6.) But the course which they took is not given anywhere in the canonical books of the Bible. However, in the Apocrypha, an account of their movement is given in the second Look of Esdras. It should be remembered that Joseph Smith was told not to revise the Apocrypha while he was working on the rest of the Bible. The Lord explained that there were "many things contained therein that are true" but there were also "many things contained therein that are not true." (Doctrine and Covenants 91:1, 2) Which of these two headings this particular account in Esdras would fall under is, of course, not known, so it must be read with that in mind. The account is of interest, nevertheless. It is given in 2 Esdras 13:39-50, and reads:

"And whereas thou sawest that he gathered another peaceable multitude unto him; those are the Ten Tribes which were carried away prisoners out of their own land in the time of Osea the king, whom Salmanasar, the King of Assyria, led away captive, and he carried them over the waters, and so they came into another land. But they took this counsel among themselves, that they would leave the multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a further country, where never mankind dwelt, that they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own land. And they entered Euphrates by the narrow passages of the river, for the Most High then showed signs for them, and held still the floods till they were passed over. For through that country there was a great way to go, viz., of a year and a half; and the same region is called Arsareth. Then dwelt they there until the latter time; and now when they. shall begin to come, the Highest shall stay the springs of the streams again, that they may go through; therefore sawest thou the multitude with peace. But those that he left behind of thy people are they that are found within my borders. Now when he destroyeth the multitude of the nations that are gathered together, he shall defend his people that remain. And then shall he show them great wonders."

They Shall Come as a Body

All such speculation as to the whereabouts of this group of Israelites is strictly that--only speculation. As yet, their specific location has not been revealed to the Church. But the idea that the gathering has already been fulfilled in the great missionary efforts of the Church is in error, for the prophets have definitely stated that they shall come as a body; their coming shall be so miraculous that it could not be mistaken for a gradual response to missionary work.

On the 3rd day of November, 1831, Joseph Smith received a revelation which the Lord designated should be the Appendix to the compilation of revelations later known as the Doctrine and Covenants. In that revelation, the Lord spoke of the return of the ten tribes from out of the north.

And they who are in the north countries shall come in remembrance before the Lord; and their prophets shall hear his voice, and shall no longer stay themselves; and they shall smite the rocks, and the ice shall flow down at their presence.

And an highway shall be cast up in the midst of the great deep.

And their enemies shall become a prey unto them.

And in the barren deserts there shall come forth pools of living water; and the parched ground shall no longer be a thirsty land.

And they shall bring forth their rich treasures unto the children of Ephraim, my servants.

And the boundaries of the everlasting hills shall tremble at their presence.

And there shall they fall down and be crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim.

And they shall be filled with songs of everlasting joy. [^41]

As one contemplates the full import of those prophetic statements, it is not hard to understand why Jeremiah says:

Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that they shall no more say, The Lord liveth, which brought up the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt;

But, The Lord liveth, which brought up and which led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all countries whither I had driven them; and they shall dwell in their own land. [^42]

Several of the latter-day prophets have made it clear that the return of the ten tribes is not to be some figurative event but an actual return of the group so long lost. President Charles W. Penrose explained why many members of the Church are of the lineage of Ephraim or other tribes and shows how this cannot be construed to mean that the ten tribes have already returned.

There is no doubt in the minds of those who have investigated this subject, that when traveling northward, as described by Esdras, the tribes of Israel mingled on the way with Gentile nations, and that numbers of their posterity are to be found in the various provinces of Germany, in Switzerland, in Holland, in Sweden, Denmark, Norway, Finland, Iceland, and the numerous islands in the far north.

Much of the blood of Israel is, doubtless, to be found in the British Isles. It was obtained, in all probability, by the admixture of Saxon, Danish, Norwegian and Swedish blood with that of the ancient Britons and the Picts and Scots, who inhabited those islands and were subject to the incursions and conquests of the peoples mentioned, among whose ancestors the Israelites mingled in their journey of a year and a half towards the extreme north. Thus the nations here mentioned became impregnated with the seed of Israel, and their descendants who came to this country, bringing the principles of religious freedom and planting the standard of liberty, were also of the lineage to whom many blessings were promised, and from among all these, many who are of Israel embrace the gospel of the latter-day dispensation. The gathering of some of their descendants to Zion is in part fulfillment of the prophecies in regard to the gathering, but there are revelations which cannot be said to be literally fulfilled in this movement. Some of these are here cited: [Here he quotes Doctrine and Covenants 133: 26-34.]

This indicates the coming of a body of these Israelites, with prophets at their head, from regions of ice and rocks, under Divine direction, to receive blessings on this land where are the "everlasting hills," and the gathering place for Israel and the keys of power and authority in the hands of the "children of Ephraim." It is evident, also, that they have important records, containing accounts of the dealings of the Lord with them, and his word concerning them, which they are to bring with them, that they may be joined with the record of the Jews-the Bible-and the record of the Nephites-the Book of Mormon (see 1 Nephi 15: 12, 13.) [^43]

In both of the general conferences in 1916, Elder James E. Talmage warned against trying to water down the prophecies concerning the ten tribes by interpreting them figuratively. In April conference he said:

There is a tendency among men to explain away what they don't wish to understand in literal simplicity, and we, as Latter-day Saints are not entirely free from the taint of that tendency .... Some people say that prediction is to be explained in this way: A gathering is in progress, and has been in progress from the early days of this Church; and thus the "Lost Tribes" are now being gathered; but that we are not to look for the return of any body of people now unknown as to their whereabouts. True, the gathering is in progress, this is a gathering dispensation; but the prophecy stands that the tribes shall be brought forth from their hiding place bringing their scriptures with them, which scriptures shall become one with the scriptures of the Jews, the holy Bible, and with the scriptures of the Nephites, the Book of Mormon, and with the scriptures of the Latter-day Saints as embodied in the volumes of modern revelation. [^44]

In the October conference Elder Talmage added a startling and marvelous promise:

The tribes shall come; they are not lost unto the Lord; they shall be brought forth as hath been predicted; and I say unto you, there are those now living-aye, some here present-who shall live to read the records of the Lost Tribes of Israel, which shall be made one with the record of the Jews, or the Holy Bible, and the record of the Nephites, or the Book of Mormon, even as the Lord hath predicted. [^45]

President Joseph Fielding Smith also explained that the gathering of Israel from among the Gentiles was not the same as the gathering of the lost tribes.

We discover from the declaration by the Prophet to the people of the world, that the cleansing of the earth of much of its iniquity, by blood, fire, earthquake, pestilence and the display of angry elements, was to assist in preparing the way for the return of the lost tribes of Israel. We should not be confused. The call for the gathering of scattered Israel had been proclaimed three years earlier and the missionaries had been hard at work gathering into the fold those of Israel who had scattered themselves among the Gentiles. The great day of the coming of the lost tribes would be alter the preparatory work had been accomplished in the destruction of the wickedness in very great measure, and the way prepared in part for the coming of the Lord also and the building of his Holy City and Temple. [^46]

Elder Orson Pratt described their coming as being after the building of the New Jerusalem, also, and explained that it would be such a marvelous event that even the mountains would tremble at their coming.

After Zion is built in Jackson County, and after the Temple is built upon that spot of ground where the corner stone was laid in 1831; after the glory of God in the form of a cloud by day shall rest upon that Temple, and by night the shining of a flaming fire that will fill the whole heavens round about; after every, dwelling place upon Mount Zion shall be clothed upon as with a pillar of fire by night, and a cloud by day, about that period of time, the ten tribes will be heard of, away in the north, a great company, as Jeremiah says, coming down from the northern regions, coming to sing in the height of the latter-day Zion. Their souls will be as a watered garden, and they will not sorrow any more at all, as they have been doing during the twenty-five hundred long years they have dwelt in the Arctic regions. They will come, and the Lord will be before their camp, he will utter his voice before that great army, and he will lead them forth as he led Israel in ancient days. This long chain of Rocky Mountains, that extends from the cold regions of the north away into South America, will feel the power of God, and will tremble before the hosts of Israel as they come to sing on the heights of Zion. In that day the trees of the field will clap like hands, says the Prophet, and in that day the Lord will open waters in the wilderness, and streams in the desert, to give drink to his chosen, his people Israel. And when they come to the height of Zion they shall be crowned with glory under the hands of the servants of God living in those days, the children of Ephraim, crowned with certain blessings that pertain to the Priesthood, that they could not receive in their own lands. [^47]

Doctrine and Covenants 133:26-33.

Jeremiah 23:7-8. (Italics added)

Charles W. Penrose, "Something About the 'Lost Tribes'," The Improvement Era, October, 1910, pp. 1087-1088. (Italics added)

James E. Talmage, Conference Report, April, 1916, p. 130. (Italics added)

James E. Talmage, Conference Report, October, 1916, p. 76. (Italics added)

oseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, Melchizedek Priesthood Course of Study, Published by the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1948, Vol. 2, p. 141. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 68, July 25, 1875. (Italics added)

Blessings and Counter-Blessings

As can be seen from the statements of the Lord and the various prophets, this will be one of the great events of the entire world's history and one that should be inspiring indeed to those privileged to witness it. The promises speak of these lost peoples coming to be "crowned with glory, even in Zion, by the hands of the servants of the Lord, even the children of Ephraim." [^48] As was discussed in the previous section, the children of Ephraim include the faithful members of the Church. This crowning of the children of Israel by the children of Ephraim will consist in part of helping them to come to a fulness of the gospel and obtain the blessings of the temple.

President Wilford Woodruff explained in detail what this "crowning" would consist of.

Again, here are the ten tribes of Israel, we know nothing about them only what the Lord has said by His Prophets. There are Prophets among them, and by and by they will come along, and they will smite the rocks, and the mountains of ice will flow down at their presence, and a highway will be cast up before them, and they will come to Zion, receive their endowments, and be crowned under the hands of the children of Ephraim, and there are persons before me in this assembly today, who will assist to give them their endowments. [^49]

The blessings will not flow in one direction only, however. The children of Ephraim shall receive many blessings from these children of God so long lost to us. The Doctrine and Covenants states that they will bring their rich treasures to the members of the Church awaiting them in Zion. [^50] Part of these riches will undoubtedly consist of a new book of scrip-ture-sacred records of God's dealings with this group of people equal to our own present standard works. Elder Talmage and others already cited have referred to these records. What a record it must be! It will probably contain the account of their original journey to the location of their long concealment and of the prophets that have dealt with them down through the centuries. It, too, will act as another witness for Christ, just as our own Book of Mormon, for Christ told the Nephites that he would visit the lost tribes just as he had them. [^51]

This fulfillment of the great prophecies concerning the lost ten tribes of Israel will provide one of the most sure and most impressive signs that the end of the world in its telestial state is about to draw to a close.

Doctrine and Covenants 133:32.

Wilford Woodruff, Journal o! Discourses, Vol. 4, pp. 231-232, February 22, 1857. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 133:30.

3 Nephi 15:19-20; 16:1-3; 17:4.

ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN

When Daniel interpreted the dream of Nebuchadnezzar, it was only the beginning of the prophetic vision he had of the last days. The last chapters of his writings are filled with the records of his visions and revelations. Many of these are couched in symbolic language and are difficult to interpret. In the seventh chapter, for example, Daniel speaks of one known as the "Ancient of Days," speaking at some length concerning him.

I beheld till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire.

A fiery stream issued and carne forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousands stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened ....

I saw in the night visions, and behold, one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.

And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. [^52]

To many people of the world these verses are no more clear in their meaning than are the other symbolical verses recorded by Daniel. But fortunately, the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith the meaning of these verses and thus provided information about another great sign of the approaching return of Jesus Christ. Joseph Smith spoke of this "Ancient of Days" in his History of the Church.

Daniel in his seventh chapter speaks of the Ancient of Days: he means the oldest man, our Father Adam, Michael, he will call his children together and hold a council with them to prepare them for the coming of the Son of Man. He (Adam) is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men, and all that have had the keys must stand before him in this grand council. This may take place before some of us leave this stage of action. The Son of Man stands before him, and there is given him glory and dominion. Adam delivers up his stewardship to Christ. that which was delivered to him as holding the keys of the universe, but retains his standing as head of the human family. [^53]

Orson Pratt commented further on the Prophet's statement:

We are told by this Prophet that the Ancient of days is the most ancient personage that ever had an existence in days here on the earth. And who was he? Why, of course, old father Adam, he was the most ancient man that lived in days that we have any knowledge of. He comes, then, as a great judge, to assemble this innumerable host of which Daniel speaks. He comes in flaming fire. The glory and blessing and greatness of this personage it would be impossible even for a man as great as Daniel to fully describe. He comes as a man inspired from the eternal throne of Jehovah himself. He comes to set in order the councils of the Priesthood pertaining to all dispensations, to arrange the Priesthood and the councils of the Saints of all former dispensations in one grand family and household.

What is all this for? Why all this arrangement? Why all this organization? Why all this judgment and the opening of the books? It is to prepare the way for another august personage whom Daniel saw coming with the clouds of heaven, namely the Son of Man, and these clouds of heaven brought the Son of Man near before the Ancient of days. And when the Son of Man came to the Ancient of days, behold a kingdom was given to the Son of Man, and greatness and glory, that all people, nations and languages should serve him, and his kingdom should be an everlasting kingdom, a kingdom that should never be done away. [^54]

Thus, what Daniel foresaw was a great meeting of all the righteous holders of priesthood keys in the various dispensations. At this great meeting they each in turn stand before Adam to report their labors to him. Not only were the purposes and participators in this great event shown to Joseph Smith, but also he was given the location of that great council. In the spring of 1838, Joseph walked with some of the brethren to a place in Northern Missouri with the intent of selecting a site for a city. He records in his journal:

In the afternoon I went up the river about half a mile to Wight's Ferry, accompanied by President Rigdon, and my clerk, George W. Robinson, for the purpose of selecting and laying claim to a city plat near said ferry in Daviess County, township 60, ranges 27 and 28, and sections 25, 36, 31, and 30, which the brethren called "Spring Hill," but by the mouth of the Lord it was named Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said He, it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet. [^55]

Not only is this the place for a future visit of Adam, but the Prophet also gave the startling information that it was in this same general area that Adam lived during his mortal life. In the Valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, three years previous to his death, Adam called his righteous posterity together and blessed them with his last blessing. The Lord appeared to the gathering and Adam was filled with the Holy Ghost and predicted the future of his posterity right down to the last generation. [^56]

Daniel 7:9-10, 13-14.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, pp. 386-387, July 2, 1839. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 17, pp. 185-186, October I1, 1874. ( Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 3, p 35, May 19, 1838. (See also D&C 116)

Doctrine and Covenants 107:53-57.

The Great Priesthood Council

The meeting that Adam had with his righteous posterity in the Valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman must surely have been a marvelous one to all those in attendance. But just as surely, this great future meeting at the same location will be one of the greatest events to transpire in the preparation of the world for the coming of the Lord. President Joseph Fielding Smith vividly described what would take place at this council:

Not many years hence there shall be another gathering of high priests and righteous souls in this same valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. At this gathering Adam, the Ancient of Days, will again be present. At this time the vision which Daniel saw will be enacted. The Ancient of Days will sit. There will stand before him those who have held the keys of all dispensations, who shall render up their stewardships to the first Patriarch of the race, who holds the keys of salvation. This shall be a day of judgment and preparation ....

It was in the night vision that all this was shown to Daniel, and he saw the Son of Man come to the grand council, as he did to the first grand council in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman, and there he received the keys from Adam ....

This council in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman is to be of the greatest importance to this world. At that time there will be a transfer of authority from the usurper and impostor, Lucifer, to the rightful King, Jesus Christ. Judgment will be set and all who have held keys will make their reports and deliver their stewardships, as they shall be required. Adam will direct this judgment, and then he will make his report, as the one holding the keys for this earth, to his Superior Officer, Jesus Christ. Our Lord will then assume the reins of government; directions will be given to the Priesthood there assembled. This grand council of priesthood will be composed, not only of those who are faithful who now dwell on this eartit, but also of the prophets and apostles of old, who have had directing authority. Others may also be there, but if so they will be there by appointment, for this is to be an official council called to attend to the most momentous matters concerning the destiny of this earth. [^57]

Orson Pratt also spoke of this great meeting in the most glowing terms:

... All the various quorums and councils of the Priesthood in every dispensation that has transpired since the days of Adam until the present time will find their places, according to the callings, gifts, blessings, ordinations and keys of Priesthood which the Lord Almighty has conferred upon them in their several generations. This, then, will be one of the grandest meetings that has ever transpired upon the face of our globe. What manner of person ought you and I, my brethren and sisters, and all the people of God in the latter days to be, that we may be counted worthy to participate in the august assemblies that are to come from the eternal worlds, whose bodies have burst the tomb and come forth immortalized and eternal in their nature? [^58]

The mind is nearly incapable of comprehending such a meeting and the feelings of those privileged to be in attendance. It calls to mind again why the prophets from earliest times have looked down to the present dispensation and envied the saints who were blessed to live in it.

This great meeting of the priesthood there in Northern Missouri is a clear and definite sign that the end is approaching although the majority of the world shall not know when it is fulfilled. President Joseph Fielding Smith indicated above that only those appointed to be there would be privileged to attend. In the same discourse he indicates that the meeting will generally be a secret and will fulfill the Lord's promise that he would come as a thief in the night.

When this gathering is held, the world will not know of it; the members of the Church at large will not know of it, yet it shall be preparatory to the coming in the clouds of glory of our Savior Jesus Christ as the Prophet Joseph Smith has said. The world cannot know of it. The Saints cannot know of it-except those who officially shall be called into this council-for it shall precede the coming of the Jesus Christ as a thief in the night, unbeknown to all the world. [^59]

Elder Alvin R. Dyer said essentially the same thing, and further suggested that some presently living would participate in that meeting. [^60] That naturally brings up the question: "If it is a secret, how can we be sure that it has not already taken place?" Three things suggest an answer. First, the General Authorities who speak of it, still speak of it as being in the future. Second, it is a council of vast proportions that is to bc held in the state of Missouri. That would seem to indicate that it might take place after the Church returns to claim the land of Zion. But the third and most definite of all was given by Daniel himself. He said that the Ancient of Days would sit after earthly thrones "were cast down." He went on to say that he beheld the "horn" making war against the saints, "until the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom." [^61] Joseph Fielding Smith explained it in this way: "Until this grand council is held, Satan shall hold rule in the nations of the earth; but at that time thrones are to be cast down and man's rule shall come to an end." [^62] Obviously, Satan still rules in the nations of the world in many respects and so the Grand Council of Adam-ondi-Ahman seems to be one of the last events and one of the great signs of the times which is yet to be fulfilled.

Joseph Fielding Smith, The Way to Perfection, (Genealogical Society: Salt Lake City, 1931), pp. 289-291. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 17, pp. 187-188, October 11, 1874. ( Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, Melchizedek Priesthood Course of Study, Published by the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1948, Vol. 2, p. ,291. (Italics added)

Alvin R. Dyer, The Millennium,' The Instructor, June, 1970, pp. 196-197.

Daniel 7:21-22. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Church History and Modern Revelation, Melchizedek Priesthood Course of Study, Published by the Council of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah, 1948, Vol. 2, p. 290.

THE LAST CALL

In his book entitled The Government of God, John Taylor wrote of the coming judgments on the earth and the mistaken idea that they will come instantaneously upon the world. Said he:

Some people talk about the world being burned up, about plagues, pestilence, famine, sword, and ruin, and all these things being instantaneous. Now it would not be just for the Lord to punish the inhabitants of the earth without warning. For if the world are ignorant of God, they cannot altogether be blamed for it; if they are made the dupes of false systems, and false principles, they cannot help it .... Before the Lord destroyed the inhabitants of the old world, he sent Enoch and Noah to warn them. Before the Lord destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, he sent Lot into their midst. Before the Children of Israel were carried captive to Babylon, they were warned of it by the Prophets; and before Jerusalem was destroyed, the inhabitants had the testimony of our Lord, and his Disciples. And so will it be in the last days; and as it is the world that is concerned, the world will have to be warned. [^63]

To raise the warning voice to the world has been a major mission of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints since its earliest beginnings. In the preface to the Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord explicitly stated that this was his purpose in calling Joseph Smith to be a prophet and his reason for restoring the gospel. [^64] Missionary work has been a divine injunction upon the Church since that time and thousands of faithful members of the Church through the years have heeded, and are still heeding, that call. Literally millions of people have been gathered into the Church through this great effort.

In chapter 3, prophecies were cited of the time when the missionaries of the Church would be called home because of the spreading war and chaos in the United States and other countries. The Lord indicated this same thing when he spoke of "preaching his own sermons." [^65] So it appears as though there may be a time when normal missionary work will not take place in the world. But the Lord is long-suffering and ever merciful to his children and seeks to give them every chance to repent and return to him.

Thus it is that one of the final things to be done prior to the return of the Savior and the beginning of the Millennium will be a last great missionary effort designed to gather out the righteous from all nations before the earth is cleansed by fire. This last great call will come from a force of missionaries the likes of which the world has never before known. In all of its history, the Church has never had more than about 15,000 missionaries in the field at one time; most of the time much less than that amount were missionaries. In the last call, the force shall be nearly ten times that number-a vast army of missionaries numbering 144,000 men.

John the Revelator was shown this great body of missionaries in his visions of the latter days and described them as servants whom were sealed by the angels: "And I heard the number of them which were sealed: and there were sealed an hundred and forty and four thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israel." He then goes on to explain that 12,000 were chosen from each of the twelve tribes of Israel. [^66] The Lord spoke of these special servants in the Appendix to the Doctrine and Covenants also: "... For the hour of his coming is nigh-When the Lamb shall stand upon Mount Zion, and with him a hundred and forty-four thousand, having his Father's name written on their foreheads." [^67]

While working on the revision of the King James Version in the spring of 1832, Joseph Smith asked several questions concerning the revelations of John. One of those questions pertained to the verses cited above.

Q. What are we to understand by sealing the one hundred and forty-four thousand, out of all the tribes of Israel-twelve thousand out of every tribe?

A. We are to understand that those who are sealed are high priests, ordained unto the holy order of God, to administer the everlasting gospel; for they are they who are ordained out of every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, by the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth, to bring as many as will come to the Church of the Firstborn. [^68]

A statement as clearly put as that leaves little room for debate as to the mission and purpose of these special servants.

President Joseph Fielding Smith spoke of these high priests and the privilege it would be to be included in that group.

This certainly is a great honor to be one of the 144 thousand who are specially called by the power of "the angels to whom is given power over the nations of the earth" to bring souls unto Christ. John the Apostle, had the great desire to bring souls to Christ. The Three Nephite Disciples likewise sought this great honor and it was granted to them. It is one of the noblest desires that a man can have. It will be a wonderful blessing to those who are called in this great group. [^69]

It is difficult to say when the actual calling of these men will take place. Some prophets have spoken as though it would be after the return of the ten tribes. But whether it would happen before, after, or during the Council of Adam-ondi-Ahman is not clear. Joseph Smith once indicated to some holders of the priesthood that the selection for that group of high priest-missionaries had already commenced even then.

I attended prayer-meeting with the quorum in the assembly room, and made some remarks respecting the hundred and forty-four thousand mentioned by John the Revelator, showing that the selection of persons to form that number had already commenced. [^70]

The question of "when" is an interesting one but not a critical one. What is comforting is the knowledge that one last great and final call shall go out before the cleansing fire sweeps the world. Then, indeed, will John's vision of the angel flying through the midst of heaven be fulfilled. [^71]

Doctrine and Covenants 88: 88-90.

John Taylor, The Government of God., (S. W. Richards: Liverpool, England, 1852), p. 95. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 88: 88-90.

Revelation 7: 3-8.

Doctrine and Covenants 133: 17-18.

Doctrine and Covenants 77:11. (Italics added)

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 6, p. 196, February 4, 1844. (Italics added)

Revelation 14: 6.

The Hour Approaches

The last days prior to Christ's great advent shall be momentous ones for those worthy to stand. It is marvelous to consider how much information concerning the last days the Lord has given his children. There is no reason why any person should be caught unaware as the end of the world approaches. Well did the Lord speak when he promised:

And unto you it shall be given to know the signs of tire times., and the signs of the corning of the Son of Man. [^72]

The establishment of the kingdom of God, the blossoming of the Lamanite people, the return of the ten tribes, the great priesthood meeting at Adam-ondi-Ahman and the last call to the nations of the earth are five of those signs and will signal the approaching hour of the coming of the Lord.

Doctrine and Covenants 68:11. (Italics added)
