Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Ten

The House of Judah

On the one hundred and thirtieth anniversary of the organization of the Church, Elder George Q. Morris, of the Council of Twelve, said:

. . . I thought I would like to mention three signs that the Lord gave that we might observe and know when we saw them that he had set his hand again to accomplish final preparatory work for the coming of the millennium.

The first of these was to be the restoration of the gospel of Jesus Christ ....

Another sign of great importance was the rise of an evil power ....

A third item is God's promise that he would gather Jews to Jerusalem, and I think perhaps we may well now not continue saying the Jews are going to gather in Jerusalem. 1 think now we may well say they have gathered. The ultimate returns will come later as they develop this land and are joined by others.1

When the independent state of Israel was created in 1948, the words of prophets long dead were fulfilled and a new era in the long and troubled history of the House of Israel was born. With it one of the great signs of the Lord's coming, predicted by prophets many centuries before, entered the final stages of its fulfillment.

Israel the Unfaithful

Several thousand years before the birth of the Savior, Abraham was promised that the hand of Jehovah would be over him and his posterity. Through the chosen, or covenant, people which came from this great patriarch, were all the nations of the earth to be blessed. [^1] As part of that covenant, Abraham was told that he and his posterity would be given a promised land as their "everlasting possession" and, said Jehovah, "I will be their God." [^2]

Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were men of high spiritual stature, and well earned their right to the covenant. Unfortunately, as time passed, much of their posterity were not as anxious to have Jehovah as their God, and, like an unfaithful spouse, turned to the gods of the heathen. Through succeeding generations, notwithstanding the efforts of mighty prophets like Moses, Samuel, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Daniel and others, the House of Israel turned to idolatry and wickedness. Whether it was unnamed golden calves or deities with strange names like Baal, Ashtoreth, Molech, or Chemosh didn't matter a great deal; the Israelites generally preferred them to the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And thus the stage for the future tragedy of this nation was set.

The prophets of Israel began early in their history to predict the great scattering of this people. Before they even crossed the River Jordan to possess the promised land, Moses predicted the tragic consequences of Israel's idolatry.

I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess it; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be destroyed.

And the Lord shall scatter you among the nations, and ye shall be left few in number among the heathen, whither the Lord shall lead you. [^3]

Periodically during the reign of the judges and the long era of the kings, the covenant people would turn back to their God, but the repentance was never permanent enough to last for more than one or two generations.

So Jeremiah warned:

I will scatter them also among the heathen, whom neither they nor their lathers have known: and I will send a sword after them, till I have consumed them. [^4]

And Ezekiel promised:

And I will scatter toward every wind all that are about him, to help him, and all his bands; and I will draw out the sword after them.

And they shall know that I am the Lord, when I shall scatter them among the nations, and disperse them in the countries. [^5]

With the added perspective of history, we today can see the literal fulfillment of these prophetic utterances. After Solomon's death, Israel was split into two kingdoms-the northern kingdom of Israel and the southern kingdom of Judah. In 721 B.C., the Assyrians under Shalmaneser swept the northern kingdom into captivity and those ten-and-a-half tribes were lost to history, and remain lost to this day. One hundred and thirty-four years later, King Nebuchadnezzar brought the Babylonians against Judah, and that kingdom too was carried away. Through the righteousness of men like Daniel, his three companions, and Ezra, the house of Judah was not destroyed, but seventy years later Cyrus freed them to return to Jerusalem. Even this did not change the hearts of the remaining Israelites for very long. Though the captivity corrected their tendency to worship idols, their hearts were still hardened away from "true worship" of their God. Soon the Jews were back in virtual slavery to a variety of conquering nations.

The Savior came into the Jewish nation at a time when they were nothing more than a vassal province of Rome. He, too, struggled to overcome the hypocrisy and pride of the Jewish nation, but had comparatively little success. So, sadly he mourned:

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!

Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. [^6]

The final scattering of that royal tribe was completed less than forty years after Christ was crucified. Vespasian and Titus, Roman generals, brought in the mighty Roman legions to crush a Jewish revolt. The rebellion spread until Jerusalem itself came under siege, and, in one of the great catastrophes of the world's history the Jewish nation ceased to exist. Elder Ezra Taft Benson referred to that tremendous final blow and later persecutions in a conference address in 1950.

I think one of the saddest chapters in history is the account of the dispersion and suffering of Judah.

I have before me a quotation of Will Durant in his book, The Story of Civilization, in which he states that "no people in history fought so tenaciously for liberty as the Jews, nor any other people against such odds." He says further, "No other people has ever known so long an exile, or so hard a fate."

Then referring to the siege of Jerusalem under Titus, lasting for 134 days, during which 1,110,000 Jews perished and 97,000 were taken captive; he states that the Romans destroyed 987 towns in Palestine and slew 580,000 men, and a still larger number, we are told, perished through starvation, disease, and fire.

"Nearly all Judea was laid waste. So many Jews were sold as slaves that their price fell to that of a horse. Thousands hid in underground channels rather than be captured. Surrounded by Romans they died one by one of hunger while the living ate the bodies of the dead."

Scarcely eight thousand Jews were left in all of Palestine. And even their banishment and scattering didn't end their persecution. Efforts were made to drive them from various countries. Some nations made an effort to banish them completely. They were accused of causing the "Black Death" that spread through Europe in 1348, and many Jews were crucified therefore.

I have said nothing regarding the Crusades and the dastardly deeds perpetrated in the name of Christianity upon the remaining Jews in Palestine. Yes, the prophecies regarding the dispersion and the suffering of Judah have been fulfilled. [^7]

Little wonder that Christ said: "Behold, your house is left unto you desolate." Little wonder that Hosea, speaking for the Lord, says: "Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God .... " [^8]

Abraham 2: 8-11.

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Deuteronomy 4:26-27. (Italics added) See also Leviticus 26:27-39.

Jeremiah 9: 16. (Italics added)

Ezekiel 12: 14-15. (Italics added)

Matthew 23: 37-38. (Italics added)

Ezra Taft Benson, Conference Report, April, 1950, pp. 74-75. (Italics added)

Hosea 9:1.

Israel and Judah to Return

Ironically, even as the ancient prophets predicted the calamities that would befall their people, they often predicted their future restoration as well. The Lord promised Abraham that the covenant was to be an everlasting one, and the Lord's promises will be kept. This is why Elder Morris designated the restoration of the Jews as one of the signs that the preparatory work for the Millennium was begun. This is also why the Lord explained to the Nephites that the restoration of his people would be the sign to indicate when the end was drawing near.

And verily I say unto you, I give unto you a sign, that ye know the time when these things shall be about to take place-that I shall gather in, from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel, and shall establish again among them my Zion. [^9]

This great work of gathering Israel has been going on since the organization of the Church, but the gathering of the Jews back to the land of Jerusalem is a more recent phenomenon. On October 24, 1841, one of the Twelve Apostles of God returned to Jerusalem and specifically dedicated that land for the return of the Jews. The world took little note of that special mission of Eider Orson Hyde's, but the century following that solitary prayer has seen great changes upon the land so dedicated. The prayer of Orson Hyde has been abundantly answered, for in part he said:

Grant, therefore, O Lord, in the name of Thy well-beloved Son, Jesus Christ, to remove the barrenness and sterility of this land, and let springs of living water break forth to water its thirsty soil. Let the vine and olive produce in their strength, and the fig tree bloom and flourish. Let the land become abundantly fruitful when possessed by its rightful heirs; let it again flow with plenty to feed the returning prodigals who come home with a spirit of grace and supplication; upon it let the clouds distil virtue and richness, and let the fields smile with plenty. Let the flocks and herds greatly, increase and multiply upon the mountains and the hills; and let Thy great kindness conquer and subdue the unbelief of Thy people. Do Thou take from them their stony heart, and give them a heart fresh; and may the Sun of Thy favor dispel the cold mists of darkness which have beclouded their atmosphere. Incline them to gather in upon this land according to Thy word. Let them come like clouds and like doves to their windows. Let the large ships of the nations bring them from the distant isles; and let kings become their nursing fathers, anti queens with motherly fondness wipe the tear of sorrow from their eye. [^10]

With an additional one hundred and thirty years' perspective, it is not difficult to see the prophetic nature of Elder Hyde's prayer. The Jews have indeed been returning to their native land from which they have been dispersed for so many centuries. The land has indeed begun to be abundantly fruitful to these rightful heirs, and they have once again become a government worthy of identity. The Apostle's request that the large ships of the nations be used to return the Jews to their homeland brings forth the vivid pictures of refugee ships described in the novel Exodus, by Leon Uris.

In the talk previously referred to, Elder George Q. Morris went on to recount the great miracle of the return of the Jews.

In a writing issued recently this statement was made:

"About two million Jews have returned to restore land which has lain desolate for centuries. In little more than ten years fetid swamps have been transformed into fertile valleys. Orchards now blossom on stony hillsides. Farms have sprouted in the desert and towns and cities have been built on the site of ancient settlements." (Know the World: Israel, "Around the World Program" by Peggy Mann.) ....

In 1948, with a population of 600,000 the Declaration of Independence was issued, and the State of Israel was established. An army of 35,000 Jews was opposed by an army of nearly 80,000 Arabs. In about nine months peace was declared and they set up their government. They planted more than 53 million trees. Martyrs' Forest bas six million trees, one for each Jewish life lost in Nazi Europe.

This statement by a writer is very interesting:

"Strangely enough when the State of Israel was reborn in 1948, it was a nation of 600,000, the same number which the Bible reports that Moses led out of bondage in Egypt. It now numbers some two million, the same number which it is said populated the ancient Kingdom of Solomon, when Israel was in all its glory." (See above reference)

That is why we may now say that the Jews have returned to Palestine. On a land one-tenth the size of Utah they have nearly a half million more people than we have in our whole Church [1960]. They have about 258 people for each square mile in Palestine. which is a dense population. We have about ten a square mile in Utah. [^11]

The continuing miracle of the Jewish tenacity for national life in the face of nearly overwhelming odds is yet another testimony that the promises of the Lord concerning this clown-trodden people are being fulfilled.

3 Nephi 21:1. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 4, p. 457, October 24, 1841. (Italics added)

George Q. Morris, Conference Report, April, 1960, p. 101.

The Great Gathering Home

It is exciting to know that prophecies that have stood unfulfilled for hundreds, even thousands of years are being fulfilled in one's own lifetime. That is the case with the gathering home of the Jews to their ancient homeland. The sufferings which this people have endured while awaiting their return are too numerous to recount. Fresh in the minds of most people are the terrible persecutions which raged against the Jews under Nazi Germany, but that was only one example out of many hundreds of scourges this people have undergone down through the centuries. Ezra Taft Benson of the Quorum of Twelve spoke of these devastating calamities and showed how they have worked to further the Lord's purposes in gathering these, his children, back home. He spoke of visiting the ruins of a Jewish ghetto in Warsaw, Poland, after World War II.

As we stood on the crumbled brick and mortar and the rubble stone fifteen feet deep, with only the spire of one burned synagogue showing-no other building in that vast area-we were told by the guide that some two hundred thousand bodies, it was estimated, still remained under the rubble of those once great buildings in this section of Warsaw.

We visited some of the concentration camps and the crematoriums where it is estimated, six million of the sons and daughters of Judah lost their lives, reducing their world population from seventeen to eleven million.

We were impressed almost to tears as we visited some of these wanderers, these persecuted and driven sons of our Heavenly Father, to find how doggedly they were determined to return to Palestine. Ofttimes, as they would come into relief agencies to get temporary help, we would ask them why they did not settle nearby. Sometimes they were invited to stay. But they had one desire, and that was to return to the land of their fathers.

I recall that a survey was made by UNRRA, United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration, in which they interviewed 3,629 Jews in displaced persons' camps to determine what they would like to do if they were given their freedom to move and locate as they pleased. Of this number, 3,619 indicated that they would like to go back to Palestine. Nine of them expressed a desire to come to the United States, and one to Australia. This desire-which is almost a passion-was so great that it was as strong as life itself ....

Yes, my brethren and sisters, this great drama goes on before our very eyes, in large measure unnoticed by the Christian world. One hardly ever hears reference to the prophecies regarding Judah's return. Yet, the promises are clear that it would be one of the great events of the last days. And, of course, we know from modern revelations and prophecies that much more is yet to occur. [^12]

It is equally exciting to see the words of our own latter-day prophets fulfilled through events that are transpiring in the world today. Joseph Smith clearly indicated, for example, that Christ could not come before the Jews were gathered home. In the general conference of the Church in April, 1843, he said:

Judah must return, Jerusalem must be rebuilt, and the temple, and water come out from under the temple and the waters of the Dead Sea be healed. It will take some time to rebuild the walls of the city and the temple etc.; and all this must be done before the Son of Man will make His appearance. [^13]

This statement was made while there was a great flurry in the United States over William Miller's predictions that the second advent would occur in that year. History has now shown the folly of those predictions and the accuracy of Joseph Smith's.

President Wilford Woodruff was also most explicit when he spoke of the gathering of the Jews as being one of the unfulfilled signs of the times. In 1875, speaking of Christ, he said: "He will never come until the Jews are gathered home and have rebuilt their temple and city and the Gentiles have gone up there to battle against them." [^14] Four years later, after becoming president of the Church, Wilford Woodruff made another prediction:

The time is not far distant when the rich men among the Jews may be called upon to use their abundant wealth to gather the dispersed of Judah and purchase the ancient dwelling places of their fathers in and about Jerusalem and rebuild the holy city and temple. For the fulness of the Gentiles has come in, and the Lord has decreed that the Jews should be gathered from all the Gentile nations where they have been driven, into their own land, in fulfillment of the words of Moses their law-giver. [^15]

Elder Benson referred to this quote by President Woodruff in the conference talk referred to above and said: "It is rather significant that up to 1948 more than seven hundred million dollars has been expended by American Jews alone in helping to bring about the fulfillment of this prophecy by President Wilford Woodruff." [^16] In an interview in 1967, Israel's Prime Minister, Levi Eshkol explained Israel's magnificent progress as a nation as partially resulting from help given to the Jews by other Jews from all over the world who "... look upon this enterprise of the homecoming as a joint venture of the Jewish people throughout the world. They have helped with about 100 million dollars a year in donations to assist Jewish immigrants to Israel . . . including more than 90 per cent who came penniless." [^17]

Ezra Taft Benson, Conference Report, April, 1950, pp. 77-79. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 5, p. 337, April 6, 1843. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 111, September 12, 1875. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 111, September 12, 1875. (Italics added)

Ezra Taft Benson, op. cit., pp. 76-77. (Italics added)

U.S. News and World Report, April 17, 1967, p. 76. As quoted by Daniel H. Ludlow, "Israel Prophecies Being Fulfilled," BYU Summer Devotional, (BYU Press: Provo, Utah) August 8, 1967, p. 8.

Jerusalem for the Jews and the Temple Rebuilt

One of the signs given by the Savior to his disciples concerning the end referred to the city of Jerusalem. Christ spoke of the time when Jerusalem would be encompassed about with armies, and warned the Jews to flee from these days of vengeance. [^18] He then continued:

But woe unto them that are with child, and to them that give suck, in those days! for there shall be great distress in the land, and wrath upon this people.

And they shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away captive into all nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden, down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. [^19]

As was previously mentioned, that promise was fulfilled when the Roman legions besieged the city of Jerusalem and finally destroyed it (A.D. 70). Although the city itself was restored under the Emperor Hadrian about sixty-five years later, Jerusalem remained as a city of the Gentiles down through the centuries. Hadrian built a temple to Jupiter upon the site of the ancient temple; five hundred years later the city was taken by the Arab chieftain, Khalif Omar, in 637 A.D.; the European Christians held it for a few years after the Crusades, but the city soon fell into the possession of the Turks; it intermittently passed back and forth between various Arab and Turkish rulers until the British captured it under General Allenby in World War I. For more than 1800 years the prediction of the Master was literally fulfilled-Jerusalem was trodden down by the Gentiles.

Although the British set up Palestine as a homeland for the Jews and the Jewish people began to flock back to Jerusalem, the city of Jerusalem was still not completely controlled by the Jews. When Israel declared themselves to be a free and independent nation in 1948, the Arabs bitterly protested and war broke out. Peace was finally achieved through the United Nations, but Jerusalem was partitioned and became a divided city-half belonging to Israel, the other half to Jordan. Perhaps this is what Zechariah foresaw when he said that "... a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem." [^20] But finally, after nearly 1900 years, in June, 1967, the now-famous "six-day war" broke out and Israeli forces smashed through Jordanian defenses and captured all of Jerusalem. So as Christ, Joseph Smith, Wilford Woodruff, Orson Hyde, and others predicted, Jerusalem is being rebuilt and inhabited once again by those so long ago dispersed from its streets and dwelling places.

These prophets also spoke of the time when the temple would be constructed once more. As yet, that prophecy is unfulfilled, but the conditions are shaping up so as to bring about its fulfillment, perhaps in the next few years. Once again it seems as though the obstacles are insurmountable, but the prophets have spoken. The site of the temple is presently occupied by one of the holiest of Moslem shrines-the Mosque of Omar, also known as the Dome of the Rock. Tradition associates it with the spot where Abraham nearly offered up Isaac for sacrifice. But in addition, Moslems believe that it was from this site that their Prophet Mohammed ascended into heaven. Even though the site is now under Jewish control, the Jews are understandably reluctant to tear down a shrine of such stature. If they were to do so, it would undoubtedly bring the rage of the Arab world into sharp focus, and aggravate matters far beyond their present tenuous limits.

But the obstacles against the Jews repossessing Palestine and the holy city also seemed insurmountable; yet the Lord brought about his work and fulfilled his word. So it is that it can be expected that the temple will also be rebuilt and the words of the Lord's servants vindicated. When that is accomplished, the world will have yet another indication that "God works in mysterious ways, his wonders to perform !"

As the promises concerning the Jews are fulfilled, it brings to mind President Woodruff's statement when he spoke of the future destiny of the Jews and warned the nations of the Gentiles to take heed of the Lord's promises so that they themselves might avoid his coming judgments.

The gospel is now restored to us Gentiles, for we are all Gentiles in a national capacity, and it will continue with us, if we are faithful, until the law is bound, and the testimony sealed, and the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled, when it will again revert to the Jews, whom the Lord will have prepared to receive it. They will gather to their own land, taking with them their gold and silver, and will rebuild their city and temple, according to the prediction of Moses and the prophets. When this time arrives, which is nigh, even at our doors, let the Gentile nations who reject the gospel which is now sent to them, prepare to meet the judgments of an offended God! For when their cup is full even to the brim, the Lord will then remember the chastisements of the Jews, his favored people, and at whose hands they will have received double for their iniquities. Offenses must come, said the Savior, but woe unto them by whom they come. Woe unto the Gentiles, who have administered afflictions to the Jews for these many years! Woe unto them if they now reject this only means of salvation, for the awful calamities spoken of in these books, the Bible and Book of Mormon wilt certainly befall them. [^21]

Luke 21:20-22.

Luke 21:23-24. (Italics added)

Zechariah 1:16.

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, pp. 220-221, August 13, 1876. (Italics added)

The Great War-The Jews Find Their Messiah

Since the June, 1967, war an uneasy and sporadic peace has hung over the nations of the Middle East. The large political powers of the world have applied diplomatic pressures to bring about cease-fire agreements and treaties of peace. Some of the leading statesmen have predicted that the conflict in this area of the world can be resolved without further warfare. The ways of God are not the ways of men, however, and the decrees of God are often ignored by the "wise men" of the world. The prophecies clearly indicate that the troubled conflicts already witnessed in the Middle East are but a prelude to great catastrophic events yet to come. Especially is this true of war.

According to both the prophets of the Old Testament and those of the latter-day restoration, the Jews are yet to see a war of such staggering proportions that the mind finds it difficult to grasp. It seems clear from the description given by these prophets that none of the conflicts in Jerusalem's long and bloody history could qualify as being this predicted war. Ezekiel, for example, recorded the words of the Lord, wherein the great invading force was described. The leader, symbolically called Gog, prince of the land of Magog, was pictured as leading a great host of warriors from many lands. [^22] Anciently, the land of Magog was a land to the north of the generally known world of the Israelites. Josephus identified it as the land of the Scythians, who were the people living in the regions north of the Black and Caspian Seas in present-day Russia. It was also used to refer to almost any people of crude and unlearned ways who were from little-known countries to the north. [^23] Ezekiel pictures them as coming from the north [^24]and as being so numerous as to be like "... a storm, thou shalt be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy bands, and many people with thee." [^25] Their purpose shall be to spoil and ravage the land of Israel. [^26]

And yet strangely enough, it is out of this great catastrophe that the Jews will finally come to know their Master, Jesus of Nazareth. Many of the latter-day prophets have spoken of this great event, and their predictions add more details to what is known concerning the last of the tribulations of the house of David-the battle known as Armageddon.

Elder Charles W. Penrose predicted that the nations of the Gentiles would come up against Jerusalem in order to take spoil of their wealth so that they could alleviate their own bankrupt positions. He then described the resulting war and final deliverance of the Jews.

The bankrupt nations, envying the wealth of the sons of Judah, will seek a pretext to make war upon them, and will invade the "holy land" to "take a prey and a spoil." . . .

His [Christ's] next appearance will be among the distressed and nearly vanquished sons of Judah. At the crisis of their fate, when the hostile troops of several nations are ravaging the city and all the horrors of war are overwhelming the people of Jerusalem, he will set his feet upon the Mount of Olives, which will cleave and part asunder at his touch. Attended by a host from heaven, he will overthrow and destroy the combined armies of the Gentiles, and appear to the worshipping Jews as the mighty Deliverer and Conquerer so long expected by their race; and while love, gratitude, awe, and admiration swell their bosoms, the Deliverer will show them the tokens of his crucifixion and disclose himself as Jesus of Nazareth, whom they had reviled and whom their fathers put to death. Then will unbelief depart from their souls, and "the blindness in part which has happened unto Israel" be removed. [^27]

Orson Pratt explained that Satan would play a part in the gathering of this mighty army through the showing forth of miracles.

He will gather up millions upon millions of people into the valleys around about Jerusalem in order to destroy the Jews after they have gathered. How will the devil do this? He will perform miracles to do it. The Bible says the kings of the earth and the great ones will be deceived by the false miracles. It says there shall be three unclean spirits that shall go forth working and they are spirits of the devils. Where do they go? To the kings of the earth; and what will they do? Gather them up to battle unto the great day of God Almighty. Where? Into the valley of Armageddon. And where is that? On the east side of Jerusalem.

. . . There the Lord shall fight for his people, and smite the horse and his rider, and send plagues on these armies, and their flesh shall be consumed from their bones, and their eyes from their sockets. They will actually fulfil these prophecies, with all their pretension to Bible and prophetic learning. [^28]

The promises referred to by both Elder Penrose and Elder Pratt refer to ancient prophecies given by Isaiah, Ezekiel, Joel, Zechariah, and other Old Testament prophets. The promises of deliverance for Jerusalem and the return of the Savior are found most specifically in Zechariah where he foretells of the Jews looking upon the wounds of Jesus and the mourning that will result from their startling discovery; [^29] of the fountain springing forth ; [^30]of the great earthquake and the resulting avenue of escape opened in the Mount of Olives; [^31] of the destruction of the army; [^32] and of the resulting millennial era that will be ushered in. [^33]

President Joseph Fielding Smith also wrote of this terrible war and described in more detail the great earthquake that would split the Mount of Olives and the earthquake which would save the Jewish nation.

All of them [the prophets] speak of it; and when that time comes, the Lord is going to come out of His hiding place. You can see what a terrible condition it is going to be; and the Jews besieged, not only in Jerusalem, but, of course, all through Palestine are in the siege; and when they are about to go under, then the Lord comes. There will be the great earthquake· Tile earthquake will not be only in Palestine. There will not be merely the separation of the Mount of Olives, to form a valley that the Jews may escape, but the whole earth is going to be shaken. There will be some dreadful things take place, and some great changes are going to take place, and that you will find written in the book of Ezekiel (38: 17-23), which I did not read to you. [^34]

He went on to speak about the Jews recognizing their Savior and then President Smith said:

Then they will fall down at His feet and worship Him. After these days will come their redemption and the building of Jerusalem. They will be given their own land again, and every man will live under his own vine and his own fig tree and they will learn to love the Lord and keep His commandments and walk in the light, and He will be their God and they will be His people, and that is right at our doors. [^35]

In the Book of Revelation, John also spoke of this last struggle and told of the Gentiles treading down the holy city for a period of forty-two months, or three and a half years. [^36] During this period, there will be two witnesses who will be given power to prophesy and to work with the people of Judah. John spoke of the tremendous power which they would have, which probably explains the success of the Jews in holding off such a powerful army for three and one-half years. [^37] Joseph Smith explained that the two witnesses are prophets raised up to the Jewish nation prior to the end.

Q. What is to be understood by the two witnesses, in the eleventh chapter of Revelations?

A. They are two prophets that are to be raised up to the Jewish nation in the last days, at the time of the restoration, and to prophesy to the Jews after they are gathered and have built the city of Jerusalem in the land of their fathers. [^38]

John went on to say that after the witnesses had finished their testimony, they would be caught and killed by the troops besieging Jerusalem. This would cause much rejoicing and merrymaking among the armies of Gog. Rather than the bodies being buried, John predicted that they would be left lying in the streets, evidently as a sign of Gog's triumph. [^39]

In his pamphlet, A Voice of Warning, Parley P. Pratt explained how the Gentiles would race through the city plundering the Jews.

John in his 11th chapter of Revelation, gives us many more particulars concerning this same event. He informs us that, after the city and temple are rebuilt by the Jews, the Gentiles will tread it under foot forty and two months, during which time there will be two Prophets continually prophesying and working mighty miracles. And it seems that the Gentile army shall be hindered from utterly destroying and overthrowing the city, while these two Prophets continue. But, after a struggle of three years and a half, they at length succeed in destroying these two Prophets, and then over-running much of the city, they send gifts to each other because of the death of the two Prophets, and in the meantime will not allow their dead bodies to be put in graves, but suffer them to lie in the streets of Jerusalem three days and a half, during which the armies of the Gentiles, consisting of many kindreds, tongues and nations, passing through the city, plundering the Jews, see their dead bodies lying in the street. But after three days and a half, on a sudden, the spirit of life from God enters them, and they will rise and stand upon their feet, and great fear will fall upon them that see them. And then they shall hear a voice from heaven saying, "Come up hither," and they will ascend up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beholding them. [^40]

According to John, it is then that the great earthquake strikes, felling one-tenth of the city and killing seven thousand people outright. [^41]

Ezekiel 38: 1-7.

F. N. Peloubet, Peloubet's Bible Dictionary, (Holt, Rinehart & Winston: New York, 1947), pp. 380, 598. See entries' for "Magog" and "Scythians."

Ezekiel 38: 15.

Ezekiel 38: 9.

Ezekiel 38: 13.

Charles W. Penrose, "The Second Advent," Millennial Star, Vol. 21, pp. 582-583, September. 10, 1859. (Italics added)

Footnotes are at the end of the chapter.

Zechariah 12: 10-14; 13: 6.

Zechariah 13:1; 14:8. (This is evidently the water which Joseph Smith said would come from the temple and heal the Dead Sea. See footnote No. 14 of this chapter.)

Zechariah 14:1-7.

Zechariah 14:12-15.

Zechariah 14:16-21.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Signs of the Times, (Deseret Book Co.: Salt Lake City, 1964), p. 170. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Signs of the Times, (Deseret Book Co.: Salt Lake City, 1964), pp. 171-172. ( Italics added )

Revelation 11: 2.

Revelation 11: 3-6.

Doctrine and Covenants 77:15.

Revelation 11:7-12.

Parley P. Pratt, A Voice of Warning, Published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (first published in 1837), pp. 41-42.

Revelation 11:13.

Close to the End

For those closely watching the signs of the times, this event just spoken of shall signal the last of the world's existence. The prophets indicate that it is shortly thereafter that the great coming of the Lord in glory takes place, and the Millennium is ushered in. John, for example, after speaking of the two witnesses being caught up to heaven, and the great earthquake says:

The second woe is past; and, behold, the third woe cometh quickly.

And the seventh angel sounded; and there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ; and He shall reign for ever and ever. [^42]

Parley P. Pratt briefly summed up the entire closing scene.

Suffice it to say, the Jews gather home, and rebuild Jerusalem. The nations gather against them in battle. Their armies encompass the city, and have more or less power over it for three years and a half. A couple of Jewish Prophets, by their mighty miracles, keep them from utterly overcoming the Jews; until at length they are slain, and the city is left in a great measure to the mercy of their enemies for three days and a half, the two Prophets rise from the dead and ascend into heaven. The Messiah comes, convulses the earth, overthrows the army of the Gentiles, delivers the Jews, cleanses Jerusalem, cuts off all wickedness from the earth, raises the Saints from the dead, brings them with Him and commences His reign of a thousand years .... [^43]

President Joseph Fielding Smith indicated also that this would be one of the last events to be fulfilled before Christ came.

One thing we are given by these prophets definitely to understand is that the great last conflict before Christ shall come will end at the siege of Jerusalem ....

So we are given to understand that when the armies gather in Palestine will be the time when the Lord shall come in judgment and to make the eventful decision which will confound the enemies of his people and establish them in their ancient land forever. [^44]

This miraculous deliverance of the Jews by their Redeemer will be something that the nations of the earth shall speak of for many years. The destruction of the army is of such a magnitude that Ezekiel tells of the Jews burning the spoils of war for seven years without need of going to the fields or forests for fuel. [^45] The number of the slain shall be so great that the entire house of Israel shall spend seven months burying the dead in an attempt to cleanse the land. [^46] Thereafter, they will have to hire permanent burial teams to seek out the bodies which are as yet unburied to remove the stench of death from off the face of the land. [^47]

It is not hard to understand why in a Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles the kings and rulers of the earth were warned that they could not remain neutral in the coming crises.

You cannot, therefore, stand as idle and disinterested spectators of the scenes and events which are calculated, in their very nature, to reduce all nations and creeds to one political and religious standard, and thus put an end to Babel forms and names, and to strife and war. You will, therefore either be led by the good Spirit to cast in your lot, and to take a lively interest with the Saints of the Most High, and the covenant people of the Lord; or, on the other hand, you will become their inveterate enemy, and oppose them by every means in your power. [^48]

And so the tribe which produced the royal house of David, so long trodden down by their enemies, so long searching for their Messiah, so long without a homeland, shall come to know that the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob still lives and still remembers the covenants made with their fathers so long ago.

Revelation 11:14-15. (Italics added)

Parley P. Pratt, A Voice of Warning, Published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (first published in 1837), p. 42.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956), pp. 46-47. (Italics in original)

Ezekiel 39: 8-10.

Ezekiel 38: 11-13.

Ezekiel 38: 14-16.

Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles, Millennial Star, Vol. 6, pp. 6-7, (end of volume) October 22, 1845. (Italics in original)
