Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Eleven

The End—And the Beginning

In the introduction to this work, reference was made to a frightened pilgrim who stood at the gates of the future and asked the keeper for a light to guide him through the darkness. And the keeper of the gate replied, "Go out into the darkness, and put your hand in the hand of God. That shall be to you better than a light, and safer than the known way." Throughout this work an attempt has been made to show that prophecy is the hand of a kind and loving Father extended to his groping and frightened children. Guiding his children through foreboding days of violence, war, corruption, and decay seems to be one of the major tasks of the Lord, and as has been amply demonstrated, he has abundantly marked the future course of the world and of his Church.

We know that the great turmoil and chaos that will reign in the earth prior to the return of the Master is necessary to prepare a world for his reign. We know that Satan shall rage in the hearts of men but shall not triumph. We know that God shall closely watch over the worthy, protecting them in times of crises and blessing them as they draw near unto him. We know that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was restored specifically to prepare the world for the great millennial day. We know that the face of the future is known to God and he is anxious to prepare his children so that its dreadful visage may be smoothed into one of smiling promise. We know that the day shall come that the earth shall burn as an oven, and the wicked as stubble, but we also know that the signs of the times have been given so that the wicked may take heed and turn from their paths of self-destruction. We know that the Lord Jesus Christ is coming to claim his kingdom, and this magnificent King shall set the affairs of the world in order that peace shall dwell in the hearts of men.

Now, we look for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and we expect it just as much as when the sun goes down we expect it to rise above the hill tops in the morning. And when He comes we expect it will be Himself—Jesus of Nazareth, our Elder Brother, the first-born of God in the spirit world, the Only Begotten of God in the flesh. We expect that He will come and reign over the earth as King of kings and Lord of lords .... 1

It is to this joyous culmination of the world's history that we now turn our attention.

Those Who Will Not See

It seems a difficult thing to understand how any person could live through the great events which lead to the return of the Son of God and still refuse to change his heart in preparation for that coming. Yet, there will be vast multitudes of people who shall be caught as were those in the days of Noah [^1]—living their lives of spiritual apathy; laughing at or ignoring the mounting evidence that the day of reckoning approaches. Parley P. Pratt spoke of the great number of signs that would be shown to warn the world of the second advent but still predicted that this singular event would catch the world unaware.

Whoever will look to the word of the Prophets, and to the sayings of Jesus Christ, on this subject, the same will be convinced that all the signs of which I have spoken are clearly pointed out as the signs of His coming. But, notwithstanding all these things are written, His coming will overtake the world unawares, as the flood did the people in the days of Noah. The reason is, they will not understand the Prophets. They will not endure sound doe, trine; their ears are turned away from the truth and turned to fables because of false teachers, and the precepts of men. . . . [^2]

Elder LeGrand Richards explained how men would seek to rationalize away the most evident signs, even as they presently ignore the great signs which have already been given.

While I was president of the Southern States Mission, one of our missionaries wrote in from Florida and said, "President Richards, I have been reading about the signs of the coming of the Lord." he said, "when the sun darkens and the moon ceases to give of its light and the stars fall from heaven, everybody will know that he is coming."

And I wrote back and said, "Probably they will know. The newspapers might announce some great phenomenon in the heavens, misplacement of planets, that have caused consternation, and scientists will have their explanation to make of it, and unless they have faith in the living God, unless as Jesus said, they can read the signs of the times, they may not know anything about what is going on in the world."

"Why," I said, "if the inhabitants of this earth had the ability and the power to read the signs of the times, they would know that already the Lord has given far more than the darkening of the sun or obscuring the light of the moon or causing the stars to fall from the heaven, for what he has accomplished in the establishment of his kingdom on the earth in these latter days, and the unseen power operating in the world for the accomplishment of His purposes, are greater signs than any of these phenomena that we read about—the signs of his coming." [^3]

And so, ironically, the vast majority of the world will ignore the great abundance of evidence and the innumerable warnings given by the Lord and will be caught unawares. President Joseph Fielding Smith warned members of the Church that this may be true of some of them as well, if they are not watchful.

In our own day messengers have come from the presence of the Lord declaring that it is even now at our doors, (D&C 110:13-16) and yet many, even among the Latter-day Saints, go about their affairs as though this coming of the Lord Jesus Christ and the ushering in of this reign of peace had been indefinitely postponed for many generations. I say this to you that it is at our doors. I say this with all confidence because the Lord has said it. His messengers have said it as they have come from his presence bearing witness of him. [^4]

Thus, as the last of the great signs are fully fulfilled, the world will be tragically unprepared for the greatest event of its entire history. As the last moments of the earth's telestial history draw to a close, it is hard for the mind to imagine the feelings that will strike the hearts of those who have been eagerly watching and waiting for the coming of their king. The Lord has described that last winding-up scene most vividly:

And there shall be silence in heaven for the space of half an hour; and immediately after shall the curtain of heaven be unfolded, as a scroll is unfolded after it is rolled up, and the face of the Lord shall be unveiled;

And the saints that are upon the earth, who are alive, shall be quickened and be caught up to meet him.

And they who have slept in their graves shall come forth, for their graves shall be opened; and they also shall be caught up to meet him in the midst of the pillar of heaven. [^5]

Elder Orson Pratt spoke of this great silence and the appearance of the Lord that would follow immediately thereafter:

Immediately after the sounding of this tromp there will be "silence in heaven for the space of half an hour." Whether the half hour here spoken of is according to our reckoning—thirty minutes, or whether it be according to the reckoning of the Lord we do not know. We know that the word hour is used in some portions of the Scriptures to represent quite a lengthy period of time. For instance, we, the Latter-day Saints, are living in the eleventh hour, that is in the eleventh period of time; and for aught we know the half hour during which silence is to prevail in heaven may be quite an extensive period of time. During the period of silence all things are perfectly still; no angels flying during that half hour; no trumpets sounding; no noise in the heavens above; but immediately after this great silence the curtain of heaven shall be unfolded as a scroll is unfolded. School children, who are in the habit of seeing maps hung up on the wall, know that they have rollers upon which they are rolled up, and that to expose the face of the maps they are let down. So will the curtain of heaven be unrolled so that the people may gaze upon those celestial beings who will make their appearance in the clouds. The face of the Lord will be unveiled, and those who are alive will be quickened, and they will be caught up; and the Saints who are in their graves will come forth and be caught up, together with those who are quickened, and they will be taken into the heavens into the midst of those celestial beings who will make their appearance at that time. These are the ones who are the first fruits, that is, the first fruits at the time of his coming. [^6]

Matthew 24:37-41.

Parley P. Pratt, A Voice of Warning, Published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (first published in 1837), p. 46. (Italics added)

LeGrand Richards, Conference Report, April, 1951, pp. 40-41.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956), p. 55. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 88:95-98.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 16, p. 328, December 28, 1873. (Italics added)

Two Zions Unite

It is evidently about this time that another great and significant event takes place. As the righteous from all ages—both living and dead—are caught up to meet the coming Lord, a group of people who long ago distinguished themselves for their righteousness will also descend and join the millennial band who are to take up abode with the saints on the earth. This group of saints were so righteous in an age of wickedness that the Lord took up the entire city to himself. [^7] That, of course, was the City of Enoch. The latter-day prophets have made it clear that the return of this city shall be part of the great latter-day restoration of all things.

For example, the Lord implied that return in the song sung by millennial saints: "The Lord hath brought down Zion from above. The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath. . . . [^8] Orson Pratt referred to that scripture in 1854:

. . . We expect that the Zion which was built up by Enoch, that had no poor in it, will come down again at the commencement of the Millennium to meet the Zion here, according to the song in the Book of Covenants . . . and they shall gaze upon each other's countenances, and see eye to eye. [^9]

Moses 7:67-69. See also Doctrine and Covenants 38:4.

Doctrine and Covenants 84:100.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 2, p. 103, September 10, 1854.

He Comes!

Many of the prophets, both ancient and modern, have spoken of this crowning experience of man's history, but perhaps none have done it more eloquently than President Charles W. Penrose, in his article, "The Second Advent."

The tongue of man falters, and the pen drops from the hand of the writer, as the mind is rapt in contemplation of the sublime and awful majesty of his coming to take vengeance on the ungodly and to reign as King of the whole earth.

He comes! The earth shakes, and the tall mountains tremble, the mighty deep rolls back to the north in fear, and the rent skies glow like molten brass. He comes! The dead saints burst forth from their tombs, and "those who are alive and remain" are "caught up" with them to meet him. The ungodly rush to hide themselves from his presence and call upon the quivering rocks to cover them. He comes! with all the hosts of the righteous glorified. The breath of his lips strikes death to the wicked. His glory is as a consuming fire. The proud and rebellious are as stubble; they are burned and "left neither root nor branch." He sweeps the earth "as with the besom of destruction." He deluges the earth with the fiery floods of his wrath, and the filthiness and abominations of the world are consumed. Satan and his dark hosts are taken and bound—and the prince of the power of the air has lost his dominion, for he whose right it is to reign has come, and the "kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ." [^10]

Charles W. Penrose, "The Second Advent," Millennial Star, Vol. 21, p. 583, September 10, 1859. Perhaps it should be noted here that many people picture, incorrectly, the Savior coming in apparel which is brilliantly white. The scriptures explicitly tell us that at his coming he will be clothed, not in white, but in red apparel. (Doctrine and Covenants 133:48, Isaiah 63:2.)

The Great and Dreadful Day

On April 3, 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery went behind the curtains of the pulpit in the Kirtland Temple and bowed in solemn prayer. As they finished, a marvelous vision opened to them, and they received several important visitors, including the Savior, Moses, Elias, and Elijah. The coming of Elijah was in fulfillment of a prophecy uttered by Malachi about four hundred years before the birth of the Savior. [^11] As Elijah spoke to Joseph and Oliver, he referred to this prophecy of Malachi's and explained that he was now fulfilling it. By this, he went on to say, ". . . ye may know that the great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors." [^12]

At first it may seem contradictory to use the adjectives "great" and "dreadful" to describe the same event. But further reflection will substantiate the appropriateness of both words. To those who have been eagerly watching and waiting for the coming of the Lord, who have made the necessary preparations so as to be included in that group which Christ described as his "first fruits" [^13] it shall indeed be a great day. To those who have ignored or rejected the innumerable warnings, who have felt sure that the Lord was delaying his coming, who are not worthy to endure the brilliant presence of the Son of God, what better word to describe their experience on that day than "dreadful"?

It is for this very reason that the Lord has gone to such great lengths to warn his children. It is for this very reason that in the Doctrine and Covenants alone there are nearly fifty separate references to the coming of the Savior and pleas for his children to prepare for that day. [^14] It is for this reason that the Lord warns:

But the day soon cometh that ye shall see me, and know that I am; for the veil of darkness shall soon be rent, and he that is not purified shall not abide the day.

Wherefore, gird up your loins and be prepared. . . . [^15]

It is for this reason that the Lord predicts:

And then they shall look for me, and behold, I will come; and they shall see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with power and great glory; with all the holy angels; and he that watches not for me shall be cut off. [^16]

It is for this reason that he promises: "And again, be patient in tribulation until I come; and behold, I come quickly, and reward is with me, and they who have sought me early shall find rest to their souls." [^17]

Malachi 4:5-6.

Doctrine and Covenants 110:16.

Doctrine and Covenants 88:98.

For a listing of these references see footnote "e" to Doctrine and Covenants 1.

Doctrine and Covenants 38:8-9. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 45:44. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 54:10. (Italics added)

A New World Like unto Eden

Thus, in an unbelievable blaze of glory, the world of war, bloodshed, anarchy, slavery, pain, violence, immorality, depravity and despair comes to an end. After six thousand years, the troubled, turbulent world will be no more. Even though the end of the world as we have known of it for these sixty centuries will be a catastrophe in some ways, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believe that this climactic end marks the beginning of something vastly more important-the millennial era.

"We believe . . . that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and, that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." [^18] In other words, we believe that once again the earth shall become a paradise, much as it was during the time when Adam and Eve lived in the Garden of Eden. It is appropriately called a paradise, for the conditions then will be so markedly different from what presently exists.

And in that day the enmity of man, and the enmity of beasts, yea, the enmity of all flesh, shall cease from before my face.

And in that day whatsoever any man shall ask, it shall be given unto him.

And there shall be no sorrow because there is no death.

In that day an infant shall not die until he is old; and his life shall be as the age of a tree;

And when he dies he shall not sleep, that is to say in the earth, but shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye, and shall be caught up, and his rest shall be glorious.

Yea, verily I say unto you, in that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—

Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof—

Things most precious, things that are above, and things that are beneath, things that are in the earth, and upon the earth, and in heaven. [^19]

For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.

But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.

And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people: and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying.

There shall be no more thence an infant of days, nor an old man that hath not filled his days: for the child shall die an hundred years old; but the sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.

And they shall build houses, and inhabit; they shall not plant, and another eat: for as the days of a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands.

They shall not labour in vain, nor bring forth for trouble: for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring with them.

And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer; and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.

The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the bullock: and dust shall be the serpent's meat. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord. [^20]

To achieve such an era, those who are not capable of living in a world of peace and harmony must be swept off. The rebellious and the wicked who refuse to live according to the laws of God will be destroyed so that the paradise spoken of may be ushered in. This explains the great judgments of the Lord. They are to prepare the world for its paradisiacal glory. According to President Joseph Fielding Smith, this will include all those who have been living a telestial law.

When the reign of Jesus Christ comes during the millennium, only those who have lived the telestial law will be removed. The earth will be cleansed of all its corruption and wickedness. Those who have lived virtuous lives, who have been honest in their dealings with their fellow man and have endeavored to do good to the best of their understanding, shall remain. [^21]

President Brigham Young described the hearts of those who bring the Millennium into existence.

The Millennium consists in this—every heart in the Church and Kingdom of God being united in one; the Kingdom increasing to the overcoming of everything opposed to the economy of heaven, and Satan being bound, and having a seal set upon him. All things else will be as they are now, we shall eat, drink, and wear clothing. Let the people be holy, and the earth under their feet will be holy. Let the people be holy, and filled with the Spirit of God, and every animal and creeping thing will be filled with peace; the soil of the earth will bring forth in its strength, and the fruits thereof will be meat for man. The more purity that exists, the less is the strife; the more kind we are to our animals, the more will peace increase, and the savage nature of the brute creation vanish away. If the people will not serve the devil another moment whilst they live, if this congregation is possessed of that spirit and resolution, here in this house is the Millennium. Let the inhabitants of this city be possessed of that spirit, let the people of the territory be possessed of that spirit, and here is the Millennium. Let the whole people of the United States be possessed of that spirit, and here is the Millennium, and so will it spread over all the world. [^22]

Down through the troubled millennia of history, man has dreamed of a time when society would perfect itself and achieve harmony and peace. Plato dreamed of the "Republic," Sir Thomas More visualized the mythical country of "Utopia," Aldous Huxley saw a "Brave New World"; many have longed for it, but very few have found it. When the Son of Man comes to make the kingdoms of the world subject to his righteous rule the reality of this dream will come to pass.

Tenth Article of Faith of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Pearl of Great Price.

Doctrine and Covenants 101:26-34. (Italics added)

Isaiah 65:17-25. (Italics added)

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956), p. 62. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 1, p. 203, April 6, 1852. (Italics added)

Free Agency Still Preserved in the Millennium

Some have pictured that all people will be forced to accept the gospel of Jesus Christ if they are to live during the thousand-year era of righteousness, but this is not the way the Lord works with his children. As President Joseph Fielding Smith indicated, only those living a telestial order of things will be swept off in preparation for the Millennium. This will leave many people who live good lives but not the kind of lives that would take them to the celestial kingdom. In short, there will be people living the terrestrial law and the celestial law during the Millennium.

All people will acknowledge that Jesus is the Savior and the King to whom homage must be given, but this does not imply that all peoples will accept the gospel in its fulness. Brigham Young explained it in this manner.

When all nations are so subdued to Jesus that every knee shall bow and every tongue shall confess, there will still be millions on the earth who will not believe in him; but they will be obliged to acknowledge his kingly government. You may call that government ecclesiastical, or by whatever term you please yet there is no true government on earth but the government of God, or the holy Priesthood. [^23]

A few years later President Young said:

In the millennium men will have the privilege of being Presbyterians, Methodists, or Infidels, but they will not have the privilege of treating the name and character of Deity as they have done heretofore. No, but every knee shall bow and every tongue confess to the glory of God the Father that Jesus is the Christ. [^24]

This agrees essentially with what the Prophet Joseph said about eighteen months before his martyrdom.

While in conversation with Judge Adams during the evening, I said, Christ and the resurrected Saints will reign over the earth during the thousand years. They will not probably dwell upon the earth, but will visit it when they please, or when it is necessary to govern it. There will be wicked men on the earth during the thousand years. The heathen nations who will not come up to worship will be visited with the judgments of God, and must eventually be destroyed from the earth. [^25]

Journal of Discourses Vol. 7, p. 142, May 22, 1859. (Italics added)

Journal of Discourses Vol. 12, p. 274, August 16, 1868. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 5, p. 212, December, 1842. (Italics added)

The Great Work of the Millennium

Isaiah spoke of the time when the people would have the privilege of enjoying the full fruits of their labor, and when their efforts to produce goods would not be in vain. [^26] This would seem to indicate that the people then will find it much easier to provide enough food and materials to take care of their temporal needs. This would free man from much of the presently required time needed to produce enough for his wants. In the telestial world in which we live, the effort a man puts into sustaining himself and his family is often robbed by storm, pestilence, disaster, or through high taxes, vandalism, or robbery. In the conditions predicted for the Millennium, it seems as though a person would have to spend much less of his time trying to maintain life than he does today. This raises a natural question: What will people do with all of the extra time? Here again the prophets have given us the answer.

Joseph Smith taught the early members of the Church that there was no work as important as was the work for the salvation of the dead. So important was it that the very salvation of living members of the Church depends on it.

It is sufficient to know, in this case, that the earth will be smitten with a curse unless there is a welding link of some kind or other between the fathers and the children, upon some subject or other—and behold what is that subject? It is the baptism for the dead. For we without them cannot be made perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect. [^27]

The billions of people who have lived upon the earth without knowing of the saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ must have their work performed for them before the final day of judgment. This work can be done only in the temples. The great burden of this vast project rests upon the faithful members of this dispensation. Although the Church has been working diligently since the time of Joseph Smith to build temples and carry out the work for the salvation of the dead, only a small proportion of the total work has been accomplished. The completion of that great work will be the primary task of the faithful members of Christ's kingdom during the Millennium.

President Brigham Young testified concerning the work of the Millennium on several occasions. In 1859 he said:

When his kingdom is established upon the earth, and Zion built up, the Lord will send his servants as saviours upon Mount Zion. The servants of God who have lived on the earth in ages past will reveal where different persons have lived who have died without the Gospel, give their names, and say, "Now go forth, ye servants of God, and exercise your rights and privileges; go and perform the ordinances of the house of God for those who have passed their probation without the law, and for all who will receive any kind of salvation: bring them up to inherit the celestial, terrestrial, and telestial kingdoms. [^28]

Three years later he explained in more detail how those in the Millennium will receive the information necessary to do the temple work for these people.

The Gospel is now preached to the spirits in prison, and when the time arrives for the servants of God to officiate for them, the names of those who have received the Gospel in the spirit world will be revealed by the angels of God and the spirits of just men made perfect; also the places of their birth, the age in which they lived, and everything regarding them that is necessary to be recorded on earth, and they will then be saved so as to find admittance into the presence of God, with their relatives who have officiated for them. [^29]

President John Taylor predicted that the time would come when there would be thousands of temples built to accomplish this work.

This is a great work. Well might it be said to Joseph Smith, "You are laying the foundation of a great work"—so vast that very few can begin to comprehend it. We read sometimes about the millennium. But what do we know about it? It is a time when this work will be going on, and Temples, thousands of them, will be reared for the accomplishment of the objects designed, in which communications from the heavens will be received in regard to our labors, how we may perform them, and for whom. [^30]

Elder George Q. Cannon said that redemption for the dead would be the "occupation" of the people.

. . . During that period, as God has revealed, the occupation of his people will be to lay a foundation for the redemption of the dead, the unnumbered millions who lived and died on the earth without hearing and obeying the plan of salvation. [^31]

President Wilford Woodruff also referred to the great number of temples that will be built to accommodate the vast scope of this work.

When the Savior comes, a thousand years will be devoted to this work of redemption; and Temples will appear all over this land of Joseph—North and South America—and also in Europe and elsewhere; and all the descendants of Shem, Ham, and Japheth who received not the Gospel in the flesh, must be officiated for in the Temples of God, before the Savior can present the kingdom to the Father, saying, "It is finished." [^32]

Knowledge concerning these countless numbers who have died may come not only through angels and spirits but perhaps also through the Urim and Thummim, according to a suggestion of President Joseph F. Smith's.

The great work of the Millennium shall be the work in the temples for the redemption of the dead; and then we hope to enjoy the benefits of revelation through the Urim and Thummim, or by such means as the Lord may reveal, concerning those for whom the work shall be done, so that we may not work by chance, or by faith alone, without knowledge, but with the actual knowledge revealed unto us. [^33]

President Joseph Fielding Smith indicated that this communication with those who have passed on will be on a daily basis.

It is our duty to go to the temple and take our records and work for the dead of our own lineage as far back as we can go, but what about these others? I will tell you. The great work of the millennium, of 1,000 years, will be for the salvation of these souls. . . .

Those who will be living here then will be in daily communication with those who have passed through the resurrection, and they will come with this information, this knowledge that we do not have, and will give it to those who are in mortality And in that way every soul who is entitled to a place in the celestial kingdom of God will be ferreted out, and not one soul shall be overlooked. [^34]

What an exciting thought! To live and work in such a way that daily communication with resurrected beings can be expected! Add to that the feelings that come when one realizes that he may raise his children in a land of peace, plenty, and love, when disease and death shall no longer run rampant through the masses of humanity, and what heart cannot help but long for the privilege to see the millennial reign of Christ ushered in!

See Isaiah 65:17-25. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 128:18. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 6, p. 347, July 31, 1859. (Italics added)

Journal of Discourses, Vol. 9, p. 317, July 13, 1862. (Italics added)

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 25, p. 185, May 18, 1884. (Italics added)

George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 14, p. 322, December 3, 1871. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 19, p. 230, September 16, 1877. (Italics added)

Joseph F. Smith, The Improvement Era, December, 1901, pp. 146-147.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956), Vol. 2, pp. 166-167. (All italics in original)

The Final Scenes

For nearly a thousand years, the earth shall know a period of paradisiacal glory which shall be a great blessing to all the inhabitants thereof. But this state is not to continue forever. When Christ promised that Satan would be bound during the millennium he also told us that he would once again be loosed for "a little season."

. . . And Satan shall be bound, that old serpent, who is called the devil, and shall not be loosed for the space of a thousand years.

And then he shall be loosed for a little season, that he may gather together his armies. [^35]

At the close of the Millennium, Satan shall once again begin to gain power over the hearts of the children of men, so much so, that he shall begin to stir them up once more to make war against the saints of the Most High God. George Q. Cannon taught that this power would result as mankind once again began to drift away from the principles of righteousness, including the Law of Consecration.

I also believe that when Satan is loosed again for a little while, when the thousand years shall be ended, it will be through mankind departing from the practice of those principles which God has revealed, and this Order of Enoch (the Law of Consecration) probably among the rest. He can in no better way obtain power over the hearts of the children of men than be appealing to their cupidity, avarice, and low, selfish desires. This is a fruitful cause of difficulty. [^36]

This rebellion will evidently lead to a last great conflict between the forces of Satan and the servants of Jesus Christ. The Lord described this great battle in the Doctrine and Covenants:

And Michael, the seventh angel, even the archangel, shall gather together his armies, even the hosts of heaven.

And the devil shall gather together his armies; even the hosts of hell, and shall come up to battle against Michael and his armies.

And then cometh the battle of the Great God; and the devil and his armies shall be cast away into their own place, that they shall not have power over the saints any more at all. [^37]

As the Lord describes the hosts of heaven arrayed in battle against the hosts of hell, it brings to mind the original war in heaven. It would seem that the original conflict was not decisively settled as far as Satan is concerned and he still feels he can triumph over the work of the Almighty. This tremendous battle is also referred to as the battle of Gog and Magog. Joseph Smith said:

The battle of Gog and Magog will be after the millennium. The remnant of all the nations that fight against Jerusalem were commanded to go up to Jerusalem to worship in the millennium. [^38]

This may at first be somewhat confusing, since the vast armies of the Gentiles which are to gather against Jerusalem just before the second coming are also referred to as the armies of Gog and Magog. [^39] Evidently, Gog is a name symbolical of all that is evil, militarily speaking, and thus is used to describe both great conflicts. According to President Joseph Fielding Smith, however, the first of these battles is more appropriately titled the battle of Armageddon, and the second at the end of the Millennium as the battle of Gog and Magog. "Before the coming of Christ, the great war, sometimes called Armageddon, will take place as spoken of by Ezekiel, chapters 38 and 39. Another war of Gog and Magog will be after the millennium." [^40]

Elder Pratt described this great final war at some length in an address to the saints in 1877.

He [Satan] with his army will come against the Saints, and the beloved city, and encompass them round about. His army will be so great that it will be able to come upon the Saints on all sides; he is to encompass their camp. Because of the favorable position he is to hold, in that great last battle, and because of the vast number of his army, he doubtless believes that he will get the mastery and subdue the earth and possess it. I do not think he fully understands all about the designs of God: for John tells us when this great army shall be gathered in position, around the camp of the Saints, that "fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them." Devoured whom? Not those who are fallen angels, for they have no bodies to be devoured; but this fire from heaven will devour the wicked apostate race who will have listened to them and who will have joined Satan's army; they will be consumed, consequently the kingdom of Christ will not be overcome by Satan or taken away from the Saints. [^41]

That final contest between the enemies of righteousness and the saints of God will end just as did the first one, fought so many years before this earth was inhabited. And just as the battle of Armageddon will signal the end of the telestial world and the coming of the terrestrial, so will the battle of Gog and Magog at the close of the Millennium signal the end of the terrestrial order and the coming of the celestial.

Doctrine and Covenants 88:110-111.

George Q. Cannon, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 16, p. 120, June 29, 1873.

Doctrine and Covenants 88:112-114.

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 5, p. 298, March, 1843.

Ezekiel 38:1-3.

Joseph Fielding Smith, Doctrines of Salvation, (Bruce R. McConkie, comp.), Vol. 3, (Bookcraft: Salt Lake City, 1956), Vol. 3, p. 45. (Italics in original)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 346, February 25, 1877.

The Celestial Kingdom-The Final Destiny

It is at this time that the earth passes through its final stages of temporal existence and becomes the celestial kingdom. [^42] It is then that those found worthy to dwell with God shall be given their home. It is then that the earth will become a gigantic Urim and Thummim as described by the Prophet Joseph:

This earth, in its sanctified and immortal state, will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon, whereby all things pertaining to an inferior kingdom, or all kingdoms of a lower order, will be manifest to those who dwell on it; and this earth will be Christ's. [^43]

This is the final glorious destiny of the earth, and gives added meaning to the Beatitude which says: "Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth." [^44] Then shall the earth cease its temporal existence and become the residence of those beings who have kept the celestial law. [^45]

Elder Orson Pratt spoke of this celestial law and how it qualifies those who keep it to dwell on this sanctified earth, and he also spoke of what would happen to those who did not keep the law.

If we are not thus prepared, where shall we go? God is the author of many creations besides those that are celestial. He will prepare a creation just adapted to the condition of such people&mash;those who are not sanctified by the Gospel in all its fullness, and who do not endure faithful to the end, will find themselves located upon one of the lower creations, where the glory of God will not be made manifest to the same extent. There they will be governed by laws adapted to their inferior capacity and to the condition which they will have plunged themselves in. They will not only suffer after this life, but will fail to receive glory and power and exaltation in the presence of God the Eternal Father; they will fail to receive an everlasting inheritance upon this earth in its glorified and immortal state. [^46]

Thus it could be said that there shall be two times that the world comes to an end. And both times shall be a new beginning.

Doctrine and Covenants 88:18-20.

Doctrine and Covenants 130:9. See also 77:1.

Matthew 5:5. See also Doctrine and Covenants 88:17.

Doctrine and Covenants 88:22.

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 15, p. 323, December 3, 1876.
