Gerald N. Lund, Coming of the Lord ( 1971)

Chapter Twelve

Anxiety?...or Anticipation?

Shortly before his death, President Jedediah M. Grant, counselor to Brigham Young, asked a most intriguing question:

Why is it that the Latter-day Saints are perfectly calm and serene among all the convulsions of the earth-the turmoils, strife, war, pestilence, famine and distress of nations?1

Why indeed? When that question was put to a group of college students, after a lengthy discussion, one replied: "What kind of a question is that? Who is calm and serene? If you ask me, a better question would be: 'How can one become calm and serene after hearing all of the horrible things that God has promised to send upon the world before the second coming?'"

His voice was sincere; his question was in earnest; his point was well taken. How indeed can one remain calm and serene in the face of promises of hailstorms so widespread that the crops of the earth are destroyed;2 of earthquakes so powerful that even the heavens tremble; 3 of plagues so terrible that men's flesh will fall from their bones, and their eyes from their sockets; 4 of thunders so loud that they reach to the very ends of the earth; 5 of "blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke"; 6 of times so frightening that men's hearts shall fail them;7 of a presence so brilliant that the sun hides its face in shame,8 the elements melt "with fervent heat," 9 the waters boil and the mountains flow down in the face of that presence?10 The coming of the Lord and the events that precede it will be catastrophic. How can anyone find peace and serenity, be he Latter-day Saint or anything else?

Actually, the question posed by President Grant and the one posed by the student are not as different as they may at first appear. In fact, when one can answer the latter, he can easily see the answer to the former.

Be Not Troubled

In an outstanding address given in October conference in 1966, Elder Marion G. Romney quoted the Lord's words to Joseph Smith in 1831. The Lord was recounting to the Prophet the things that he had told his disciples before his death concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, the scattering of the Jews, and the other great calamities of the last days. "And now, when I the Lord had spoken these words unto my disciples, they were troubled." [^1]-a most natural reaction; much the same reaction as that given by the student previously mentioned. But the Lord immediately said unto them:

Be not troubled, for, when all these things shall come to pass, ye may know that the promises which have been made unto you shall be fulfilled ....

Even so it shall be in that day when they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is nigh.

And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the coming of the Son of Man. [^2]

Elder Romney then commented:

The fact that the Lord recounted these predictions to the Prophet Joseph in 1831 surely emphasizes their importance to us. And since the disciples were troubled when they were but being told of these calamities to come far in the future, it is no wonder that we are troubled as we witness their occurrence ....

It was in the light of Christ's foreknowledge.... that he said to his disciples, "be not troubled .... "

I hope we are all familiar with these words of the Lord and with his predictions concerning other coming events, such as the building of the New Jerusalem and the redemption of the old, the return of Enoch's Zion, and Christ's millennial reign.

Not only do I hope that we are familiar with these coming events, I hope also that we keep the vision of them continually before our minds. This i do because upon a knowledge of them, and an assurance of their reality and a witness that each of us may have part therein, rests the efficacy of Christ's admonition, "be not troubled .... " [^3]

When President Grant asked the question cited above, he immediately answered it. And his answer is the same as that given by Elder Romney, viz., the foreknowledge of things which are going to happen helps to prepare us for them.

Why is it that the Latter-day Saints are perfectly calm and serene among all the convulsions of the earth-the turmoils, strife, war, pestilence, famine and distress of nations? It is because the spirit of prophecy has made known to us that such things would actually transpire upon the earth. We understand it, and view it in its true light. We learned it by the visions of the Almighty .... [^4]

The Lord instructed his disciples that when they saw all of these things which he had foretold come to pass then they would know that his coming was near and he would shortly fulfill his promises to them. It is faith in the fulfillment of these prophecies that allows one to "be not troubled," for the Lord has abundantly promised that through all of the strife and turmoil, he shall prevail and conquer at last. And with him in that conquest shall be those who have qualified as saints of the Most High God.

President John Taylor summed up in this manner:

In relation to events that will yet take place, and the kind of trials, troubles, and sufferings which we shall have to cope with, it is to me a matter of very little moment; these things are in the hands of God, he dictates the affairs of the human family, and directs and controls our affairs; and the great thing that we, as a people, have to do is to seek after and cleave unto our God, to be in close affinity with him, and to seek for his guidance, and his blessing and Holy Spirit to lead and guide us in the right path. Then it matters not what it is nor who it is that we have to contend with, God will give us strength according to our day. [^5]

During the terrible struggles of World War II, Elder John A. Widtsoe put it this way:

Above the roar of cannon and airplane, the maneuvers and plans of men, the Lord always determines the tide of battle. So far and no farther does He permit the evil one to go in his career to create human misery. The Lord is ever victorious; He is the Master to whose will Satan is subject. Though all hell may rage, and men may follow evil, the purposes of the Lord will not fail. [^6]

This is why President Heber J. Grant stated that Latter-day Saints have no fears for the future.

While the world is in a state of commotion and there is perplexity among the nations, the Latter-day Saints have no fears for the future. The signs of the times indicate the near approach of the coming of the Lord, and the work that we are engaged in is a preparatory one for that great event .... [^7]

Doctrine and Covenants 45:34. (Italics added)

Doctrine and Covenants 45:35, 38-39. (Italics added)

Marion G. Romney, Conference Report, October, 1966, pp. 51-52. (Italics added )

Jedediah M. Grant, The Improvement Era, February, 1915, p. 286. (Italics added)

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 18, p. 281, November 5, 1876. ( Italics added )

John A. Widtsoe, Conference Report, April, 1942, p. 34. (Italics added)

Heber J. Grant, Conference Report, October, 1930, p. 5. (Italics added)

The Lord Protects His Own

Having no fears for the future when the future is dark and foreboding is sometimes difficult to achieve, but the prophets have comforted this generation with the promise that the Lord will watch over and protect those willing to follow his counsel.

Therefore, verily, thus saith the Lord, let Zion rejoice, for this is Zion-THE PURE IN HEART; therefore, let Zion rejoice, while all the wicked shall mourn.

Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her. [^8]

In the same talk in which he declared that the angels of heaven had been loosed to reap down the earth, President Wilford Woodruff spoke of those who would be shielded from the dreadful judgments coming upon the earth.

Can you tell me where the people are who will be shielded and protected from these great calamities and judgments which are even now at our doors? I'll tell you. The priesthood of God who honor their priesthood, and who are worthy of their blessings are the only ones who shall have this safety and protection. They are the only mortal beings. No other people have a right to be shielded from these judgments. They are at our very doors; not even this people will escape them entirely. They will come down like the judgments of Sodom and Gomorrah. And none but the priesthood will be safe from their fury. [^9]

About fifteen years earlier. President John Taylor spoke of being in tune with God and the peace that would bring during times of strife.

We are, as the French would say, en rapport, with God; that is, in communication with God .... And while nations shall crumble and thrones be cast down, and the God of heaven arise and shake terribly the earth, while the elements melt with fervent heat in fulfillment of ancient as well as modern prophecy; while these things are going on he will whisper, peace to Zion. [^10]

In October conference, 1905, President Joseph F. Smith promised:

You do not need to worry in the least, the Lord will take care of you and bless you, he will also take care of his servants, and will bless them and help them to accomplish his purposes; and all the powers of darkness combined in earth and in hell cannot prevent it. They may take men's lives; they may slay and destroy, if they will; but they cannot destroy the purposes of God nor stop the progress of his work. He has stretched forth his hand to accomplish his purposes, and the arm of flesh cannot stay it. He will cut his work short in righteousness, and will hasten his purposes in his own time. It is only necessary to try with our might to keep pace with the onward progress of the word of the Lord, then God will preserve and protect us, and will prepare the way before us, that we shall live and multiply and replenish the earth, and always do his will; which may God grant. [^11]

In the talk previously referred to, Elder Marion G. Romney also discussed how one could recognize and resist the power of evil and be delivered from the judgments of God.

Naturally, believing Christians, even those who have a mature faith in the gospel, are concerned and disturbed by the lowering clouds on the horizon. But they need not be surprised or frantic about their portent, for, as has already been said, at the very beginning of this last dispensation the Lord made it abundantly clear that through the tribulations and calamity that he foresaw and foretold and that we now see coming upon us, there would be a people who, through, h acceptance and obedience to the gospel, would be able to recognize and resist the powers of evil, build up the promised Zion, and prepare to meet the Christ and be with him in the blessed millennium. And we know further that it is possible for every one of us, who will, to have a place among those people. It is this assurance and this expectation that gives us understanding of the Lord's admonition, "be not troubled." [^12]

The Lord's protective care for those worthy to be called saints, will consist of much more than simply shielding them from the judgments which sweep the world. That is much, and for such protection one would be understandably grateful. But, there is much more. Elder Romney touched on it when he said that it is possible for those who are worthy of the Lord's protective care not only to be shielded from his judgments but also to participate in the exciting events which will prepare the world for Christ's coming and his millennial reign.

Doctrine and Covenants 97:21, 25. (Italics added)

Wilford Woodruff, "The Temple Workers' Excursions" The Young Woman's Journal, August, 1894, p. 512. (Italics added)

John Taylor, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 21, p. 100, April 13, 1879. (Italics added)

Joseph F. Smith, Conference Report, October, 1905 pp. 5-6. (Italics added)

Marion G. Romney, Conference Report, October, 1966, pp. 53-54. (Italics added)

The Last Days-A Choice Blessing

For those so qualified, the opportunity to live through the last days preceding the return of the Savior shall be a blessing the likes of which few generations have enjoyed. Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints look back on the early history of the Church and its pioneer heritage with great pride and respect. We think of the persecutions in Missouri, look on the terrible sufferings at Winter Quarters, read of the exploits and triumphs of men like Joseph Smith, Brigham Young, Parley P. Pratt, Heber C. Kimball, Wilford Woodruff, and many others, and are proud of what our forefathers have done.

But project the mind into the future. Perhaps a hundred years from now, future Church history classes will speak with equal reverence of the marvelous return to Jackson County, Missouri, or of the tremendous faith of those who built the New Jerusalem and the temple there-and they may be speaking of those who are now living. Today, members of the Church rejoice over the stories left to them by their grandparents and great-grandparents-stories of faith, sacrifice, and inspiration. But think for a moment of the stories that this generation will have to tell their grandchildren and great grandchildren. The future destiny of the Church holds as many opportunities for greatness as does the history of the past!

Imagine, if it is possible, the thrill and pride that would come to a person assigned to work with the construction crew of the temple in Zion. President Wilford Woodruff had a dream in 1877 wherein he saw the temple in Missouri under construction. He described the scene he saw of twelve men who represented the twelve gates of the New Jerusalem. Then he continued:

I saw people coming from the river and from distant places to help build the Temple. It seemed as though there were hosts of angels helping to bring material for the construction of that building. Some were in Temple robes, and the pillar-like cloud continued to hover over the spot. [^13]

Can the reader picture himself in such a scene? What an exciting thing it would be to pass on such scenes to one's posterity in family home evenings of the future!

Nor is that all. President Lorenzo Snow spoke of when the Savior would visit Zion and offered a most sublime promise:

Many of you will be living in Jackson County and there you will be assisting in building the temple; and if you will not have seen the Lord Jesus at that time you may expect Him very soon, to see Him, to eat and drink with Him, to shake hands with Him, and to invite Him to your houses as He was invited when He was here before. I am saying things to you now, which I know something of the truth of them. [^14]

Such a blessing is nearly beyond one's ability to comprehend. Shaking hands with the Lord Jesus Christ in humble greeting; spending an evening at dinner with him-the mind is overwhelmed! Imagine a husband and father coming home to announce that a special guest shall be spending some time in the home! Picture going to a special temple session where it is known that the Savior shall be present! Blessings beyond a person's most optimistic hopes are in store for those privileged to participate in such times.

Or to turn to another scene. Visualize, if possible, that day in the city of New Jerusalem when a commotion is heard in the streets, and someone shouts over the tumult, "Here they come! Here they come!" People pour into the streets and look northward across the plains to see a vast cloud of dust signaling the arrival of the ten tribes! What an experience to watch prophet grasp prophet in firm handshake, to watch as the people of Ephraim who journeyed over the plains from the west delightedly introduce themselves to the people of Dan, of Issachar, of Reuben, Manasseh, and the other tribes, who traveled over the plains from the north. After the children are put to bed, many long hours could be shared around the table with members of this long-lost group. Think of the history and experiences they will have to share with us.

As the mind runs over the whole range of events prophesied for the last days, many other examples of exciting and stimulating experiences are suggested. Picture the feelings of those fortunate enough to participate in the council at Adam-ondi-Ahman with Adam, Christ, and all of the prophets who have held keys throughout history. Think of the missionary experiences those 144,000 high priests will have as they spread the gospel to every nation, kindred, tongue and people. Imagine the feelings of the heart as the heavens are rolled back like a scroll and the face of the Lord is unveiled! The examples could be multiplied again and again.

Joseph Smith included an editorial from the Times and Seasons in his History of the Church which summed up the whole point most adequately. Speaking of the prophets; priests, and kings of every age, the editorial says:

. . . They have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day glory .... Our name will be handed down to future ages; our children will rise up and call us blessed; and generations yet unborn will dwell with particular delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the privations that we have endured; the untiring zeal that we have manifested; the all but insurmountable difficulties that we have overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the glory and blessing which they will realize. [^15]

Matthias F. Cowley, Wilford Woodruff, History of His Life and Labors, Bookeraft: Salt Lake City, 1964), p. 505. (Italics added)

Lorenzo Snow, Deseret News, June 15, 1901, p. 1. (Italics added)

Joseph Smith, DHC, Vol. 4, pp. 609-610, May 2, 1842. (Italics added)

Those Counted Worthy to Stand

These things will, of course, be true only of those who have endured faithfully in the covenants they have made with the Lord. The judgments for the wicked in these last days will be as terrible as the blessings are glorious for the righteous.

It is as though each person stands at the entrance to two separate corridors. The one is dark and threatening, filled with frightening shapes and shadows and menacing threats to personal safety. The other is bright and lighted, filled with beauty and pleasant fragrances and joyful experiences. The Lord stands at the entrance pleading with those who approach to avoid the one and choose the other. Some people read descriptions of the calamities coming upon the earth and speak as though God were trying to force them down the dark corridor to make them repent, when in actuality he has only described that corridor to us so that we could wisely choose to avoid it and pass through the more pleasant one. But some will not heed the counsel and they refuse to walk where God would have them walk.

The servants of God are working feverishly to help today's generations choose their path wisely and thus be preserved, for God does seek to preserve his people. [^16] But, as President George Albert Smith asked:

Are we going to be worthy of that preservation? Because only those who are worthy will be preserved. He has said that unless we keep His commandments we will forfeit our blessings and the calamities that already are abroad on the earth and are spreading day by day will find us. [^17]

Melvin J. Ballard also pleaded with the saints to be awake to the importance of these days.

These are the last days spoken of by the prophets of old. These are the signs. Oh, Latter-day Saints, let us, though we be in Zion, be not asleep, for this is the day when no man can be at peace, nor shall we remain at peace in sin or in transgression; for everything will be shaken that is not built upon righteousness, and every man, whether in Zion or elsewhere, who does not keep the commandments of God, shall be shaken and shall fall, and shall feel the chastening hand of the Almighty. [^18]

What a tremendous choice it is that lies before each person today, and yet how few find themselves even vaguely concerned over that choice and its consequences!

A natural question arises when one considers the importance of being prepared for the critical times coming upon us. It can be asked in many ways but it is essentially the same question asked by the young college student. "How can I prepare myself so that I may remain calm and serene? What can I do to make sure I will enjoy the tremendous blessings of the future rather than suffer the terrible judgments? In short, what must I do that I might look forward to the future not with anxiety, but with anticipation?"

Doctrine and Covenants 35:13-14.

George Albert Smith, Conference Report, October, 1941, p. 100. (Italics added )

Melvin J. Ballard, Conference Report, October, 1923, p. 32. (Italics added)

The Five Who Are Wise

Just prior to his crucifixion, Christ spent some time teaching his disciples about the last days and the signs of the times. When he finished, he described the condition of men at that time with a parable, the Parable of the Ten Virgins. The symbolism of the parable is simple and to the point and yet very profound. Ten virgins were waiting for the coming of the bridegroom with their lamps. burning in welcome. The bridegroom tarried and the virgins drowsed off. Suddenly at midnight the cry was raised that the bridegroom was coming. Five of the virgins found that their lamps had gone out during the long delay, and asked the others for oil. They were refused by the wise virgins, for they said that they would then have no oil for their own lamps. While the foolish virgins rushed out to buy more oil, the bridegroom came, the wedding party entered the wedding chambers and the door was shut. Later the five foolish virgins returned and pleaded with the Lord to let them in. But they were refused because, the Lord said, "I know you not." Then the parable was concluded with this warning to all: "Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of man cometh." [^19]

The key to the interpretation of the parable lies in the symbolic meaning of the oil, for the lack of oil was what made the five virgins foolish. On March 7, 1831, the Savior once again referred to that parable and applied it to our own time. In that passage he also explained what the "oil" represented.

And at that day, when I shall come in my glory, shall the parable be fulfilled which I spake concerning the ten virgins.

For they that are wise and have received the truth, and have taken the Holy Spirit for their guide, and have not been deceived-verily I say unto you, they shall not be hewn down and cast into the fire, but shall abide the day. [^20]

That also sums up the answer to the question of what preparations are necessary if one is to replace anxiety with anticipation. Those who have patterned their lives after the guidance of the Holy Spirit shall not be deceived. Elder Harold B. Lee, speaking to the Church in general conference, warned members of the Church that the only thing that would permit them to survive the great days of evil and deception would be an unshakable testimony.

Unless every member of this Church gains for himself an unshakable testimony of the divinity of this Church, he will be among those who will be deceived in this day when the "elect according to the covenant" are going to be tried and tested. Only those will survive who have gained for themselves this testimony. [^21]

Several other latter-day prophets echoed this message. Brigham Young warned the saints not to be overly anxious for the second coming unless they were sure they were properly prepared.

Are you prepared for the day of vengeance, to come, when the Lord will consume the wicked by the brightness of his coming? No. Then do not be too anxious for the Lord to hasten his work. Let our anxiety be centered upon this one thing, the sanctification of our hearts, the purifying of our own affections, the preparing of ourselves for the approach of the events that are hastening upon us. This should be our daily prayer, and not to be in a hurry to see the overthrow of the wicked .... Seek not to hasten it, but be satisfied to let the Lord have his own time and way, and be patient. Seek to have the Spirit of Christ, that we may wait patiently the time of the Lord, and prepare ourselves for the times that are coming. This is our duty. [^22]

In 1956, Elder Lee spoke of four steps that would prepare an individual for the Millennium and the coming of the Lord.

Now, I have asked myself, this being the time to prepare for the millennial reign, how shall we set about to prepare a people to receive the coming of the Lord? As I have thought seriously about that matter, I have reached two or three sure conclusions in my own thinking. This preparation demands first that a people, to receive the coming of the Lord, must be taught the personality and the nature of God and his Son, Jesus Christ ....

To my thinking, another requisite of that preparation to receive the Lord at the beginning of his millennial reign demands that the people be taught to accept the divinity of the mission of Jesus as the Savior of the world ....

[There is] still another requirement, as I see it, for a people to be prepared to receive the Savior's coming. We must be cleansed and purified and sanctified to be made worthy to receive and abide that holy presence ....

And now, finally, there is still one thing more that is necessary, to my thinking, before that preparation is made for the millennial reign. We must accept the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith as the instrumentality through which the restoration of the gospel and the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ was accomplished. [^23]

Every member of the Church should seriously examine his own testimony and personal life on the basis of these four steps, to see if his testimony is "unshakable." In October conference, 1970, now in the First Presidency, Elder Lee added one additional important step of preparation.

Now the only safety we have as members of this Church is to do exactly what the Lord said to the Church in that day when the Church was organized. We must learn to give heed to the words and commandments that the Lord shall give through his prophet, "as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me; . . . as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith." (D&C 21:4-5) There will be some things that take patience and faith. You may not like what comes from the authority of the Church. It may contradict your political views. it may contradict your social views. It may interfere with some of your social life. But if you listen to these things, as if from the mouth of the Lord himself, with patience and faith, the promise is that "the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and his name's glory." (D&C 21:6) [^24]

Matthew 25:1-13.

Doctrine and Covenants 45:56-57. (Italics added)

Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, October, 1950, p. 129. (Italics added)

Brigham Young, Deseret Evening News, May 1, 1861, p. t. (Italics added)

Harold B. Lee, Conference Report, October, 1956, pp. 61-62. (Italics added)

Harold B. Lee, "Uphold the Hands of the President of the Church," The Improvement Era, December, 1970, p. 126. (Italics added)

If Ye Are Prepared, Ye Shall Not Fear

If the emotions one feels as he contemplates the foreboding days ahead are primarily fearful, then perhaps what is needed is a serious evaluation of one's personal relationship with Jesus Christ. It is he to whose coming we look, and if it is with frightened eyes, perhaps it is because we are not completely comfortable with our present relationship to him. In quotations already cited in this chapter, Jedediah M. Grant, and his son, Heber J. Grant, both spoke of Latter-day Saints being without fear in the face of the future. What they seem to mean is the prepared Latter-day Saint. At a conference of the Church in Fayette, New York, held before the Church was a year old, the Lord spoke through Joseph Smith and gave a most profound truth, and a promise, saying: "... if ye are prepared ye shall not fear." [^25] Elder John A. Widtsoe spoke in conference during World War II, using that scripture as his theme. His words are as significant in our own day as they were when he uttered them.

Fear, which "shall come upon every man," is the natural consequence of a sense of weakness, also of sin. Fear is a chief weapon of Satan in making mankind unhappy. He who fears loses strength for the combat of life, for the fight against evil. Therefore, the power of evil ever seeks to engender fear in human hearts. In this day of sorrow, fear walks with humanity. It directs, measurably, the course of every battle. It remains as a gnawing poison in the hearts of the victors as of the vanquished.

As leaders in Israel, we must seek to dispel fear from among our people. A timid, fearing people cannot do their work well. The Latter-day Saints have a divinely assigned world-mission so great that they cannot afford to dissipate their strength in fear. The Lord has repeatedly warned His people against fear. Many, a blessing is withheld because of our fears. He has expressly declared that man cannot stop his work on earth, therefore, they who are engaged in the Lord's latter-day cause and who fear, really trust man more than God, and thereby are robbed of their power to serve.

The key to the conquest of fear has been given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. "If ye are prepared ye shall not fear." (D&C 38:30) That divine message needs repeating today in ever), stake and ward. Are we prepared in surrender to God's commandments? In victory over our appetites? In obedience to righteous law? If we can honestly answer yes, we can bid fear depart. And the degree of fear in our hearts may well be measured by our preparation by righteous living, such as should characterize Latter-day Saints ....

In this world upheaval, in this day of wanton destruction, we, as a people, must look upward. There must be trust and faith in our hearts, Hope must walk by our side. We must remember charity also. We must treasure the warm words of the Father to His Church, "Be of good cheer, and do not fear, for I the Lord God am with you, and will stand by you." (D&C 68:6) [^26]

Oh! that each heart could honestly repeat the words spoken by President Joseph F. Smith during World War I.

No matter what may come to me, if I am only in the line of my duty, if I am in fellowship with God, if I am worthy of the fellowship of my brethren, if I can stand spotless before the world, without blemish, without transgression of the laws of God, what does it matter to me what may happen to me? I am always ready, if I am in this frame of understanding, mind, and conduct. It does not matter at all. Therefore, I borrow no trouble nor feel the pangs of fear. [^27]

Much has been said concerning the coming of the Lord Much more could be said. The world rushes headlong toward disaster and many live in fear of that "dreadful day." But many others look forward with poignant longing for the "great day" of the Lord.

The advice of Elder Orson Pratt should be in the forefront of the mind of every Latter-day Saint in these troubled and ominous times.

With a work of such magnitude before them, the Latter-day Saints should be wide awake, and should not have their minds engaged in those fooleries in which many indulge at the present time. We should put these things away, and our inquiry should be, -"Lord how can we prepare the way before thy coming? How can we prepare ourselves to perform the great work which must be performed in this greatest of dispensations, the dispensation of the fulness of times? How can we be prepared to behold the Saints who lived on the earth in former dispensations, and take them by the hand and fall upon their necks and they fall upon ours, and we embrace each other? How can we be prepared for this?" How can all things that are in Christ Jesus, both which are in heaven and on the earth, be assembled in one grand assembly, without we are wide awake? [^28]

When we can make such questions the code for patterning our daily living, we too can truly be prepared for the coming of the Lord.

Doctrine and Covenants 38:30.

John A. Widtsoe, Conference Report, April, 1942, pp. 33-34. (Italics added)

Joseph F. Smith, The Improvement Era, July, 1917, p. 827. (Italics added)

Orson Pratt, Journal of Discourses, Vol. 16, p. 326, November 22, 1873. ( Italics added )
