The missionary labors of the elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints would form a most interesting chapter in the history of human endeavor. Every experience seems to have fallen to the lot of "Mormon" missionaries, who have labored under every clime and among all classes and races of people. Taken, by a sudden call, from the home, workshop, field, store or office, they have gone out at their own expense, with no special training in speaking or argument, to teach to all the world a system of eternal truth, against which mighty forces have ever been arrayed. The third generation of this volunteer army is now carrying the gospel over the face of the earth, and the vigor of the work is unabated.

The plain, unstudied sketch herewith presented of a few of the missionary experiences of an elder who spent a third of his long, mature life in foreign missionary service can be duplicated by hundreds of the missionaries of the Church. Simple and straightforward these sketches are; yet, between the lines, may be read every human emotion, from the highest exaltation of spirit to the darkest despair. It would be well if many such missionary lives could be published for the encouragement of all who desire to battle fearlessly for righteousness.

Bishop Anthon L. Skanchy died on April 19, 1914, after a lingering illness of several years. In the midst of the pain of this sickness he wrote these sketches, chiefly of his early mission when he had the privilege of opening the gospel door in the beautifully majestic land of the midnight sun, and of bringing hundreds into the Church. He wrote in his mother tongue, which he loved so well. The eloquent directness, as well as the severe repression of feeling, characteristic of the northern people, are on every page.

A few weeks before his death. Bishop Skanchy entrusted his manuscript to me, to do with it as I might see fit. He hoped that, somehow, his experiences might strengthen the testimonies of others. The missionary instinct was strong within him. I have rendered it freely into English, and, while in so doing it has lost its peculiarly eloquent flavor, I hope it has not wholly lost its power for good. I should greatly love to fulfil the wish of the noble author of these sketches, who was the instrument in the hands of God of bringing to the family to which I belong, and to me, the priceless gift of an understanding of the gospel.

That thousands of such strong men as was Anthon L. Skanchy could and do find a life's satisfaction in the gospel, in spite of the hardships and contempt they must endure, is a strong testimony of the inherent vitality of the message of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

LOGAN, UTAH
