Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Preface

In honor of President David O. McKay's ninety-fourth birthday, Elder Ezra Taft Benson was invited to deliver a tribute to the prophet. On that occasion, he began his remarks by stating, "It's a wonderful thing to focus attention on a great life."

Indeed it is. An inscription on one wall in the Library of Congress puts such musings in lofty perspective: "The history of the world is the biography of great men."

I believe that you will find in this biography the story of a truly great man. Not a perfect man, nor a man who hasn't faced and even struggled with mortality's challenges. But a man of conviction and courage. A man who has remained true to the principles in which he deeply believes—despite criticism, at times. A man who has responded to assignments within the gospel kingdom that have demanded total commitment and faith in the Lord. This is a man who has faced hardships, has worked to overcome personal shortcomings, has had triumphs, and through it all has turned his life completely over to the Lord.

In the mid-fifties a young man working in Washington, D.C., became acquainted with Ezra Taft Benson, then Secretary of Agriculture. After observing the Secretary function in his demanding, often controversial, post while trying to retain the dignity and deportment of an apostle, the man asked Elder Benson how he managed to handle everything. Elder Benson replied, in words to this effect, "I work as hard as I can and do everything within my power. And I try to keep the commandments. Then I let the Lord make up the difference." There, in a nutshell, lies the formula to President Benson's life and to his success.

But while Ezra Taft Benson's life has all the makings of a remarkable story, telling it is challenging. Biography itself is an intimidating art form—one made all the more demanding when written about a living subject. And that becomes even more difficult when the man belongs, by virtue of his spiritual calling, to a very elect group—one of only thirteen in this dispensation to culminate his life with service as president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. A living prophet.

President Benson himself once set forth the parameters within which LDS biography should be written: "No writer can accurately portray a prophet of God if he or she does not believe in prophecy."

May I say from the outset that I believe in prophecy. And I have a deep conviction that Ezra Taft Benson is a prophet of God. This book is written from that perspective, and it is this orientation that has governed decisions regarding which materials to include and which to lay aside.

For that reason, this biography does not tell everything. Certainly, it would require a multivolume work to thoroughly analyze Ezra Taft Benson's involvement and contributions in government and other areas of activity. For example, one 600-page autobiographical account covers his eight cabinet years alone. The amount of materials extant on his life is enormous.

Further, there are episodes and elements of President Benson's life that have been left out of this biography. It is no secret that his unequivocal and vocal support of freedom and the U.S. Constitution, and his condemnation of communism, socialism, and, in fact, anything that he has perceived as a threat to man's freedom, has aroused controversy and prompted certain critics to oppose him over the years. By and large, these episodes have not been detailed in this biography. While some may wonder if these omissions point to the fact that President Benson feels uncomfortable about his past or has reversed his stand on some of these issues, nothing could be further from the truth.

It would be presumptuous of me to assert that I have reviewed everything documenting the life of Ezra Taft Benson, but little has escaped my attention. I have read every page of his personal journal, dating back to 1939; literally thousands of pieces of correspondence written to, by, and about him; a large portion of the 9,000 pages of religious speeches he has given through the years (as well as hundreds of pages of secular addresses); and thousands of newspaper clippings, magazine articles, and books written about and by him. I have viewed newsreels, television programs, and speeches preserved and housed in the National Archives and the Library of Congress, as well as interviewed dozens of individuals who have had intimate association with President Benson in various capacities. Through it all I have not found anything that seems inconsistent with his calling as prophet, seer, and revelator. In fact, even during times when he was most vocally criticized for his patriotic activities or philosophies, he repeatedly responded to his critics with kindness and tolerance. President Benson has requested that those who have opposed him over the years not be treated critically in his biography. Yet, a full and accurate telling of some incidents involving his critics would likely reflect negatively on those individuals, so the episodes have not been included. As Nephi explained in his writings, I have not told everything, but what I have told is true.

Space limitations make it difficult to mention everyone who has assisted in some way with the preparation of this biography. But I must single out a few individuals, hoping that the many others who made substantive contributions will know of my sincere appreciation for their efforts.

President Benson himself was most cooperative, consenting to numerous interviews and providing encouragement throughout. I am grateful for his kindness to me. Other members of the Benson family responded to frequent requests for interviews and access to documents and correspondence held by the family. Each of President Benson's children—Reed Benson, Mark Benson, Barbara Walker, Beverly Parker, Bonnie Madsen, and Beth Burton—submitted to lengthy interviews and assisted in other ways. Their contributions were invaluable. Special mention must be made of Flora Parker, a granddaughter of President and Sister Benson, who played a crucial role. I do not overstate the facts to say that, had it not been for her thousands of hours of painstaking research, as well as for her assistance in so many other ways, this book would very simply not have seen the light of day.

Both of President Benson's counselors in the First Presidency, many members of the Twelve, and a number of other General Authorities granted personal interviews in which they reflected on their association with President Benson. I am grateful for their time, reflections, and interest in this project.

I received assistance from researchers and librarians at the Library of Congress and National Archives in Washington, D.C., the Eisenhower Library in Abilene, Kansas, and the Church Historical Department and Archives in Salt Lake City. I also recognize the cooperation of the Department of Religious Instruction at Brigham Young University. In addition, several readers reviewed this manuscript at various stages and offered timely suggestions, criticisms, and comments. Their responses were most helpful. I am most grateful to Ronald A. Millett and Eleanor Knowles of Deseret Book Company for their encouragement and patience.

I deeply appreciate friends who, in numerous ways, relieved me of responsibilities in other areas of my life so that I could devote more time to what became an all-consuming endeavor. This includes professional associates, those with whom I serve in Church capacities, and close friends who seemed to know when and how to offer encouragement. I am most deeply grateful for the support of my family, in particular that of my mother and father, Charles and JoAnn Dew, who seem to have unending confidence in me. Their support transcends anything else earthly.

Though others have been involved in various ways in the preparation of this biography, I am the author. I alone produced the text and therefore take responsibility for this interpretation of the life of Ezra Taft Benson.

This project has taught me many things. First, that Ezra Taft Benson, like his predecessors, is indeed a prophet of God. I have learned that, truly, man's ways are not God's ways, and that at times we must be willing to listen to and be directed by a higher voice than our own. I have learned that in times of sincere need and inquiry the Lord will respond to His children, that He will strengthen and guide them and make them equal to the righteous tasks before them. And I have come to understand, perhaps in a way unique to a biographer of a prophet, that it is under the Lord's direction that a man is schooled and prepared to assume the mantle of the prophet.

Through it all I have reached the conclusion that, at times, in the interest of honesty, we mortals do injustice in the way we evaluate history. We try very hard to demonstrate that great men and women are fallible; or, in the Church context, that a leader or a prophet, as in this case, is just a mortal man, complete with personal weaknesses. While I enthusiastically favor an honest depiction of any individual, I would hope that such a focus not sidetrack us from or obscure something that is perhaps more significant.

Certainly, a prophet is but a mortal man. It doesn't take scholarly analysis to arrive at that conclusion. I wonder, however, if this conclusion isn't shortsighted. The purpose of evaluating the life of a prophet, in my view, is not to focus in the main on his mortality, but to demonstrate how a mortal man can live his life in such a way that the Lord would see fit to call him as His mouthpiece. It is this very process that should give all of us comfort and encouragement.

It is a humbling experience to carefully examine, to even probe, a prophet's life. A biographer sees so much—the good and the bad; the trials and the triumphs; the joys and the pains. To the biographer goes the fragile responsibility of analysis, of putting into perspective a person's life, of drawing conclusions about a man's contributions, his dreams and aspirations, his motives, and so forth. From the outset I respected President Benson as a man with a divine calling. But the more I researched and read and reflected, the more I came to realize how truly remarkable Ezra Taft Benson is.

This biography is simply my attempt to share what I have learned about this man. My intention is not that, after reading this book, you will agree with everything Ezra Taft Benson has said or done, but that you will understand him; that you will have a sense for what has driven him, and why; that you will respect him for the life he has lived.

Elder Neal A. Maxwell has written, "Since we are here to be thus proved, how can that occur except we are tested? If we are to learn to choose wisely, how can that occur except there be alternatives? If our soul is to be stretched, how can that happen without growing pains? . . . When anciently we shouted for joy in anticipation of this mortal experience, we did not then think it would be an ordinary, pedestrian thing at all. We sensed the impending high adventure."

For Ezra Taft Benson, life has indeed been high adventure. From eleven lonely, dangerous, but rewarding months in post-World War II Europe, to eight demanding years in the U.S. cabinet, to over four decades as a General Authority, his life has been adventurous. It has been a life of preparation, a life destined to culminate in the most ennobling service mortal man can render. Elder Orson F. Whitney explained, "Each succeeding president of the Church ought to vary in some respects from all other incumbents of that high and holy position. For this reason: The work of the Lord is always progressing, and consequently always changing—not its principles, nor its aims; but its plans, its instruments, and its methods of procedure. . . . Hence a variety of leaders is essential. Today is not yesterday, nor will tomorrow be today. The Lord provides the men and the means whereby He can best work, at any given time, for the carrying out of His wise and sublime purposes. The Man of the Hour will be ready whenever the Hour strikes."

President Heber J. Grant was once asked how a man becomes president of the Church. He replied, "He is called to the Council of the Twelve Apostles and then outlives his associates." While that may seem a very simple formula, President Gordon B. Hinckley explained the wisdom of such a precedure: "Once a man is called to the Council of the Twelve, a new regimen comes into his life. . . . His is a world mission. Over the years that follow he is likely to travel far and wide in the pursuit of that ministry. He develops a depth of vision and understanding that comes in no other way. He sees the Church in operation in a great variety of environments. As the years pass, in the very process of this work he is disciplined and refined, polished and softened, strengthened and humbled. Only after many years of such seasoning does he become senior Apostle."

It is this journey, the life journey of Ezra Taft Benson, that I have endeavored to tell.

"I thank the Lord for my heritage, for my parents, my grandparents, and my great-grandparents who have seen fit to give their all to help in the establishment of this the kingdom of God upon the earth."
