Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 1

A Rich Heritage

In the year 1638, England was ruled by the unpredictable, tyrannical Charles I, and political and religious fugitives were leaving in great numbers. Among them were John Benson and his family, who fled Caversham, Oxfordshire, England, aboard the Confidence that year to search for peace and prosperity in the New World. Some 341 years later one of John Benson's most celebrated descendants, Ezra Taft Benson, would proclaim, "Since I was a small boy I have had a keen awareness that . . . a noble heritage is one of life's greatest treasures." [^1]

Indeed, the family line and legacy John Benson carried to the New World would spawn offspring of international repute and influence. His descendants would prove resilient, devoted to principle, intensely loyal to country, and receptive to truth.

In America, John Benson received a land grant in the Massachusetts Bay Colony. The subsequent five generations of Bensons, mostly farmers and laborers—Joseph, Benoni, Benoni, Jr. (a shoemaker-turned-lieutenant who marched as a Minute Man following Paul Revere's ride through Lexington), John (also an officer in the Revolutionary War) and John, Jr.—lived primarily in and around Mendon, Massachusetts. The Bensons were God-fearing people who praised the Almighty for guiding them to America and spoke fiercely in defense of their new republic.

It was in Mendon, on February 22, 1811, that John, Jr., and Chloe Taft Benson became the parents of their fourth child and first son—Ezra T. (for Taft). The young Ezra, of necessity, was an industrious boy who labored with his father on the family farm where apples were grown and hogs were raised. Ezra remembered his parents as religiously inclined, though they never joined any religious group. Firm believers in the Bible, they taught their children to observe the Sabbath.

In 1832 Ezra married Pamelia Andrus, and during their first years of married life they enjoyed a healthy income from Ezra's investments in a hotel and, later, cotton mill. But they also buried their first two children. And when unexpected reverses stripped them of their funds, Ezra found work where he could. But he was restless, with a deep desire to go west.

Eventually his yearnings prevailed, and by 1838 Ezra had worked his way to Quincy, Illinois, where he first met the "Mormons," as members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were known. They were a small band of religious patriots recently driven from Missouri by mobs and Governor Lilburn W. Boggs, who demanded they be "expelled or exterminated."

Ezra T. Benson was a tall, stocky man with deep, penetrating eyes. Though virtually unschooled, he had a discriminating mind and a knack for eliciting trust in others, even strangers. In Quincy he boarded with an amiable Mormon family, the Thomas Gordons. Initially Ezra found the Mormons "very peculiar," but over time, as he became better acquainted with the Saints and as the Gordons introduced him to the gospel message, Ezra decided the Saints were a "very agreeable" lot of people whose "spirits amalgamated with mine." Nevertheless, he kept them at arm's length. He was very disturbed when two of them, George D. Grant and Edmond Bosley, predicted he would join the Church. [^2]

In July 1840 Ezra's curiosity was aroused when he observed Joseph Smith, prophet and president of the Church, as the Prophet attended a religious debate. Ezra determined that Joseph seemed too pleasant a man to be the rogue his detractors made him out to be.

Some time later Ezra and his wife attended a gathering in which Orson Hyde, a member of the Church's Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, delivered a moving discourse on the gathering of the Jews. Elder Hyde called upon John E. Page, another apostle, to pray, and Ezra recorded that he had never "heard the like before. They took up a collection to assist them on their mission to Palestine, and I threw in a half-dollar, being all I had. This was the first time I had ever helped any missionary." (Ironically, Elder Page was later excommunicated from the Church, and Brigham Young would select the young convert, Ezra T. Benson, to fill his place in the Quorum of the Twelve. [^3]) At the close of the meeting Pamelia asked her husband if he had made a donation; when he replied affirmatively, she responded, "That is right. If I had money I would have helped them, too, for they are deserving of it."

Late one night, after learning much more about the Church, Ezra retired to a snow-covered grove to seek spiritual guidance. Shortly after beginning to pray, he heard a sound as though someone were walking toward him on the frozen snow; instinctively he jumped up, but he could see nothing. The noise recurred three times. After the last encounter he became convinced it was an opposing power trying to discourage him from prayer. At that point he shouted out, "Mr. Devil, you may break snow crust, but I will pray!" Ezra did pray, and the sounds did not return.

Pamelia received a confirmation of the gospel message before her husband. As she and Ezra returned from a meeting, she picked up a Bible, turned to Paul's discourse on prophets and apostles in the twelfth chapter of First Corinthians, and said she couldn't imagine why the same organization shouldn't exist today. "She said she firmly believed Joseph Smith was a prophet of God," said Ezra T. years later. "The remark produced in me a peculiar sensation, as I perceived that she was convinced of the truth of the doctrines." Nevertheless, he asked her to wait to be baptized, hoping he would be ready to join her soon. [^4]

Non-Mormon neighbors tried to divert the Bensons' attention from Mormonism. When Ezra asked a Unitarian minister if he baptized by immersion for the remission of sins, the minister answered that that was an option but not really necessary—whatever Ezra wished. Ezra said he "thought this was getting salvation a little too easily." [^5]

Things began to move quickly, and Ezra soon gained a witness of the truth. On Sunday, July 19, 1840, he and Pamelia attended a meeting during which a dispute arose between two individuals administering the sacrament, and harsh words were spoken. Concerned that the unruly display would dissuade her husband, Pamelia asked Ezra what he thought of it all. He replied that he couldn't imagine the actions of its members altering the truth of Mormonism. Afterwards, Daniel Stanton baptized them both in the Mississippi River in the presence of some three hundred curious onlookers. When the ordinances were completed a shout went up, "The Mormons have got them!"

The Bensons readily embraced their new religion, and soon their lives revolved around it. Shortly after Ezra was ordained an elder, his wife became very ill. "I reflected upon my calling and perceived it was my prerogative to administer to her," he said. "I laid my hands upon her head and rebuked the disease and it left her instantaneously." [^6]

Upstream from Quincy, the Saints had already begun their colonization of Commerce, later named Nauvoo, and in April 1841 the Bensons moved there. By the fall of 1843 Ezra had completed a red brick home, near Heber C. Kimball's, complete with two stories and a cellar. On April 27, 1844, Ezra entered plural marriage, taking a second wife, Pamelia's younger sister, Adeline Brooks Andrus. Adeline was a slight woman who stood but a fraction over five feet tall.

Pamelia and Adeline saw their husband very little, for soon thereafter Ezra left on the first of two missions in the East. On the first of these he returned to Mendon and was disheartened to find that his "most intimate acquaintances would not come to hear" him. He was even mobbed and spat upon with tobacco juice. En route he became schooled in matters of the Spirit. At a meeting in Chambersburgh, Illinois, he preached eloquently and, he said, "felt as though my feet were about six inches from the floor, for when I stepped I could not feel it. Many said . . . they had never heard such a discourse in their lives and I really began to think I was a preacher." The next day he preached again. "But not having put my trust in the Lord as much as I should it proved the driest discourse I ever heard; and had there been a back door, I think I should have been missing." [^7]

During his second mission he learned of the martyrdom of Joseph Smith, and he quickly returned to Nauvoo. In the fall of 1844 he was called to serve on the high council in Nauvoo, and in December of that year he went East again to preside over the Boston Conference. In May 1845 he returned to Nauvoo to work on the temple by day and stand guard at night. The political climate was tense, with the Saints uncertain about their safety. By February 1846 many of them were leaving Nauvoo.

Just prior to the expulsion of the Saints from Nauvoo, Brigham Young, who had succeeded Joseph Smith as head of the Church, advised Ezra to join the first company heading west. Ezra replied that he had no provisions and few resources to obtain them. Brigham answered, "God down the street and ask every man you meet to give you some help until you get a conveyance."

The first man Ezra stopped, Jared Porter, loaned him a horse. A second provided another horse and a double harness. A Brother Chidester sold him a wagon, while Stephen Farnsworth gave him cloth for a wagon cover. Ezra traded his wives' beautiful woven shawls for two hundred pounds of flour, a few bushels of Indian cornmeal, twelve pounds of sugar, and a little bedding.

Though both Pamelia and Adeline were soon to bear children, they packed a few clothes and, on February 9, 1846, crossed the frozen Mississippi, leaving behind a home filled with belongings. Ezra later remarked about his wives, "Never at any time did I hear a murmur from their lips."

A month after crossing the Mississippi, Pamelia delivered a child. A crudely draped canvas protected her and the child from the bitter elements, with only a bed raised on brush to insulate her from torrential rains. The baby soon died. On May 1, 1846, Adeline delivered her first child, George T. Benson, in a wagon box at Garden Grove, Iowa. Midwife Patty Sessions charged Ezra T. $1.50 for her services. Years later Adeline's eldest great-grandson, Ezra Taft Benson, would explain, "These were not people who were used to living in poverty. . . . These were refined, well-educated people for the day. They were not used to roughing it . . . but they joined an unpopular faith and . . . were true [and] faithful, so they met the test." [^8]

At Sugar Creek, Iowa, the rains had been so heavy that the loaded wagons sank at times to the hub. Ezra's team was weak, and he finally told Brigham Young he would not be able to proceed further. Brigham asked what could be unloaded, and in short order Ezra T. had been relieved of six hundred pounds of wheat and other foodstuffs, which were distributed among the Saints. Heading into the wilderness, he had only fifty pounds of flour and a half bushel of meal with which to support his family. After that, when others complained about their wagons sinking in mud to their axles, he would respond, "Go to Brother Brigham, and he will lighten your load." [^9]

It was on the trail that Ezra T. was called to the Quorum of the Twelve by Brigham Young—the first such appointment since the death of Joseph Smith. The journey ahead would require a unique breed of leader, one anxious and able to serve under grave conditions. President Young instructed Ezra, in part, "If you accept this office, I want you to come immediately to Council Bluffs, to prepare to go to the Rocky Mountains." [^10] Ezra Benson, at age thirty-five, was ordained an apostle on July 16, 1846, by President Young and promised that he should yet have "the strength of Samson." Nearly a year later, he was in the first company of pioneers that entered the Salt Lake Valley on July 24, 1847. He spoke in the first sacrament meeting held there, and then headed back across the trail to inform other companies en route that a place of settlement had been located.

During subsequent years Ezra would serve a number of missions, Europe and Hawaii among them, travel in and out of Salt Lake City, and play a key role in colonizing the Great Basin, particularly Tooele, Utah, where he milled lumber, and, later, Cache Valley.

Prior to leaving for a mission to England, Ezra was promised in a blessing at the hands of Jedediah M. Grant that he would lift his voice "like a trumpet and cause the hearts of the Saints to rejoice and the wicked to quake," and would ultimately possess "power to overcome all your enemies." [^11] Such qualities would resurface three generations later in his name-sake and great-grandson.

Ezra was called to preside over the Saints' settlement of Cache Valley. Many years later Heber J. Grant, who was then president of the Church, would jokingly tell Elder Ezra Taft Benson the story of Ezra T. Benson's settlement in northern Utah. "Did I ever tell you about the mean trick Brigham Young played on your great-grandfather?" he asked Elder Benson. "No, President, I didn't know Brigham Young ever played a mean trick on anyone," Elder Benson replied.

"Oh, yes, he did. I'll tell you about it," President Grant said. "Your great-grandfather built the finest home in Salt Lake City, with the exception of Brigham Young's home. It was a beautiful, two-story home with a porch at both levels, a white picket fence, and a yard filled with fruit and ornamental trees and even a small stream. He was just ready to move his families in from their log cabins when President Young called him into the office and asked him to move to Cache Valley and pioneer that area. 'We suggest you sell your home to Daniel H. Wells,' President Young said. Now, Daniel H. Wells was Brigham Young's counselor," President Grant concluded. "Wasn't that a mean trick?"

Mean trick or not, Ezra T.'s leadership proved most effective. During the nine years under his direction, the settlements in Cache Valley prospered. He organized the building of homes, mills, schools, canals, and churches; fostered the development of cooperative institutions, patterned after those he'd seen prospering in Great Britain; occupied a seat in the territorial legislature; acted as brigadier general of the Cache Valley militia; and served as spiritual leader to the Saints in that area.

On September 3, 1869, at age fifty-eight, Ezra T. Benson died suddenly and unexpectedly. Some four thousand attended his funeral, including three hundred Indian braves who paid their respects to the man who had befriended them. He once explained, "I want most to have a testimony of Jesus Christ that will pierce like a cannonball."

George T. Benson was deeply affected by his father's passing. He had grown close to him—traveled with him, worked at his side, observed his gospel service. It was a rich heritage that Ezra T. passed on to his eldest son, and George in turn inherited his father's capacity for leadership.

George spent his boyhood in Logan, Utah, where he eventually met and married Louisa Alexandrine Ballif, a woman of French descent. Her father, Serge Louis Ballif, had first heard of the Church in 1852 in Lausanne, Switzerland, while serving as a clergyman in the Cathedral of Lausanne. Two young men knocked at his door and told him, in halting French, that the gospel had been restored. Serge had earlier participated in publishing The Gospel of the Holy Ghost, a series of books disputing the Protestant Reformation's claim to the authority lost by the Catholics. This gave him a respectable background in religious issues, and he accepted the gospel message almost immediately. Before leaving for America, he filled a mission for the Church in Switzerland, published gospel tracts, and provided financial assistance to missionaries.

Serge's daughter Louisa and George T. Benson became the parents of thirteen children. George served on the first high council in Cache Valley, and later he and his wife were called to further the settlement of Preston, Idaho, in the northern part of the valley. Subsequently he served as bishop of the Whitney (Idaho) Ward in the Oneida Stake for over twenty years. On one occasion Joseph F. Smith, who later became sixth president of the Church, visited Whitney and took a meal at the Benson farm. The table was laden with food, and the large family had gathered around. Before blessing the food, Elder Smith turned to George, stretched out his long arms, and said, "Bishop Benson, all this, and the gospel, too."

Louisa Ballif Benson, a woman of great faith, served for many years as president of the Oneida Stake Relief Society, a stake that extended as far north as Baker, Oregon, and south to the Utah line. Her calling demanded that she make frequent visits—by horse and buggy to neighbors and via train for longer trips.

On one occasion as she was returning from Oregon by train and walking down the aisle, she heard a voice say, "Sister Benson, sit down and take hold of the seat." She glanced over her shoulder but saw no one. After walking a few steps further, she heard the voice again. Quickly she sat down and took hold of the seat arms. Almost immediately the train jumped the tracks and wrecked. Many were injured but she was unharmed. She removed her white petticoat, made bandages, and administered relief to the injured. The Union Pacific Railroad awarded her a citation for bravery and compassionate service.

Louisa and George's fourth child and second son, born June 24, 1875, carried the name of his father—George T. Benson Jr.

The spirit of country and the soil surged through George Jr.'s veins. He loved horses and rode a spirited mount named Kit. Schoolwork didn't come naturally to him, and he preferred farming to studying.

Even as a boy, George Jr. was methodical. His brother Serge wrote, "George was always dependable and father had great confidence in him. He always took good care of his things. He was slower and more deliberate than I . . . and would still be smoothing and folding his pants when I was in bed and asleep, if we had come home at the same time." Often when George and his brothers arrived home in the evening, the brothers would start to dash inside, only to have George call back, "We must groom and feed the animals before we can expect to feed ourselves." Not only was George his father's namesake, but he was a replica when it came to the gospel. As Serge said, "George was intensely religious, and father and mother never had to drive him to church. He was always ready to go." [^12]

George's prompt, methodical nature extended even into courtship. He insisted on having the horse and buggy every Wednesday evening and again on Friday if there was a dance in Franklin, Preston, or Whitney. He would always see his girlfriend home on Sunday night. Neighbors could tell when George had had a nice evening out, because he'd whistle or sing all the way home.

Who was this girlfriend? George had eyes for only one—Sarah Dunkley. Sarah was born in Franklin, Idaho, in 1878, the sixth of thirteen children of Joseph and Margaret Dunkley. Joseph had been taught the gospel on the streets of his native England. Though not aligned with any religious group, he was a serious student of the Bible and had investigated the doctrines of many denominations. When he heard the message taught by the Latter-day Saint missionaries, he studied the scriptures even more avidly. In time he gained a testimony of the restored gospel. Though his family was opposed to the Mormons, Joseph was relentless in his search for truth, even paying for the elders' lodging at times. He married Margaret Leach, and they studied the gospel together, finally joining the Church against the will of his parents. When Joseph and Margaret announced that they were immigrating to Utah, their families tried to thwart the couple's ambitions. But on April 1, 1854, Joseph and Margaret set sail for America.

The couple were not, however, blessed with children; and with Margaret's consent, Joseph took a second wife, Mary Ann Hobbs, who subsequently died in childbirth. Later he took a third wife, Margaret Wright, and to them were born thirteen children, eight sons and five daughters.

In the late 1850s Brigham Young called Joseph as one of eight men to settle Franklin, Idaho, in northern Cache Valley. Not the least of the pioneer group's troubles were caused by Indians, and night after night Joseph sat watch atop nearby Little Mountain. Men and women alike faced the possibility of confrontation with the natives. One morning as Margaret Wright was alone in her kitchen, she was startled to see a large Indian with his nose pressed against the windowpane. He walked around to the open door and Margaret asked what he wanted. "Me want flour," he answered. Margaret gave him flour. The Indian then said, "Me want sugar," and Margaret supplied sugar. Not satisfied, the Indian demanded, "Me want more flour," to which Margaret said, "No." She had just enough flour left to make biscuits for lunch. Later, when she reported the incident to Joseph, he said, "Margaret, I'm sorry you didn't give him more flour." "But you would have had to go without bread for lunch," she countered. "That would have been better," her husband insisted. "Remember the counsel of President Brigham Young that it is better to feed the Indians than fight them?" That night one of Joseph's finest horses was stolen from the barn.

The Dunkleys homesteaded a parcel of land with a high white alkali content, not the best soil for crops. The rural existence did, however, provide an excellent setting for the development of industry, cooperation, perseverance, and loyalty—all qualities that Sarah Sophia, their sixth child and second daughter, inherited.

Sarah's childhood was typical of pioneer life in Cache Valley—harsh winters, but summers of horseback riding, swimming, and outings in the canyon. She was a young beauty—flashing dark eyes, abundant black hair, and a radiant personality. Around the community she was characterized as "little mother" because of her pleasant and stabilizing influence on other youths. She and her sister Kate became close friends with Addie and Florence Benson, daughters of George T. Benson Sr., and the four were inseparable—playing and singing together and working out on a homemade tumbling mat.

George Benson Jr. was three years older than Sarah, and for a time he thought of her as his younger sisters' friend. But as Sarah matured, George became enthralled with the girl. They took buggy rides, went on picnics in Cub River Canyon, and attended stake conferences in Preston and weekly dances in Franklin. The young couple waltzed beautifully together as old-timers nodded approvingly from the sidelines.

After a wedding date was set, George worked long hours with the railroad to earn extra money (one foreman called him one of the hardest workers he had ever seen) to build a home for his bride. He hauled timber from the nearby Wasatch Range to build a two-room home with a small shanty in back of the house for washing. The home sat on a forty-acre farm a mile and a half northeast of Whitney. Sarah and her mother carded wool and sewed pieces of material together to make patchwork quilts, curtains, bedspreads, and other accessories. At seventeen Sarah completed an advanced sewing course in Logan, and throughout her life she was a superb seamstress. Her talents would prove invaluable in clothing her seven sons and four daughters.

On October 19, 1898, Sarah and George were married in the Logan Temple. The small home they had built and furnished themselves was ready for occupancy. While not elaborate, it was adequate for a young couple in love. One day as George anxiously left the house to go to his work, Sarah called after him, "You forgot something." As he came back, she said, "Oh, never mind," and splashed soapsuds on him. After he had driven off, she explained to her sister-in-law, who was visiting the couple, "We have decided that neither of us leave the other without a good-bye kiss. He sure has a time remembering it."

"I've never forgotten the picture of the house, meager furniture, Sarah washing on the board, the newly planted trees, the beginning of a home, and the wholesomeness of it all," the sister-in-law recalled. [^13]

George was a leading farmer in the valley. He later acquired fifteen Holsteins and sold milk to the local milk-condensing plant. He drove a fine team and took excellent care of his live-stock. Early one April morning his younger brother Frank burst in on the sleeping George and shouted, "Your young Jersey is stuck in the manger. It's suffocating!" George was in the barn in seconds. Just as he found the calf okay, he heard Frank call from outside, "April Fool's!" For his prank, Frank ate a few meals standing up.

George thrived on working in the soil and living by the law of the harvest—that you can only reap what you sow. Though not terribly patient (he was sometimes criticized for expecting too much of others and being impatient with their faults), he was a man of sterling character who felt that no one owed him a living and whose ambition was to help his children help themselves. His wife had qualities to match, particularly when it came to rearing children.

When Sarah learned they were to be blessed with their first child, she and George were ecstatic. They prayed and planned together about their family, and eagerly awaited the baby's arrival.

On August 4, 1899, as Sarah's labor began, George administered to her. Dr. Allan Cutler attended her in the bedroom of their farm home, with both grandmothers, Louisa Benson and Margaret Dunkley, there. The delivery was protracted. As the baby, a large boy, was delivered, the doctor couldn't get him to breathe and quickly laid him on the bed and pronounced, "There's no hope for the child, but I believe we can save the mother." While Dr. Cutler feverishly attended to Sarah, the grandmothers rushed to the kitchen, praying silently as they worked, and returned shortly with two pans of water—one cold, the other warm. Alternately, they dipped the baby first in cold and then in warm water, until finally they heard a cry. The 11 3/4 pound boy was alive! Later both grandmothers bore testimony that the Lord had spared the child. George and Sarah named him Ezra Taft Benson.

From the time he could walk, "T.", as young Ezra was nicknamed, was his father's shadow—riding horses, working in the fields, hitching up the horse and buggy for meetings, playing ball and swimming in the creek. He had a rich sense of heritage, stemming from his birthright as Ezra T. Benson's eldest great-grandson, but also because he idolized his father and, as a young boy, felt an unusual sense of security and deep pride in who he was. Years later, after George Benson died, his eldest son overheard one of the few non-Mormons in Whitney say, "Today we buried the greatest influence for good in Cache Valley." Without question, George Benson was a powerful influence in the life of his eldest son.

Notes and Sources

Space limitations make it impossible to indicate every source examined in the preparation of this biography. The public papers of, published accounts about, and addresses, articles, and books by Ezra Taft Benson are voluminous, and a complete list of them would require a book-sized presentation. Listed, therefore, are only those materials directly involved in the writing of this biography.

I have drawn heavily from the following: the personal journals of Ezra Taft Benson from 1939 to the present (when an excerpt from his journal is quoted, it is not referenced unless the material illustrates specific facts); speeches and addresses of President Benson; interviews with family members, General Authorities, and numerous colleagues of President Benson through the years; and literally hundreds of published sources (including magazine and newspaper articles), most of which have been preserved in over one hundred scrap-books, as well as books by and about him.

The following books provided reference information: Richard O. Cowan, The Church in the Twentieth Century (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985); Leonard J. Arrington, ed., The Presidents of the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986): James B. Allen and Glen M. Leonard, The Story of the Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976).

The following include biographical overviews of President and Sister Benson's life that were helpful: Merlo J. Pusey, "Ezra Taft Benson: A Living Witness for Christ," Improvement Era, April 1956, pp. 234ff.; Lydia Clawson Hoopes, "Ezra T. Benson," Improvement Era, October 1943, pp. 592ff.; Mark E. Petersen, "Ezra Taft Benson: A Habit of Integrity," Ensign, October 1974, pp. 15-29; Mark E. Petersen, "President Ezra Taft Benson," Ensign, January 1986, pp. 2-13; Derin Head Rodriquez, "Flora Amussen Benson: Handmaiden of the Lord," Ensign, March 1987, pp. 14-20; "President Benson: Spiritual, Honest and Straightforward," Church News, April 21, 1985.

Chapter 1, "A Rich Heritage"

In preparing this chapter, I relied heavily upon genealogical records and family histories prepared by members of Ezra Taft Benson's family (in particular, those histories compiled by David and Beth Benson Burton), as well as the following published sources: John Henry Evans and Minnie Egan Anderson, Ezra T. Benson (Deseret News Press, 1947); Descendants of the George T. Benson, Jr. Family (1968); Donald Benson Alder and Elsie L. Alder, The Benson Family (The Ezra T. Benson Genealogical Society, Inc., 1979). See also "The Kinship of Families," transcript of remarks on the television program "What's Your Name," KDYL-TV, January 31, 1954, BYU Extension Division; Gene Allred Sessions, Latter-day Patriots (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975).

Footnotes

I was reared in an ideal home. Though poor in material things, my parents were loving, industrious, and had a love of God in their hearts"

---
Notas:
[^1] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Best Advice I Ever Received," Reader's Digest, November 1954, p. 97.
[^2] Leavitt, "A Boy from Whitney," pp. 24, 26.
[^3] 3. Evans and Anderson, Ezra T. Benson, p. 11.
[^4] 4. Ibid., p. 14.
[^5] 5. Journal History, July 16, 1846.
[^6] 6. Ibid.
[^7] 7. Ibid.
[^8] 8. "Oral History, Ezra Taft Benson," Idaho Heritage 9 (1977): 15.
[^9] 9. See Ezra T. Benson, p. 114; also "Ezra T. Benson," in Journal History, July 16, 1846.
[^10] 10. Evans and Anderson, Ezra T. Benson, p. 125.
[^11] 11. Missionary Blessings, in "Docket of the Municipal Court of the City of Nauvoo."
[^12] 12. See Descendants of the George T. Benson, Jr. Family, 1968.
[^13] 13. Melinda Nelson Benson to Ezra Taft Benson (hereafter ETB in references to correspondence), February 5, 1952.
