Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 2

A Boy from Whitney

In many ways, Ezra Taft Benson was born, as Charles Dickens put it, in the best of times, yet the worst of times. The early 1890s were unsettling years for Americans. It seemed that the moorings of society were being swept away. Agrarian unrest, industrial violence, a sluggish economy, class conflict, and even a march of the poor on Washington indicated just some of the country's problems. The United States had rebounded from a devastating civil war, but American morale was soon to reach low tide with the assassination of President William McKinley.

On the other hand, the early twentieth century was an exciting, invigorating era. The Wright brothers inaugurated a new age with their twelve-second flight at Kitty Hawk, and by the end of the century's second decade, automobiles were quite commonplace. The world became much smaller as man, with his new technology, learned to span the continents.

Closer to home, the Manifesto had announced the end of polygamy for the Church, and Utah had subsequently gained statehood. Accordingly, the Saints achieved some measure of national acknowledgment, if not respect. Heber J. Grant would soon open the Japanese Mission. Just over a quarter of a million Saints lived in forty-three stakes and nineteen missions. The Church was poised for a period of growth destined to internationalize the religious movement that had heretofore been largely confined to the Intermountain West.

It was a time of bridging the gap between old and new. But oblivious to all this, young Ezra Benson's world didn't extend much beyond the small LDS farming community of Whitney, Idaho.

Whitney was, in many ways, an ideal community for a boy born in the dawn of the twentieth century. The northern end of Cache Valley was beautiful, with access to lakes and forests; and, though winters were severe, spring and summer brought the sweet smell of cowslips, wild roses that lined ditchbanks and red hay flowers in the pasture, clear streams that flowed down through the Cub River Canyon, and long, warm days. People were friendly; most of the neighbors were related one way or another; families visited each other without warning and stayed for supper; Ezra's grandpa was also the bishop, had been since anyone could remember; and all but one of the three hundred townspeople were members of the Church (and that one man finally joined). It was a place where a boy worked a man's hours, but also reveled in the freedom of farm life.

Despite Ezra's precarious birth, he was anything but frail and grew into a robust, husky boy. The out-of-doors was in his blood, and he took readily to farming and rural life.

Ezra wasn't an only child for long. Fifteen months after his birth he was joined by a brother, Joseph; fifteen months later, a sister, Margaret—and so on. He eventually had six brothers and four sisters, five of whom were born before Ezra turned eight.

Sarah Benson was adept at handling her brood and intended to raise them properly. She was determined to teach her eldest son some manners. He was, for example, to greet people with a polite "How do you do?" One afternoon the family was seated at the dinner table, with assorted uncles and aunts present, when Ezra looked down from his high chair, noticed the big bowl of boiled eggs, and said, courteously, "How do you do, eggs?" Those at the table erupted in laughter, and it was a family joke that was retold for years.

The Bensons were a happy, unified group. Laughter and singing were heard coming from the little house throughout the day. Ezra would often say that he grew up in an "ideal family," the son of "ideal parents"; his sister Margaret would add, "Those were wonderful days. I could live every one of them over again and love every minute." Sarah had a way of making life fun for her family and a dry sense of humor that caused her husband to teasingly protest that many times he couldn't tell if she was joking or not. But Sarah and George adored each other, and from the outset they created a warm, fun atmosphere in their home.

Nevertheless, farm life was not easy. At an age when most children are scarcely allowed out of their mother's sight, Ezra was an apprentice field hand. As the eldest son, he grew up fast. George Benson relied on his boy to shoulder, in many cases, a man's responsibility.

At age four, Ezra climbed onto the seat of a harrow and, mustering his most grown-up voice, commanded two horses to "giddy-up." By the time he turned five he could drive a team; at seven he was thinning beets, herding cattle, tending chickens, "hunting" eggs ("in the machine shed, in a straw stack, and in any other unlikely place we would find them, ofttimes beneath a defiant hen who had her own ideas about the hatchery business"), cultivating potatoes, and milking cows. As the Benson family expanded, so did their stucco, two-room family home, their acreage, and the chores.

George Benson was an exceptional farmer, the best in Cache Valley, some said. He not only had agricultural savvy, but he was also efficient and generally regarded as a perfectionist. When the rains fell and it was too muddy to get in the fields, he already had chores in the tool shed set aside so time wouldn't be wasted. For a time he worked as a field man for the local sugar factory, teaching farmers how to get maximum tonnage out of their sugar beets. One day as he and Sarah drove to Preston, passing field after field of sugar beets, George repeatedly commented on the straight rows, "My, the man who drilled those must have surely known his business." Finally Sarah asked, "Yes, and who drilled them?" George laughed, pleased at his joke as he replied, "I had the honor."

George took pains to teach his eldest son the finer points of agriculture. From the time Ezra learned to drive a team, he and his father worked together in the fields, in the sheds, and during haying and thrashing seasons. To George's delight, Ezra caught on quickly, liked farm work, and was responsible. He was also intrigued about the scientific aspects of farming—how to increase efficiency, improve varieties of seed, and the like. George let him subscribe to farm magazines to keep abreast of new developments, and Ezra often stayed up late to read the latest information under the glow of a coal oil lamp.

In the dark early-morning hours and numbing cold, Ezra milked a string of dairy cows (using what he humorously referred to as the "arm strong" method) and fed lambs and steers; later he managed his own herd of thirty milk cows. When it came time to build corral fences and cut wood for winter fuel, he drove a wagon team into the nearby forests to chop pine poles. He rode the range, but he also "rode the stick" behind six horses on an old header—a big cutter bar that cut the stalks of grain and left them lying on the ground. In the fall he herded cattle up on the range in the Cache National Forest, living on blue grouse and white potatoes. In the early winter George and the boys felled a few Lombardy poplar trees, a row of which lined the south and east sides of the farm. After the horses had been allowed to eat the bark from the trees, the boys sawed the wood first into blocks and then into smaller pieces. It was their job to keep the large woodbox near the kitchen full, and during the winter it seemed to Ezra that he had to stuff the box continually as the wood burned in the stove so rapidly.

All of Ezra's daily chores had to be done before he left for school in the morning or did homework in the evening. At age eight he enrolled in the little Whitney grade school, but his attendance was sporadic. As was typical of the times, if he was needed on the farm, particularly during planting season or harvest, George didn't hesitate to keep him home.

During haying season, everyone helped. The older children pitched hay as it was pitched onto the wagons, while the younger ones drove wagons, tromped hay down, rode derrick horses, carried water, and ran errands. Grain harvest was also a major event. Sarah and the girls baked bread and pies days in advance. For the better part of a week a crew of twenty or so pulled in with a huge threshing machine and harvested the crop. Afterwards, the children had their bed ticks stuffed with clean, fresh straw. Harvesting the sugar beets was another time when a call for help went out. Even the girls harvested beets—no easy task after hooking, pulling, and cutting the tops off each one.

Tilling the soil was, however, a matter of survival, for the Bensons relied upon their garden of carrots, turnips, and all manner of vegetables and fruits to feed the growing family. Potatoes and apples were placed in pits covered with straw and soil to last the winter; carrots and turnips left in the ground and covered with straw could be dug up all winter long.

Farming is no occupation for a tenderfoot. Only a rare breed of man will work his knuckles to the bone while putting his livelihood at the mercy of the elements, and do it year after year. In any era, it is a tough way to make a living; but at the turn of the century, when farmers homesteaded without milking machines, diesel tractors, and hybrid seed, the challenge of survival was stark. Despite its inherent hardships, farming is something that can get in a man's—and a boy's—blood. It is a reverence for, a love affair with, the land. So it was with young Ezra.

In 1909, when a U. S. Presidential Commission insisted that there had never been a time "when the American farmer was as well off," the Bensons might well have disagreed. Making ends meet to feed the constantly growing family was not easy. But scratching out a living taught Ezra and his brothers and sisters that they couldn't expect to reap what they didn't sow—and cultivate. They also learned how to work and persist at something without immediate reward. Often the crops were damaged by weather and insects. Years later his sister Margaret would say, "We had our hard times, our difficulties. There was nothing easy about raising eleven children in those days." As Ezra recalled, "I presume by some standards we were poor, but no government official ever told us we were, so we never knew it."

For one thing, though there were few extras, there was always plenty to eat. George saw to it that they had a year's supply of staples. Coal was ordered by the carload. Flour, sugar, and other basic commodities were stored in a cellar. Usually a calf or hog was killed in winter and hung under the porch where it stayed frozen until it was eaten.

Then again, it was Sarah's homemaking wizardry that kept her large brood from feeling deprived. A meticulous housekeeper and exceptional cook, she made do. Ezra was often enticed into the kitchen by the aroma of hot bread. He and his brothers loved to cut the top off a loaf, put butter on it, and down it in short order. It took a great deal of persuasion to get her to agree to this, but she usually succumbed to their pressure. Occasionally she purchased bakery bread, at which George always complained, "Where did you get this stuff? It tastes like cotton!" Rather than resort to store-bought bread when she ran short, Sarah made "Lumpy Dick," a porridge created by stirring whole wheat flour into hot milk. Ezra didn't care for the concoction except when his mother laced it with cinnamon and a little sugar.

At least once a year the family hitched the horses to the white-topped buckboard and made their pilgrimage to Brigham City, Utah, some thirty-five miles south, for a load of peaches, cantaloupes, tomatoes, watermelons, and other orchard fruits. They raised apples, pears, plums, and raspberries. Sarah put up hundreds of bottles of fruit, plus jams and jellies, every year.

Ezra's responsibilities weren't confined to farming. Every Wednesday night George and Sarah went to choir practice, leaving him to tend younger brothers and sisters. Sometimes he wondered if his parents didn't expect a little much of him. "But they had full confidence in my ability to meet almost any situation," he admitted. "That helped me have confidence."

When the family was young, they got along, for the most part, without modern conveniences—no running water, electricity, telephone, or even gloves for their hands because gloves were too expensive. On Saturday one of the boys, usually Ezra, pumped water until his arms ached so Sarah could do the washing. That evening an old tub was dragged into the center of the kitchen and filled with water that had been heated on the stove. The girls bathed first; then the boys carried the tub outside, dumped the water, and poured in fresh water for their baths. Every family member went through the ritual. Ezra never forgot the day his mother first turned on running water from the tap. She cried.

The home was enlarged as the family grew, but the only heat in the upstairs bedrooms came through a grill over the kitchen stove that funneled heat into the girls' rooms. As more bedrooms were needed, Ezra and one of the other boys slept on the screened porch off the kitchen. More than once he awoke in the winter covered by a light dusting of snow.

Any kind of serious discouragement was not part of young Ezra's experience. "Very seldom, if ever, did I find mother depressed," he remembered, "and never can I remember her raising her voice, except when she called father in from the field when something urgent had occurred."

George Benson was by nature a happy man. First thing in the morning he shouted, "Let a little sunshine in. Clear the darkened windows, open wide the door, let a little sunshine in." If the season was warm, he would open the front door, then call his children—"Ezra, Joe, Margaret, time to get chores done"—and shake the stove vigorously. The boys' room was directly upstairs, and that was the sign they had better get up.

Though they worked hard to carve out an existence, the Bensons had recreation too. Ezra remembered, "Father and mother seemed to enjoy each other to the fullest. Never were they so happy as when they were together and the children were with them." George loved to do things with his family, for he understood that the rigors of farm labor needed to be spiced up. After the beets were hoed, thinned, or topped, or all the hay was hauled, he would take the family on a trip—to Bear Lake to fish and swim for a day or so, or to the canyon to camp out. Some of the work was, to a boy, half work and half play—trapping muskrats and rounding up cattle in the canyons.

George always provided good horses for the family to ride. In the winter he kept one team sharp-shod so they could be driven along the road to shine with the bobsleighs down near the church. In winter, as many of the Bensons as were old enough got into the action of breaking colts, a task made easier in deep snow. Even the girls joined in.

Most Saturdays were half-holidays. Around one in the afternoon, the work stopped, and the family joined in everything from horse and foot races to baseball games and small rodeos, where the boys tried to ride calves. Swimming, hiking, and picnicking were favorite activities. It was said that Sarah could pack the finest picnic basket in the valley. The Bensons had the first phonograph in the area, and the boys had a basketball court with backboards at both ends and a dirt playing surface that George rolled until it was smooth and packed solid. The Benson farm was a gathering place for young people.

The family loved to sing—Ezra in particular. As soon as someone else was old enough to babysit, he joined his parents at choir practice. Sarah sang as she sewed at the treadle machine, hymns such as "Have I Done Any Good in the World Today?" and popular tunes such as "Annie Laurie" and "In the Evening by the Moonlight." At nighttime the family gathered around the old piano for singing.

There was even fun during Idaho's cold, harsh winters. When the snow drifted over the fences, Ezra put on skis, tied a long rope to a saddle horn, and skiied behind his horse. When the road became snowpacked, the boys skated holding onto a horse's tail or dragging behind a rope tied to a bobsleigh.

George's brother Serge ran the local store, and when he came to visit at Christmas, he would bring a washtub full of presents, one for each child. Once he taught his nephew Ezra in three classes a week—priesthood, Sunday School, and MIA. A series of lessons on courage, particularly moral courage, had a great impact on young Ezra's character. Serge was popular with youth, had a great influence with boys, and could teach without preaching. Serge may also have preserved Ezra's life. While on a fishing expedition with his uncle, Ezra reached to climb over a ledge. Just then a blast from his uncle's gun fired over his head, and he looked up in time to see a coiled rattlesnake blown into the canyon several hundred feet below.

Marbles was a favorite game, and Ezra became proficient. One season he started with ten and won well over a thousand. Serge provided a place in front of his store where the boys could play marbles on their way home from school. Sometimes he gathered them inside for wrestling matches. Ezra thought Serge was one of the greatest "boys' men" he ever met. George never seemed to worry when his son was with Serge.

Serge seemed to have a special feeling for his nephew. Once when a neighbor remarked how straight and proudly Ezra T. carried himself, Serge replied, "Why shouldn't he? He's the only boy I know who has never done anything of which he should be ashamed." Serge often told his own children that Ezra was not an ordinary young man, but one chosen for a special mission.

There was mutual respect between Serge and George. Uncle Serge told Ezra about the time George was helping build a home near the Whitney store. One of the workmen continually told vulgar stories. When the man announced that he had an especially good story and, in a mock tone, asked, "Are there any women present?" George immediately replied, "No, but there are gentlemen present and if you can't say something decent, keep your mouth shut." The foul language stopped.

Patriotic holidays were big events for the Bensons, who never missed a celebration—July 4th in Preston, July 24th in Whitney, and June 15th, Idaho Day, in Franklin. The boys shined the white-top buckboard, curried the horses, and put flags in the horses' bridles. There was always a big parade early in the morning, followed by a stirring patriotic gathering. Years later Margaret still remembered the impact of those events. "There would be wonderful talks about our country, and we'd all stand and sing 'Oh Say, Can You See!' It would thrill us, it was so stirring. Even today, when I sing the national anthem, I can feel the thrill I had when I sang that song as a child." Sarah took plenty of fried chicken and salads, and after the assembly the family would spread quilts on the lawn for a picnic. Each child got a few pennies to spend on whatever he or she wanted—ice cream, hot dogs, popcorn, the Ferris wheel.

Christmas and Thanksgiving were exciting holidays spent alternately with the Benson or the Dunkley grandparents. The family traveled by bobsleigh with bells on the horse. Both families were music enthusiasts, and singing and dancing filled the grandparents' homes. Grandma Dunkley could sometimes be persuaded to dance the Highland fling and tell Indian stories.

Like all children, Ezra and his brothers and sisters looked forward to Christmas for months. On Christmas Eve they listened for the sound of sleighbells, which their father rang during the night. If the children weren't in bed, Santa wouldn't stop. On Christmas morning there would be Santa taking toys off the tree and presenting them to the children. Then he'd be off with a "Ho, ho, ho!"

It didn't dawn on the children that their father was always out doing chores alone on Christmas morning, until one summer day they stumbled across a Santa Claus costume at the bottom of a big trunk. So that's why Father always arrived after Santa left! After that, whenever Father and Mother made their visits to Santa, the older children hunted to find toys they'd brought back. One year the boys discovered a sleigh in the top of the granary.

Uncle Serge often brought books for the children to read. Between chores and church work, there wasn't a lot of time for reading, but George and Sarah were careful about the literature that came into their home. Two statements influenced young Ezra: "Be as careful of the books you read as of the company you keep" and "Except a living man, there is nothing so wonderful as good books." On stormy days when he couldn't work outside, on Sundays, and some evenings, Ezra holed up with a book.

As a boy, Ezra read the scriptures, particularly the Book of Mormon, and volumes of success stories by Horatio Alger and the biographies of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln. Upon graduation from the eighth grade, at which time he felt "he'd learned about everything there was to learn," his grandparents gave him a two-volume set, Little Visits with Great Americans, by Orison Marden, which he thumbed until it was dog-eared. During high school, Tolstoy's What Men Live By and Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress stirred him.

To Ezra, his dad was his hero. Such admiration of his father was in many ways a tradition with the Bensons. The family was unified and loyal, though occasional domestic flare-ups occurred. "We children had our differences and arguments," Margaret said. "Father was very strict about not letting us quarrel when he was in the house. How mother ever put up with eleven of us with our water fights, pranks, and teasing is more than I can comprehend."

But underneath the everyday tangles was a foundation of harmony and love. On April 27, 1915, the Deseret News carried an article reporting that President Joseph F. Smith had announced the home evening program. He promised that to those who obeyed, "great blessings will result. Love at home and obedience to parents will increase. . . . The youth of Israel . . . will gain power to combat the vile influences and temptations which beset them." That evening George Benson told his family, "The Presidency has spoken, and this is the word of the Lord to us." From that time forward, not a week passed without home evening. Each child had an assignment—to pray, to conduct, to give the lesson, to plan the program, to prepare refreshments ("which we loved because then we could have what we wanted," Margaret said). They sang songs, read from the scriptures, told pioneer stories, wrote letters to relatives and missionaries, played games, and shared talents.

George Benson was a man who took Church leaders at their word. Morning and evening prayers, with everyone kneeling around the table, were never missed. "The spirit of gratitude and thanksgiving was always emphasized in our family prayers," Ezra says. Because his parents relied heavily upon the Lord, Ezra, while still a boy, patterned after them. His father often counseled, "Remember that whatever you do or wherever you are, you are never alone. Our Heavenly Father is always near. You can reach out and receive His aid through prayer." In 1954 Ezra would write in a Reader's Digest article, "All through my life the counsel to depend on prayer has been prized above any other advice I have ever received. It has become an integral part of me, an anchor, a constant source of strength." [^1]

Attending church was accepted as a matter of fact. Work on the farm ceased on the Sabbath day, and the whole family made preparations the night before. Margaret baked a cake every Saturday for many years. Usually at least one of the eleven had a talk to prepare. All laid their clothes out so there would be no scrambling for shoes and socks the next morning. George Benson was fastidious and punctual. He felt that the Spirit of the Lord was present when the meeting began, and if family members weren't there on time, they missed out. Every Sunday morning he announced, like a local stationmaster, "The buggy will leave at twenty minutes to ten. Those who aren't ready will have to walk." The buggy often pulled out of the yard as a child or two, sometimes with boots or coat in hand, ran to catch up. Only once did George Benson arrive late. That Sunday he had a sick horse, and by the time he and the veterinarian had attended to it, the family was behind schedule. Even so, they still walked in during the opening hymn. One of George's sisters lived across the street from the church, and she set her watch by George. When she saw the Benson buggy approaching, she knew it was time to leave for church. However, that Sunday morning, as she walked out of her home, she could hear music. She immediately confronted George, a confused look on her face. "They're singing. Are we late?" she asked.

The little rock meetinghouse in Whitney had one big room heated by a pot-bellied stove on the main floor and a large room in the basement that was often used for dances and parties. On Sunday, both rooms were partitioned off by curtains for classrooms. The ward was close-knit, and parties were for everyone, with babies sleeping on benches and daughters dancing with fathers. In the summer the ward met at the ball diamond for baseball and picnics, often featuring Grandma Benson's fried chicken, corn on the cob, and watermelon.

George and Sarah were sticklers for proper behavior. "Where gospel principles were concerned Father was very strict," Margaret remembers. "When he said no the first time, we knew that meant no." Though the children could always "expect Father and Mother's support when we were in the right, it was a bit perilous to ask for their support when we were in error," says Ezra Taft. And when the children were in the wrong, they faced the music.

One day Ezra T. and his brother Joe, who was small for his age, were walking home from school when a group of older boys, cousin George B. Parkinson among them, started to heckle Joe. In defense of his younger brother, Ezra T. intervened, and soon sharp words turned into a fisticuffs. George B. went home with a bloodied nose, Ezra T. with his hands skinned and covered with blood. Sarah didn't chastise her son for defending Joe, but she promptly asked him to run over to the home of Aunt Lulu (George B.'s mother) to fetch a start of yeast. "Mother, please don't ask me to do that," Ezra pleaded. But Sarah would not relent, and mother's requests were the same as a demand for the children. George had taught them that. When Ezra arrived, Aunt Lulu pulled both boys into a bedroom and gave them a "good lecturing about cousins living together in peace. I would have been happy to leave the yeast and run," Ezra said. When he finally escaped Aunt Lulu's clutches, he hurried home "feeling somewhat repentant but that I had done my duty to protect my young brother."

On the whole, stern discipline wasn't an everyday occurrence in the Benson home. "We were too busy to get into a lot of trouble," Ezra recalled.

That does not mean that boys would not be boys. Ezra was a prankster and, along with his brothers and friends, had his moments. On Halloween they were known to press their luck to the limit. Using horses, they disengaged outhouses and relocated a few wagons. Late one holiday night, he and his friends slipped into the watermelon patch owned by the local sheriff (who was known to be somewhat timid). Hearing noise in the patch, the sheriff shot his revolver into the air. One of the boys, who was carrying a six-shooter, fired back into the air. Immediately the sheriff yelled, "Shoot in the air, boys. That's what I'm doing." "That's about the closest we ever came to any real friction," Ezra insisted.

William Poole, a cousin about Ezra's age, got his hair cut at Uncle George's, who had the only clippers in town. Ezra T. did the cutting. "He'd start at the back and come right over to the front," William remembered. "Then he'd go by one ear over to the other ear. Then he'd get the mirror and show us how we looked, and we had four patches of hair. He'd say, 'Is that the way you wanted it?' We'd tell him no, and then he'd always discover that the clippers wouldn't cut anymore. He'd tease us for a long while, and then finally the clippers would start working and he'd finish our hair." [^2]

Ezra once convinced two friends to steal a platter of fudge from a cousin's house. But despite his periodic mischief, Grandma Benson always told other family members, "Don't ever say anything bad about Ezra. I have a lot of special grandchildren, but Ezra T. will make us all very proud someday."

Ezra got some of his fun-loving spirit from his father, who, though no-nonsense on the basics, was a tease. When one of the girls was anticipating the arrival of her date, George sat in his favorite chair, took his shoes off and put them on the table, or draped his socks over a chair—any silly thing to fluster them.

For most of Ezra's growing-up years, his grandfather, George Benson Sr., was bishop of the Whitney Ward, and he frequently emphasized the theme of missionary work. Year after year Ezra listened to returned missionaries relate their experiences—all of them mentioning the difficulties they had had. He wondered why the missionaries almost always said these were the happiest years of their lives. Nevertheless, Ezra wanted to serve a mission, and even as a boy he worried that he might not have the opportunity.

One Sunday when two missionaries reported their missions, seventeen-year-old Ezra sat on the front bench, thoroughly entranced. Afterwards he asked his father how old he had to be to receive his patriarchal blessing. His father replied there wasn't a standard age requirement, but that a person had to be worthy. "Am I worthy?" Ezra asked. His father thought for a moment, then answered, "As your father, I think you are. But it's for the bishop to say. Why don't you go ask the bishop?" Ezra located the bishop, his grandfather, and the two found an isolated corner of the chapel, where Bishop Benson asked Ezra some questions. Finally he wrote on a slip of paper authorization for the blessing. The stake patriarch was visiting that day, and Ezra handed the white-haired man, John Edward Dalley, the slip of paper. "My boy," Brother Dalley said, "if you'll come with me, we'll walk up the street to brother Bert Winward's, and I'll give you the blessing today."

That day Brother Dalley pronounced a blessing that answered the boy's prayers. Ezra was told that, if faithful, he would go on a mission to the nations of the earth, that his life would be preserved on land and sea, that he would raise his voice in testimony and would grow in favor with the Almighty, and that many would rise up and bless his name. Ezra went home walking on air.

The influence of the gospel permeated Ezra's upbringing. Often he found his mother bending over the ironing board, pressing long strips of white cloth. Newspapers lined the floor to keep the material from getting soiled. When Ezra asked what she was doing, she answered, "These are temple robes, son. Your father and I are going to the temple in Logan." Then she would place the flatiron on the stove and tell her son how important it was to be able to go to the temple. She also expressed how much she hoped her children would enjoy temple blessings.

For Sarah Benson, no sacrifice was too much, no assignment too demanding, when it came to the Church. Though rearing eleven children in the process, she occupied several challenging callings, ward Relief Society president among them. During that time, seven-year-old Ezra harnessed the horse and got the buggy ready for his mother to go to her midweek Relief Society meetings. He also gathered a half bushel of wheat from the granary and put it in the buggy. In a forerunner of the welfare program, Relief Society sisters stored and distributed wheat. (Following World War I, President Herbert Hoover called for that wheat to relieve suffering and hunger in central Europe. And some three decades later it would be Sarah's eldest son who coordinated shipments of grain and other goods for needy Latter-day Saints in Europe following World War II.)

George, too, was called upon to serve in an unexpected but demanding way. In the spring of 1912 a chicken pox epidemic raged in the Whitney Ward. One Sunday morning Sarah and George went to sacrament meeting without their children, leaving them at home where they wouldn't be exposed to the contagious disease. At meeting's close, the owner of the Whitney store opened his store long enough for the farmers to pick up their mail.

As they drove toward home, Sarah sorted the mail and found a letter addressed to George T. Benson Jr. The return address on the envelope was Box B, Salt Lake City, Utah. Mission calls were issued from Box B. In those days, no one asked if you were ready, willing, or able to fill a mission; the bishop assessed worthiness and the call came. Sarah hurriedly opened the letter. The news was bittersweet: her husband had been called on a mission. He was to leave as soon as he could get his affairs in order. Sarah was carrying their eighth child.

As the couple drove into the yard, the children ran out of the house to find both of their parents crying. Ezra recalled, "We'd seen father in tears and mother offering comfort, and mother weeping and father offering consolation. But never both of them at once." All seven of the children crowded around the buggy, unsettled at their parents' lack of composure. Then their parents reassured them, "Everything is fine. Come into the living room. We want to talk to you."

The children quickly gathered inside on the worn sofa, and their father explained what had happened. Through her tears, Sarah told them: "We're so proud that Father's considered worthy to go on a mission. We're crying a little because it means two years of separation, and your father and I have never been separated more than two nights at a time since our marriage."

To finance the mission, George sold his eighty acres of dry land, and Sarah and the children doubled up and shared their home with James Chadwick and his new bride, who helped farm the row crops. Twelve-year-old Ezra was left to supervise a dairy herd and care for the pasture land and a few remaining acres of hay.

In addition to greatly missing his father, to whom Ezra had grown even closer in his early teenage years, the strapping boy was affected by George Benson's unexpected mission call in other ways. Hard as the work on the farm might have been heretofore, things would be entirely different. His father had been his best friend; Ezra had always had him to look up to. Now his younger brothers and sisters, even his mother, would be counting more on him, and he didn't want to let them down. "I always considered my father the ideal, and I hoped I could follow his example," Ezra said.

Measuring up to George Benson's example was a tall order—one that required integrity, industry, devotion. Ezra knew he no longer had the luxury of being a boy. In his father's absence, he would be the man of the house. The worry-free days of boyhood were gone.

Ezra Taft Benson's childhood has been detailed by himself and other family members in numerous talks, addresses, and articles, as well as in various family histories. In addition, interviews were conducted with or written recollections were received from Margaret Benson Keller, George Benson III, Orval Benson, Lera Benson Whittle, Sarah Benson Eveleth, Florence Peck Packer, Effie Peck Stevenson, and William Poole.

Through the years several detailed oral interviews have been conducted with President Benson. In 1974 Dr. James B. Allen conducted extensive interviews for the James Moyle Oral History Program, a typescript of which is in the Church Archives, Historical Department of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Reed Benson interviewed his father at length in 1984, and the author conducted seven additional interviews with President Benson in 1986. All were used heavily in preparing this and subsequent chapters. See also Melvin Leavitt, "A Boy from Whitney," New Era, November 1986, pp. 20-31; "Franklin Stake of Zion" in Andrew Jenson, Encyclopedic History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: Corporation of the President, 1941), p. 262; "Man, the Temple of God," an address by Ezra Taft Benson dated June 17, 1978; "Life Sketch of Geo. T. Benson," Franklin County Citizen, August 29, 1934; Lera Benson Whittle, "My Life Story" (unpublished manuscript); Mrs. Serge B. Benson to Ezra Taft Benson, February 2, 1952; and the following unpublished manuscripts by Ezra Taft Benson: "Why I Am What I Am" (circa 1925), "Sarah Dunkley Benson," and "Personal Incidents and Observations."

Footnotes

"Those days on the farm when Father was away were a real test for the family. But there came into our home a spirit of missionary work that never left it."

---
Notas:
[^1] Leavitt, "A Boy from Whitney," p. 28.
[^2] Sessions, Latter-day Patriots, p. 77.
