Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 3

Man of the House

In a matter of weeks George Benson was fifteen hundred miles away, answering his call to the Northern States Mission. At home his expectant wife and their seven children were trying to adjust. Valdo, the youngest, walked for days through the barnyard calling, "Daddy, Daddy."

"We had some real tests on the farm," Ezra remembered, many of which affected him directly. He took on extra chores and worries, sandwiching them in before and after school—when he could get there. He dug vegetables from under the snow, comforted brothers and sisters who missed their father, helped discipline and encourage them, and resisted, at least part of the time, the urge to behave as a boy his age could be expected to behave.

He bore his duties well. George hadn't been gone long, however, when Ezra faced a challenge of larger proportions. A raging smallpox epidemic invaded the crowded farmhouse, and a red flag hanging out front cautioned visitors to stay away. Everyone became seriously ill—including Ezra and his mother. In her delicate condition, Sarah became critically ill, and the doctor decreed that she must call George home from the mission field. She protested, but the physician was adamant. He was concerned about the unborn baby, but even more so about this thirty-four-year-old woman who, in his judgment, couldn't possibly fight off smallpox while carrying a child—all with her husband half a country away.

When Sarah went into delivery, her condition became so precarious that the doctor insisted George be called home. But Sarah had the last word. "No," she insisted in her weakened condition. "Let him stay and finish his mission. The Lord will take care of me." Shortly thereafter she delivered a son, their fifth, and named him George Taft III. The infant appeared to have grown to full size while in the womb, but was born shriveled from lack of nourishment. In time, though, both Sarah and her baby recovered.

There were other kinds of challenges. One evening as Sarah and Margaret drove home in a one-horse buggy, a violent storm arose, buffeting the lightweight carriage. Sarah quickly pulled into a neighbor's yard about a half mile from home and huddled Margaret to her. But she feared the children at home were in danger, so she prayed and felt prompted to prod the horse back onto the road.

As the frightened horse struggled for footing, trees crashed around them and limbs flew like arrows. Suddenly a huge tree crashed behind them, blocking the road. Had Sarah hesitated even a few seconds, she and Margaret would have been blocked from home and might even have been injured. Instead, Sarah arrived at the homestead to find the living room window blown out and the children huddled in the kitchen around a flickering lamp.

As the children grew older, they reflected with wonder on that period and their mother's endurance and faith. More than one of them said, "Never did we hear a murmur from her lips."

Before he left on his mission, George arranged for monies from the sale of half his farm to go to the family during his absence; nevertheless, Sarah and the children, by and large, provided for themselves. They sold milk and traded eggs for groceries at the store in Whitney, tended their garden and orchard, and stored potatoes and apples for use all winter. Frugal by nature and experienced at making do, Sarah churned butter, patched and repatched clothing, and kept meals simple. Suppers of bread and milk with tender green onions were common. Ezra arose early, milked the cows, and did other chores before leaving for school. In the evening he tended chores before doing homework. When he milked the cows, his younger brothers and sisters often came to the barn so he could squirt milk in their mouths. He was fairly accurate, though sometimes he misfired, not always accidentally. "'T' did the work of a man, though he was only a boy," Margaret remembered. "He took the place of father for nearly two years."

Meanwhile, the family received frequent letters from George with such postmarks as Des Moines, Cedar Rapids, and Chicago—places that seemed halfway around the world. In the evening by the faint glow of a coal oil lamp, with the children hunched around the kitchen table, Sarah read the prized letters. "We had great spiritual moments in our home while Father was on his mission," Ezra said. "In our prayers at night Mother prayed that Father would be successful and that he wouldn't worry about home. She prayed that our work would go well in the fields, that we'd be kind to each other. She may have wept in the privacy of her bedroom, but she never doubted Father's call. When your mother prays with such fervor, night after night, you think twice before you do something to disappoint her."

With each week, as letters arrived and George related his experiences of perseverance and faith, a spirit of missionary work enveloped the farm house. Ezra, in particular, relished each letter. His father's stories and words excited him, even moved him. (In time, all eleven of George's children served missions, some more than one.)

In those days it was customary for missionaries to room in the homes of local Saints. In one city, however, as Elder Benson and his companion found lodging in a home where the elders had lived for years, they were astonished to learn that the homeowners weren't members of the Church. Finally George asked the head of the house, "How long have you known the missionaries?" "Ten years," was the reply. "Ten years!" George exclaimed. "You have an obligation. Have you prayed about it? Have you read the Book of Mormon?" "Yes, we have read the Book of Mormon," the man answered, "but only a little of it. And no, we have never prayed about it."

That night the family called on George Benson to offer a prayer, which turned into a kneeling sermon. He challenged them to read the Book of Mormon in its entirety, and he and his companion taught them the gospel. A child overheard the parents say that they must look into this religion, and in time all were baptized. (Four decades later George's son Ezra Taft Benson, by then an apostle, would perform the marriage of a daughter of that family.)

Ezra absorbed these stories coming from the father he idolized. They made the extra work at home worth it. Ezra seemed naturally inclined toward religion. As Margaret said, "The Church seemed to be his first priority. He loved to participate in anything he was asked to do." A friend commented, "He was just a little bit more spiritual than the rest of us." [^1]

Ezra couldn't remember when he didn't have a testimony—not that his early life was marked by dramatic spiritual milestones, but he accepted the gospel and was willing to try to live its teachings. In this and other ways, he modeled after his father. His sister Sarah said, "Our father was very strong, physically and spiritually. He was also very tender. Ezra inherited those qualities."

George read the scriptures, particularly the Book of Mormon, to his children, and Ezra always rejoiced on those occasions. Family prayer, held regularly, was a time to thank the Lord for their abundant blessings. Ezra couldn't remember his father ever going to the field without first having family prayer. If he forgot, Sarah always reminded him. And attending church on Sunday, choir practice on Wednesday evening, priesthood meeting on Monday night, and other meetings in between was routine. Ezra's first attempt to give a talk in a church meeting was at a meeting of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, one of the Church's youth organizations. He made two key points: there is always room at the top, and America is another name for opportunity.

In this atmosphere, Ezra's spiritual inclinations flourished, but in such a natural way that it never occurred to him that his upbringing was different from any other. Religious activity was not contrived, never forced. Behavior was modeled. In particular, Ezra observed his father closely, and one of the first qualities he discerned was integrity. It was commonly accepted in the community that if George Benson thought something was all right, it was all right. It seemed to him that Edgar A. Guest must have been writing about his father when he wrote "A Real Man," which began,

Men are of two kinds, and he

Was of the kind I'd like to be.

Some preach their virtues, and a few

Express their lives by what they do.

That sort was he.

When George Benson returned home after almost two years, he found a growing, changing, but happy family and a farm that had survived his absence (in fact, he was able to purchase additional acres, all tillable and some more fertile than those he had sold to finance his mission, which caused him to say his mission had been prosperous, in more ways than one). He also found that the twelve-year-old boy he had waved good-bye to had become a young man.

It's possible that George's mission did as much for his eldest son as it did for himself. The firsthand experience with faith, the shouldering of heavy responsibility—it all prodded Ezra to handle more than he might have otherwise done. And as George sat on a one-legged stool, milking cows and singing at full voice "Ye Elders of Israel," "Israel, Israel, God Is Calling," and "Come, All Ye Sons of God," Ezra could see that his father had also grown. The songs echoed through the barn and fields so often that Ezra learned every word of these and other missionary songs and could repeat them throughout his life.

In addition to emphasizing missionary work, the family's sacrifice reinforced their total commitment to the gospel—something of which Ezra saw repeated evidence.

As tithing settlement approached one December, Ezra over-heard his parents discussing a fifty-dollar note due at the bank and the fifty dollars they owed in tithing. Yet they had only fifty dollars to their name. George had tried, without success, to earn money to cover the deficit by selling a hay derrick he had built. Their alternatives were clear: they could either pay the bank note and hope to pay their tithing soon, or they could pay the tithing and hope to meet the note when it came due. They decided to pay the tithing, and the next evening they handed the bishop their fifty dollars. As they drove home, a neighbor stopped them to inquire about the hay derrick. When he learned the asking price, he made out a check for fifty dollars on the spot. George paid back the bank.

Ezra learned from his father in other ways. Though George was a man of few words, his interests became Ezra's interests. One thing that caught George's attention was patriotism and, to some degree, politics. He believed that the Founding Fathers of the United States had been inspired, and on one occasion he openly supported a particular candidate and even made mention of the man in family prayers. When George's candidate lost the election, Ezra was anxious to hear what his father would say in his next prayer. George prayed for the man who had won. When Ezra asked how he could pray for the man who had defeated his candidate, he replied, "Son, I think he'll need our prayers even more than my candidate would have."

At age fourteen Ezra graduated from the small elementary school in Whitney. Though he had missed school often in the fall for sugar beet harvest and in the spring for planting, he had completed the required study in six years. The following year, 1914, he was off to the Oneida Stake Academy in Preston, a Church-sponsored school where morning devotional and prayer began each day's activities and the instructors opened new worlds to the farmboy. From Harrison R. Merrill, a large man who had a home up the Cub River, he acquired a love of literature—poetry in particular. Ezra also enjoyed carpentry, often staying late to work on projects. He crafted a cupboard and table, an oak desk with shelves on either side, and a hat rack, and was "quite proud" of himself.

It was at the academy that Ezra first met Harold B. Lee, who was a year ahead of him in school. They became good friends, and both sang in the school's first choir. Ezra also played trombone, though his major interests were agriculture and vocational training. He felt that "a man ought to be able to repair something," and he pursued manual training wholeheartedly. He played basketball with the same intensity and enthusiasm. George Benson enjoyed basketball and encouraged all seven of his sons in the game. Once he issued a challenge through the Franklin County Citizen that his family would take on any other family in basketball. "We were probably fortunate we didn't have any takers," Ezra said.

George had his younger sons milk the cows so Ezra could travel with his high school team. Ezra, who played forward and was the most accurate shooter, was captain of the team. They traveled up and down the Snake River Valley, taking on any organized team they could find—town teams, high school teams, even the teams from Ricks Normal College at Rexburg Idaho, and the Brigham Young College in Logan, Utah. In Shelley, Idaho, where there was no basketball court, they drained the swimming pool and attached temporary backboards on either end.

Participation in competitive athletics taught Ezra several things, including sportsmanship. "I learned to play fair. Father always stressed that. 'It is better to lose than lose your temper,' he'd always say." But even George got caught up in the competition. Sarah frequently put her hand on his arm and said, "Now, George, don't overdo it." Ezra remembers his father swearing only once. The Oneida Stake Academy was playing Brigham Young College in Logan, and late in the game Oneida trailed by a point after failing to convert on several attempts. Ezra suddenly got the ball and an exasperated George yelled, "Hell, 'T', put it in!" "It was shocking to the local citizens coming from George Benson, but apparently they understood his enthusiasm and anxiety," Ezra said. "When we finished with a one-point victory, Father was overjoyed."

During one game, Marion G. Romney, who would serve with Ezra as a General Authority many years later, suited up for the opposing team from Ricks. Though Oneida won by a point, the Rexburg team treated the Oneida squad to a bobsleigh ride to Sugar City for a contest there. Ezra drove the team most of the way. In later years he'd say he "always received a greater thrill driving a good team of horses than from the finest automobile."

Until his brothers were old enough to attend Oneida Academy with him, Ezra usually rode his pony to school. En route, he would stop at Worm Creek to check his string of muskrat traps. In the evening he would check them again and gather up the day's take. Before milking cows and cleaning the stable in the evening, he skinned and stretched the pelts over a cedar shingle, shaped them with his pocket knife to proper size, and hung them to dry. Then he shipped them to a Chicago furrier. The proceeds helped pay for books and clothing and added to the family coffer.

The Oneida Stake Academy was noted for its discipline. One day while taking an economics exam, Ezra's pencil lead broke. As he leaned across the aisle to borrow a penknife, the teacher walked up the aisle, took his papers, accused him of cheating, and announced, "You will not be allowed to play in the basketball game tonight." Ezra tried to explain what had happened, but the instructor would hear nothing of it.

Heartsick at the accusation and frustrated at failing to clear his name and being disqualified from competition, he went home to talk with his father. "Father asked me if I had cheated and looked on the other person's paper," Ezra recalled. "I assured him that I had not cheated, and looked him squarely in the face as I told him so." George believed his son and replied, "'T', it's all right. Things will work out. Don't worry. Now go do your milking." While Ezra was milking cows, the coach called and said that the principal wanted to see Ezra before the game. Ezra went reluctantly, still disappointed and discouraged. When the principal asked Ezra to confess his dishonesty, Ezra again insisted that he had not been dishonest. Minutes before the game he received permission to play. "But my spirits were so broken I was unable to put my heart fully into the game," he said. "We lost, which of course was a disappointment, but the greater disappointment to me was the fact that I had been misjudged and accused of violating a principle that had been an important part of my training. It's the only time I can remember having my honor questioned. I did learn from the incident how important it was to keep my name and my father's name above reproach." He also learned to avoid even the appearance of evil.

Ezra's father was undoubtedly proud of his eldest son. Ezra worked hard on the farm, progressively accepting more responsibility. He was strong, capable of doing a man's work. Area farmers traded chores to cut down on hiring of help, and Ezra was called upon frequently. At age sixteen, Ezra earned lasting local fame by thinning an acre of beets in one day. It was backbreaking work, using a wide-bladed, short-handled hoe, and the surprised farmer paid him two five-dollar gold pieces and two silver dollars. Ezra had never felt so rich.

William Poole, Ezra's cousin, explained the significance of the feat: "I would stake out three-fourths of an acre of beets and get up before sunrise and work until dark to finish. 'T' was the first person I remember who thinned an acre of beets in one day.

"Uncle George taught all the boys to work hard," William continued. "My father liked to hire 'T' to pitch hay because he worked hard. I liked to tromp hay for 'T' because he could pitch a fork of hay exactly where I needed it."

As a teenager, Ezra dug trenches for the pipes that brought water from a nearby spring through underground pipes into the Benson home, and postholes for the posts that supported wires that carried electricity into Whitney. He also drove teams into the nearby forests with his father to fell timber for derricks or fences. Sometimes he slept under a load of timber to escape the elements.

"I grew up believing that the willingness and ability to work is the basic ingredient of successful farming," Ezra said. "Hard, intelligent work is the key. Use it, and your chances for success are good." [^2]

But there was time for fun, too. Sarah's brother, John Dunkley, purchased the first car in the community, a Ford. After church, children gathered around, hoping to see him crank it and start down the road, kicking up dust as he went. In 1915 George purchased his first car, a Dodge. The self-propelled buggy was a miracle in its time, though the ride wasn't much better than that of the hay wagon. Occasionally George let Ezra take the car out alone. One Saturday Ezra drove to Logan. The only stretch of pavement was a short distance between Smithfield and Logan, and heading down a slight grade on that stretch, Ezra pushed the speed to fifty-one miles an hour. When he reported his feat, George could scarcely believe him. His mother protested, "You could have been killed."

In the winter the family still opted for the bobsleigh over the car. En route to church they would pick up passersby, and the sleigh would be full, with people standing on the runners at the side of the carriage. When Ezra drove, he couldn't resist skidding around corners—especially if he and his friends were going to a social function. The corner by the Whitney store became especially slick from all the whirling, making the sport dangerous. But Ezra was skillful in handling the horses, and though he liked to have fun, he wasn't reckless. Even then Margaret wondered if her oldest brother was meant to serve a great mission, for he was always protected, whether it be riding horses, operating large machinery, or pursuing any other activity with an element of danger.

By this time Ezra had become a tall, handsome, strapping man, and the girls "all swooned over him," as Margaret put it. He was well liked and active in the local social group, but no one in particular had caught his eye.

Ezra got along well with others, though he was a tease. One friend explained, "He was quite a joker. . . . He could make friends with anybody. . . . He had that personality." [^3] Margaret said that he "had a sense of humor and made fun for everyone." Being only two years younger, she caught the brunt of his antics. One December morning she was standing on the top rung of a stepladder, putting decorations on the Christmas tree, when Ezra entered. Seeing his sister perched precariously, he tromped across the floor to give the ladder a good shake. Margaret shrieked in protest and tossed a dustpan at him. The edge of the pan caught him on the lip and tore it open, leaving a permanent scar. "The cut lip didn't change his personality," Margaret said. "He still loved to tease and joke."

Ezra was secretary of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association in the ward while Margaret was secretary for the Young Women's MIA, and for two years they attended meetings together. A young lady who moved into the ward noticed that Ezra Benson always accompanied Margaret home. Finally she asked Margaret if she was going steady with Ezra. They got a chuckle out of that.

Despite his more human moments, Ezra had a desire to be "a leader of boys," and in 1918 he got his first formal opportunity when Bishop Benson called his grandson, Ezra, as assistant Scoutmaster to twenty-four lively, mischievous Scouts. (He later became Scoutmaster.) Ezra took to the assignment like a veteran. In those days the YMMIA sponsored choruses for the teenage boys, and the Scoutmaster was expected to get them to practice. The choirs sang not only for pleasure and entertainment but also in competitions. After weeks of practice and pushing and prodding on Ezra's part, his choir won first place in the Franklin Stake competition, which qualified them to compete in the Logan Tabernacle against six other winning groups. This was a big event for the boys, some of whom had never been as far from home as Logan.

To motivate his troop, Ezra promised them—"in a moment of anxiety or weakness," he wasn't sure which—that if they won the regional competition, he would lead them on a thirty-five-mile hike across the mountains to Bear Lake.

On the night of the competition each choir drew lots for placement. The Whitney chorus drew last place, which prolonged their anxiety. When they were finally announced, twenty-four boys marched up the aisle and onstage while the pianist played "Stars and Stripes Forever." Ezra crouched between two benches to direct their performance. "They sang as I'd never heard them sing, and of course I'd not tell the story had we not won first place in Logan," he said.

A promise made is a debt unpaid, and the Scouts had barely been declared the winners when they gathered around their Scoutmaster to remind him of the hike. At a subsequent prehike planning session, one twelve-year-old Scout excitedly suggested, "Mr. Scoutmaster, I'd like to make a motion. We should all clip our hair off so we will not be bothered with combs and brushes on the trip." The older Scouts squirmed (crewcuts, they thought, would not attract young women), but the motion carried—not, however, before one of the older Scouts said, "How about the Scoutmasters?" It was Ezra's turn to squirm.

The following Saturday Ezra took his place in the barber's chair, with twenty-four Scouts looking on. As the barber neared the end of Ezra's haircut, he said, "If you'll let me shave your head, I'll cut the hair of the rest of your boys for nothing." Two days later, twenty-four Scouts and one bald Scoutmaster, with his bald assistants, set out for Bear Lake. The ten-day hike was "gloriousnevertheless," filledwithfishing, camping, hiking, swimming, and camaraderie. "One of the joys of working with boys is that you get your pay as you go along," Ezra later explained. "You can observe the results of your leadership daily. . . . Such satisfaction cannot be purchased at any price; it must be earned." [^4]

Ezra kept in touch with his Scouts. Years later, while visiting the Whitney Ward as a General Authority of the Church, he ran into seven of them. All were serving in leadership positions. They could account for the whereabouts, and faithfulness, of all their troop except two. Several years later, while in southern Arizona, Ezra ran into one of those two. The man had married out of the Church, but his wife had later joined. After corresponding with the couple for some time, Ezra performed their temple sealing. Later, while in Burley, Idaho, he saw the other Scout. Again, Ezra officiated at the temple sealing.

Despite ordinary squabbles, a deep unity developed as the Benson family matured. They worked together and counted on one another—physically, emotionally, and spiritually. Whatever else had happened during the day, the Bensons prayed together. One significant by-product of their pleadings was deep family loyalty, a quality that sank to the heart of Ezra's soul—loyalty to family and also to country.

During Ezra's teenage years at Oneida Academy, the United States became embroiled in World War I, and many young men left for war. "There was a great patriotic spirit in our little Whitney Ward, as well as throughout the country, and a large number of boys enlisted," Ezra recalled. Though he wasn't subject to the draft, he felt impelled to get involved. When one ward member returned, attired in his dress blues, after honorable duty, Ezra "desired to get in." Not long after that, he learned that a military program was being established at Utah Agricultural College (now Utah State University) in nearby Logan, and he pled with his parents for permission to enlist.

George Benson was a patriot. He didn't say much about the war, but his sons knew he looked favorably upon young men who served their country. After prolonged consideration, he and Sarah gave Ezra their consent to enlist in what was the equivalent of a Reserve Officers Training Camp (ROTC) program. Soon thereafter, Ezra left for Logan. The year was 1918.

By that fall, so many local boys had followed suit that farmers found themselves shorthanded for sugar-beet harvest. Military officials were approached about giving the recruits a two-week leave to assist with harvest. Permission was granted. The mass furlough was to begin on a Saturday. On Friday morning, Ezra felt a strong impression that he should leave for home immediately. When the feeling persisted a second and then a third time, he requested permission to leave early, caught a ride to Whitney, and arrived home around noon.

Almost immediately he was stricken with a severe fever. Delirious for three days, the only thing Ezra later remembered of that period was the doctor leaning over him and telling his parents, "Only the power of the priesthood of God can save him." George and Grandfather Benson administered to the young man, and Sarah watched over him day and night, mopping his forehead with cool towels to control the fever. Finally it broke and he began to recover. The flu epidemic, which killed thousands of persons worldwide, broke out in the barracks in Logan the same day Ezra became ill, and the young men who had cots on either side of him there both died. One of those youths was Ezra's cousin, George B. Parkinson. Ezra felt that the Lord had a hand in preserving his life. "Why should I get the impression to go home early on Friday?" he asked. "Had I waited, I would have suffered there with the rest of them, and probably passed away."

As it was, the war ended that fall, and Ezra didn't serve active duty. He returned home, and in the spring of 1919 he graduated from the Oneida Stake Academy. In the winter of 1921 he returned to Logan to start his first quarter at Utah Agricultural College. He attended college during winter quarters and took correspondence courses during the fall and spring, when he stayed home to help his father with harvest and planting. More than once, farm work cut directly into his education.

One fall Ezra, Margaret, and Joseph were all planning to leave for school, but unseasonal weather made it impossible for George to find help to get the beets in. The whole family had to pitch in—including the college students, who had planned to be in Logan by then. The fields had turned into acres of oozy mud. George bought waterproof overalls for everyone; in the morning they each put on a clean pair and headed for the fields. At noon, caked with layers of mud, they tromped home and Sarah handed out clean overalls before sending them back to the fields. "We topped every beet," Margaret recalled. "Those were hard times, in that respect. But we also had good times together—even out in that muddy field."

In the early fall of 1920 Ezra spent a weekend in Logan preparatory to enrolling for winter quarter. He and a cousin were standing on a curb on Main Street when an attractive young woman drove by in a Ford convertible and waved to a friend. A few minutes later she drove by a second time and waved again. "Who is that?" Ezra asked. "Flora Amussen," his cousin replied. There was something about the girl that impressed Ezra, and he responded enthusiastically, "When I come down here this winter, I'm going to step her." "Like heck you will," the cousin answered, adding, "she's too popular for a farm boy like you." "That makes it all the more interesting," Ezra countered. He received the distinct impression that he would marry her.

A few weeks later Ezra was surprised when the same young woman walked into Sunday School in the Whitney Ward. Flora was a weekend guest of Ann Dunkley, Ezra's cousin. After the meeting Ann's father, Uncle Joseph, approached Ezra. "These girls are bothering me something fierce to take them on a drive to Lava Hot Springs this afternoon," he said. "I've got the old Ford gassed up, but I wonder who might be able to drive them for me."

"Why, if I can find someone to milk my cows for me," Ezra replied, not slow to sense opportunity, "I'll be happy to do you the favor, Uncle."

For the first time Ezra was in Flora's company, and he liked it. She was vivacious, happy, sensible, and appreciative of the slightest favor—something that impressed Ezra. He felt that she radiated goodness. When she returned to Logan at the end of the weekend, he resolved to get better acquainted with her. To Flora, Ezra was a curiosity. "I never knew of such a person," she said. "He was a plain, typical farm boy—homespun in his appearance and manner. But he had that wholesome, honest, God-fearing look that farm folks seem to have."

That winter Ezra and Margaret lived with Grandma Benson in Logan. They were part of the same crowd, went to the same parties, and often accompanied each other to dances and other activities. One evening "T" arrived home to find that Margaret had accepted a date to the dance that evening. Without a partner, perhaps this was his chance to call Flora Amussen. Soon he had her on the phone, but she explained that she had decided not to accept a date to the dance. As student body vice-president, she was to present letter sweaters to the football players at intermission. "I don't mind sitting out a dance or two while you take care of your responsibilities," Ezra insisted. A few hours later the farm boy from Whitney, wearing a blue serge suit that was shiny in the back, pulled up in front of Flora's large three-story home, took a deep breath, and wondered what he'd gotten himself into, calling on the most popular—and apparently one of the wealthiest—young women on campus.

Flora's was a home of obvious culture and refinement, but Barbara Amussen, her widowed mother, quickly put Ezra at ease. "Almost immediately this good woman was talking to me about farming and my family, both subjects on which I spoke with confidence," Ezra remembered. As he and Flora prepared to leave, she kissed her mother good-bye tenderly. That impressed him. He knew he was escorting an unusual girl, and he determined to make the most of it. Their courtship proceeded, and Ezra's impression that he had found the woman for him was confirmed.

But marriage, assuming Flora would have him, was down the road. In the summer of 1921 a letter postmarked Salt Lake City and signed by President Heber J. Grant arrived in Whitney, addressed to "Elder" Ezra Taft Benson. He was being called on a mission! He quickly replied to President Grant and pledged, simply, "I am very pleased and thankful that I have been counted worthy to fill a mission and will try to do my duty." [^5]

Since those early days in the rock meetinghouse in Whitney, Ezra had waited for this day. Finally, at age twenty-one, he had been called on a mission—to Great Britain.

Most source materials listed for chapter 2 apply to this chapter also. Additionally, in this and subsequent chapters I refer to handwritten notes of Flora Amussen Benson, all undated.

Footnotes

"Town in uproar about Mormons, but thank the Lord I'm one!"

---
Notas:
[^1] See excerpts from James T. Palmer journal in Roger Toone to author, 1987.
[^2] David O. McKay to First Presidency, February 27, 1924, David O. McKay Papers, Church Archives. See also Allen and Leonard, Story of the Latter-day Saints, p. 505.
[^3] Sarah Dunkley Benson to ETB, September 4, 1921.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Excerpts from James T. Palmer journal.
