Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 4

A Mission to England

It was quite an adventure. Prior to 1921, the most ambitious outings for the farm boy from Whitney, Idaho, had been a few thirty-five-mile trips to Logan, Utah, and an occasional 120-mile excursion to "the city"—Salt Lake City. Not only had Ezra Taft Benson never been far from home, but he'd not been exposed to divergent views or life-styles, had never faced religious opposition—let alone ridicule—and had never been without the support of family nearby. But with his call to the British Mission, that changed.

When George Benson learned of his son's call, he was elated. This was something he had looked forward to with great anticipation since his own mission eight years earlier. Ezra, too, was thrilled with the news. "I was pleased because I have English blood in my veins. And I knew I'd be close to Scotland, and I have Scottish blood in my veins. It seemed right somehow."

Flora Amussen also took the news with good spirits. Undaunted that her frequent companion would spend over two years an ocean away, she sensed how important the experience would prove to him, was pleased that he had chosen to serve a mission, and knew he would work hard. Working hard physically was no test for Ezra but in England the work would be grueling spiritually and mentally as well, developing new dimensions in his character and personality. It was in England that his testimony and his knowledge of gospel principles would flourish.

As the day for departure drew near, Ezra could hardly bear the anticipation. He was more keyed up than at Christmas time. Flora threw a party for him at her elegant home. Anticipating his week aboard ship crossing the Atlantic, she unveiled a roll of paper and had everyone write him a letter—each of which she dated for opening. At home George and Sarah held a special home evening honoring their eldest son. Because the old rock church was being rebuilt, his farewell was held on a nearby tennis court.

On July 13, 1921, George ordained Ezra an elder, and early the following morning George and Sarah went through the Logan Temple with him. Then, with Flora joining them, they were off to Salt Lake City. There, Elder Seymour B. Young of the First Council of the Seventy set Ezra apart to serve in the British Mission with headquarters in London. England—a place Ezra had only read about. Yet, in a couple of weeks he'd be there! It was still almost beyond comprehension.

The evening of July 16, Elder Benson shook his father's hand and embraced him, kissed his mother, and boarded the Continental Limited No. 20 in Salt Lake City. Flora rode with him as far as Ogden, where he bid her "a quick and snappy good-bye."

Six days later, on July 22, he and some missionary companions set sail on the Victorian, an English ship, from Montreal, Canada. Before boarding, he was thrilled to hear a concert in the park conducted by John Philip Sousa. On his first day at sea Ezra opened, as Flora had instructed, the letter marked "First Day on Board." The next day he read the second letter and opened a cake she had sent. "I had mail every day on the boat," he remembered, "and that was something! It was so nice to be able to open a letter out in the middle of the ocean, and Flora had masterminded it all. It made me think of her at least once a day."

By and large, the weather during the ten-day crossing was cold, foggy, and windy, resulting in rough seas. Elder Benson's companion was homesick, and both endured seasickness. Ezra read the scriptures, joked with the ship's stewards, and talked with other passengers. At midnight on August 1, they docked at Liverpool, and by eight o'clock the next morning they were at mission headquarters. Without delay mission president Orson F. Whitney, a member of the Council of the Twelve, assigned Elder Benson to the Carlisle Branch of the Newcastle Conference, in the Lake District near the Scottish border.

Though many years later Ezra would say, "I've never had a real test of my faith, because I've always felt that regardless of the seriousness of conditions, the Lord was on our side," what he found in England, as a young missionary unused to bitter prejudice, presented as great a test of his mettle and endurance as anything he would experience for many years to come.

Elder James T. Palmer met Elder Benson and another missionary at the train station in Carlisle and took them to his room in a boardinghouse. Elder Palmer described their accommodations: "There was a bed and a narrow cot. . . . Elder Benson and I slept on the bed. The springs at the best were stretched and old; with the weight of two men, we slept with sunken springs almost to the bare floor. . . . Elder Benson [and I] . . . called this situation home for better than the whole next year." [^1]

Some of the Church's most fruitful proselyting had occurred in England in the late 1830s and 1840s, but by the time Elder Benson arrived, anti-Mormon sentiment was rampant. A plague of opposition to the Church, initiated in large measure by the clergy and festered by the English press, had infected much of the British Isles. Anti-Mormon movies, plays, and articles appeared regularly. Winifred Graham, among others, had popularized a series of vicious novels that depicted Mormons as immoral and deceitful. In 1922 a film titled Trapped by the Mormons, adapted from one of Graham's books, was representative of dramatic fare that characterized missionaries as villains who mesmerized young women and lured them to Salt Lake City. It's little wonder the missionaries had difficulty proselyting wherever the film was shown. In some areas they couldn't secure lodging, and some were even beaten on occasion. David O. McKay, after his arrival in England as mission president in late 1922, told the First Presidency, "Winifred Graham and her . . . associates have opened the flood gates of hell, and are deluging England with the vilest slander that impure minds can imagine." [^2]

Initially none of this frightened the young elder, who was caught up in the spirit of missionary work. He bore his testimony twice during his first Sunday in England and soon thereafter got a taste of tracting, which he called "bonny stuff." On his second Sunday in Carlisle he took charge of Sunday School and sacrament meeting and preached a sermon on the Apostasy.

Elder Benson would be called on to preach many sermons, and, without the advantage of structured missionary discussions that were developed in later decades, embarked on his own study program. "We'd had a lot of reading of the scriptures in our home, and at least I'd been exposed to them enough to feel confident about reading and using them," he reflected. His mission log, in which he accounted for every shilling spent, frequently noted the purchase of secondhand books. He studied the writings and debates of Elder Orson Pratt, "eagerly devoured the Book of Mormon," read the complete History of the Church by Joseph Smith, and studied the life of the Prophet. Near the end of his mission he would write: "Each day I am learning to love books more."

Before Ezra left Utah, he and Flora had agreed to write each other once a month, and the letters were to be "newsy and inspirational, no mush!" In large part, they held to their monthly pact, though Ezra's log of letters written reveals he slipped in an extra missive once in a while. He was prodigious in writing to family and friends; his mother heard from him more than anyone else, his sister Margaret was a close second, and Flora a distant third.

From home he received a constant flow of encouragement and parental counsel. "Be prayerful, Ezra T.," his mother warned, "and do not fail to keep the commandments of the Lord and trust in him at all times and he cannot help blessing you to fill an honorable mission." [^3]

How important were the letters, Christmas cards, and small packages that came from home? "Received mail which I read time and time again," he wrote in his journal. Years later he explained their significance: "Mother and father poured out their hearts to me in letters, and were a real strength to me as a young man. Flora's were full of spirit and encouragement, never any sentimental stuff. I think that increased my love and appreciation for her more than anything."

What prompted Ezra and Flora to keep their letters newsy and infrequent, one can only speculate. But in England, Elder Benson's conviction that missionaries were better off without girlfriends was confirmed. One of his companions was preoccupied with a girl he had left behind, writing her almost daily. Concerned, Elder Benson said, "She'll get sick of you. You can't possibly keep up this pace, and she won't have time to answer your letters." "Oh, Elder Benson, you don't know what love is," his companion replied. When Ezra explained his and Flora's agreement, his companion was astonished. "Your relationship won't possibly last," the elder warned. But in fact, it was the companion's friendship that fizzled. "I learned it isn't good to leave a girl behind and expect her to wait for you," Ezra reflected later. "It distracted my companion. It took him a while to get the spirit of missionary work."

Such a grace period was impractical in England in the 1920s, when missionaries were forced to season quickly. From the beginning Ezra's responsibilities were manyfold—teaching, speaking, fellowshipping branch members and recent converts, blessing the sick, presiding at weekly Relief Society meetings, and tracting, always tracting. After only five days in Carlisle, he had his first taste of door-to-door solicitation. A month passed before he sold his first Book of Mormon to an investigator.

The proud parents at home followed their son's progress as best they could via delayed mail. Ezra's mother wrote, "Papa in bearing his testimony was telling of you tracting twelve hours a day. We are glad you are working hard. Of course, we were not worried . . . for you always worked hard at home." [^4]

In the little time left after tracting and attending to branch duties, Ezra studied voraciously, usually in preparation for speaking assignments. His range of topics was as diverse as it was demanding, on such subjects as the Atonement, the Restoration, faith, the Book of Mormon, sacrifice, premortal life, baptism, and prophecy. In church and during street meetings, he worked on perfecting his delivery and ability to communicate. He faithfully recorded his "Index to Antidotes [Anecdotes] Happenings," a compilation of stories, quotations, and object lessons pertinent to gospel topics. On indifference: "An immigrant went to sleep in his bunk after the ship had been in collision. When aroused, not too gently, and told that the vessel was sinking, he said impatiently, 'Let her sink; it is not mine.' This is the attitude of many people with regard to the world in which we live and the conditions prevailing." On teaching the gospel: "Every little girl thinks her doll best. Don't tear it to pieces to show it's made of sawdust—give her a better one and she'll leave the old."

While he enjoyed speaking, Ezra didn't feel he was developing well along that line. At one meeting a woman fainted while he was speaking, and after another attempt he recorded that he was disgusted with his "frail attempt at speaking."

Despite such critical self-examination, one of Ezra's greatest mission experiences occurred when he and his companion, Elder James T. Palmer, were invited to speak at the South Shields Branch. "We have a number of friends who don't believe the lies being printed about the Church, and we feel certain we can fill our little chapel, if you'll come," branch leaders wrote.

The elders fasted and prayed about the meeting. As promised, the little chapel was filled to capacity. Elder Palmer recorded in his journal what happened: "Elder Benson was assigned to speak on the apostasy . . . . He mentioned that he was humble and nervous about speaking. But he was impressed by the spirit . . . and gave a strong and impressive discourse of the truthfulness of the Book of Mormon, never once remembering that his subject was to be of the apostasy."

Ezra later recalled, "I spoke with a freedom I had never experienced. Afterwards, I couldn't recall what I had said, but several nonmembers surrounded me and said, 'Tonight, we received a witness that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God, and we are ready for baptism.' It was the experience of a lifetime. The Lord sustained me. I couldn't have done it otherwise. It was the first experience of that kind I'd had, where I knew that the Lord was with me." [^5] The inspiration to speak on the Book of Mormon would be a recurring theme throughout his life.

There were many spiritual moments in England. One day he told his companion he had the impression that his grandmother Louisa Benson had just passed away. Ten days later he learned that she had indeed died—at almost the exact hour he had received the impression. "The Spirit," he later preached, "is very real. Prayer is very real."

It could well have been providence that during Ezra's first month or so of tracting, he suffered no serious confrontation. While few people showed interest in his message, even fewer demonstrated opposition. But in mid-November 1921 his fortunes began to change. Tracting in an affluent area, he found the people "bitter and narrowminded." Two days later he ran into some "hot people and was told to go to hell."

The missionary harvest was painstakingly slow, though occasionally it bore fruit. On December 18 he spoke on the Resurrection at sacrament meeting, with "a new investigator present, [a] result of my tracting." The Millennial Star reported that on September 29, 1921, Elder Benson and Elder Gray baptized and confirmed three individuals. Every person counted. Every visitor, investigator, or new member bolstered the ranks of the branches appreciably. Ezra recorded many meetings where attendance was sparse, such as fast and testimony meeting on September 4, 1921: "19 present. Two Saints bore testimonies."

The missionaries were responsible for much more than proselyting. Often Ezra and his companion were required to exhort the Saints, even call them to repentance. At a time when the Church was being badgered with criticism, some of its members slackened their pace. One evening he visited a family and "exhorted them to be more dutiful." He straightened out "branch squabbles," hunted up "backsliders," warned a sister to "cease her drunkedness," and had a long talk with one man about the harmful effects of tobacco. "Tobacco is a weed/the devil sewed the seed/It drains your pockets, scents your clothes/and makes a chimney of your nose," he wrote. To those who had difficulty giving up their tea, he quoted Doctrine and Covenants 89:3, teaching that the Word of Wisdom was adapted to "the capacity of the weak and weakest of all Saints" in the hopes that none would want to be classified in that category. [^6]

While his focus in England was missionary work, Ezra's interests evidenced breadth and depth. He seemed aware of current and world events, making frequent note in his journal of elections, athletic events, and other happenings. On Saturdays, when time permitted, he and his companion discarded their "iron horses," as they called their bicycles, and walked through the countryside, stopping to visit branch members. Their principal means of travel was by bicycle, and Ezra wore out several pairs of pants and had to have them "reseated." It wasn't fancy, but in those days men wore coats that were a little longer than current fashions.

On New Year's Day in 1922, a Sunday, Ezra headed his journal with an enthusiastic, "Make it a banner year!" With five months' experience, no longer a newcomer, he was poised for more responsibility.

Opposition to the Church heated up in early 1922, owing in some part to the influence of the movie Trapped by the Mormons. The uneventful days of tracting were a thing of the past. On January 10, Ezra mentioned in his journal, without elaboration, the movie's author: "Winnifred Graham on our track again." Also that day he noted, "Ran into one of those birds that knows more about the Mormons than I did." The next day he was kicked out of one house, and a week later there were still "more stories of the terrible Mormons." On Sunday, January 29, someone attempted to break up one of their meetings. A week later he noted, "Tracting in South Street, women rather excited, afraid they're going to be taken to Utah."

One morning Ezra and his companion knocked on a door, and a woman answered. As soon as the word Mormon was uttered, her husband jumped up and joined her at the door. "Oh, I know all about you Mormons," he challenged. "When I was in the British Navy we sailed right into Salt Lake City port, and those Mormons wouldn't let us land."

The only area where Ezra seemed to make any headway was a poor section of the city: "Tracting in Union Street, one of the lowest in the city, people the best."

As the opposition intensified, Ezra kept good spirits, though at times he had to work at it. One Sabbath he took a stroll through the countryside while reciting from the poem "America for Me":

'Tis fine to see the Old World, and travel up and down

Among the famous palaces and cities of renown,

To admire the crumbly castles and the statues of the kings,

But now I think I've had enough of antiquated things.

So it's home again, and home again, America for me!

My heart is turning home again, and there I long to be,

In the land of youth and freedom beyond the ocean bars,

Where the air is full of sunlight and the flag is full of stars.

A series of one-liners in his journal indicates the challenges: "Cussed by a little 18 yr. old maid . . . tracting among the rich—enjoyed it in spite of their bitterness"; "detectives on our trail at present"; "two ministers watching us tract. ha! Rain and snow." Maids in some wealthy homes usually answered the door, and some subsequently accused the missionaries of trying to lure them away. An anti-Mormon lecture, "Inside of Mormonism," was held one evening while the Saints were holding an MIA meeting. "Town in uproar about Mormons. All of vast assembly voted to have us put out of town," Ezra wrote on March 30, 1922. He penned a rebuttal for the Cumberland News denouncing lies published about Mormonism.

Despite the rejections, Ezra kept his sense of humor ("Went tracting, was kicked out twice is all") and perspective ("Kids yelling Mormons! as we go down to church, but thank the Lord I'm one"). But conditions continued to intensify to the point where the missionaries even called on the police for protection. In April 1922, while trying to rent a hall for a meeting, Ezra lamented, "Searched in vain for a hall but no success. The world seems to be against the work of the Lord."

Opposition notwithstanding, some good came of the anti-Mormon tirades. The Millennial Star, reporting on a meeting held in Grimsby on March 31, 1922, noted, "It was the unanimous opinion that more good than harm was resulting. All the meetings are better attended than they have been for years past and many new friends are being made." [^7]

On May 8, 1922, Elder Benson was called to serve as conference clerk and set apart by President Whitney. Later that week he moved to Sunderland, near the North Sea. As clerk, he oversaw distribution of the Millennial Star to members and handled all mission reports, including membership records that were in poor shape. On his first Sunday in Sunderland, May 21, Ezra was also called as branch president. Wearing at least three hats—as missionary, conference clerk, and branch president—the young elder found his days were hectic, the demands insistent. The morning after he was called as branch president, he had to settle a squabble with a branch member. He spent much time compiling reports, attending to local members' needs, organizing reports of branches throughout the conference, and tracting and holding cottage meetings. He spent days "punching the typewriter" and sending off "Stars" and "Juveniles," referring to the Church's Millennial Star and Juvenile Instructor. Many Church records were handwritten in pencil, and the tedious work strained Ezra so that he had to be fitted for glasses.

With responsibility come rewards, and Elder Benson had many rewarding experiences. On June 25, 1922, he took the ferry across the Tyne River to North Shields to visit Brother and Sister Horrors, arriving to find her "gone into a fit . . . gasping for breath and holding her hands over her heart as tho in great pain." Elder Benson blessed her that her health would be "speedily restored." Less than ten minutes later she was working in the kitchen. The experience left its mark on the young elder who wrote: "Is not God's power with the Priesthood in the household of faith? The honor and the glory be to Him forever."

Dates of note didn't escape Elder Benson's attention. On June 27 he wrote, "78 yrs. ago today, Prophet Joseph killed." On July 4, he celebrated Independence Day from a distance: "Wouldn't I like to be home today just to give one good yell!" Just ten days later it was a landmark of a different nature. "One year since I left the dear home in the [mountains]. Has been the most beneficial year of my life, because it has been spent in the service of the Master."

Nevertheless, the fruits of tracting and ferreting out investigators provided a meager harvest. By and large, the people were indifferent and bitter. Ezra kept himself going by "devouring the Book of Mormon," particularly the missionary experiences of the sons of Mosiah.

His record-keeping obligations as conference clerk were complicated by the fact that many Saints fell away from the Church or had been "lost" from the records, and over the years the records had become an entangled mass of confusion. "Still hard at the records day in and day out," he wrote. "Many are shown to have apostatized and many lost. Almost without exception, those marrying out of the Church fall away." Occasionally there was success, such as the day he exulted, "To my joy, found some of the lost members."

In November 1922 Orson F. Whitney was released as mission president and was succeeded by David O. McKay, also a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. President McKay and his wife, Emma Ray, along with five of their six children, settled into the mission residence, Durham House, in Liverpool. In addition to serving as president of the British Mission, he supervised the presidents of eight other missions—Swiss-German, French, Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, Netherlands, Armenian, and South African. Thus, with enormous distances to travel, the mission president had only semifrequent contact with the missionaries. Even so, President McKay was to have a profound influence on Elder Benson. [^8]

On January 8, 1923, Ezra met his new mission president and recorded his first impression: "He is . . . truly a man of God. . . . He gave some excellent advice. He said for us to hold our own and fear not man. Go with head up, we have nothing to be ashamed of. The world steps aside for the man that knows where he's going." The young elder pondered that advice, believing it to be in perfect harmony with everything he had been taught, and he felt that he knew where he was going. However, an unexpected call from the new mission president a few days later stunned him, for he received a letter from President McKay announcing that he, Ezra, was being appointed as president of the Newcastle Conference, taking in all of northern England. "Never did I feel so weak and humble," Ezra wrote. "I felt weak because I know my inability and yet I felt thankful to think the Lord has as much faith in me and that he would entrust to my care the supervising of 8 branches of the Church, preside over some 600 saints and eleven elders."

Now the welfare of both his fellow elders and the Saints was his concern. He found himself consoling offended elders, spurring on negligent members, continuing his search for "lost" members, visiting scattered Saints, and conducting conferences. One evening he visited a Sister Taylor, who had been ill. She offered Ezra supper but had no butter for the bread. "Just as I was sitting up to eat a knock came at the door. A little boy appeared with a slice of butter," he wrote.

Antagonism toward the Mormons continued to hamper the missionary effort. In March 1923 Ezra tried to secure a hall in South Shields for a conference, "but was treated as an undesirable." President McKay wrote that "the bigotry of the people here is quite in keeping with the dense fog that hangs like a pall over Liverpool." [^9]

On May 9 President McKay sent out a circular for all missionaries to Great Britain, calling them to repentance: "We regret to say that the reports of the month of April on the number of hours tracting are anything but satisfactory. Kindly urge your Elders to renewed activity in this labor." And further, "Keep yourself above suspicion, by avoiding the very appearance of evil, by leaving the young ladies absolutely alone. We must request Conference Presidents to report hereafter any and all infringements of this rule." He concluded with a fitting analogy: "A very large ship is benefited very much by a very small helm in the time of a storm, but being kept workways with the wind and the waves." [^10]

Elder Benson took his leader's counsel seriously, and he was to learn to follow counsel precisely. Word came from President McKay that, because opposition had become so intense, tracting in some areas and all street meetings were to be discontinued until further notice. Before discontinuing, however, Ezra and his companion reasoned that it would be permissible to conduct a street meeting already announced for the following Sunday night in Sunderland.

On Sunday evening the elders, dressed in black suits and bowlers, began their open-air assembly near the railway station in Sunderland. As the meeting progressed, attendance increased steadily. Some persons became rowdy, and when the pubs closed, a large group of men, many inebriated, swelled the audience. In order to make themselves heard, the elders turned their backs to each other and shouted their message. Some persons on the periphery began to yell, "What's all the excitement?" Others shouted back, "It's those dreadful Mormons." With increasing pandemonium, the shout went out, "Let's get 'em and throw 'em in the river!"

The elders became separated, with the crowd pushing Ezra down one side of the railway station and his companion down the other. As he was pushed along in a man-made circle some ten feet in diameter, Ezra began to pray silently for help. "When it seemed that I could hold out no longer," he reported, "a big husky stranger pushed his way through to my side. He looked me straight in the eye and said in a strong, clear voice, 'Young man, I believe every word you said tonight.' As he spoke a little circle cleared around me. This to me was a direct answer to prayer. Then a British bobby appeared."

The policeman escorted Ezra home with strict instructions to stay put. But when his companion didn't return, Ezra disguised himself in an old English cap and jacket and set out to find him. An onlooker who quickly saw through the disguise told Ezra that the elder's head had been "mashed in." Ezra started off in a sprint to find him and ran into the same policeman, who confirmed that the elder had had a nasty blow, but that he, the policeman, had helped him safely home.

"I went back to the lodge and found my companion disguising himself in order to go out and look for me," Ezra wrote. "We threw our arms around each other and knelt together in prayer. To my knowledge it is the only time in my life that I did not immediately follow the counsel given me by my presiding officer. It almost cost us our lives. Resorting to prayer in such a time of crisis was not born of desperation. It was merely the outgrowth of the cherished custom of family prayer with which I had been surrounded since earliest childhood." [^11]

Perhaps because England was shrouded in outspoken resentment toward the Mormons, and hence its missionaries, President McKay expected members to aid the proselyting effort. In late 1922 he explained, in a conference in London, "The aim of the British Mission for 1923 . . . is that each member of the Church . . . bring at least one soul to a knowledge of the gospel." Later he wrote to Rudger Clawson, president of the Council of the Twelve, "Our aim is to have every member a missionary, not in the sense of leaving their homes or work, but in the sense of opening the way for elders." Thus the phrase "Every member a missionary" was coined. In conferences throughout the mission President McKay gathered enthusiastic support for the program. "President McKay knew how to reach people," Ezra recorded. "He had the confidence of every missionary in England. He was a great leader and a hard worker, and we in turn worked for him." Four decades later, at a dinner honoring President McKay's ninety-fourth birthday, Ezra would pay tribute to his mission president: "I shall never forget how he lifted us, how he inspired us, how we loved him, how we hung on his every word. . . . His wisdom to the missionaries was the wisdom of Solomon." [^12]

Such spiritual boosts were important to the young elder, who by this time had aged beyond his years in maturity and wisdom. He continued to tract, to teach, to conduct conferences, and to exhort the Saints. His preaching was evidently effective, for even many years later some British Saints were referring to him as "our Benson."

On November 2, 1923, Elder Benson received his release. "I am a bit reluctant about accepting it as I feel there is so much to do in the field and so few to do it," he recorded. To a friend in the United States he wrote, "I certainly do loath leaving these dear good Saints. . . . Really it is the hardest part of my mission." The Millennial Star reported a farewell party given in his honor: "President Benson received many gifts from the Saints and Elders. He thanked them for their support and exhorted them to live the Gospel they had embraced. . . . The hall was filled with Saints and friends." The outpouring of affection from those with whom he had labored was intense and gratifying. Ralph Gray, a companion, summed up Ezra's mission twenty years later when he wrote upon Ezra's call to the Twelve: "True to your pattern, as I knew you in England, you have continued on with the same energy and loyalty to self and church that characterized your Mission Field Activities." [^13]

Ezra's mission had taught him much. His knowledge of the gospel had increased greatly and his conviction that it provided the only way for a happy life was solid. He had survived intense opposition, finding an inner calm in the Savior and sense of purpose the only sure antidote. And he had had his first exposure to the international scope of the Church.

Ezra bid good-bye to friends in Sunderland and arrived in Sheffield in time to participate in a semiannual conference. From there he traveled with President McKay to Liverpool. En route, President McKay was pulled over by a policeman for speeding in a small English town. "President McKay was always at his best when he met with a bobby," Ezra remembered. "He said, 'Now officer, I know you're out here for our protection. And if I've done anything wrong, I'm in a repentant mood.' The officer chuckled and waved us off."

After his release, Elder Benson made a short visit to the continent. The occasion called for his first airplane flight, from London to Paris. There were just two other passengers. "After ten minutes the can was called for. We were all three sick while the Frenchman chuckled," he reported. He toured France, Switzerland, Germany, and Belgium. In Lausanne, Switzerland, where his great-grandfather had lived and preached prior to joining the Church, he enjoyed a reunion with his uncle, Serge Ballif, president of the Swiss Mission.

On December 2, accompanied by another elder, Ezra set sail for home on the Metita. They resolved to have scripture study each morning, but rough seas cut short their plans. "We lacked the desire to do anything but heave and reheave," he said. "First we think we're going to die, and then we're afraid we're not."

On Christmas Eve, after nearly a month of travel, he arrived in Whitney. The reunion with his parents was sweet. They sat up all night, filling stockings for the other children and gathering presents that had been hidden around the farm. Ezra remembered, "It was a choice evening. My love for my parents had never been quite so great." When his ten brothers and sisters arose early the next morning, he couldn't hold back the tears as he once again was embraced by the unity that prevailed in their family circle.

En route to Whitney, Ezra had stopped long enough in Salt Lake City to receive a blessing at the hands of the Church Patriarch, Elder Hyrum G. Smith. With his mission over, and sensing that his life was different than he had pictured it thirty months earlier, he wished for additional guidance. The Patriarch promised Ezra that his name, like unto that of his predecessors, would be held in honorable remembrance throughout the generations of time. And, perhaps in prophetic vision, Elder Smith counseled, "Be true to thy righteous convictions; be humble in thy devotion; shrink not from duty when it's made known, but keep thy trust in the Lord and thou shalt live even unto a goodly age to fill up the full measure of thy mission and creation."

In preparing this account of Ezra Taft Benson's mission, I have referred extensively to his missionary journal, dated August 1921 through December 1923; issues of the Millennial Star of the corresponding period; Manuscript History of the British Mission, November 20, 1921, to October 14, 1923; Ezra Taft Benson, "Personal Reminiscences," undated and unpublished; Francis M. Gibbons, David O. McKay: Apostle to the World, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986); and oral interviews with Ezra Taft Benson.

Footnotes

"Ours was a glorious courtship during which I discovered in Flora a rare combination of virtues."

---
Notas:
[^1] Brigham Young to Carl Amussen, date unknown.
[^2] Carl Amussen to Barbara Amussen, June 26, 1900.
[^3] Blessing by Patriarch Charles Ora Card upon head of Barbara Smith Amussen, February 27, 1903.
[^4] Barbara Amussen, personal journal, March 24, 1927.
[^5] See "Barbara S. Amussen," unpublished tribute.
[^6] Flora Amussen Benson, untitled address, circa 1958.
[^7] Millennial Star 84 (1922): 254.
[^8] Millennial Star 84 (1922): 733. See also Gibbons, David O. McKay, pp. 123-29.
[^9] December 15, 1922, David O. McKay Papers, Church Archives.
[^10] David O. McKay to missionaries of the British Mission, Circular Letter No. 79, May 9, 1923.
[^11] See Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country (Deseret Book, 1974), p. 109; Ezra Taft Benson, "Preparing Yourself for Missionary Service," Conference Report, April 1985; Ezra Taft Benson, "The Best Advice I Ever Had," Reader's Digest, November 1954.
[^12] Millennial Star 84 (1922): 826; also David O. McKay to Rudger Clawson, February 5, 1923, David O. McKay Papers, Church Archives.
[^13] ETB to Harriet Andrews, November 3, 1923; also Millennial Star 85 (1923): 784; Ralph S. Gray to ETB, August 2, 1943.
