Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 5

Her Name Was Flora

After the holiday reunion with his family, made even more festive by the season, Ezra looked forward to renewing other acquaintances—in particular, with the girl he'd left behind. And on the Sunday following his return he had his chance.

In sacrament meeting, while Ezra was reporting on his mission, Flora unexpectedly walked in and sat in the back of the chapel. Temporarily flustered, he managed to regain some composure and bring his remarks to a close. The bishop then invited Ezra to return that evening to an MIA meeting and continue his remarks. Ezra eyed the girl in the back, preoccupied with their reunion. But before the "last word of the closing prayer had quite left the mouth of the benedictorian," Ezra wrote in his journal, "Flora, with her characteristic indifference in not wanting me to think she was chasing me, left the meeting." The congregation crowded around Ezra afterward to welcome him home, and it was an hour or so before he again spotted Flora.

Then, finally, the nervous anticipation of seeing each other was past, and they were laughing and enjoying one another's company as before. As Ezra was planning a trip to Logan the next day, and Flora had missed her ride back to Logan that evening, he volunteered to drive her home.

When David O. McKay had released Ezra as Newcastle Conference president and as a missionary, he had challenged the young missionary to return home, find a wife, and settle down. Ezra was smitten by the vivacious Flora Amussen and more than willing to obey his mission president's counsel.

The young woman who caught Ezra Benson's fancy was, by almost anyone's standards, a catch. She was popular, attractive, spiritual, and intelligent. She was equally comfortable with the homeless and with those of aristocratic bearing. And she came from a distinguished and faithful lineage, as did her farm boy suitor.

Flora was born in Logan on July 1, 1901, to Carl Christian and Barbara McIsaac Smith Amussen. Carl Amussen was one of Utah's first jewelers and watchmakers, a highly respected, influential businessman of the pioneer era. The third of four sons of a sea captain named Carl Paulus Christian Asmussen, Carl Christian Amussen (who later dropped the first s in his surname) chose not to follow his father's occupation and apprenticed himself to a master watchmaker, O. F. K. Peterson, in his native Kjoge, Sjaelland, Denmark. Peterson would allow no student his credentials until he had mastered the intricate art of handcrafting a watch. Carl wore the watch he made during his apprenticeship for many years, winding it with a tiny gold key.

After Carl's apprenticeship, the lure of adventure took him to Copenhagen, Paris, Amsterdam, and London, where he was employed by the watchmaker for Queen Victoria and Prince Albert. At one point he crafted jewelry for Czar Nicholas of Russia. His love of the sea ultimately took him to Australia, and after a disastrous flirtation with gold prospecting, he settled down to build a prosperous jewelry business in Melbourne.

Melbourne was a frontier city in a country that originally served as a prison colony, and Carl slept with firearms under or near his pillow. Few months passed that he didn't fight off thieves, and the strain took a toll on his health. In time his condition became so grave that an assistant checked on him several times a night to see if he had passed on. Carl wrote his parents, "I am still living. I have no pain . . . but am wasting away. . . . My only desire is that I might yet have the pleasure of seeing you all again and put into your hands the money I have made here."

Eventually Carl sold his business and shipped his gold dust and gold nuggets to the Danish mint, where it was minted into coins. At twenty-nine—single, affluent, but in broken health—he returned to Europe, where he spent three years recuperating and traveling. With his health regained, he was poised for a new adventure. He again sailed to the South Pacific, settling in 1857 in Auckland, New Zealand, a busy seaport on the cross-roads of the expanding British Empire. Again his jewelry business prospered—but in New Zealand, he found even greater riches.

Inquisitive about religion, Carl had examined various sects and denominations, but none had satisfied his longings. One day, while strolling in Christchurch, New Zealand, he noticed a pamphlet on the sidewalk—A Voice of Warning by Parley P. Pratt. He read and reread it, prayed about it, and felt certain that the doctrines it taught were correct. The name of a church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and an address in Liverpool, England, were stamped on the back. Assuming that Liverpool was the headquarters of the unfamiliar church, he left his business in the hands of an employee and departed for England.

In England Carl contacted the missionaries and learned more about this new church, and on September 29, 1864, he was baptized by Elder E. A. Groves. Carl's parents received the news with bitterness, mortified at their son's behavior. But Carl knew that the gospel was true, and he felt compelled to join the Saints in Salt Lake City. He left for America in 1865 and crossed the plains to the Church's headquarters in Salt Lake City. Because of his wealth, he traveled in style, accompanied by a cook and a driver.

The following year Carl returned to New Zealand, this time as a missionary, and in due time he disposed of his business and baptized seven of his friends. In response to a letter regarding opposition he was experiencing in New Zealand, Brigham Young replied, "The devil hates this work, and if he can influence the people by whom you are surrounded, you may depend upon it he will stir them up to anger against you. Every faithful elder has had this to contend with." [^1]

Tradition has it that while Carl was returning to Salt Lake City, again crossing the plains, he met a young Danish convert, Anna K. Nielson, who proposed to him. Upon arrival, he requested an audience with Brigham Young and asked if he should marry the woman. President Young's two-part reply stunned Carl. First, President Young said he could see no reason why Carl shouldn't. And second, the President explained that men who were able to support more than one family were encouraged to marry more than one wife.

Carl also requested permission to purchase a lot on Main Street to build a jewelry store. Permission was granted, and in 1869 he had wagons loaded in St. Louis with slate shingles, plate glass windows and mirrors, and a generous supply of jewelry, and transported to Salt Lake City. The establishment he subsequently constructed, a two-story sandstone structure, was hailed as the foremost addition to the business district. (The facade of that building was still intact over a hundred years later as the entrance to a Salt Lake City bank. The plate glass mirrors that lined his walls later adorned the walls of the Salt Lake Temple.) Carl also helped establish ZCMI (Zion's Cooperative Mercantile Institution), the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company, and other enterprises in the fledgling territory.

Following President Young's advice, Carl married Anna Nielson on August 2, 1869. He subsequently took Martha Smith, a young woman from Tooele, Utah, as his second wife on November 6, 1884. The following year, on October 3, 1885, Carl was married to his third (and final) wife—Barbara McIsaac Smith, Martha's sister. They were sealed in the Endowment House in Salt Lake City.

Barbara found in her marriage to the kind and gentle Carl Amussen the stable, peaceful home life she had never enjoyed. Both her parents had embraced the gospel in their native Scotland and subsequently immigrated to Utah, where they met each other. Barbara's mother, Elizabeth McIsaac Smith, died when Barbara was two, and an older sister, Elizabeth, filled in as best she could until their father, Adam Browning Smith, remarried. The stepmother created an oppressive environment, and eventually the marriage ended in divorce—but not, however, before the sensitive young girl had gone through much suffering.

Times were difficult for those living the law of plural marriage in the 1880s; to elude federal marshals, they were often relegated to life on the underground. Before Carl married the third time, he consulted Anna about Barbara. Later Barbara related: "Aunt Anna had a beautiful dream. . . . She saw me married to [Carl] and the posterity that was added to his glory and his kingdom. When my husband asked me to be one of his wives . . . I hesitated." The decision to enter plural marriage was not an easy one, and Barbara prayed about it for some time. "Our people were sorely persecuted for this kind of marriage," she said. "Nevertheless . . . I had reasons to believe it to be a most sacred and proper thing to do."

As persecution against polygamy intensified, Carl relocated Martha and her family and Barbara in California. They didn't find refuge there, and eventually they moved to Vancouver Island in British Columbia. After three years of relative tranquillity, Barbara, at her husband's insistence, returned to Utah, where she took up residence in Weber County under an alias. In 1887 her first child, Victor, was born. Three months later she returned to Canada with her infant, this time lodging with the family of Charles Ora Card, founder of the settlement that ultimately bore his name, Cardston. There she served as a counselor to Zina Card in Canada's first Young Woman's Mutual Improvement Association organization. Over the next few years Barbara endured a transient life, living in Canada, returning to Utah, relocating again in California, returning to Canada, and making intermittent visits to Utah. She was frequently separated from her husband, though over time she bore seven children, one of whom died at birth.

When her baby died, Barbara felt deeply the sacrifices inherent in the polygamous life-style. Carl was in California at the time, attending to Anna, who was deathly ill. His words of comfort by mail didn't begin to assuage the hurt. He wrote: "I had a couple of hours cry . . . fearing I might lose you also. . . . Dear Barbara, I wish I could say something kind to you to comfort you. I am so sorry for what has happened and sorry that I should be away." [^2]

But though plural marriage was demanding of its participants, and, Barbara said, she was "cruelly driven and persecuted" by enemies of polygamy, she always referred to plural marriage as "that glorious principle."

Carl Amussen was always a dignified, aristocratic gentleman. George Albert Smith, who later became an apostle and then president of the Church, remembered him as "perhaps the most particularly dressed merchant in Salt Lake City. He wore a black suit . . . of Prince Albert pattern, a white shirt and a necktie which he tied around his collar. He always appeared to me to be dressed to meet company. . . . He was the personification of dignity."

John A. Widtsoe, who also later became an apostle, once called on Carl Amussen for assistance in raising funds for a ward building. "In parting [Carl] took out his purse, took out a five-dollar gold piece and gave it to me as a contribution to take to the bishop. I had expected a contribution of a dollar or two. . . . With considerable pride I delivered the five-dollar gold piece to the bishop." Some years later Barbara summarized her husband's virtues in a journal entry: "What a noble man he was. He expected strict obedience, but was very liveable, unselfish and sympathetic. Treated all alike, never showed partiality to anyone."

An avid horseman, Carl Amussen rode in a luxurious surrey pulled by a team of white Arabian horses in black harness. He also had one of the finest libraries and collections of oil paintings in the territory.

Carl Amussen was generous with his third wife. According to Barbara's youngest daughter, Flora, "My father would give Mother a certain amount each month to manage her family. She often didn't need it all. The second wife told her not to tell their husband because he would decrease her allowance, but Mother said she certainly would tell him. When she [did] he was so happy that he gave her twice as much because she had managed so well."

In July 1896 Carl purchased a fourteen-room home in Logan to house Martha's and Barbara's families. Before he purchased the home, he took both women to inspect it. While Martha complained about living so far from Salt Lake City, Barbara responded, "What a nice place. I couldn't say one word against it. How many would be thankful for such a home."

Such an attitude was reflective of Barbara Amussen's threepoint philosophy about life: first, live the gospel; second, be loyal to your husband and be satisfied with what he can provide; and third, teach children to obey their parents. It was a philosophy that she ingrained in her children. The youngest child, Carl Amussen's last child, was born in Logan on July 1, 1901. Though frail at birth, the infant survived. Her name: Flora Smith Amussen.

By this time Carl's health had begun to fail. Flora was only fifteen months old when her father died suddenly of cardiac asthma on October 29, 1902. He was survived by fourteen children, forty-one grandchildren, and three great-grandchildren. Barbara was thirty-four years old at the time. Though her life with him had been interrupted frequently, she felt his loss deeply. Thirteen years later she recorded in her journal, "Before my husband died he told me that if I wished to marry again to do so. . . . I am not married again yet, and I don't think I will." And she didn't. Carl's business success enabled him to provide well for his survivors, and Barbara was left, by prevailing standards, a wealthy woman.

Barbara Amussen was deeply devoted to the gospel, her testimony nourished through lonely years living a principle that perhaps tested her spiritual mettle. And she was adamant about teaching the gospel to her children. In a letter to her son George dated February 2, 1916, she wrote: "You haven't said a word in your letters to me of going to Church. . . . When you spend six days in the week for your temporal welfare you certainly should be willing to get spiritual food one day in the week. . . . Don't you know how I long for your development in spiritual things as well as temporal ones?"

Charles Ora Card, in a blessing pronounced upon Barbara's head, said, "Thou art one of the chosen and honored mothers, and as reward of thine integrity the Lord will honor and preserve thy children down to the latest generation, and I bless you that you may enjoy wisdom in the rearing and instruction of your family. . . . Your children shall . . . vindicate the cause of good." [^3]

Barbara didn't allow her abundant means to separate her from those whose financial situations were less generous. A close friend who worked with her for many years in the Logan Temple, Luella Cowley, wife of apostle Mathias Cowley and mother of another apostle, Matthew Cowley, said, "She was easy to approach, seemed to put people at ease. Although she was better off financially than most of us, you would never know it from her manner. She was content to live as the humblest. Her interests were in spiritual not material possessions."

Barbara attended the temple frequently, and on March 14, 1916, William Budge, president of the Logan Temple, called her to officiate in that sacred edifice. For twenty years, until July 22, 1936, she faithfully went every day the temple was open. In order to traverse the slippery snow-covered streets in winter, she had a blacksmith fashion metal "ice creepers" that fastened onto her shoes. Her diary entries often began with phrases such as this: "Another happy day in the temple."

One day in February 1933 she recorded, "Today . . . there has been a real blinding snowstorm. . . . And in spite of this stormy weather the Saints are coming to the Temple by the hundreds both day and night and we are having four companies in the day and two at night which often brings the number of dead endowed to one thousand or more in one day." On one occasion, a fellow temple worker, Jan Molen, told her, "I saw a most beautiful light over your head and your face was the same. At first I thought it was the sun, but no, it was a beautiful light that was more than mortal." [^4]

In 1936 Barbara broke her ankle, and even after recovery, she had difficulty walking. Mildred Evans, a close friend, recalled: "When her health was such that she could not carry her full share of duties, . . . she said it never indicated a true love for the Lord's work when we continue to hold on to a position after we become incapacitated and others are required to carry part of our load. . . . So she asked to be released [as] an ordinance worker." Barbara did, however, tend children so their parents could attend the temple.

Barbara loved the scriptures, particularly the writings of Paul, who preached many character traits that she strived to develop. Mildred Evans said, "Sister Amussen could apply herself to the rich and poor—the old and young. She knew just the right thing to say to the sad and lonely, the sick, the lame, the halt, the blind, the odd. . . . The Christ spirit in her sought the Christ spirit in you."

And she loved life. At age sixty she invited friends to her home to join her in exercising. "We had a jolly good time, laughed and exchanged girlhood experiences," remembered Luella Cowley. "She is the kind of person who is loved and remembered for the things she did. Her voice wasn't heard much in public. She was quiet and unassuming, a true and loyal friend. To have been one of her friends is a blessing." [^5]

Barbara Amussen and her daughter Flora were very close. Fourteen years younger than her eldest brother, Victor, and three years behind the sister closest in age, Eleonora, Flora often had her mother's undivided attention. Flora suffered several bouts of serious illness, including scarlet fever and appendicitis, and Barbara nursed her back to health.

Flora adored her mother, and as a teenager she vowed to never leave her. When Barbara explained to her daughter that she could not attain the highest degree of glory without celestial marriage, Flora replied, perhaps naively but with some insight, "Then I want to marry a poor man materially, but rich spiritually, so we can get what we get together." After a pause she added, "I'd like to marry a farmer." (Years later when Flora repeated this story to her children, her husband would add, "You not only married a poor man materially, but a man in debt.")

Flora's childhood was spent in relative prosperity. She drove her own car and played tennis on the court in the backyard. She and her mother traveled—to Chicago, California, and elsewhere—and she saw more of the world than many of her peers. But there were lonely times. When she was in her teens she was the only child still at home. With her mother working every day in the temple, she frequently had lunch alone at the Bluebird, a popular restaurant on Logan's Main Street, and rode the streetcar to an empty house after school. Always fearful about who or what might be lurking in corners of their threestory mansion, she would shout when she arrived home "Who's there? Get out of here!" She disliked coming home to an empty house and vowed she would avoid such a situation in her own family.

While Flora was a child, the stake patriarch visited Barbara Amussen's home to pronounce blessings on the older children. As he prepared to leave he noticed Flora, sitting in a high chair, and said, "I feel impressed that I should give this child a blessing." In this blessing he made the unusual promise that no man would ever deceive her. Even as a child, Flora exhibited discernment and keen instincts and compassion for people. Through the years this gift would prove an immeasurable blessing to her husband.

Barbara Amussen's home was a haven for children. Boxes of toys, dolls, and costumes were available for Flora and her friends. They were allowed to play in the living room, which was furnished with exquisite imported rugs and furniture, and a large sandbox and swings were in the yard. Hundreds of books lined the library, and Barbara loaned them freely. She believed home should be the principal training ground for a child, and that such training should be as enjoyable as possible. It was a philosophy that her daughter would subscribe to with her own children.

Barbara and Flora sang together in the Logan Fifth Ward choir. They also enjoyed attending the German dances at the Ninth Ward meetinghouse, where they waltzed and did the twostep. Not only did mother and daughter sometimes dance together (they were champion waltzers), but it was there that Barbara set an example of compassion for Flora. They talked with the immigrants, often took foodstuffs to those in need, and sought out the friendless and others who needed attention. Sometimes they took suitcases full of food and supplies to Barbara's father in Tooele. Flora remembers visits with the aged man and whitewashing the walls in his cottage.

Flora acquired many of her mother's traits, including compassion and the desire to mingle with persons from all walks of life. The farm boy Ezra Benson would later assess that she was "not stuck up, though she lived somewhat above the rest." Her open and unpretentious ways were endearing, and as she matured, she was popular among her peers. Because she was petite and attractive, friends nicknamed her "Dolly." But her mother insisted that she not respond to the name. At Utah Agricultural College she was, according to her farm-boy suitor, "the most popular girl on campus." "Oh, go on," Flora would protest, "you're prejudiced." "I may be prejudiced, but I'm also right," he'd answer. Indeed, Flora had many suitors, one of her professors among them, which Ezra considered "pretty stiff competition."

At the college the slender, dark-haired coed's interests were varied. She was an independent spirit, but she was also wellrounded in her interests. She was elected to the Periwig Club, the national dramatic society, and as a junior took the lead role of Viola in Shakespeare's Twelfth Night. The campus newspaper wrote on April 16, 1924, "Flora Amussen is a delightful Viola," and the college yearbook noted that she "carried her part to perfection."

Flora was a member of Sorosis, a social club, chairman of the junior prom committee, and president of the Girls' Athletic Club. An excellent tennis player, she won the university's women's tennis singles one year. The campus paper reported, "Flora Amussen won by defeating Miss Mabel Spaude, 9-7, 6-4, in one of the best contests seen on the courts." She also was elected studentbody vice-president. In announcing her selection, the campus newspaper said she was "one of the most popular girls in the school. She . . . says that we are certainly going to have [a good time] the remainder of the summer."

Many who associated with Flora insisted that her popularity was in direct proportion to her kindness to and willing acceptance of everyone. She herself said that any credit, if due, was owed her mother, who set the tone and direction of her life. Many years later, in a tribute, Flora quoted from a brother's letter to their mother: "I am so grateful I have been raised in a home with a foundation in spirituality—where everything that ever occurred, the question was asked beforehand, is it right? There I learned to pray in family prayer. There I learned the power of faith. . . . You always showed me the better way. How can I help but succeed?"

When Ezra returned from his mission and renewed his friendship with Flora, he was confident she was "just right." To make certain, he decided to get a second opinion from an expert—his mother. He and his mother devised a plan. Flora wasn't the only young woman interested in the handsome returned missionary: throughout his mission another girl had showered him with letters. The plan was that a friend would invite Flora and Ezra would invite the other girl to visit the Bensons in Whitney. When the foursome arrived, the senior Bensons welcomed them in. During the visit Ezra's brother Volco tripped in the family room, hit the floor hard, and started to wail. Flora immediately jumped up and consoled the boy, teasing him out of his tears by asking, "Oh, did you make a hole in the floor?" The boy stopped crying and all started to laugh. Later that evening, as the couples were leaving, Ezra pulled his mother aside. "How about it?" he asked. "Oh," she replied, "there's no question. It's Flora."

Sarah knew that Flora was the woman for her son—and her son, Ezra, knew it. His ambition was to settle down on the Idaho farm with a wife and to rear a family. Even Flora seems to have been agreeable. And at twenty-three, she was certainly of marriageable age. But in her judgment the timing wasn't right. She saw in Ezra Benson more than a hard-working farm boy who would stay loyal to the faith and make a fine father and husband; she saw potential that might not surface if he returned to the farm immediately. She didn't discuss her apprehensions with him, but "prayed and fasted for the Lord to help me know how I could help him be of greatest service to his fellowmen. It came to me that if the Bishop thought I was worthy, [he would] call me on a mission. The Church came first with Ezra, so I knew he wouldn't say anything against it." [^6]

With unusual resolution, Flora talked quietly with her bishop. Then, a few months after Ezra's return from England and before he had formally proposed, she made her own announcement: She had been called to serve a mission in the Hawaiian Islands.

The news shocked Ezra. "I was ready to settle down on the farm," he recalled, "and I didn't have too much briefing as to why she was leaving. It was really tough. She was the light of my life."

Flora knew she was taking a calculated risk. Though convinced her boyfriend needed to finish his education and that both of them would profit by maturing spiritually before tying themselves down, she also recognized the possibility he might not wait two years. Flora never admitted as much, but she seemed to have had some premonition of the scope of Ezra's future, and she feared that if they married immediately, he would return to the farm and forfeit other opportunities.

On August 26, 1924, Flora and Ezra boarded the westbound train in Salt Lake City, and he rode with her as far as Tooele, where he said good-bye. He recorded in his journal, "We were both happy because we felt the future held much for us and that this separation would be made up to us later. It is difficult, though, to see one's hopes shattered. But though we sometimes had a cry about it, we received assurance from Him who told us it would all be for the best."

I have referred extensively to family histories (many of them prepared by David and Beth Benson Burton) of Carl Christian Amussen, Barbara McIsaac Smith Amussen, Elizabeth McIsaac Smith, and others. I also quote from Barbara Amussen's personal journal, personal writings (undated) of Flora Amussen Benson, and Ezra Taft Benson's personal journal. See also Noble Warrum, "Carl Christian Amussen," Utah Since Statehood 4 (Chicago: S. J. Clarke, 1920): 700-701; "Carl Christian Amussen," Daughters of Utah Pioneers, lesson for February 1981, p. 217; "Brief Life Sketch of Barbara Smith Amussen by Herself," December 25, 1932 (unpublished manuscript); Reed A. Benson interview with Flora Amussen Benson, August 12, 1985; Mildred D. Evans, "Remembrances of Barbara S. Amussen" (unpublished manuscript).

Footnotes

"There are few things in the world which give a man such courage as the faith of a noble companion. Flora had more faith in me than I had in myself."

---
Notas:
[^1] Ezra Taft Benson, "Of One Blood, All Nations," Improvement Era, June 1958, p. 433.
[^2] Confidential Mission Report, June 8, 1926; Benson Family Collection.
[^3] Letter to Flora Amussen, dated October 2, 1925, signed "Auntie," postmarked Santa Monica, California.
[^4] See "Hawaiian Mission," Liahona: The Elder's Journal, March 9, 1926; "Diamond Anniversary of Missionary Effort in Hawaii," Improvement Era, April 1926, p. 613; also Barbara Amussen journal, 1925.
[^5] Eugene J. Neff to John Q. Adams, June 16, 1926.
[^6] Orson F. Whitney to ETB, August 3, 1926. Whitney, Idaho, was named after Orson F. Whitney when George T. Benson, Sr., Ezra's grandfather, suggested that the settlement be named after a bright young bishop he had met in Salt Lake City—the same man who would later serve as Ezra's mission president and perform his marriage.
