Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 6

A Wait—Then Marriage

Separated from Flora by the Pacific Ocean and her call from the Lord, Ezra thrust himself wholeheartedly into farming. In the fall of 1924 he and his brother Orval consummated an agreement to purchase their father's farm, including the family homestead, for $17,000. Civic duties (George Benson was county commissioner, a member of the school board, and an executive of the Franklin County Sugar Company) demanded most of George's time, and Ezra and Orval, who had ambitions to become full-fledged farmers, saw this as their opportunity to launch into professional agriculture.

The brothers moved ahead with enthusiasm. They were progressive in their approach to farming and imaginative in marketing their products such as selling bottles of fresh milk with the slogan, "You can whip our cream, but you can't beat our milk."

"Father let us experiment," Ezra remembered of the days working under his father's direction. "We'd come home with some new idea, and whether he believed in it or not he'd let us find out if it was good or bad. Father was generous that way, more generous than we sometimes were with him."

Orval and Ezra agreed that their business would have greater chances of being profitable if they both got an education. During the nine months since he returned from England, Ezra had enrolled in only one semester at UAC, where he sang in the male chorus, played basketball, and joined a fraternity. But one semester had just given him a taste of higher education, and he longed for more. Orval also wished to attend college and serve a mission. They agreed to alternate semesters at school, and Ezra enrolled at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. His first semester was all he had hoped for. "I was moving ahead to be a farmer," he said, "and things looked favorable. I was getting the best technical knowledge available. Everything I'd wanted was coming to fruition."

That summer Ezra spent six weeks at BYU's summer school, held at the "Alpine School" in Provo Canyon. The students lived in tents and held "laboratory in God's great out of doors." With instruction by Dr. Adam S. Bennion, and a firsthand experience with the mountains, streams, and birds, it was, Ezra said, "all so unusual, so good, so beautiful." At the time attorneys William Jennings Bryan and Clarence Darrow were arguing the case of evolution in the Scopes "monkey trial" in the South, and this prompted open debate on science versus religion, which Ezra absorbed with interest. He strongly opposed Darwin's theory of species development and took that stand in his debate. Required also to write an essay entitled "Why I Am What I Am," he analyzed his life and the influences that had affected him, saying he received "all of the advantages of the training found in a good LDS home." [^1] An occasional letter from Hawaii also helped the time pass quickly.

The following fall Orval and Ezra both attended BYU and "batched it," purchasing a Ford roadster to drive home for sugarbeet harvest. But the realities closed in. Farm life is a difficult taskmaster, and both finally acknowledged that one of them had to remain on the farm at all times. They agreed that Ezra should finish school, then run the farm while Orval went to school and on a mission.

Ezra returned to BYU, where, in an effort to graduate by the summer of 1926, he averaged twenty hours a quarter. Though his heart may have been in Hawaii, he also took full advantage of campus activities. He was elected president of the Agricultural Club, a prestigious organization since agriculture was seen as the profession of the future. He was also president of a men's glee club, chairman of the senior entertainment committee, and a member of the Mask Club. He wrote of an ice and snow carnival, canyon parties and studentbody dances, dramatic productions, and lyceums. All the while he was becoming a mature young man respected by his peers. As a returned missionary, he held an edge over those who hadn't experienced the personal growth, spiritual insight, and self-control a mission can engender.

While visiting Whitney during semester break, Ezra was driving along a gravel road one night when another old vehicle, lit only by carbide lamps attached to the hood, approached. The lamps were faint, and Ezra didn't see the car until he was nearly on top of it. Quickly he steered his Dodge off the road and landed on a railroad right-of-way. Mark Hart, the driver of the other auto, remembered that Ezra came over to him and, with unusual restraint, asked, "Say, what on earth are you boys driving? What kind of light do you have on that contraption?" Said Hart, "He should have been furious with us, but he just advised us to get our relic off the road before we killed someone, and then he left. He showed tremendous self-restraint."

On one trip home from college Ezra undertook an assignment from his sociology professor, Dr. Lowrey Nelson, to make a survey of his community, including the standard of living, number of homes with electricity, and percent of the population who finished grade school. After he made a verbal report in class, Ezra was asked to remain afterwards. Dr. Nelson quizzed him further and finally concluded, "I have made several studies of Mormon communities, but based on your record this is the finest community I have heard of in the intermountain area."

Ezra was pleased with the remark and with the A grade he earned in the class. With a major in animal husbandry and a minor in agronomy, he pored over the books. Often the questions he raised in class were prompted by current problems he and Orval faced on the farm. When the Agriculture Club visited Whitney to get a firsthand look at agriculture, Ezra was like a proud parent, showing off his acreage.

He had not allowed the social whirl to overshadow his motives for attending school. "The girls were always tagging us," he admitted. But, he added, "we clipped our hair so the girls would let us alone. We wanted to study." That strategy was apparently only partially successful. Toward the end of the school year Ezra was named BYU's Most Popular Man, an honor that no doubt flattered him but which he insisted was "all rather embarrassing though interesting."

After this social triumph, close friends wrote to Flora in Hawaii and begged her to communicate with Ezra more frequently or else lose him to another girl. But she persisted in writing him just once a month. Her peace of mind and faith were well founded, and she refused to be distracted. For his part, Ezra wasn't interested in the abundant social opportunities that came his way.

At one session of general conference during Flora's absence, Ezra encountered Elder David O. McKay and took the occasion to introduce his former mission president to his parents. Elder McKay immediately inquired, "Well, Brother Benson, are you married yet?" "No," Ezra answered. "It's this darn church I belong to. They went and called my intended on a mission to the Islands." Elder McKay immediately broke into a smile and in mock sympathy replied, "Well, isn't that too bad."

Actually, even Ezra would admit that the separation wasn't all that bad. Not that he cared any less for Flora, but during the twenty-two months of her absence both of them enjoyed significant personal growth. Ezra graduated from college while experiencing the stretching, fulfilling relationships unique to college life. And Flora put her future in the Lord's hands in order to serve a mission. (Years later her son Mark would evaluate the impact of that decision: "Mother's missionary experience had great bearing on her. She put the kingdom first. I've always felt her mission was part of the plan, not only so Dad would be required to wait a while for marriage, but also so that Mother would gain another spiritual dimension she probably wouldn't have acquired otherwise.")

Flora arrived in Hawaii on September 6, 1924, aboard the S. S. Calawaii. A throng of well-wishers, including mission president Eugene J. Neff and other Saints, crowded the pier as the steamer docked, and thousands of colorful leis were quickly draped around disembarking passengers. The lush tropical growth and climate were unlike anything Flora had imagined, and she found the abundance of delicious fruit and the friendliness of the people so much to her liking that she later claimed no homesickness.

The new missionary was quickly put to work. In addition to teaching investigators, she served in the mission home, planning meals and supervising the staff. And Flora had a knack for dealing with children. She could go into a group of rowdy children and quiet them immediately. On October 21 she was granted a license to teach English in the territory of Hawaii, and President Neff put her to work supervising the local Primaries and teaching in the elementary school in Laie, where she had children from seven nationalities in her classroom.

In general, missionary work in Hawaii was progressing favorably (the mission reported 455 baptisms in 1926), and President Neff described Sister Amussen as "a very good, energetic missionary." [^2] She also worked in the Hawaii Temple and wrote home often to request that more family names be sent so she could perform the ordinance work. One evening as she prepared to leave the temple after a day of officiating, she found that her associates had already left and she was alone. In order to get to the mission home, she had to hop a fence and pass by an immigrant workers' camp. The night was dark, and she was suddenly fearful for her safety. She knelt and prayed that she would be protected. When she left the temple door a circle of light surrounded her and moved with her over the fence, past the village, and to the mission home door. She felt strongly that the Lord had heard her prayer, and considered the occurrence a benchmark in her spiritual growth.

Flora loved missionary work and all that it encompassed—teaching children, serving in the temple, even supervising house-work at the mission home. She sang solos in meetings, participated in baptisms for the dead, learned to speak some Hawaiian, even directed a Church play. In her estimation, all of these activities were integral to serving the Lord. An aunt wrote, "Your dear father loved [you] so much. . . . His greatest desire was that his children should grow up to be true and faithful Latter-day Saints. And whenever I think of you, I think of . . . the great joy you are giving him in . . . doing God's will." [^3]

Back on the mainland, family and friends missed Flora. A nephew, Billy Preston, wrote, "We sure miss you. It seems you have been gone a year. . . . We are just fine but don't get along half as well as if you were here." Ezra no doubt agreed with that appraisal, though he wrote only once a month, as agreed, and occasionally sent candy or other presents.

Flora had been in Hawaii for thirteen months when her mother, who had been called on a special short-term mission, joined her there on October 31, 1925. President Neff assigned them as companions, and they rented an apartment on Beretania Street in the heart of Honolulu.

Flora didn't wait for things to happen. She realized her mother would need a way to get around easily, so when Barbara arrived, Flora asked if she wouldn't like to purchase a secondhand auto. "I wouldn't think of doing anything like that until I talked with President Neff," Barbara replied. But Flora had foreseen her mother's reaction and had obtained the necessary permission. "If we can get one at a reasonable price, we will do so," her mother answered. Flora had already scouted the city for such a car, and three days after her mother's arrival, a suitable roadster was delivered to the mission home.

Flora and Barbara relished their reunion and subsequent service for seven months as missionary companions. On December 12, 1925, the Hawaiian Mission celebrated its Diamond Jubilee—seventy-five years since the first missionaries arrived in the Islands. Flora narrated an ambitious pageant, performed for an audience of some eight hundred, to commemorate the anniversary. [^4]

When the Sisters Amussen encountered Tomizo Katsunuma, a Japanese gardener whom Carl Amussen had converted in Logan (and one of the Church's first Japanese converts in the United States), and learned that he had slipped into inactivity, they fellowshipped him and he returned to the Church.

Shortly before the end of their missions, Barbara and Flora toured the mission with President Neff, who also would soon be released. Of the tour Barbara wrote: "Every place we went, the Saints met us in large numbers. Their homes, automobiles and churches were at our disposal. And oh! how they decorated us with leis or wreaths of sweet fragrant flowers. . . . Such great love and hospitality, I have never seen!"

When Flora and her mother, with the Neffs, set sail for California on June 9, 1926, aboard the S. S. Maui, Flora took with her tender feelings for the Saints in Hawaii and a deeper testimony of the gospel. En route home President Neff dictated some of his final correspondence as mission president. In a letter to the bishop of Flora's home ward, he reported, "We know of no missionary who has ever come into the field [who] has given [her] heart and soul, time, and talents to the work of the Lord as Sister Amussen has done. She has won the love of many people, and has been the means of inspiring them to a bigger and better life." [^5]

There was one young man back in Utah who was certain he would be inspired just to be with Flora Amussen again, though he insisted he wasn't "waiting" but was simply "anxious" for her to return.

Ezra graduated with honors from BYU the spring of 1926 (he was also voted the man most likely to succeed). His marks earned him a research scholarship in agricultural economics at Iowa State College. He had written Flora of his intention to go to Iowa that fall and strongly hinted he would like her to accompany him. She answered that he ought to hold the invitation until he saw her first.

When Flora returned to Logan in June, Ezra found her sweeter than he remembered, though her clothes were less fashionable than before. She had written from Hawaii, "When I come back I'll be thin as you were [after your mission], your suit shining like a dollar, and you looking like you had no pep. I'll be just the same. Please have patience with me." As predicted, Ezra teased her, "Honey, you are just exactly what you said you'd be." But that soon changed. He later added that "the other girls were modeling after her as they used to do."

Ezra and Flora were soon inseparable. "There was so much to tell and we seemed to enjoy each other so very much," Ezra said. It had been a seven-year courtship with four and a half years of interruption. Nevertheless, Ezra reflected, "It was a perfect courtship during which I discovered in Flora a great character and a rare combination of virtues. The competition at times was strenuous, but I was determined." Some who sensed that marriage was inevitable for Ezra and Flora wondered what the young socialite saw in the rough-cut Idaho farm boy. "Why, she'll always outshine him. He's only a farm boy!" was the sentiment commonly expressed in hushed conversations.

The young couple talked for hours, exploring their feelings about a future together. Ezra made Flora promise that she would be willing to spend her life on the farm. She announced her intention to turn the allowance from her father's estate back to her mother so she and Ezra could "get what they got together." The more they talked, the more comfortable they felt with each other. "T. was practical, sensible and solid," Flora said. "I wasn't looking for handsome, but I knew he was. He was sweet to his parents, and I knew if he respected them, he'd respect me."

On July 12, 1926, they announced their engagement. There was nothing intimidating about asking for Flora's hand. Ezra liked Barbara Amussen so much that he was often accused of dating Flora so that he could spend time with her mother. Barbara in turn had unusual respect and admiration for her daughter's suitor, and frequently marked scriptural passages that posed questions she assumed the returned missionary would be able to answer. Many evenings the three of them discussed religion into the night. (Prior to her death Barbara Amussen confided in a fellow temple worker that her son-in-law would one day be an apostle.)

Others weren't so sure about Ezra Benson. "Everyone was amazed when they heard I was engaged to this farm boy," Flora admitted, "and thought it would never go through." When one acquaintance questioned her decision, Flora was overheard to say, "This man I am marrying is a diamond in the rough, and I am going to do all within my power to help him be known and felt for good, not only in this little community but for the entire world to know him."

Ezra's first mission president, Elder Orson F. Whitney, was enthusiastic when Ezra wrote to tell President Whitney he was marrying the "finest girl in the world." President Whitney replied, "Allow me to congratulate you on getting the 'finest girl in the world,' and to commend your good taste in shooting so high and your luck in hitting the mark." [^6]

Ezra was scheduled to leave for Iowa in late September, so there was little time to prepare for wedding festivities. With her mother's help, Flora hurriedly gathered a trousseau. Ezra worked on the farm up until the final week before the marriage, hiring his cousin William Poole and another boy to help him herd sheep forty-four miles from Grace, Idaho, to Whitney. It took them three days, walking and tossing pebbles at the sheep to keep them moving. "T paid me two dollars a day plus fifteen cents each for three candy bars," William remembered. "He agreed to pay all expenses. T kept saying, 'Hurry up, boys, I've got to get to Logan to get married.'"

On September 8, 1926, Ezra loaded his old Model-T Ford pickup with a half-ton box on the back filled with trunks, camping gear, and all of their belongings. Two days later he and Flora were married in the Salt Lake Temple by Elder Whitney. Sarah and George Benson, Barbara Amussen, and Ezra's brother Joseph witnessed the 9:30 A.M. sealing. "The wedding ceremony was too beautiful for words," Ezra wrote. "Everything went off so quiet and peaceful. . . . It all made us so thankful for the Restored Gospel and all that it holds out to us. Surely we had never been happier."

The newlyweds were honored at a wedding breakfast in the President's Suite at the Hotel Utah. In addition to family, President and Sister Neff, Ann Dunkley, and Elder and Sister Whitney were present. Everything went perfectly. Then, after one aborted attempt, the couple managed to steal away. They took a guest elevator up one floor, ran to a rear service elevator, and made their way down to the back alley. There they hailed a taxi and hurried to a relative's home on Sixth Avenue, where they had parked the truck, hoping to hide it from those who wanted to decorate it. They changed clothes and by 3:30 P.M. were on the road, headed east toward Wyoming, their "cares behind and [their] joys ahead," as Ezra wrote.

Most of the roads between Salt Lake City and Ames, Iowa, were rough and often unpaved, which made driving the unpredictable old truck an adventure. Too poor to pay for overnight lodging, they spent eight nights en route in a leaky tent. But to the newlyweds, the finest hotel might have offered splendor but no more joy, for they were finally together. Flora knew that her husband "didn't have the wealth of the world, but he had the more valuable wealth of character, industry, health, honesty, and a love of righteousness."

With plenty of time to reach Ames, they drove as far each day as suited them. Ezra's journal of the trip is filled with notations of climate, crops, livestock, and soil conditions. And now and again they noticed signs marking the trail of the Mormon pioneers. At Council Bluffs Ezra noted that this was the place his great-grandfather had been called and ordained an apostle.

Ezra's passion for the land is evident in his comments as he discovered in Iowa the simple checkerboard beauty of cultivated acres that stretched, in some cases, as far as the eye could see. "Iowa in the heart of the famous corn belt is an inspiration. . . . It was a beautiful sight to ride along the smooth clay roads, kept in perfect condition . . . with corn on either side and cattle and hogs in the ever green pastures. . . . House and buildings painted white and surrounded by green made a beautiful sight," he wrote. Several times they turned down the lane of a farmstead and Ezra asked the farmer questions about his crop rotation, management, and livestock program. "I was especially impressed with the businesslike manner of the majority of these farmers. Never did I find one who in any way apologized for his station in life," he wrote.

In addition to the sticky humidity of the Midwest, the trip afforded other inconveniences. One afternoon, while climbing a steep hill on a detour, Ezra shifted into low and "one of the magnets from the fly wheel came loose and flew thru the casing and tore things up pretty badly." They got a tow to the nearest garage, where a mechanic worked all day to get the vehicle running, finishing just in time for Ezra and Flora to make camp in a wooded area overlooking a stream. That night it poured and by midnight they were sleeping between soggy quilts. Recalled Ezra later, "I was so embarrassed! I never felt so sorry for my wife. The rain kept coming through and I worried for fear she'd catch cold."

By morning the rains abated, and they found that the river near where they had camped had reached its highest level in thirty years. The Ford wouldn't start, so again they had to be towed. Late that day they reached Ames, and by nightfall they rented a one-room unit in the Lincoln Apartments on Boone Street just a block from campus.

Their accommodations were humble. The cockroach-infested apartment had a bed in one corner, a desk in another, and a kitchen area so small "you had to back out of it." Flora cleaned the rug and put an insecticide powder underneath, but still the roaches came. They shared a shower down the hall with three other couples.

But Ezra was ecstatic. "I suppose that more or less every person gets a thrill of satisfaction when they start their first housekeeping," he wrote. "With us it was more instead of less. It soon looked like the coziest little cottage one can ever imagine. Flora is so cute and womanly in her management of the house. I wouldn't be single again for one million gold." Despite their modest dwelling, they invited Dr. C. L. Holmes, dean of Iowa State's Department of Agricultural Economics, to dinner and served the meal on a rickety card table. "Mother told me that no matter who you entertain, give them the best you have but make no apologies," Flora said.

Things were arranged nicely enough that when Orval Benson visited, he sent glowing reports back to Whitney. Margaret, who had not been able to attend the wedding, wrote to Ezra, "Orval told us what a nice little apartment you have . . . and he hasn't stopped raving about Flora's good cooking yet." She concluded, "T., we all think you surely have a wonderful little wife. We use[d] to think you couldn't get anyone good enough for you, but I think you['re] pretty well matched. We're all proud of you both and your good taste." [^7]

Ezra quickly got situated in school, enrolling in courses in advanced farm management, economic geography, marketing, and statistics. Flora joined the faculty women's club and enrolled in home economics classes. The nearest branches of the Church were in Des Moines (thirty-two miles away) and Boone (eighteen miles). Five other Latter-day Saint families lived in Ames, and every other week they held Sunday School in one of the homes there. On alternate Sundays, Ezra and Flora attended one of the organized branches out of town.

Finances were tight. As promised, Flora had returned to her mother, who had fallen on difficult financial times, the monthly allowance she had been receiving from her father's estate. Ezra's scholarship gave them just $70.00 a month for living expenses, of which $7.00 went to tithing, $22.50 to rent, and $20.00 to food. In addition, he and Orval were still making payments on the farm. Thus, he and Flora could afford to drive the truck only once a week—to get groceries.

Ezra noticed that other graduate students often carried empty quart jars with their sack lunches. One day he saw a spigot in the dairy building with a sign that read "Free buttermilk for graduate students." Ezra disliked buttermilk, but as money was tight, he started filling his own jar and eventually came to enjoy the thick, creamy beverage. Students could also visit the college's experimental farm and glean such vegetables as hickory squash and turnips, and pick walnuts from trees in nearby pastures (which they always did on Mondays so their stained hands would be clean by Sunday). "Flora was a good sport," her husband recalled. "I was pleased with how she met the situation."

Life was not limited strictly to school work and financial survival. A few months after they arrived in Ames, Ezra suggested to Flora that they enjoy a game of tennis. Flora was willing. It was the worst beating he ever took. Flora had never mentioned to him that she won the women's singles tournament at UAC.

They also attended lectures, lyceums, and other free entertainment that the college offered. They decked out in tuxedo and gown for the President's Reception and the Inaugural Ball, but took in few of the football games, which cost four dollars. They read many books together, discussing and debating their contents. On Saturdays they scoured Ames for bargains. Other newlyweds expressed surprise at how much time the Bensons spent together, but there was nothing they enjoyed more than being with each other.

The newlyweds wrote often to their families in Logan and Whitney, and their mothers kept them apprised of events at home. When Ezra's brother Valdo needed counsel and Ezra supplied it, his mother expressed her thanks: "I am thankful for the wonderful letter you wrote Valdo, you always give such good advice it will be such a help to him, he thinks his big brother is a wonder." Sarah obviously was proud of her eldest son. On another occasion she wrote, "How dad and I do hope that all our children will have the same good reputation our eldest son has. You have been a dear good boy . . . [and] have caused us little worry. How we do appreciate and love you." [^8]

Sarah Benson also supplied motherly counsel. "I am happy to hear you are both so happy," she wrote. "Well, why shouldn't you be? . . . I just know if you will continue to be faithful our Heavenly Father will bless you that your love for each other will grow stronger as the years go by. It is a sad thing . . . to see husband and wife grow more distant . . . as time goes on. Oh, what a sad thing!" [^9]

The university atmosphere encouraged a tolerant flow of ideas, and on occasion the subject of religion was raised. One evening Ezra attended a dinner for graduate students at which religion and its impact on college students was discussed. He took advantage of the opportunity to tell of the influence the Church and BYU had had upon his life. The students organized a religious discussion group, with Ezra appointed as a committee member.

As their year in Ames drew to a close, Ezra took every opportunity to learn from agricultural experts who visited campus. He was fascinated with the marketing side of agriculture, a facet of the industry he felt was commonly ignored.

By May 20, 1927, he received notification he would graduate with honors and was being inducted into Gamma Sigma Delta, the National Honor Society of Agriculture. Five days later his thesis, "The Beef Cattle Situation in the Northern Range Area in its Relation to the Iowa Feeder," was approved, and on May 31, he took his oral exams, which lasted two hours. One can sense his relief at getting it all behind him. "It's over. After all the very long and weary hours of preparation, it was only half as difficult and nerve wrecking as I had it pictured to be. . . . A warm congratulations followed from all, and an announcement that I had made a very creditable showing. Then home to tell the news to my best gal," he recorded.

Dr. Holmes offered Ezra a teaching position at Iowa State, but Ezra was anxious to return to Whitney. On June 13, he paraded to the gymnasium on the Iowa State campus for commencement, where he was awarded a master of science in agricultural economics. Two days later he and Flora packed the old Ford, took a final look around their first home, and headed north toward St. Paul, Minnesota. They intended to take a scenic route home, touring through Minnesota, North Dakota, Montana, and Wyoming so that Ezra could evaluate agriculture of the northern Midwest firsthand. Again they camped en route and took in sights and looked up friends and relatives along the way. Occasionally they stopped at mission homes; in Valley City, North Dakota, they posed as investigators and had "a good deal of fun" with the missionaries.

Ezra observed the soil conditions, the ratio of pasture to cultivated land, methods of irrigation, the numbers of dairy cattle, the condition of farm homes and rural schoolhouses, and uninterrupted expanses of wide open spaces unlike anything in the West. "Every few miles one passes a white one- or two-room schoolhouse with two outhouses painted to match," he noted. "I was led to wonder where people came from to occupy these buildings, as often a home could not be seen in any direction."

In Cleveland, North Dakota, he put Flora on a train for Dickinson, North Dakota, some 217 miles away. Heavy rains had left the roads rutted and treacherous in places, and just prior to leaving Ames they had learned that she was carrying their first child. Ezra chose not to leave Flora's health to chance. As she left, he headed across country to meet her train that evening. When they were reunited, he recorded that they "were so happy to meet, as though it had been a week." From there they headed across the Dakota Badlands, made famous by Theodore Roosevelt, and Ezra continued to be solicitous of his wife, who didn't complain about the hot, dusty ride but who tired easily. They stopped often so she could rest. Two weeks later they arrived in Whitney to a loud and boisterous welcome from family and friends.

"I always wanted to marry a farmer," Flora said, "because I knew they had to work hard for what they got." Ezra responded to his wife's devotion. Perhaps he realized then the force she had already become in his life. Certainly later the impact of her influence became fully evident when he said, "As always she had more faith in me than I had in myself. It was her prayerful, quiet planning and inspiration, in large measure, that encouraged me to complete college and graduate study before settling down on the farm." But Ezra's view of the future did not seem as long-range as Flora's. Back from Ames, he reflected, "We were home, and we expected to spend the rest of our lives there."

Most of the information in this chapter is drawn from author's interviews with Ezra Taft Benson, Reed Benson, Mark Benson, and Mark Allen; the Barbara S. Amussen journal; personal writings of Flora Amussen Benson; and an interview of Ezra Taft Benson by Margaret Benson Keller. Also see "My Companion," a tribute by Ezra Taft Benson to Flora A. Benson; Manuscript History of the Hawaiian Mission, 1901-1930, Church Archives.

Footnotes

"I am grateful that my lot has been cast in large measure with rural people, and I thrill as I have the opportunity of mingling with them, working with them."

---
Notas:
[^1] See Richard B. Morris and William Greenleaf, The History of a Nation (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1969), 2:685-89.
[^2] Orval Benson to ETB, January 7, 1928.
[^3] See Deseret News, December 17, 1952.
[^4] See "Hawaiian Mission," Liahona: The Elder's Journal, March 9, 1926; "Diamond Anniversary of Missionary Effort in Hawaii," Improvement Era, April 1926, p. 613; also Barbara Amussen journal, 1925.
[^5] Eugene J. Neff to John Q. Adams, June 16, 1926.
[^6] Orson F. Whitney to ETB, August 3, 1926. Whitney, Idaho, was named after Orson F. Whitney when George T. Benson, Sr., Ezra's grandfather, suggested that the settlement be named after a bright young bishop he had met in Salt Lake City—the same man who would later serve as Ezra's mission president and perform his marriage.
[^7] Margaret Benson Keller to ETB, October 13, 1926.
[^8] Sarah Benson to ETB, Thanksgiving Day, 1926; also Sarah Benson to ETB, October 13, 1926.
[^9] Sarah Benson to ETB, March 27, 1927.
