Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 7

Return to the Farm

In June, Idaho is at its best. The harshness of a bitter winter is forgotten; trout are running in the streams and rivers; ditchbanks are lined with wild yellow and red roses; and the air smells of sweet clover.

If home is truly where the heart is, there's no question that the twenty-seven-year-old Ezra Benson felt he was finally home. To family and friends, who couldn't recall knowing anyone who'd gone "back east" to college and earned a prestigious master's degree, he returned a hero, almost bigger than life. And life couldn't have been sweeter. He was home in Whitney with his wife; they were expecting their first child; and after on-again-off-again university work, he could get back into farming and make all his book learning pay off.

Though Flora was no stranger to many in the small farming community of Whitney, there were some who wondered if a woman reared in more luxurious circumstances could tolerate rural life and exist on a farmer's income. To Flora's credit, she adjusted to her new environment, living up to the promise she had made her husband before they were married. She was not a complainer and didn't feel sorry for herself when her husband left at sunrise and returned past dusk, nor did she moan about their lack of funds.

On that score, despite booming nationwide prosperity, farmers were in the throes of an agricultural depression. Prior to and during World War I, the American farmer had enjoyed a steady increase in real income. But during the postwar decade, times were lean. In 1919 gross farm revenues accounted for nearly 16 percent of the national income; ten years later that share had decreased to 8.8 percent, or nearly $6 billion less than in 1919.

In large part, the depressed agricultural market was an outgrowth of the war. Responding to a huge wartime demand for food, farmers had increased their acreage and output. Some mortgaged heavily to purchase land at inflated prices. Meanwhile, cumbersome postwar surpluses, abetted by an agricultural revolution that brought with it improved varieties of fertilizers, livestock, seed, and pest controls, dramatically increased per-acre productivity. In short, the market was glutted; the price of farm commodities fell; and many farmers could not keep up with payments on land, equipment, and even livestock. [^1]

Ezra and Orval suffered from the trend. They had purchased the farm in 1924 while land values were still inflated, and they still owed money on their property. It had been difficult for them to keep current with interest payments, let alone reduce the principal. (By January 1, 1930, for example, butterfat sold for seventy cents a pound; within the year it had dropped to seventeen cents. The bank was forced to liquidate Orval's herd, previously worth $250 a head, at $35 each.) Ezra also owed money on his school loans. And on October 11, 1927, Orval was set apart as a missionary to the Danish Mission. Ezra was expected to help support Orval out of proceeds from the farm. In a letter from the mission field Orval joked, "Received your letter . . . with the check. . . . Hope things are going along alright for it looks as if you will have to keep me here for four or five years to learn this language." [^2]

Despite their financial challenges, Flora insisted that they make it on their own without dipping into what little inheritance she had retained after marriage. "My wife seemed to care little for material wealth," Ezra said. "Her one ambition was to support me in my efforts to serve my church, my fellowman, and to rear an honorable family. Always she found time to be helpful to my brothers and sisters."

Though the farm home had running water and electricity, there were few conveniences—no overstuffed furniture, carpeting on the floor, or air conditioning. Flora scoured milk buckets, washed clothes by hand until they could afford a second-hand machine, and cooked for the large group of threshers hired to harvest grain. She managed the household on a meager budget, constantly supplementing the funds with foodstuffs from the garden or using recipes that made meals go further.

Ezra worked long hours with his dairy herd and in the fields, hoping to increase production and therefore some margin of profit. His brother Valdo moved in with them to drive the dairy truck, delivering milk they bottled on the farm. They kept a flock of 250 chickens, traded eggs for groceries, and slaughtered a hog each winter for meat. There was respectable production from field crops—sugar beets, alfalfa, and a little grain—though prices were low.

In late 1927 the birth of Ezra and Flora's first child loomed near, as did accompanying doctor and hospital bills. They sold a cow they had just paid for to raise money for the doctor. They planned that a Salt Lake City physician, Dr. Earl Skidmore, would deliver the child, and as the time neared, Ezra drove Flora to the Utah capital. But several days passed without the birth, and finally, anxious about things at home, he returned to Whitney. While he was en route, Flora went into labor, and he arrived home just as word reached him that Flora was in delivery. He hurried back to Salt Lake City and learned that he was the father of a baby boy, born on January 2, 1928. They named their son Reed Amussen Benson.

"There's nothing quite like the thrill of becoming a parent the first time," Ezra reflected. "You know for nine months it's going to happen, but there's no way to anticipate the feelings. I just couldn't believe we had a boy."

When they returned to Whitney from Iowa, Ezra and Flora were immediately put to work in the Whitney Ward. "T," as everyone still called him, became a member of the stake Young Men's MIA board, and a short time after her baby was born, on April 29, 1928, Flora was sustained as president of the Whitney Ward Young Women's MIA. Ezra also had a chance to refuel his fire for missionary work. On November 27, 1927, while attending a stake priesthood meeting in the old opera house in Preston, his name was announced as one of those to be ordained seventies. When he joined the others for the ordinations after the meeting, Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve said, "Oh, you are not the Ezra T. Benson we meant, but I feel impressed to ordain you a seventy." As a seventy, Ezra got another taste of missionary work, and he loved it.

Ezra farmed for two years on his 160 acres in southern Idaho and despite the skimpy profits, his thriving Holstein herd was talked about for miles and his trim acres attracted the attention of the county commissioners. They were looking for a new county agricultural agent, connected with the University of Idaho Extension Service, an office financed cooperatively by the county, state, and U.S. departments of agriculture.

One afternoon the Franklin County commissioners stopped at the Benson farm to visit Ezra. They knew about his educational background and were familiar with the agricultural record compiled by his father. And they were hoping to hire someone native to the area. Would Ezra accept the job as county agent?

Ezra, flattered at the overtures, indicated he would be happy to consider their proposal. In the meantime, word of the conversation reached Dean Iddings of the University of Idaho, who was the director of Extension Services. He was happy to give Ezra Benson the appointment as a county agent, but policy prohibited any agent from serving in his own county. At that point, Ezra refused the offer. He was obligated to oversee the farm while Orval was in Denmark, and didn't feel he could move from the county.

Days later the commissioners were back at Ezra's doorstep. The dean had made an exception, and if Ezra would accept the post, he could not only serve in his own county but also maintain his residence on the farm.

The offer was tempting—but also distressing. Since boyhood Ezra had wanted to stay in Whitney and farm. Despite the hard work and discouraging economic factors, he loved the land. On the other hand, this job carried a salary of $150 a month, more than he was currently earning and enough to help meet some of his pressing financial obligations—education and farm debts, plus a growing family. It would allow him to pursue his interest in agricultural marketing with local farmers. Flora encouraged him, bolstering his confidence that he could fill the post well. Ezra decided to accept, but on one condition—that he move to Preston, the county seat, to avoid a potential conflict of interest. He felt that it wouldn't sit well with farmers if he were drawing a salary from the county and still farming. On March 4, 1929, he was appointed county extension agent of Franklin County, and soon thereafter he hired Kenneth Olverson to run the farm, with Ezra providing some supervision until Orval returned.

In Preston Ezra purchased a small red brick home that was in a preliminary stage of construction. By doing much of the framing and other labor himself, he obtained the dwelling, for thirty-three hundred dollars, complete with a small apartment in the basement that could be rented for additional income.

It took several months to complete the home, which was just as well. Flora was again carrying a child, and on May 2, 1929, she bore their second son, Mark Amussen Benson. Flora had always said she wanted a dozen children, but Mark's birth, just sixteen months after Reed's, was hard on her health. Nevertheless, she and Ezra were delighted with their small family, and by the time she came home from the hospital with her new son, the home was ready for the family.

The home, located two blocks east of the center of town, put the couple in the Preston First Ward. Again they became active in Church activities. Flora was called to the stake Young Women's MIA board, and Ezra, whose Scouting reputation had spread, was asked to lead the ward's senior Scouts on an energetic hike.

Ezra thoroughly enjoyed working with the Scouts, but he had almost as much fun serving as county agent. Though he had an office in the Greaves Building, next door to Sheriff Bill Head, he spent scarcely thirty days at his desk the first year there, preferring to drive around the county "helping farmers solve a hundred and one problems," as he put it. He talked with farmers, and then assessed areas where a hard-working county agent could make a difference. He put in long hours to get programs introduced and functioning, as well as spent time at his own farm. His skills of observation and organization were invaluable in developing programs and administering them among dozens of farmers with diverse operations and schedules.

"He sure was a hustler," recalled D. G. Eames, a Preston dairyman. "He really got around the county and looked after things. He once went with me to Bear Lake and helped me pick out some purebred Holsteins. That started me in the purebred business." G. L. Wright, later county commission chairman, declared after Ezra had moved on, "The county would sure like to have him back." [^3]

By and large, local farmers had four problems: first, they weren't taking advantage of new agricultural technology and procedures; second, the marketing of their products was left largely to chance; third, some farms suffered from poor management; and fourth, many young men were leaving the farm, and Ezra anticipated a shortage of well-prepared young farmers a few years down the road.

Ezra began to respond to his observations with self-helps for the farmer. He selected "demonstration farms," where one particular facet of farming—for example, irrigation—was operating smoothly, and organized field trips for other farmers to inspect and analyze the procedures being used. On demonstration days, farmers even competed with each other in contests that included everything from livestock to per-acre yield. He also invited specialists in poultry, dairy, and field crops from the University of Idaho to visit the county, where he took them from farm to farm, answering questions and giving instruction as it related to each farmer's situation.

During his two years as county agent, Ezra became an agricultural jack of all trades. He found there was no systematic rotation of crops, and some of the land was infested with nematode because beets had been grown without rotation. Ezra taught the farmers how and when to rotate their crops, including planting sweet clover to revitalize the soil. He helped them arrange for bank loans and taught them how to do their bookkeeping, how to forecast expenses and revenues, and how to play the volatile commodities market. He also introduced improved varieties of grains, fertilizers, and pest controls. When he convinced six farmers to try Federation wheat, yields were so encouraging that most of the production was saved for seeding the county the following year. He led a campaign to rid the county of rodents and eradicate weeds, persuading a county commissioner to allocate eight hundred dollars for the project, and organized a county competition herd composed of some of the finest dairy cattle in the area.

In time Ezra won over some of the older generation of farmers to the progressive farming techniques he had learned in school. For example, when he promoted open shed barns for dairymen, a cost-saving measure, many older farmers resisted, insisting that cattle preferred barns. So Ezra engineered a demonstration. Feed was provided in the barn and in the corral near the shed, and both shed and barn were bedded well. In the morning every cow had left the barn and was resting under the shed.

During his second year, Ezra became actively involved in the 4-H Club movement. He wanted to get boys enthused about agriculture so they would want to return to the farm, and then know how to make a living when they did so. His results were beyond argument. Enrollment increased dramatically, from one hundred to nearly five hundred. The program grew so large that approval was obtained to hire an additional agent to work with 4-H Clubs. He also organized the county's first 4-H Club fair. Over four thousand turned out to see the exhibits.

As he moved throughout the county, Ezra became increasingly convinced that one of the great weaknesses not only in Franklin County but throughout the agricultural industry was the lack of marketing. Even great products didn't sell themselves—not at profitable rates. Working individually, farmers were totally at the mercy of the markets; but working cooperatively, their marketing opportunities increased measurably.

From childhood Ezra had been trained in the principles of cooperation. Many of the early Mormon settlements, including Whitney, were founded on cooperative techniques. As he observed what was happening in Franklin County, he became convinced that one of the most effective ways for farmers to sell their products, and at acceptable prices, was to join together in cooperative groups.

On a limited scale he put his ideas to work. His first attempt was a pig project, where he directed the farmers to pool their hogs and classify and size them according to breed. The quantity was larger than any one farmer's herd, and the hogs were better classified than they ordinarily would have been. Ezra had them shipped to California and sold for a better price than the going rate locally.

Utilizing the same principle with a different product, wheat, Franklin County farmers organized their own flour mill and bypassed the middleman who typically absorbed much of the profit. Ezra promoted formation of the Franklin County Grain Growers, which by 1930 produced 80 percent of the county's wheat. And he continued his emphasis on farm management, organizing a two-day economic conference for local farmers. Three hundred attended, of whom two hundred secured livestock loans.

In the second year alone, Ezra held 147 meetings, many of them at night. Though he lived in Preston and was beginning to keep long hours, he made time to frequent his parents' home in Whitney. Younger brothers and sisters looked up to him, and he was conscientious about this stewardship. His youngest sister, Sarah, who at fifteen years his junior had few memories of Ezra, was amazed when he stopped by the home one evening after she had been left behind when her friends went to a dance at the Persiana Ballroom in Preston. "I was sitting home practically in tears when Ezra came by and said he'd drive me to the dance. He did—took me in to make sure I met up with my friends, arranged a ride home, and then left."

In Ezra's nearly two years on the job as county agent, word of his programs spread throughout the state. As a result, on October 15, 1930, he was given a promotion as agricultural economist and extension specialist with the University of Idaho Extension Division in Boise. The appointment form on file includes this statement regarding his qualifications: "Mr. Benson has excellent training. . . . We are very fortunate in securing a man of Mr. Benson's qualifications for this work at a time when men with such qualifications are in great demand."

By this time Orval had returned from his mission. Trying to make ends meet on his modest salary, with payments on the farm and their Preston home as well as providing for the needs of a wife and two sons, was difficult for Ezra. The brothers determined it best to dissolve their partnership, and Ezra sold his interest in the farm to Orval.

Ezra and Flora's decision to move their family to Boise wasn't nearly as difficult as deciding to move to Preston had been. Boise was the state capital, and Ezra saw opportunities there that he would never have in Franklin County. The short time he had spent as county agent had raised his sights, so in late 1930 the Bensons moved to Boise, 180 miles west of Preston.

In addition to sources cited for chapters 5 and 6, see unpublished biographical sketch, "Ezra Taft Benson"; Ezra Taft Benson, "Franklin County Extension Agent Annual Report for 1929," November 20, 1929; Ezra Taft Benson, "Franklin County Extension Agent Annual Report for 1930," October 31, 1930. Also "Benson Excelled as County Agent," Deseret News, December 17, 1952.

Footnotes

"I had a firm philosophy that you cannot help people permanently by doing for them what they can and should do for themselves."

---
Notas:
[^1] B. Clair Johnson to author, undated, circa May 1986.
[^2] As quoted in Morris and Greenleaf, The History of a Nation, p. 794.
[^3] Salt Lake Tribune, July 1, 1938. See also Benson and Eke, "1938 Agricultural Outlook for Idaho."
