Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 8

Agriculture Specialist

The early thirties found the United States in throes of the Great Depression. In the summer of 1932, when the nation's economy hit bottom, one-fourth of the working force was unemployed. Perhaps nowhere were conditions as strained as among the chronically depressed farmers. While farm output dropped only 6 percent between 1929 and 1933, commodity prices plummeted a startling 64 percent.

The situation throughout Idaho was no different. And as the economist/extension specialist hired to direct the marketing effort of the University of Idaho's Extension Division, Ezra Benson came face to face with the stark realities of local agriculture.

As he saw it, conditions had never rebounded from the post-World War I slump. Young men returning from war had found a shortage of jobs. Rather than let their sons sit idle, many Idaho farmers divided their homesteads, giving each son a small portion. Now few owned enough land or livestock to sustain life. As a county agent Ezra had lamented that the typical farmer owned only a few acres, four head of horses, six cows, three sows, three hundred hens—and had a wife and six children. Yet it was Ezra's assignment to help Idaho farmers survive. In his pivotal role, he had the potential of affecting half the population of Idaho. He welcomed the challenge.

Ezra was soon on the road, spending little time in his basement office in the State Capitol. He was critical of those who believed the country's farms could be administered from a desk in Washington, and he wasn't about to plan programs for people he didn't know or determine solutions for problems he didn't fully understand. As he drove from county to county, he encountered sobering scenarios: farmers watching their life's work sold to the highest bidder in foreclosure auctions; granaries full of wheat and cellars filled with potatoes that weren't worth anything; farmers who were experts in the field and dairy, but strangers to a budget and uninformed about improved strains of livestock and crops.

And he observed situations that didn't make sense—farmers who raised grain yet scrimped to buy high-priced puffed wheat in a box; who bought the fruit the family ate rather than raising fruit on idle acres; who left valuable equipment outside to rust in winter without taking preventive measures. He cried with men whose homesteads had been in their families for decades and who knew nothing other than tilling the soil, but who couldn't afford to stay on the farm.

After his first tour of the state, Ezra came to appreciate more fully the Prophet Joseph Smith's counsel to the Latter-day Saints that men should be taught correct principles and then allowed to govern themselves. "I had a firm philosophy," Ezra said. "You cannot help people permanently by doing for them what they can and should do for themselves. I had to help the people stand on their own feet."

Based upon supply and demand, it was clear to Ezra that until crop surpluses were reduced, farmers would find no relief at the market. And the surpluses could be alleviated only if commodities were marketed more aggressively. Within his own domain, he attacked the problem areas vigorously.

Flora and the boys found they would often have to function without their husband and father, as the pressure and demands of his job took Ezra away from home nearly half of the time. For eight years he crisscrossed the state, giving demonstrations, speaking, conducting outlook seminars, and talking one-on-one with farmers. It wasn't uncommon for him to be away for two weeks, then return home just long enough to change clothes before going to a church meeting. Flora used to humorously say, "Well, when you are home, you're gone." She and the boys often stood alongside the track at the Boise train depot, waiting for Ezra to return. As a boy Mark had the impression that his father "moved fast. Whenever he was going anywhere, he didn't fiddle around—he moved. It taught us boys, subtly, that he was engaged in a good cause and was anxious to get the work done."

To Ezra's mind, there were few causes better, and his position with the Extension Division became more than a job. To really help the farmers, he had to gain their confidence and do what hadn't been done before—improve their situation.

Carol Youngstrom, then assistant agricultural economist and assistant professor at the university experiment station, remembered that "Ezra had the attributes required. He had the background and knowledge, but he also had the leadership qualities. He was a good extension economist. Among other things, he was confident and well respected among the people he worked with."

Hans C. Johnson sold farm equipment in the small community of Bancroft in Bannock County. One summer in the early thirties the county suffered a heavy infestation of ground squirrels, and Ezra Benson stopped to inquire about the availability of squirrel poison. Johnson's son, B. Clair Johnson, was in the store and remembers watching Ezra "stride confidently into my father's store. From a boy's viewpoint, he was excitement itself! He was perfectly dressed as a farm counselor and possessed an air of confidence felt by all who saw and heard him. His hi-top boots laced almost to the knee were, in the parlance of this day, the epitome of 'cool.' I was, as a young boy, so fascinated by his person that I paid little heed to his conversation with my father. He stayed only a short time, completed his business, and strode out as purposefully as he had entered. Somehow all assembled felt the truth of my father's words when he said, 'There is a young man who is really going places!'" [^1]

Few who observed Ezra's obsession with getting relief to farmers would have disagreed. To accomplish this he became a combination teacher-administrator-analyst, preaching the doctrine of self-reliance as well as a variety of practical functions. He held classes from county to county, informing farmers on the outlook for prices and production and helping them determine how many acres to plant. He tracked the weekly market value of everything from eggs to apples, advising farmers when and how much to sell. He openly disagreed with New Deal farm measures, in which the government imposed price supports and production controls, but kept farmers informed on regulations and requirements for participating in subsidy programs. He traveled nationwide to study livestock marketing, helped farmers get loans, taught budgeting and financial forecasting, gave advice on crop rotation, interpreted government relief bills for farmers, and conducted farm management conferences. And he spearheaded or assisted with campaigns to develop markets for Idaho products nationwide, including an effort to make the baked Idaho potato famous on menus across America.

For farmers who had been purchasing puffed wheat, he calculated the savings in grinding their own for cereal. He showed farmers how to preserve their machines from rust by spraying them with crankcase oil, and teamed with engineers to instruct farmers in machinery repair. Ezra evaluated that "there were shortcuts that would save money in light of the fact that most had a minimum of cash in their pockets. Most farmers could be nearly self-sufficient, but were not doing so."

In time he became Ezra Benson the Expert, and local town newspapers chronicled his wide-ranging efforts. One paper noted: "Present relatively high beef prices probably will be maintained through 1938, Ezra T. Benson . . . predicted." The Teton Daily News of February 3, 1938, referred to him as one of several "prominent speakers" scheduled to participate in a community function.

When Roosevelt's New Deal promoted increased price supports and production controls through the Agricultural Adjustment Act in May 1933, it was Ezra's responsibility to administer the program, though he disagreed heartily with its premise: that farmers would receive subsidies for reducing their herds or acreage. Millions of hogs were slaughtered and ten of the forty million acres planted to cotton were plowed under that year. Even Secretrary of Agriculture Henry Wallace, who concocted the scheme, admitted, "I hope we shall never have to resort to [it] again. To destroy a standing crop goes against the soundest instincts of human nature." [^2]

The waste of food and fiber offended Ezra's sensibilities and was an outrage to his logic. "I never encouraged the farmers to join up, but I did explain the economics of the program," he said. However, when the hog program was announced, he opposed it openly, and the dean of agriculture called him in. "We had a friendly visit and talked for an hour," Ezra remembered. "I explained my philosophy, and he agreed with me. But he wasn't sure I should have been quite so vigorous in opposing it."

Ezra rarely toned down his comments, though he delivered speeches by the hundreds in churches and high school auditoriums. When the forecast for agriculture looked grim, he didn't try to mask the situation. In his 1938 outlook report, for example, he admitted that farm prices and the domestic demand for farm products were "the lowest since August 1934" with little hope for change. [^3]

Though his message wasn't always positive, Ezra had wide acceptance. Dozens of Idaho's industry leaders acknowledged his influence, such as William E. Hess, vice-president of the Power County Grain Growers, who wrote: "[Thank] you for . . . your splendid talk at our annual stockholders meeting and picnic. Everybody I talked to said you hit the nail on the head." [^4]

Through it all Ezra became convinced that farmers working independently of each other had no leverage on the market; but those who joined together, disposed of their crops in bulk, and exchanged knowledge and problems in a fraternal give-and-take atmosphere could accomplish much more.

The National Council of Farmer Cooperatives was encouraging the formation of state cooperative organizations nationwide, and by 1933 Ezra had done enough talking in Idaho to lead to the formation of the Idaho Cooperative Council (ICC), a federation of agricultural marketing organizations in the state. The ICC's premise was simple: getting small cooperatives to work together under a unifying umbrella. His foresight in pushing for such an organization did not go unnoticed by national co-op leaders; only California had organized earlier. During the five years Ezra served as its executive secretary, the ICC became one of the most progressive organizations of its kind in the nation. [^5]

In Ezra's judgment, the co-op concept made good sense. Farmers who were linked could pool their resources to purchase machinery at a discount, sell their commodities in larger quantities with increased bargaining power, buy fuel and other staples in bulk at lower prices, improve their marketing, and share industry knowledge. In addition, they could purchase stock in the enterprise and share dividends when the co-op turned a profit. Ezra's convictions about cooperatives became the stabilizing plank in his agricultural philosophy.

He helped organize small, specialized co-ops, such as the Idaho Potato Growers Association. Before he was through, hog producers, dairymen, and turkey and poultry growers had all organized. "We found that if we could discuss our common problems," Ezra explained, "it usually drew us closer together. We developed almost a fraternal spirit."

The practical results were measurable. Dairymen, for example, had their milk condensed and canned in Preston, then shipped to California, where it commanded a higher price. Though cooperatives had some struggles—jealousy and suspicion among members, and weak leaders at times—the net results in Idaho were positive. The results were, in all likelihood, indicative of Ezra's power of persuasion and his track record, which consistently worked in the farmers' favor.

Nevertheless, professional agriculture in a rural state always foments problems. In Boise Ezra had his first scrape with occupational opposition. With farming issues paramount in the minds of state legislators and other officials, almost any decision he made could arouse controversy. When he opposed the New Deal, some local Democrats were outraged; when he preached the view that the government didn't owe farmers a living, some Idaho farmers who depended on subsidies turned on him. After he published his findings on the effects of tariffs on Idaho agricultural commodities, a state legislator blasted him. Reed remembers his father, subdued and worried about the outcry, walking to the front door the next morning, with Flora at his elbow. After kissing and hugging her husband, she said, "Don't worry, T, you're right. Things will work out."

There were also colorful moments during Ezra's association with state officials. Idaho Governor Ben Ross enjoyed campaigning on agricultural issues, though, as Ezra said, "it wasn't the subject he understood best." Nevertheless, the governor was familiar with Ezra's accomplishments. During Ezra's stint as county agent, Ross visited Preston to dedicate a new dam. The services were held on the dam itself, and the governor spoke from a flat-bottom truck. Predictably he spoke on the agricultural potential of the Gem State, and, spotting Ezra standing in the audience next to the county sheriff, said dramatically, "I can see your county agent in the audience, the most valuable man in the whole county. If you can't afford a county agent and a sheriff, fire your sheriff and let the bootleggers loose." Ezra found it very embarrassing.

Ezra seldom slowed down. But when his mother's health started to deteriorate rapidly in early 1933, the worry almost overcame him. Sarah and her eldest son had always had an unusual bond. They had been each other's strength while George Benson served a mission. She had raised her other ten children to look up to Ezra. There was, she had quietly told her husband, something distinctive about their oldest boy. And how Ezra loved his mother! She was a stabilizing force in his life, a barometer and inspiration. In his eyes, she was without flaw.

When Ezra's younger brother George prepared to leave for the Southern States Mission, his father confided in Ezra that unless the Lord intervened, Sarah would probably not live more than a few weeks. As young George stood at his mother's bedside before leaving, she counseled, "George, no matter what happens at home, I want you to stay and fill an honorable mission."

On June 1, 1933, Sarah Benson died. Despite its inevitability, her death stunned her family. Before preaching a sermon at her funeral, Elder David O. McKay visited the Bensons. Ezra described the impact of his visit on the family: "Our father was bowed in grief, and ten children were weeping for the loss of mother. But he [Elder McKay] completely changed the atmosphere in our home. He literally lifted us and filled us with hope and assurance and had us counting our blessings as we attended the funeral of that angel mother." [^6]

The following Sunday Ezra sang a solo in church, "O Mother of Mine." His cousin William Poole wondered how he could do it with so much sorrow. But from the time of Sarah Benson's death, Ezra gradually assumed more responsibility with the family. Margaret spent a lot of time with her father, who was heartsick at the loss of Sarah. In May 1934, following childbirth, Margaret was stricken with scarlet fever. On July 22 she wrote Ezra, "I was in such terrific pain and too sick to move. . . . Father sat by my bed with his head bowed for what seemed like hours, praying for my recovery. . . . I know I would never have walked, or been able to raise my head from the pillow, had it not been for the Priesthood." [^7]

Then, just fourteen months after Sarah's death, Ezra's father suddenly became ill. By the time the doctor correctly diagnosed a ruptured appendix, George's condition had become critical. Margaret, still weak from her illness, visited her father in the hospital. "They needed someone to stay all night, how I wanted to stay with him, but he said, 'No my dear it would not be wise.' He had so much wisdom." [^8]

On August 13, 1934, Barbara Amussen recorded in her journal, "We were made very sad when we got a long distance call from 'T' saying that his beloved father had passed away . . . and how sad to have mother and father both pass away while [young George] is yet on a mission."

George's death took his family by surprise, though he seemed to know it was coming. Before going to the hospital he drew up a will and consulted with the stake president on other matters.

More than a thousand people attended the funeral, at which Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the Council of the Twelve spoke. It was the largest funeral ever held in Franklin County.

The unexpected death of his father stung Ezra. From boyhood his father had been his hero, his model. There was no earthly person he wanted more to be like. The poignant circumstances took him back to the day some twenty years before when he had stood at the side of a dusty road and waved goodbye as his father left for the mission field. He remembered worrying that he would never see him again. But at least then, Ezra had had his mother to lean on. Now both were gone. The two people who had most shaped his early life had passed on. He doubted his life would ever be the same—especially as the head now of his family of ten brothers and sisters.

Pushing grief aside, Ezra corresponded immediately with LeGrand Richards, president of the Southern States Mission where George was serving. Ezra could only imagine how much harder all this must be on his brother. But Elder Richards assured him George was coping with the situation and counseled Ezra, "Now that [George] has no Father or Mother to write him it will of course be necessary that [you] write often to keep him encouraged. He must not be permitted to feel that he is alone in the world." [^9]

George later told Ezra how much Elder Richards had done to salve his grief: "I'll never forget when Father died. President Richards came to Milton, Florida, where I was. As I met the train, I tried to think why he was coming to see me. . . . He came toward me and threw his arms around me and held me tight. And then he whispered to me of Father's passing. He insisted that I return to Atlanta with him, where I spent two glorious weeks." [^10]

Despite the loss of his second parent in just a year, George completed his mission. Such family devotion to missionary work would later prompt Thomas S. Monson of the Church's First Presidency to say, "What else would you expect the outcome to be, with that kind of mother and father setting the example? The Benson family is the best example of missionary service which could be portrayed to the Church worldwide. We have none to equal it. Absolutely none." [^11]

Nevertheless, all of George and Sarah's offspring had to cope with an emptiness. In a letter to his sister Louise, who was unable to attend the funeral, Ezra described the services and closed with words of comfort: "While Father has not left very much, fortunately I feel, in the way of material things, he has certainly left us more than money can buy, and the splendid life of service and integrity which he has lived is the greatest legacy which parents may leave to their children." [^12]

It was a gospel-centered legacy that Ezra took seriously. Since moving to Boise, he had been deeply involved in the local Church organization. He had been called first to the Boise Stake's YMMIA board, and in late 1932, he was asked to serve as the stake YMMIA superintendent. Flora served on the stake YWMIA board, and their callings to work with youth suited the couple nicely. "The youth are our future," Ezra stated firmly, "and we placed great emphasis on them in the Boise Stake."

As in most generations, Ezra and his associates feared many young people were getting sidetracked, and they determined to provide quality activities to keep them involved. They held dances, such as Gold and Green balls, in the basement of the old Boise Tabernacle, and three-day fathers-and-sons' outings. Reed and Mark attended the campouts with their father. Ezra always provided a lot of infield chatter when he pitched softball. There were bow-and-arrow shooting matches, fathers versus sons softball games, peanut throws, and campfire programs, where Ezra entertained the boys with humorous recitations, such as "The Cremation of Sam McGee," led hearty rounds of singing (a favorite was "John Brown's Baby Has a Cold Upon His Chest"), and told stories about great men, heroes the boys could emulate. Mark and Reed looked forward to the outings with great anticipation, though Mark, who wasn't the healthiest child, nearly froze to death and inevitably returned home with cold sores from ear to ear. "Being with dad in the element he loved best, the outdoors, was worth it," Mark said.

Nowhere was Ezra's passion for youth more evident than in his work with Boy Scouts. From 1930 to 1933 he served as a Scout commissioner. He was one of Scouting's enthusiastic advocates.

As the little family grew in number, so did Ezra's pride and satisfaction. Five years after Mark's birth, the Bensons were blessed with a third child, their first girl. On June 20, 1934, Barbara Amussen Benson, a "lovely husky daughter," as her namesake called her, was born in Boise's St. Luke's Hospital. The delivery cost thirty-five dollars.

On January 13, 1935, the presidency of the Boise Stake was reorganized, and Ezra was sustained as first counselor to Scott S. Brown, with Mathias J. Benson (no relation) as second counselor. On the same day Ezra was ordained a high priest.

Because Scott Brown lived some eighty miles away in Weiser, Ezra carried a little more of the load than he might have otherwise. Typically, visiting General Authorities stayed with the Bensons in Boise, where travel connections were more convenient. The Bensons hosted many Church officials, including Rudger B. Clawson, Charles A. Callis, LeGrand Richards, Melvin J. Ballard, Rulon S. Wells, and Joseph F. Hardy. Flora's refined upbringing proved beneficial, for she knew how to make guests comfortable. From the beginning she counseled her husband, "You may invite anyone to our home that you wish, but when we serve meals the children will be allowed to join us at the table, not tucked away in the kitchen to get leftovers." Ezra agreed, and the children learned how to respond with guests present. Many visitors complimented Ezra and Flora on their well-behaved children.

Frequent visits from the Brethren led to memorable moments. One such occasion came in July 1936 when President Heber J. Grant and his wife stopped in Boise en route home from an Alaskan tour. The First Presidency had announced their intention to build a temple in Idaho, and stake presidencies throughout the state were hoping it would be in their city. "It was a big day for us to have the president of the church in our home," Ezra remembered, and news of the prophet's visit spread throughout the city.

That evening Flora had prepared a special meal and kept it waiting for President Grant. But, when the President arrived, he asked her if he might have just three slices of toast and a bowl of milk for supper. "I'll sit here in the breakfast room and eat while you put food on the table for the others. Then I'm going to bed. I know what's best for Heber J. Grant," he told her.

When he entered Ezra and Flora's bedroom, President Grant noticed a painting of Carl Amussen. "How did you become acquainted with this distinguished Danish gentleman?" he asked Flora. When she replied that he was her father, President Grant said, "You can't fool me! I knew that elderly gentleman as a boy." "Father was seventy-six when I was born," she explained, "and I was his last child." President Grant thought for a moment before saying, "That could be. That could be."

Just as President Grant was ready to retire, a knock came at the Bensons' front door. Fifteen prominent businessmen had come to pay their respects. Flora and Ezra hurried to find chairs for all, and President Grant joined them. The group's spokesman explained that the Boise Chamber of Commerce would donate any piece of land the Church wanted to build a temple. President Grant responded, "I'll make you a counter proposition. If all of you will join the Church and volunteer your services as missionaries, we'll build a temple in this valley as soon as the numbers justify it." Then President Grant prophesied, "Someday you will have a temple in this valley." (Ezra later said, "Flora and I kept that locked up in our hearts for years." The prophecy was fulfilled nearly five decades later, when a temple was dedicated in Boise in 1984.)

The Boise Stake was large in both distance and population. On June 30, 1937, the stake population was 7,651, and the needs of its people were widespread and diverse. Ezra continued to aggressively support the youth and was also sensitive toward those who weren't active. One experience is typical:

We were trying to select a president for the weakest and smallest elder's quorum in the stake. Our clerk had brought a list of all the elders of that quorum, and on the list was the name of a man I had known for years. He came from a strong Latter-day Saint family, but he wasn't doing much in the Church. He would work on the chapel and play softball with the elders, and he did have leadership ability.

I said to the stake president, "Would you authorize me to challenge this man to square his life with the standards of the Church and take the leadership of his quorum? I know there is some hazard in it, but he has the ability."

The stake president told me to go ahead, and after Sunday School I went to this man's home. I'll never forget the look on his face as he opened the door and saw a member of his stake presidency standing there. He hesitantly invited me in; I could smell the aroma of coffee coming from the kitchen. I asked him to have his wife join us, and when we were seated I told him why I had come. "I'm not going to ask you for your answer today," I told him. "All I want you to do is promise to think about it, pray about it, think in terms of what it will mean to your family, and I'll be back to see you next week. If you decide not to accept, we'll go on loving you."

The next Sunday, as soon as he opened the door I saw there had been a change. He was glad to see me, and he quickly invited me in and called his wife to join us. He said, "Brother Benson, we've thought about it and we've prayed about it, and we've decided to accept the call. If you brethren have that much confidence in me, I'm willing to square my life with the standards of the Church, a thing I should have done long ago. I haven't had coffee since you were here last week, and I'm not going to have any more."

He was set apart as elder's quorum president, and attendance in his quorum kept going up. He went out, put his arm around the inactive elders, and brought them in.

Years passed, and one day on Temple Square a man came up to me and said, "Brother Benson, do you remember coming to the home of a delinquent elder in Boise seven years ago? I'll never live long enough to thank you. I am now a bishop. I used to think I was happy, but I didn't know what real happiness was."

One of the stake's most dramatic changes came when it embraced the Church's new security (welfare) program. The Depression caught many Latter-day Saints unprepared. A 1935 survey revealed the distressing fact that nearly one-sixth of all Church members were receiving public relief. The welfare program was launched in April 1936 at general conference in Salt Lake City when the First Presidency outlined the principles of the new program: "Our primary purpose was to set up, insofar as it might be possible, a system under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self-respect be once more established amongst our people. The aim of the Church is to help the people help themselves." [^13]

Ezra was assigned to attend a regional welfare meeting in Burley presided over by Elder Melvin J. Ballard and Harold B. Lee, managing director of the general welfare committee. What Ezra heard in Burley impressed him. Back home in a meeting with the stake presidency, high council, and bishops he said, "Brethren, this is economically, socially, and spiritually sound, and we want to get back of it."

But Ezra didn't realize how soon his stake would get involved. Not long thereafter, he received an urgent phone call from the bishop of the Emmett Ward, telling him that the previous night's rain had split the nearly ripe cherries and they would deteriorate quickly unless measures were taken. Ezra quickly organized volunteers to pick cherries, while Relief Society sisters gathered at the stake house to bottle them. By the end of that week the Boise Stake had sent thousands of quarts of cherries to the welfare storehouse in Salt Lake City.

This was just the beginning. Though Ezra found stake members generally "slow in getting on" with the program, in time they responded very well. Just two months after they first heard about the new program, numerous welfare projects were underway: one ward had planted a multi-acre garden, another had sown fifteen acres of sugar beets, and the Relief Society in another was canning food and making quilts and clothing. The Boise Third Ward even built a small cannery.

Two years later Ezra reported the stake's progress at a regional welfare meeting, attended by Harold B. Lee and Marion G. Romney of the general welfare committee. His report was impressive. Every Melchizedek Priesthood quorum in the stake had been involved. Twenty-five thousand quarts of fruits and vegetables had been processed, at least three cars of potatoes raised, two tons of dried fruit prepared, 450 bushels of apples gathered, and a large quantity of root vegetables, such as carrots and onions, raised. [^14]

By September 1936, when Ezra took a leave to accept a graduate fellowship at the University of California in Berkeley, his impact on the welfare program and in other areas of the stake had been substantial enough that President Scott Brown refused to release him as his counselor, praising him later as having "filled every position of responsibility given him with honor and distinction." [^15]

Despite his impact on Idaho agriculture, Ezra wasn't satisfied with his qualifications. At Flora's urging he applied for and received one of six fellowship awards offered by the Giannini Foundation for Agricultural Economics. "I have always felt education was an important asset," Ezra said, "and that this additional schooling would lead to greater opportunity. We expected to have a large family, and I wanted to provide for them as well as possible." On August 1, 1936, the Bensons moved to Berkeley, California in the interest of furthering his career.

As part of his course work at Berkeley, Ezra conducted the field work for a study on beef marketing, which took him from one end of California to the other. "I think I saw every slaughter and feed yard, every boat loaded with meat that docked," he recalled.

California was the most progressive state in organizing cooperatives, and Ezra visited dozens of cooperatives, sizing up their strengths and weaknesses. Avocado growers, orange growers, walnut growers—all and many more were functioning effectively. This broadened his vision considerably and put him in a position to meet with prominent leaders in the cooperative movement.

The statewide marketing study took Ezra away from class periodically, as indicated in his professor's remarks on an essay exam taken for Economics 209 on which he received an A grade: "Paper shows good grasp considering fact you had to be absent part of the time." It also revealed that, in a nutshell, Ezra understood the burgeoning agricultural problem and could express himself articulately.

The course work at Berkeley was demanding. "T is kept very busy with his school work," Flora wrote to her mother. "He gets up . . . at 5 o'clock and starts studying. Then he leaves shortly after and I don't see him until 6 o'clock in the evening and right after supper he is right at his studying again. . . . When Saturday comes he spends half of it at school. He [tries] once in a while to go [and] visit someplace of interest with the family." [^16]

With Ezra studying heavily at his desk in a small office shared with other graduate students, and spending additional time on the road, the family spent many evenings and nights alone. It must have been a somewhat lonely time for Flora, who was now living in an unfamiliar city with only her children as company. She wrote to her mother often, thanking her for "words of encouragement and counsel." These letters no doubt focused on her loneliness.

But Flora forced herself to be independent. She was devoted to helping Ezra stretch himself to the limit, and she never regretted her role. In fact, she loved it. She lost herself in the lives of her husband and children. There were, of course, times when she struggled with rearing her children almost singlehandedly. In a letter to Ezra, she told how she had juggled finances to buy groceries when his paycheck didn't come on time and mentioned hiding Easter eggs for the children before admitting, "I don't know when I've ever felt so lonesome and just a bit discouraged. It seems I am such a flop." [^17]

On another occasion Flora's letter was more typical, revealing her intense pride in her husband: "As usual the days seem like months since you left. . . . [But] if all men . . . loved and lived their religion as you do, there would be very little sorrow [and] suffering. . . . You're always so devoted to your family and ready at all times to give help to others in need." [^18]

Overall, the nine months the Bensons spent in Berkeley were pleasant. For outings Ezra and Flora took the children on the ferry to San Francisco to visit Golden Gate Park. In early 1937, they learned they were expecting another child. Flora was so thrilled that she almost forgot her home- and morning sickness. The family also stayed close to the Church, attending the Berkeley Ward. Though Ezra was still officially a counselor in the Boise Stake presidency, the president of the Oakland Stake asked him to serve on the high council there. Flora was called to teach Primary.

In a letter to her mother dated September 5, Flora wrote that "T" had spoken in their ward's sacrament meeting, as well as in nearby Richmond, where he "spoke just grand." One Sunday the family attended a Sunday evening service in San Francisco, and during the meeting the bishop asked all returned missionaries to come forward. Flora and Ezra, with others, went to the stand, and the bishop called on several persons to speak. Flora wrote her mother about what happened then. "After all those had spoken he looked at T and said there is a man I want to hear from. . . . He said his [Ezra's] eyes have just been sparkling and he has looked so happy [and] enthused [and] interested. T got up and spoke very fine."

At the end of his nine months in Berkeley, Ezra requested a five-month extension of his leave of absence to complete his Ph.D. The application was denied, and in June 1937 the Bensons returned to Boise. Three months later, on September 20, their fourth child, Beverly Amussen Benson, was born.

The Boise Stake continued to grow. By early 1938 it had a membership of over eight thousand. In November of that year Elder Melvin J. Ballard divided the stake into three stakes, and Ezra was called as president of the Boise Stake, encompassing some 3,300 members in the Boise First, Second, and Third wards, the Glenns Ferry Ward and the Meridian Branch. He selected as his counselors Z. Reed Millar and Mathias J. Benson.

Though he had been warned by President McKay to expect a call such as this, Ezra was shocked when it came. Mark Benson, then nine, remembers the commotion the call caused at home. Flora gathered the children and told them their father had been called to be a stake president. Mark didn't comprehend the full significance, but he sensed "how pleased mother was and how anxious she was to share the news with us. She told us what a blessing it was for dad to receive that call."

As stake president, Ezra once again emphasized welfare and youth programs. He had an open-door policy with youth. Don Schlurf remembers trying to skip out with friends just before an afternoon session of stake conference. They started slowly down the hall toward the back door, keeping their eyes on the foyer to be sure their exit wasn't being detected. About then Ezra stepped out of his office, sized up the situation, and stretched his arms across the hall so that the boys fell right into them. "I'm so glad to see you boys," he said. "Let's go to conference together." He led them to the front bench, and later called upon them to bear their testimonies. Don never skipped out again.

Efficiency flourished under Ezra, whose penchant for organization quickly affected the entire stake. "No souls are saved after 9 P.M.," he insisted, instructing stake leaders to conclude meetings by that hour so that they could get home and see their children before bedtime.

As secretary of the Idaho Cooperative Council, Ezra was expected to attend annual meetings of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives and of the American Institute of Cooperation (AIC). Gradually he attracted the attention of national agricultural leaders, including Raymond W. Miller, president of the AIC. An associate of Miller's repeatedly told him about the bright young marketing specialist in Boise, calling him "one of the coming men in America in the field of agriculture." Finally in 1938 Miller agreed to visit Ezra Benson in Boise. "He did not have much of an office—just a hole in the basement—but the charm and wisdom and dignity of the man made this visit for me one of the most exciting I had ever experienced," Miller remembered.

Ralph Taylor, executive secretary of the Agricultural Council of California, had also become acquainted with Ezra. As dean of state secretaries for the cooperatives, he invited Ezra to deliver the report of the state councils at an annual meeting of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives. Ezra's presentation, said Miller, "won for him the respect of the delegates."

In the fall of 1938 word spread that the National Council was to be reorganized and that the position of executive secretary was likely to be open. The Kiplinger Agricultural Letter and other industry publications speculated openly about the appointee. Ezra Taft Benson's name was mentioned, but so was the fact that he had "no Washington experience." The Kiplinger Letter of August 6, 1938, categorically stated that "Dr. Benson" would not get the job.

Earlier that summer, however, Charles C. Teague, vice-president of the council and president of the California Fruit Growers Exchange, had approached Ezra about the position. Ezra had also visited with John D. (Judge) Miller, president of the council, and been candid about his priorities. "I told them plainly of my standards, activities in the Church, and advised them that any job which would involve the lowering of those standards would not attract me at any figure. To my joy and gratitude they approved my standards and indicated that one reason they'd come to me was because of my ideals." Ezra was offered the job.

Subsequently, a split developed in the nominating committee. Ezra withdrew his name from consideration, and during late 1938 he heard rumors that a new secretary had been hired. In the meantime he was called to be stake president, and he also received a salary increase from the University of Idaho.

As he left for meetings of the National Council in Washington, D.C., on January 8, 1939, Ezra noted in his journal that his family's future was in Boise. He had been stake president for little over a month, they had just painted their home and purchased a new lot, and they "felt settled for the future." He was surprised, therefore, when he arrived in Washington, to find that the nominating committee wanted to meet with him. Again he reviewed his religious affiliation, adding, "If this job in Washington will entail buying influence and goodwill by providing cocktails as a means of trying to gain influence, I'm not interested at any figure."

Judge Miller, ever gracious, responded to the frank young Idahoan: "Mr. Benson, we know all about your background and your principles. We've been checking you out for a year. You will never be asked to do anything that is in conflict with your standards. In fact, we'd be greatly disappointed if you did so."

Again Ezra was offered the post—this time at 25 percent more salary plus moving expenses. He declined to respond before conferring with Flora, Church leaders, and University of Idaho officials.

He placed the first call to Flora, and to his surprise she said that ever since he had left Boise, she had had a strong impression that they were going to move to Washington. She had even planned out their move. This settled the matter, and they agreed to permit Ezra's name to go before the meeting of the forty directors.

One of the directors, a Latter-day Saint, later told Ezra about the meeting, which comments Ezra recorded in his journal: "I could not hold back the tears as that group not only approved [you] but endorsed and commended the Mormon Church. . . . One man said later, 'If you were to die tonight, your funeral sermon was preached in the meeting this afternoon.'"

Ezra also went to Salt Lake City to confer with Church authorities about the new job opportunity. "They were intensely interested in the entire matter and strongly advised that I accept," he noted in his journal. "Pres. McKay said the Church needed its people in such key positions."

With this assurance, combined with Flora's support, Ezra immediately made up his mind. "There is but one decision. We will go to Washington. I feel that the Lord has a hand in it, and the entire matter is a testimony to me that it pays to live Mormonism."

This chapter is based heavily upon author interviews with Ezra Taft Benson (as well as oral interviews with him by Reed Benson and James B. Allen), Reed Benson, Mark Benson, Carol Youngstrom, Eva Labrum, Dr. Maurice Johnson of the University of Idaho, and Joe R. Williams. See also Manuscript History of the Boise Stake (1937-1940); Raymond W. Miller, "Ezra Taft Benson—Agricultural Statesman," unpublished essay; Ezra Taft Benson's "Personal Recollections," unpublished; Barbara S. Amussen journal.

Information on President Benson's activities as extension economist for the University of Idaho Extension Division is detailed through the following bulletins he coauthored: "Planning the Farm Business for the Year Ahead" (December 1936); with Paul A. Eke, "1938 Agricultural Outlook for Idaho" (December 1937); with Karl Hobson, "Annual Report for 1938"; with Paul A. Eke, "The Sources and Uses of State and County Revenue in Idaho." See also Ezra Taft Benson, "Planning for the Year Ahead," Idaho Farmer, January 1932.

Footnotes

"Life cannot be fully successful, no matter what goals we attain in the material world, no matter what honors of men come to us in our lives, if we fail as fathers, mothers, and children."

---
Notas:
[^1] Julia Dalley to FAB, March 4, 1938.
[^2] Ezra Taft Benson, "To the Elect Women of the Kingdom of God," address at Relief Society Monument Dedicatory Services, Nauvoo, Illinois, June 30, 1978.
[^3] FAB to Barbara Smith Amussen, June 30, 1935.
[^4] FAB to ETB, October 10, 1938.
[^5] See Idaho Heritage 9 (1977): 13.
[^6] Ezra Taft Benson, Tribute to David O. McKay, 1967.
[^7] Margaret Keller to ETB, July 22, no year given.
[^8] Ibid.
[^9] LeGrand Richards to ETB, September 10, 1934. See also "Thousands Attend Funeral Rites of George T. Benson," Deseret News, August 18, 1934, p. 14.
[^10] Ezra Taft Benson, Remarks, Birthday Luncheon for Elder LeGrand Richards, February 6, 1976.
[^11] Author interview with Thomas S. Monson, April 8, 1986.
[^12] ETB to Louise Benson Greenwood, August 21, 1934.
[^13] Conference Report, October 1936, pp. 3-4.
[^14] 14. See Vaughn J. Featherstone, "The Six Priority Needs in Welfare Services," October 5, 1974, LDS Church Library—Archives.
[^15] 15. Scott B. Brown to David W. Evans, undated.
[^16] 16. Flora Amussen Benson (hereafter FAB in references to correspondence) to Barbara Smith Amussen, October 5, 1936.
[^17] 17. FAB to ETB, April 2, 1936.
[^18] 18. FAB to ETB, October 25, 1936.
