Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 9

Rearing an Eternal Family

Many of the qualities that took an Idaho farm boy and fashioned him into an agricultural authority of national repute—a deep trust in God, hard work, an innate sense of values, and congenial or cooperative living—spilled over into Ezra and Flora's home life. Ezra found a sanctuary at home. "Some of the sweetest, most soul-satisfying impressions and experiences of [my] life are associated with home and family ties," he would repeat hundreds of times.

In a favorite Edgar A. Guest poem, which Flora could still recite with vigor years later, their philosophy about home life was colloquially spelled out: "It takes a heap o'livin' in a house t' make it home," the poem began. After thirteen years of marriage, Ezra and Flora still adored each other. There were the inevitable money problems as they struggled to make payments on Ezra's schooling and the farm, but they had little inclination to quarrel, though they had frank discussions on many matters. Perhaps their biggest adjustment was coping with frequent separation.

One Sunday while Ezra was visiting the Whitney Ward, the bishop introduced him by saying, "Wouldn't it be wonderful if we all had jobs like Brother Benson's. He travels this great state of Idaho all the time." Just before that, Ezra had looked over the congregation and thought to himself, "Wouldn't it be wonderful to be home every Sunday with my family."

But with their own relationship providing a solid foundation, Ezra and Flora approached the task of nurturing their family unit with energy and enthusiasm. Though their home life was in some respects typical—budgeting problems, moves and adjustments to new neighborhoods, illnesses, spats between children—it was perhaps atypical in the intense unity and loyalty that prevailed. Ezra wasn't one to look for greener pastures or to dwell upon regrets, and he taught his children it was best to be happy where they were and with what they had.

Many visitors who observed the Bensons at home commented on the friendly spirit in the home. After a visit in 1938, Flora's half-sister, Julia Dalley, described them as "a perfect family," adding, "What on earth could be more ideal? I admire the simplicity of your mode of living but most of all I was impressed with the fact that in your home there dwelled the Spirit of the Lord." [^1] Ezra and Flora worked hard to cultivate that spirit. The gospel set for them the standard for acceptable behavior and family priorities.

As with most families, the Bensons administered their share of discipline, but there was an open atmosphere in which expectations were clearly outlined. And the results were positive. Mark and Reed, though only sixteen months apart, got along unusually well. It was a relationship Flora actively fostered.

Almost from birth Mark suffered from severe asthma. Never as strong as his older brother, he was unable to splash in the shallow pool created when Ezra left the water running on their banked lawn, to run around the house, or to work outside with his father, without starting to wheeze and strain for breath. By age three he was well acquainted with doctors. One came to the house weekly to treat his clogged breathing passage. In his bedside prayers, Mark always remembered his osteopath, Dr. Anderson.

At age six Mark's condition became so serious that he almost died. Day after day Flora stayed at his bedside, applying mustard plasters to his chest and offering comfort. He wheezed so badly that he couldn't get his breath, and just when he would feel he might never breathe again, she would kneel at his bedside and pray. Relief always came. It was a constant, around-the-clock vigil that lasted for many years. There were good days, then bad days; weeks when he could play outside, then periods when he didn't leave his bed. During a visit to Boise, Grandma Amussen wrote in her journal, "Little Mark is not very well today. He isn't very strong, and the last two days he has been helping his daddy and . . . Reed . . . putting kindlings in the basement for winter. . . . We didn't take the necessary care in not letting him work too long."

Flora prepared special foods for Mark and nursed him conscientiously, but he felt that it was his mother's faith and prayers that made the difference. In a patriarchal blessing, he was promised strength of mind and body, and that he would "grow to be a stalwart, healthy man." Flora believed this, and she acted accordingly.

Many factors affected Mark's condition—weather, certain foods and pollens, and even the atmosphere in the home. Any quarrels among the children would set off an attack. Beverly remembers her mother quickly putting a stop to any bickering so that Mark wouldn't get sick. In particular, Flora elicited Reed's help. One day she said to him, "Mark does all he can to help, but he's not strong like you are, Reed. You and I might have to pick up the load and carry a little more responsibility, even if it means suffering in silence, but we can do it for Mark, can't we, because we want him to stay with us." In this and other ways Flora spent unusual time with her older son, hoping that he would then have a positive influence on the younger children. Even at a very young age, Reed was assuming a role of leadership among his brother and sisters.

Flora often told each son in confidence how much his brother loved him. The practice evidently paid dividends, for as unlikely as it may seem, neither brother later remembered ever arguing with the other. "Mother's attitude," Reed insisted, "created within me great love for my brother and a desire to work with her to protect him." Mark missed much of first grade, but on the sporadic days when he did attend, Reed stood by to defend him from the tauntings of classmates. He became Mark's hero, and over time they became inseparable.

Despite his frequent absences from school, Mark was an excellent student. His first-grade teacher, Grace Tucker, once gave him a book in which she inscribed, "To Mark, the student, the leader of his class. To Mark, the boy, his teacher's inspiration."

Such harmony set a pattern for the sisters who followed. Nevertheless, had Mark's health not demanded unusual cooperation among the children, it seems likely that Flora would have picked up the slack in other ways. She believed that home ought to be the place where children learned, developed, and had fun. Home was to be a sanctuary from the world. There were two vital areas—family loyalty and obedience—where she was emphatic. Both she and Ezra were firm about the children's not quarreling, stressing that they expected them to get along with each other. This was an eternal family unit, they emphasized over and over, and they wanted—and expected—no vacant chairs in the eternities. Even when the children were too young to appreciate the implications, the "no vacant chair" theme became part of their family culture.

Having spent much of her childhood alone, Flora felt strongly that children needed their mother at home—on their terms. Though in that day a relative few mothers worked outside the home, Ezra and Flora were particularly united in the view that Flora belonged at home. As an apostle many years later, Ezra would state emphatically, "One apparent impact of the women's movement has been the feelings of discontent it has created among young mothers who have chosen the role of wife and mother. They are often made to feel that there are more exciting and self-fulfilling roles. . . . This view loses sight of the eternal perspective that God elected women to the noble role of mother." [^2]

In her own hand Flora wrote, "If you want to find greatness, don't go to the throne, go to the cradle. There is mighty power in a mother. She is the one who molds hearts, lives, and shapes character."

Flora felt strongly that she should be home when the children returned from school. She wanted to hear about their experiences, determine if they had had problems that day, and share in their achievements and sorrows. She explained, "If I'd gone to work I would have missed so much. You don't need the material things. The Lord will make it up to you in some way."

Of necessity, Flora became the anchor in the home. From the time the Bensons moved to Boise in 1930, Ezra's work took him away nearly half of the time, and Church obligations often took much of the time that was left. One Sunday as her father prepared to leave for an afternoon meeting, young Barbara stood on the front porch and exclaimed, "Good-bye, daddy. And come back again and visit us sometime."

Though Flora was often left alone with her small children, no child questioned her authority. "Mother taught us that the mother's role is to be strong and strict," Barbara said, "and that's what she was." When the need for discipline arose, she delivered on the spot, seldom choosing to wait until Ezra was home and the intensity of the moment had passed.

Reed described those uncomfortable times: "Mother had a way of punishing with the tone of her voice. When I did something wrong, she gave me a tongue-lashing with such power that I got physically faint and had to lie down on the floor. She was angry, though she didn't raise her voice. She let me know that she expected more of me. If I wasn't pleasing her, that was the punishment that hurt the most."

Physical punishment was rare. Neither Flora nor Ezra resorted to spanking very often. The discipline was more mental than physical. Reed explained, "Dad doesn't spend a lot of time regretting things. After you confess things and the problem is taken care of, he points your head to the sun." When a child had seriously misbehaved, the disappointment showed on Ezra's face, and he walked away, crestfallen. "That was punishment enough," Mark said. "I knew how important it was to my parents for me to do what was right, and none of us wanted to let them down. They always stressed there was greatness in being good."

Nevertheless, neither Ezra nor Flora defended or tolerated a child's behavior when the child was in the wrong. Once one of them took a classmate's pencil in kindergarten. The incident so upset Flora that when Reed arrived home, he found her in bed, physically ill.

By and large, discipline incorporated a denial of privileges. When Reed came home from school spouting a coarse word he had heard at school but didn't understand, Flora refused to let him see Young Tom Edison, a movie he had looked forward to seeing for weeks. Often when a child misbehaved, Flora sent him or her to the basement. The punishment was being isolated from the other children upstairs.

But punishment was meted out far less frequently than was praise. Praise struck a responsive chord in Flora's soul. She was an encourager, a supporter of anything praiseworthy. Even in later years, as the children left home, she would send them hundreds of letters full of compliments and inspiring stories she had heard. The positive-mental-attitude enthusiasts of subsequent generations would have paled in comparison to her home-made, albeit effective and enthusiastic, forms of encouragement. The outlook on life that she and Ezra shared was positive. Their affection was open. Never did he leave for or return from work without kissing his wife and hugging the children. They both believed that it was hard for disharmony to brew if they never let a child leave home without a hug.

Flora carried the same open, positive attitude into other areas. Many days she prepared a concoction of milk and raw eggs, or orange juice, mixed with cod liver oil. She called her brew "the good drink." The children disliked it immensely, but Flora, convinced it was a deterrent to illness, prevailed.

On one occasion when Reed was performing in a piano recital at the Whitney Elementary School in Boise and having some difficulty remembering his piece, Flora called out from the audience, "Reed, you can do it. Keep going." When bullies from school waited in the ditch to harass him as he walked home, Flora advised, "The next time they try to hurt you, invite them home for watermelon." He did, and before he knew it, his mother had won them over to his side. She once wore an inexpensive brooch that Mark had given her for Christmas to a formal dinner. Mark didn't know if she wore it all evening or just when she left home, but it made him feel that he had given her something of value. When the children gave her cards on Mother's Day or small gifts for other occasions, she was effusive in her thanks but always added, "The greatest gift you can give me is to just be good."

If the children felt any resentment about their father's frequent absences, Flora quickly diffused it. Repeatedly she told the children, "Aren't we proud of our daddy, that he is helping the farmers." When his assignments were connected with the Church, she said, "Aren't we proud that our daddy is worthy to serve in the Church." When neighborhood children played outside on Sunday and the Bensons weren't allowed to, she explained, "Aren't we lucky that our family does things differently."

Constantly the children were told, "We're proud of you," "What a good job you did on that," "We have confidence in you," and the like. "Mother was never a faultfinder," Mark said. "I was disciplined, but never berated. She handled the situation when we misbehaved, but never in a way that took away our self-worth." Anything negative to be said to the children was discussed in private. Years later, when her children were older, Flora still took the same approach. She told one interviewer, "No one is perfect. In our family it is not our objective to magnify each other's shortcomings, but to encourage one another to improve."

Despite Flora's streak of optimism, the load was heavy for a woman who had four small children, one of whom was frequently ill, and whose husband was often away. Though none of the children remember her complaining, Reed sometimes found her crying while she ironed at night. He surmised, "I'm sure she was lonely for Dad, and perhaps worn out from working all day. But Mother was a natural motivator, a great encourager. We always had a sense that if Mother was behind us, we could do almost anything."

Flora's strategy built loyalty within the family. Home became the safety net. "I would have rather been home than anywhere," Mark said. "More than with friends or the Scouts. It was a refuge from the storm. Mother was the protective element, and Dad was there with his strength. When classmates gave me a bad time in school or I got a poor grade, I could go home, and there I was okay."

The children had disagreements, but never in public. Never did they criticize or belittle a family member in the presence of others. If a brother or sister ran into difficulty, the others came to the rescue. A pattern of the older watching out for the younger ones developed. Family came first. It was a theme that became a measuring rod for all they did. In later years Ezra would make an interesting comment, considering the breadth and scope of criticism he had faced by that time: "I think the one burden I could not have borne would have been a disloyal child."

Flora had a driving sense of purpose and allegiance. She felt that her greatest responsibilities were to encourage and support her husband, to rear righteous children, and to make home a haven that all wanted to return to. "Mother absolutely loved home," Mark explained. "And she loved us—not because it was her duty to, but because that was her life."

Flora took on her role with the zeal and aplomb of a chief executive. She felt that a woman needed to know how to shop prudently, feed her family properly, and keep a home clean and orderly—all of which were more central to family happiness than fine furnishings and expensive clothing. Of greatest importance was love—of the gospel, of family, and of work. "The home is the center of our mortal affections," she claimed. Accordingly, family members were to bear each other's burdens and inspire each other's ambitions.

Some may have felt that she and Ezra were overprotective. They carefully monitored their children's playmates, insisted that they know their whereabouts at all times, and required that they come home promptly from school. The children weren't allowed to see movies unless their parents had seen them or learned from reliable sources that the films were wholesome. And the children knew they must come running when they heard Flora's ear-piercing "family whistle," which could be heard for blocks. But Ezra and Flora's expectations had results. When Alice Marriott, wife of J. Willard Marriott, first met the Bensons in 1939, she thought they had the best behaved children she had ever seen.

Despite the rules, none of the Benson children felt that their home was a rigid, stifling place. Ezra and Flora selected their houses with care—first the seven-room house at 817 North 20th Street in Boise, with fruit trees, three screened porches, a large lawn, and sandboxes for the boys; and later a larger home on Owyhee Street on Boise's Whitney Bench, an acre lot complete with an expansive lawn, flowers, large vegetable garden, and swings in the backyard. Flora preferred that the children bring their friends home to play, and, following her mother's lead, she provided swings, sandboxes, and, when possible, a small basketball court for them. She wanted home to be more enticing than anywhere else.

Reed and Mark climbed trees around the house and played catch with their dad in the backyard. Ezra spent as much time with the boys as possible, often citing the story of a busy father who explained the hours he spent playing ball with his son by saying, "I'd sooner have a backache now than a heartache later." (In his day Ezra was a good baseball player. William Poole remembers a reunion in Whitney in 1935. During a baseball game at Willow Flat Diamond, Poole whispered to his wife that if "T" could bat like he used to, the ball would go in the river. Just then Ezra hit a towering shot over the river into the weeds, and the game was stopped to find the baseball.)

The boys dug a pool in the backyard and filled it with muddy water. Ezra let them hollow out cucumber boats to sail down the irrigation ditch. When he flooded the front lawn with water, the boys lined up boxes to jump from. They built an airplane out of rough lumber big enough to sit in and made plans to sail it off a golf course hill, which Flora indulged but naturally never allowed to happen.

Flora and Ezra selected toys for the children that had some educational merit, such as erector and chemistry sets, books, Checkers and Domino games, and even a life-size tepee, which sat in the backyard for months. The children had a dog named Happy, a string of bicycles, and sleds during wintertime. On the Fourth of July, Ezra took the boys to Boise's "China Town" to purchase firecrackers, and Flora made root beer. For a while the family stabled ponies on their property, until they determined that Mark was allergic to the animals. Ezra did hang on to a chicken coop, and Reed has vivid memories of his father chopping off chickens' heads and placing the chickens in boiling water before plucking them.

Once a week or so, the family gathered for singing, games, piano solos, and stories. For part of the program the children entertained their parents with plays, and after Reed and Mark's version of "Cowboys and Indians" had been patiently endured for a generous amount of time, Ezra would ask, "Any idea, boys, when the fighting will end?" The whole family loved poems, particularly Edgar A. Guest's humorous rhymes, such as "Ma and the Checkbook" and "Ma and the Auto," which Ezra sometimes read to Flora while she did the dishes.

Flora placed good books around the house, even "planting" material geared for teenagers, with babysitters in mind, such as If I Were Twenty-One. Books on presidents of the United States, nature, and other topics were always available. The dinner table was a family forum. Ezra kept everyone posted on what he was doing at work. On Sundays they talked about the gospel. In fact, there were frequent gospel discussions. Though the family had no systemized program for studying the scriptures, Ezra and Flora read to them regularly, enough to give them a healthy familiarity with the scriptures. Barbara Amussen recorded, on one of her Boise visits, "We spent the afternoon reading the Era and other good books."

Ezra generally rose at five in the morning and worked for an hour or so in his home office, which he kept cool to stimulate his thinking. During the quiet morning hours, he scoured farm journals and magazines and material on current events and economics. When he was called as stake YMMIA superintendent, he undertook a program of regular scripture study.

Even on days when the children were sick, Flora had things for them to do, such as molding putty or papier-mache objects while sitting in bed. She didn't like to see children idle.

Music was important to the family. In 1934 Barbara Amussen shipped her piano to Flora. Though Flora didn't read music, she played by ear and could accompany the family in "Spring-time in the Rockies" and other favorites. Over the years various children took piano, voice, organ, art, dance, ice skating, swimming, and sculpture lessons. One summer Ezra took the girls on tours of various industries, including a local dairy, a soda pop bottling company, and a chocolate factory. He wanted them to see free enterprise at work.

Flora wanted the children to be comfortable in front of an audience. She taught them to raise a hand when volunteers were needed for talks, prayers, or school programs. They were to sit in the front row at school, if possible, and near the front in church, together. When a younger child was assigned a talk, Ezra usually wrote out a message and Flora took the child to the basement to practice. She sat on a chair and let the child rehearse in front of her. "When I gave a talk, the first person I looked for in the audience was Mother," Reed said. "And when I struggled and forgot what to say, I'd see Mother's head bow slightly. I knew she was sending up a prayer on my behalf."

Ezra and Flora were both hard workers. Flora prided herself in how long and fast she could work. Ezra, too, worked quickly, particularly on jobs he didn't enjoy, such as running the old Hoover vacuum. He didn't take much time off. Even on Saturdays he worked in the yard. He had a strong body and mind, and work gave him great satisfaction. When he was home, he made good use of his time. Particular about an immaculate yard, he and the boys spent Saturdays mowing and trimming, weeding and watering. They had a large garden in Boise, growing potatoes, watermelon, corn, many varieties of berries, and even peanuts, which everyone said would never grow in the cold climate. In the summer Mark and Reed went from door to door, pulling their green wagon full of fresh produce from their garden to sell. Their first summer they earned fifteen dollars which they split evenly with their father. Reed always enjoyed saying, "Dad was the first middleman I had to deal with." Ezra put his own share of the earnings toward mission funds for the boys. When Ezra left for work in the morning, he often gave the boys chore assignments to complete by day's end, and he would check them off when he came home in the evening. As the girls got older, they helped their mother: when Flora made a pie, they made small ones alongside her; when she dusted, they dusted. Sometimes the children fell short with their chores; other days they followed through.

Ezra also helped around the house, bathing the children, doing loads of laundry, and even washing dishes, though he had a reputation for leaving particles of food on the plates. "We'd say, 'Dad!' and he'd be disappointed that he'd have to do some of them over again," Reed recalled. Whenever possible, Ezra took one or more of the family with him on business trips.

When Mark became ill, Ezra took him to Salt Lake City to see a specialist, and despite his poor health, the trip was a highlight for Mark. "We stayed in a hotel and ate in a restaurant together. How fun it was to be with Dad, just him and me! We talked about anything I wanted to talk about. Even as a boy, I knew Dad loved me, because he was with me and helping me get better."

Extended family was very important, and several of Ezra's brothers and sisters lived with them at various times. Valdo lived with them on the Whitney farm for a year and spent another year with them in Boise. George joined them in Boise after his mission. Both Sally and Ross worked and lived with the Bensons in Boise for a time. Sally remembers Flora welcoming her with open arms and not getting flustered by additional mouths at the table. "She always wanted to have something tasty for Ezra T," she recalled. "He loved fudge, and those were in the days when you beat it by hand until it was creamy. Flora was very fussy. She'd have me beat it for hours."

From the beginning, Ezra enjoyed an amicable relationship with his mother-in-law. Whenever he drove to Cache Valley, he stopped to visit or stay overnight with Barbara Amussen, and often they talked into the night. After one visit she recorded, "We had quite a long talk 'til the wee hours in the morning, discussing the critical conditions that now exist all over the world."

Ezra was mindful of his widowed mother-in-law, whose financial reverses late in life forced her to take in boarders and cut corners to make ends meet. "Ezra . . . called on us today. He was on his way to Denver. . . . He fetched me a five gallon can of honey and a sack of dry beans," she wrote in a typical journal entry. In 1935 he supervised the remodeling and modernization of the kitchen in the old Amussen home in Logan, and Flora paid for the construction from dividends left by her father's legacy. "It has added greatly to the comfort and convenience of my apartment, and it never would have been so lovely if Flora and Ezra T. had not given such constant supervision," Barbara wrote. She kept Ezra's temple clothes laundered so he could go to a temple session whenever he was in Logan.

Following a trip to the East with Ezra in June 1935, Flora wrote her mother: "The first thing 'T' said when we arrived in Boise was call your mother and . . . thank her for all the sweet kind things she did. . . . 'T' thinks that you are certainly a wonderful example to follow. He is always saying, 'You are so like your mother, and certainly alright in most every respect.'" [^3]

If Ezra felt Barbara Amussen possessed sterling qualities, he found that his wife embodied many of the same. Flora was a woman of unwavering faith. "When mother prayed, you knew her prayers were getting through the roof," Reed said. "She got very specific with the Lord in her prayers and talked out situations with Him; even as a little boy I felt that when she prayed for me, things would work out fine." He often looked throughout the house for his mother and finally found her in her bedroom on her knees. She would be praying for a child who had a problem or was facing something, such as an exam. She liked to be on her knees at the exact time the challenge was occurring. Family prayer was usually held at mealtime, where they turned their chairs around and knelt in family prayer at the table.

No detail was too small to take before the Lord. Flora's daughter Barbara remembered, "If someone else was leading in prayer and Mother didn't want something to be forgotten, she spoke right up and reminded the person to bless so and so. She believed the Lord was interested in every little thing that was taking place in our lives."

"Mother had more faith than any woman I've ever known," Mark said. "Faith in Dad. Faith in the children. Faith in the kingdom. Faith that the Lord would answer prayers. I've never seen more praying in my life. At the drop of a hat she'd be on her knees, praying for the children, whether it was about a test or a fight on the school grounds, it didn't matter. She and Dad both had that simple faith.

"When Dad knelt down to pray," Mark continued, "he didn't rush things. There was meaning behind his words. It came through loud and clear that he was communicating with our Father in heaven." In later years, the children reminded their parents that they prayed everywhere, even in the garage, to which Flora responded, "Of course I do. I pray wherever I feel like it."

With Flora's confidence in things spiritual came an abiding conviction that the gospel was all-important. If the children heard it once, they heard it hundreds of times that they should put their Church work first. Whether it was preparing a two-minute talk, going to meetings, or praying for Ezra when he had to speak, Flora's theme was "the kingdom first." Mark said, "From the time we were little, we saw Dad in leadership positions, and we were proud of him. But it was Mother who engendered a love of the gospel in our home."

When he was called as president of the Boise Stake in 1938, Ezra's family was young—Reed was ten; Mark, nine; Barbara, four; and Beverly, fourteen months—and his time at home was limited. "It must have been Mother who gave us a reassurance that Dad was where he'd ought to be," Mark said. "It's only in retrospect that I realize he was gone that much. It never occurred to me that some fathers were home more, and I didn't draw those comparisons. When he was home, it was great."

Things at home moved along even when Ezra was away. "That doesn't mean we didn't have struggles," Reed said. "We did. We didn't always get along. We didn't always do our chores. We tested Mother's patience to the limit at times. But, undergirding it all, was a sense of family unity that we were trying to pull together."

Over time Ezra and the children sensed that Flora had powers of discernment and often perceived when things weren't as they should be. She was a prolific note-taker, and as ideas occurred that might help her husband with a problem at work or a child who was having trouble at school, she jotted a note to discuss it that evening. Often the evenings found piles of notes in the bedroom or on the kitchen counter. She kept paper and pencil by the bed so she could jot down thoughts as they occurred during the night. She gave her husband insights on people he worked with and situations that weren't going well. He increasingly relied on her counsel. "I could see that I had a spiritually perceptive woman at my side," he said, "and I'd ought to listen." Sometimes he'd find notes to "Tell 'T' such and such" in his briefcase.

Flora was amenable to Ezra's direction in the home. But when she said she didn't feel good about something, he—and the rest of the family—paid attention.

"The word feel struck terror in me," Reed admitted. "That was the signal there was inspiration working. Mother may not have been always right, but the averages were on her side."

One day Ezra loaded Reed, Mark, and a neighbor girl in the car. Flora expressed some anxiety and lingered behind, standing in the road. Something didn't seem right. She watched as Ezra stopped down the road and let the girl out to cross the street to her home. The girl walked behind the car, paused, then dashed across the street just as another car darted up the hill. Flora, feeling uneasy, was still standing in the road and saw the accident take place. With Ezra attending to the girl, the boys hurried home and, at their mother's direction, knelt around the piano bench to pray. The girl's life was spared. "It was those kinds of experiences," Reed said, "that showed me Mother lived close to the Lord. Maybe it was just good judgment on some things, but I learned to honor her feelings."

In turn, Ezra was a support and strength to his wife. While on a short trip to Logan to visit her mother she wrote home, "One lady said I have never seen Flora look so well and happy before, and in order for her to look that way you know she must have a grand husband. I do appreciate and love you dearly 'T.'" [^4]

One thing Flora felt strongly about was teaching children manners, which they had frequent occasions to practice, as General Authorities and others visited their home. The children could tell when a General Authority was a guest in their home, because Flora prepared creamed eggs on toast for breakfast, and for dinner, bankekoed, a Danish dish of steak and gravy seasoned with bay leaf. There was also fruit in Ezra and Flora's bedroom, which room they gave up for the visiting authority because it was the best they had. As soon as the official left, the children dashed into the room, hoping to find grapes or an orange left over. When Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Council of the Twelve came, Flora always had a box of candy to pass around after meals. "Sister Benson," he would say, "if you don't mind, I'd like another piece of that candy. I don't get much of this at home."

The children didn't get much of it either, for candy was expensive, health was important, and finances were tight, though the Bensons' standard of living increased during their years in Boise. At one point the family ate canned plums for months when Ezra found a good buy on the fruit. But perhaps more significant than surviving the Depression in respectable fashion was the impact Boise, with its opportunities and responsibilities, had on the young family. While they lived there, news of Ezra Benson's agricultural expertise had spread to Washington, D.C. Two daughters had joined the family. And all six Bensons had begun to enjoy a family culture built around unity and devotion to the Church, establishing a foundation upon which they could safely build.

"Though at the time I didn't understand the word, Dad was tenacious," Mark said. "He spared no energy to accomplish something he felt was right, whether it was for the family, the Church, or his occupation. And Mother was right there with him, picking up where he left off. She tied things together at home. She's the one who helped us understand where our loyalties should be—to the family and to the Church."

Much information cited in this chapter is drawn from author's interviews with Ezra Taft Benson, Flora Amussen Benson, Reed Benson, Mark Benson, Barbara Benson Walker, Beverly Benson Parker, and Alice Marriott. See also Barbara Amussen personal journal; New Era, January 1973, p. 4; "Husband, Family and Church Are Mrs. Benson's Whole Life," Church News, December 20, 1952, p. 6; Ezra Taft Benson, "My Companion—Memories, Heritage and Tribute," unpublished manuscript.

Footnotes

"It pays to live the standards of the Church and be true to the faith."

---
Notas:
[^1] ETB to John D. Miller, January 27, 1939.
[^2] E. S. Trask to ETB, February 3, 1939.
[^3] "Benson Accepts Church Post," Cooperative Digest, September 1943, pp. 6-8.
[^4] "A Child's Example," Children's Friend, February 1947.
