Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 10

Rise to National Prominence

At the end of a busy Sunday, on January 22, 1939, feeling confident in the decision to move to Washington, Ezra nevertheless lamented in his journal, "I wonder how we'll ever be able to get along without the good people of the Boise Stake." Five days later he notified Judge Miller that he accepted the offer to become executive secretary of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives. [^1]

Ezra's acceptance meant he must also resign as secretary of the Idaho Cooperative Council, and when E. S. Trask, president of the ICC, learned of the development, he wrote, "The resignation of Mr. Ezra T. Benson . . . will be considered by the members of the Council as a distinct loss to the organization. . . . We are positive that when our members realize he is no longer to be with us, the news will be received with keen regret. . . . He has always been true to the cooperative principle, and we bespeak for his future that he will go far in the cooperative leadership of our nation." [^2]

On February 5 Ezra notified the high council of the Boise Stake that he had accepted the position, and the next day his promotion became public knowledge. He had not quite sixty days to culminate nearly eight years of activity at the extension office and effect a smooth transition within the Boise Stake. He and Flora also needed to sell their home in Boise and real estate holdings in Logan, and make arrangements for the two-month interim when they would be separated.

As confident as they were about their decision to move to Washington, it was difficult to leave Idaho. When he was released as stake president on March 26, he recorded that it was "the most difficult day I have ever experienced. . . . In my remarks I was greatly blessed of the Lord but had great difficulty controlling my feelings. There are no finer people in all the world [and] I love every one."

The stake held a testimonial in the Boise Tabernacle, which was filled to overflowing. On Ezra's last Sunday in Boise, the stake patriarch Mathias J. Benson conferred a blessing upon him in which he counseled Ezra to give freely of his time and means to forward the Lord's work on earth. Then he prophesied: "Men may try to persuade you to diverge from the course of right . . . but if you are humble and faithful before the Lord, they shall not have power over you. . . . Though you will have many perplexing problems and though there will come before you many things that will tax your judgment and ability to decide but yet, if you place your trust and confidence in the Lord, if you take your problems before Him, the solution will come unto you . . . and [you will have] no doubt as to the course that you should pursue."

Sleep would not come that night. The challenge ahead, he sensed, was enormous, the future uncertain. He was leaving a stable position in a state where he was known and respected, and joining an organization still in its administrative infancy. There were no guarantees. And he was uprooting his family and moving them three thousand miles.

But when he quickly sold their Boise home and three vacant lots they had purchased, he felt the Lord had opened the way. Just prior to the general conference in April, he said his last good-byes in Boise and headed for Washington, D.C., via Salt Lake City. "It was very difficult to leave my devoted wife and four children tonight for my new work in Wash. D.C. . . . The next 6 weeks we are to be separated will be long ones," he wrote in his journal.

He arrived in Washington the Friday after general conference. The next morning, though it was Saturday, he presented himself, with the anticipation of a nervous suitor, at 1730 I Street, headquarters of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, located centrally within comfortable walking distance of the White House. A letter from Flora full of encouragement was already waiting.

When Ezra Benson accepted his position with the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, the council was celebrating its tenth anniversary; but though it was recognized nationally, it had not yet matured organizationally. Council staffing was minimal, funds for travel were insufficient, and the organization's influence was modest. In short, "the organization was anything but stable." [^3]

The National Council was organized in Baton Rouge in August 1929, and at the close of its inaugural year, eighteen large cooperative organizations were listed as members. After a decade, some 4,000 cooperative purchasing and marketing organizations, representing almost 1.6 million farmers throughout the country and more than $1.2 billion worth of products annually, fell under the council's umbrella.

As executive secretary, Ezra functioned as the chief operating officer. He could not have foreseen how intimate his involvement with the highest levels of government would be. Still convinced that marketing was the key and cooperatives the vehicle to solving many of the farmers' woes, he would have preferred spending his early weeks in office assessing needs and determining areas where he could have the greatest and most immediate impact.

But the honeymoon was nonexistent. There was no luxury of easing into the job. Legislation that affected cooperatives was being introduced in Congress daily, and Ezra was thrust into the mainstream of agricultural politics. During his first full week in office he met with officials from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and national farm leaders regarding a bill to amend the National Labor Relations Act; spent an uncharacteristic day in bed with the flu ("reckon I'm missing my wife"); lobbied against a bill to transfer the Cooperative Division of the Farm Credit Association (FCA) to the USDA because "some crack-brained attorney thot it'd be a good thing"; and hunted houses in the evening. At the end of his first week he wrote in his journal, "The job appears almost too large for me, but I expect to give it the best I have."

Ezra and Judge Miller, the council's president, enjoyed immediate rapport. An international lawyer of repute and dairyman from Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, the Judge was considered dean of the farmer cooperative movement. On a subsequent occasion while visiting Senator Capper of Kansas, Ezra commended the Senator for passage of the Capper-Volstead Act (1922), the legislation authorizing farmers to organize cooperatives. Capper responded, "I just attached my name to the bill, and have been honored by so doing. The man who is with you, John D. Miller, wrote the act, prepared the bill, and saw it through Congress. To him should go the credit."

Ezra found his superior to be a man of intelligence and integrity. The respect was mutual. At the close of one annual meeting of the council, Ezra and the Judge relaxed after bidding the last delegate good-bye. Miller was fingering a cigar when he abruptly teased, "Ezra, you don't smoke, drink alcohol, use tea or coffee, or chase women. Just what is your redeeming vice?" (Several years later, at age ninety, Judge Miller indicated that he would like to travel one more time. His associates supposed he meant a trip to Europe and proceeded to dissuade him. Miller countered, "Oh, I'm not going East. I'm going West. I want to have one more good visit with my friend, Ezra Taft Benson, in Salt Lake City.")

Ezra's pace heated up, and during his second week he found himself on Capitol Hill lobbying, testifying in congressional hearings, and representing the interests of cooperatives regarding pending legislation. And amid it all he sandwiched in closed-door sessions with each member of the council staff. Hoping to head off the resignations that typically come with a change in command, he spoke frankly with each person, inviting each to voice concerns and ask questions.

Through 1939 Ezra's activities were manyfold. He represented cooperatives before committees of Congress, requiring him to be well apprised of numerous pieces of complicated legislation; furthered efforts to educate cooperative leaders nationwide about the agricultural outlook; prepared a monthly bulletin; and attended meetings throughout the country. He worked late into the evenings and most Saturdays, trying to get a grasp on what was an administrative juggling act.

Adjusting to his new post kept Ezra more than busy, but he longed for his family and spent what spare minutes he could looking for a home to buy or build. He finally located a comfortable home for rent in the Westgate section of Washington. Letters from Flora kept him going. "Received another lovely letter from my sweet and devoted wife," he noted after being away nearly a month. "Her unfailing loyalty is a great source of strength to me. It is extremely lonely here."

Though he had visited Washington many times, moving to the East was a culture shock, and he worried about the transition for his wife and children. "Coming here is a great change from Idaho. We will all have to make great adjustments, but the Lord will assist us if we do our part because His inspiration directed us here," he wrote in his journal.

Members of the Chevy Chase Branch of the Church at first seemed aloof, but they soon warmed up to the Idahoan, and before long he had met many who would become lifelong friends—Louise and Mervyn Bennion, Edgar and Laura Cowley Brossard, J. Willard and Alice Marriott, and others. They invited him to their homes, which relieved some loneliness.

Finally, on May 11 Ezra returned to Idaho to pick up Flora and the children. That weekend he spoke in a session of the Boise Stake quarterly conference, visited his former office in the state capitol, and helped Flora with final preparations. On Monday, May 15, the family boarded the train for Washington, D.C., occupying a drawing room and one lower berth. Three days later, at 8:00 A.M. on May 18, they arrived in Washington. After retrieving their baggage, they drove to their rented home, and by eleven o'clock Ezra was back at the office.

It was a volatile era for agriculture in America, and Ezra was immersed in the campaign to protect the interests of cooperatives nationwide. As executive secretary of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, he was the authority on cooperatives, and he had to understand every phase of cooperative agriculture well enough to defend and promote it. In the council's 1940 Blue Book, their annual report, he divided his responsibilities into six areas: legislative concerns vital to all co-ops, legislative activities pertinent to isolated co-ops, public relations, field work, an information service, and bulletins. In practice, his attention and energy were focused on two areas: legislation and field work with local co-op officials.

The council itself employed standing committees on farm parity, commodity exchange, land-grant colleges, legal and tax problems, membership, production credit, and unfair trade practices. On any given day Ezra might cover half of these topics in appearances before Senate or House committees or with other key officials representing government agencies and even departments of the President's cabinet. Few days passed that he didn't make appearances on Capitol Hill.

Ezra prepared voraciously for his encounters with congressmen. "I had to have the confidence of Congress, and I worked hard at it, preparing as thoroughly as I knew how," he recorded. One day he met for three hours in joint conference with representatives of farm organizations and members of the House of Representatives regarding wage-and-hour legislation. He was finding how political politics were, frequently recording his frustrations in his journal: "We had some rather weak and some really fine men from the House in attendance. Political expediency and not service is paramount with some."

After subsequent meetings over the same bill, he noted with disgust that one congressman, "because of backbone weakness, refused to take the leadership in a continuation of the fight to receive needed agricultural amendments. This would not be so discouraging had he not promised to go ahead."

Ezra was dismayed when a man didn't stand by his convictions. And he became frustrated with politicians who looked more to the next election than to the next generation. The tendency among politicians toward expediency and away from fiscal responsibility angered him.

Among other things, during his first year on the job he supported a federal seed bill and a fabric labeling bill that passed the House; fought legislation seeking to change the definition of a "cooperative association"; and opposed a proposal to strip the Farm Credit Association of its autonomous status and transfer it to the Department of Agriculture. Almost overnight, it seemed, the fate of cooperatives rested in his hands.

The workload was unwieldy, the pressure intense. In late June, Ezra took Flora and the boys with him to New York City for meetings of the National Council's executive committee, which was composed of distinguished agricultural leaders. It was evident that these men, heavily committed in their own businesses, expected him to essentially run the council. "I feel the responsibility very keenly," he noted. "I hope I can merit the fulfillment of promises made me regarding this work."

While in New York the Bensons spent a day at the World's Fair. But even while relaxing, Ezra was preoccupied with matters of a larger scope. "The entire Fair is a marvel in the accomplishments of man and yet how little we know about the social, economic and moral problems of the nation," he recorded.

Back in Washington, Ezra increasingly learned how serious those problems were. On July 27, 1939, a day he called "my heaviest since I came to Washington" and one filled with conferences, long distance calls, telegrams, and hurry-up letters, he admitted, to himself at least, "Were it not because I feel our work is of great value to co-op marketing, it would be a dreary life."

But the principles basic to cooperation burned deep within Ezra. He saw them as a tool for the little man. Cooperatives, he was sure, helped the individual preserve and exercise his rights of free enterprise. It was an individual's God-given right to work and to have the freedom of choice.

This sense of purpose, along with his family, kept him going. During the summer, for the first time in eight years, Ezra had back-to-back weeks at home, something he enjoyed so much that when it came time for an extended trip in August, parting was "very difficult." But when he was discouraged or found himself standing alone on an issue, Flora was inevitably there, ready to back him up.

"Mother was a 'bucker-upper,'" Reed explained. "So many times I heard her say to Dad, 'I know you can do it. We're praying for you, T.'" And her role went further than an occasional pat on the back. Flora evaluated her husband's talks and advised him on parts that might better be left out. As the years went on, Ezra counseled with her more frequently. He learned, perhaps from sad experience, that her insights about people and events were usually right. Flora was a valuable counselor.

The family's first ten weeks in Washington together, though hectic for Ezra, were filled with family outings and decisions. Flora and Ezra softened the transition for the children, taking them to points of interest. On Memorial Day they toured the Smithsonian Institution and Arlington National Cemetery, and Ezra took Reed to his first Scout meeting. Another day they caught a glimpse of the visiting King and Queen of England, and other times they picnicked in nearby Rock Creek Park or at a beach.

Family home evenings were held frequently, with one child keeping minutes. A typical evening went something like this: a song by the family, minutes read from the previous meeting, a story read by Flora entitled "How I Became a Mormon," a scripture reading by Mark, a song by the girls, a clarinet solo by Reed, closing thoughts by Ezra on "The Meaning of Family Loyalty," and discussion of family problems. The problems discussed in this meeting included the decision on whether to purchase a dishwasher or recover the living-room furniture. The minutes recorded, "We all agreed to lighten mother's work, so it was decided we purchase a dishwasher now, but wait a while to recover the furniture. It was also agreed we would not take out membership in the Edgemoor Club [a swim and tennis club] unless the dues were reduced."

The children were consulted about major purchases, including the decision to build a colonial-style, four-bedroom home in Edgemoor, a section of Bethesda, Maryland, some eight miles from the council offices. The home was finished in one hundred days, and on September 29, after Ezra had checked every detail carefully, they moved in.

It wasn't long before the swing set and sandbox were in, a basketball standard set up, and a garden planted. At home the boys mowed, weeded, and took their turns with dishes. Ezra pitched in when possible, doing the laundry in the morning, vacuuming, and the like. With four children and a large new house, Flora carried a heavy load. In the fall of 1939 the Bensons learned another child was on the way, and Ezra was even more conscientious about relieving her when possible.

Because of his position, Ezra's family had many social responsibilities, and guests came for dinner often. Regardless of who was present, though, some things didn't change. One evening Judge Miller joined the family for dinner, and as Flora called everyone to the table, the children knelt around the table for prayer, as usual. Ezra invited Miller to join them, which he did. Barbara, age six, led in prayer, saying, "Bless Judge Miller that he will have a good time with us and return to his hotel safely."

Nothing was said about the incident. Some months later, while Ezra was attending conferences in Florida with Miller and thirty other industrial, business, labor, and agricultural leaders, the conversation turned to religion. Without warning Judge Miller recounted the evening he had spent in the Benson home. Referring to Barbara's prayer, he concluded, "Gentlemen, I have never had a sweeter experience in my life. I've often thought since that my children have missed something vitally important, and that probably [I am] to blame." [^4]

"Dad used to tell us that prayer will keep you from sin, and sin will keep you from prayer," Barbara said. "And Mother prayed for us all the time—for recitals, exams, even for our friends. Some of my friends confided in Mother and Dad because they felt so close to them."

After the family moved to their home in Edgemore, Reed encountered trouble when a transfer student harassed him at school in the locker room of the gym. Reed responded by slapping the boy across the face. Students grabbed them both and took them to the gym teacher, who decided they would fight it out the next week in a boxing match with gloves and a referee. When Reed reported what had happened, his mother went to work. They bought a book on boxing, he worked out on a punching bag in the basement, and she coached him for a week. The day of the fight Flora fasted for Reed. As he left for school, she asked him when the fight would take place. She wanted to be in prayer at the exact time he stepped in the ring. Between rounds a friend, Roger Parkinson, read to Reed from the notes he had made from the boxing book, but Reed felt it was his mother kneeling in prayer that pulled him through. Round after round they went. Years later Reed would say he met the real victor when he came home that night and saw his mother. "When mother prayed for us, we knew things would be all right," he said. He won the match.

Ezra was rarely home for any length of time, but he took time for things that were important. "Dad was never too busy to talk with us," Mark said. "He often worked in his study early in the morning or late at night, but the door was always open." When Reed or Mark walked by, their father typically summoned them in and handed them a book or talk or some other document. "I'd like your opinion on this," he would say. "I'm thinking of using it in a speech." Often the materials were gospel-oriented; other times they were on freedom or love of country—even dating. "It elevated me," Mark said, "to think he wanted my opinion, and he'd ask questions about it later. Now I realize it was also his way of getting good material into our hands."

Because Scouting was a priority of their father, it became one for Reed and Mark, and earning their Eagle Scout awards was important. Each summer the boys attended the Boy Scouts' Camp Theodore Roosevelt on the Chesapeake Bay, and Ezra spent at least one weekend at the "Dad's Shack" there. The boys looked forward to these outings with anticipation akin to Christmas because they had their father to themselves. Other times they rose early and went to nearby woods to identify birds for a merit badge, or worked on other Scouting projects.

The older children were conversant with their father's work and interests. Ezra typically slipped articles into his briefcase to share at dinnertime. He marked articles in the newspaper every night, and it was Barbara's responsibility to cut them out. That spurred her interest in world events and politics, and years later she could remember talking about love of country and freedom from the time she was young. Ezra and Flora liked being the bearers of good news. They started the children collecting information and developing files at an early age. For a social studies class, Mark wrote an article on "Freedom for the Farmer" and defended it to his teacher.

Little time elapsed after their move to Washington before Flora and Ezra were again deeply involved in the Church. Flora was called as a counselor to Louise Bennion, the district Relief Society president, and Abe Cannon, the district president, called Ezra to the district council.

In an attempt to get better acquainted with the Saints, the Bensons held a few social functions at their home, where parlor games were played, along with table tennis and other activities. Flora was adept at getting everyone involved and enjoying themselves. Many would subsequently comment on the enjoyable time they spent in the Bensons' home.

In an area where a stake was yet to be formed, a former stake president was a valuable asset, and Ezra responded to numerous speaking requests. At President Cannon's behest, he prepared instructional materials for the district council and branch presidents on procedures relative to selecting local Church officers.

As he traveled throughout the country on co-op business, Ezra sought every opportunity to meet with the Saints, visiting small branches (and typically being called on to speak extemporaneously in sacrament meeting) and stopping in at mission homes. In Cleveland one Sunday he tried for four hours to find where the Saints met, even calling the police for help, but without success. On a trip through Florida he stopped in Tallahassee, where he met Saints who had known his brother George when George had presided over the district there just a few years earlier. The Saints sang George's praises.

Ezra was not a desk-bound administrator, and though the National Council funds were scarce, he traveled as much as possible to evaluate conditions within various agricultural industries, work on expansion of markets, and help improve packaging and processing. It was imperative that he be intimately acquainted with the full scope of agriculture. The breadth and depth of his briefing would prove invaluable years later and prime him for responsibilities of a greater scope.

In late November 1939 he took an extended trip through the South, stopping in Louisiana at New Orleans, where he watched cotton being loaded on boats for shipment to the Far East, and Lake Charles, where he visited the American Rice Growers Association. He rode through the cotton fields in Tennessee and met with officials from the tobacco co-op ("While I don't approve of the weed, the men showed me great respect," he noted).

Traveling by train and car was exhausting, but Ezra loved getting out among the farm leaders and driving through the country. During a trip through Connecticut in October he wrote, "Never before have I witnessed such inspiring, colorful beauty. No pen or brush could paint anything to compare with this, the handiwork of God."

He was always overjoyed to come home again. As much as he thrived on agricultural work, his frequent absences from home were hard on him.

By year's end the Bensons were solidly entrenched in the nation's capital. They had moved into a new home. Ezra and Flora were both busy in the Church. A fifth child was on the way. They had made new friends. And Ezra had been long enough on the job to sense what lay ahead of him: "Some momentous questions face the co-ops of this nation that will tax to the limit the leaders of the co-op movement." Nevertheless, on the last day of the year, Ezra evaluated 1939 as "the most valuable year thus far of our glorious married life. The Lord has blessed us with health and prosperity and wonderful new opportunities. At the end of 1938 we thot we were settled for the balance of our mortal days in Boise. May we strive more fully to be worthy of His bounteous blessings."

The year 1940 brought new opportunities, and with them increased challenges. The impact of the war in Europe presented the National Council with new problems. But in his 1939 year-end annual report Executive Secretary Benson concluded that the council was enjoying a "high degree of unity and understanding." He admitted that his greatest skill lay in achieving harmony among divergent groups. "We had some unification problems," he explained. "The cotton farmers were at odds with the sheep farmers. Or the peanut growers picked at the corn growers. If we pushed apples, the plum farmers wondered why we weren't doing more for them. If I had any skills, it was in getting groups to cooperate with each other."

Ezra saw that contention can divide a family; he was determined to prevent internal squabbles from destroying the council "family." "I emphasized that, while we represented different commodities, we must go before Congress unified. Internal differences posed the greatest threat to weakening our organization. I tried to keep peace in the family, and it was a big family."

Perhaps the most significant indicator of the council's effectiveness was revealed by its expenditures—or lack of them. Even though the council was allotted less than $16,000 in operational funds, perhaps no other organized agricultural group wielded such influence in proportion to expenditures. In 1940 the council worked on twenty-eight specific projects, nineteen of which involved legislative activity.

For some time rumors had circulated that the first stake of the Church in the East would soon be organized in Washington, D.C. The nation's capital was an area ripe for missionary growth. [^5] Even on Ezra's sporadic trips to Washington in the 1930s, he had witnessed Church growth. In the early thirties, members of the Washington Branch met in the old Washington Auditorium, an arena that smelled of stale tobacco and perspiration from prize fights and wrestling matches held Saturday evenings. On one visit Ezra asked Senator Reed Smoot (a member of the Council of the Twelve) when the Church was going to get a decent place to meet in the city. Elder Smoot took a telegram from his pocket and explained, "We bought a lot on the corner of 16th Street and Columbia Road, but the people in the neighborhood weren't happy about it and offered to purchase it for $25,000 more than we paid for it. Here's the First Presidency's answer, that we didn't buy it for speculation and we're going to build a chapel."

The result was the Washington Ward building, a landmark to Eastern Mormons. Constructed of Utah marble, it had 16,404 stones, each quarried and milled in the West to fit its particular slot in the building. The building, which had an Angel Moroni statue atop its steeple, was dedicated on November 5, 1933, and soon became one of the city's sightseeing attractions. Thousands of visitors passed through its doors during the thirties and forties.

At quarterly district conference on June 29 and 30, 1940, Elders Rudger Clawson, the president of the Council of the Twelve, and Albert E. Bowen, a member of the Twelve, organized the Washington Stake from the Capital District of the Eastern States Mission. As Ezra walked through the door to keep an appointment with President Clawson, the apostle took him by the hand and said, "Brother Benson, the Lord wants you to be president of this stake. What have you got to say about that?"

"Brother Clawson, you can't be serious," Ezra replied, stunned. "I don't know these people. I've scarcely lived here a year."

"It was an awful shock," Ezra remembered, "one that took me totally by surprise." It was evidently less surprising to others. On July 8, 1940, President J. Reuben Clark of the Church's First Presidency wrote Ezra: "I was very much delighted with the organization of the Washington Stake. Ever since you visited us in the office of the Presidency, telling us of your expectation of moving to Washington, I have had you in mind as one who would be a splendid Stake President. I congratulate you, too, upon having Sister Benson, who is so thoroughly converted to the Church. . . . I think perhaps I can see a little more clearly than some how difficult your problems are going to be there, but I have complete confidence in your ability to meet these problems."

The problems were many and complex. With war looming, it was a difficult time, economically and spiritually, to mold a new stake into full operation. Ezra selected as counselors two strong, faithful men—Samuel Carpenter, secretary to the Federal Reserve Board, as first counselor, and Ernest L. Wilkinson, a lawyer (and the future president of Brigham Young University), as second. When Wilkinson told Ezra he had recommended someone else for the position of stake president, Ezra replied, "That's just the reason I want you. I admire your judgment." [^6]

The stake, comprised of 2,013 members in four wards and two branches, was a far-flung unit, extending north into Pennsylvania and as far south as Richmond, Virginia. Most Mormons who lived in the area were young, bright, and eager, but most called to leadership positions were inexperienced in stake administration. As Ezra visited congregations, he noticed few bald or gray heads in the audience. He admitted, "I wished I might have heard a testimony from an old stalwart who had been through the fire." There was much to be done, and the providence of Ezra's short tenure as stake president in Boise seemed clear.

Ezra asked Roy W. Doxey to instruct the high council on doctrine and Church procedures. (Roy later became dean of religion at Brigham Young University.) Rarely has there been so much talent assembled in one region at a given time. Men such as J. Willard Marriott, David M. Kennedy, Cleon Skousen, and Harold Glen Clark filled key roles in the stake. Edgar B. Brossard, who would succeed Ezra as stake president, was a member of the U.S. Tariff Commission and bishop of the Washington Ward.

With Ezra's new calling, the word busy took on a new dimension. Constantly on the firing line at his work, he was now also challenged with organizing a new stake. And his and Flora's fifth child—Bonnie Amussen Benson—was born on March 30, 1940. They were delighted with the addition to their family, but times were busy. "It seems like the Lord always strengthens the back for the burden, if you're willing to take it," Flora said in retrospect of that hectic time.

Ezra was not only willing, he was also able. At the NCFC and in the stake, his administrative skills flourished. Sam Carpenter remembered, "Ezra was always prepared. he never went off half-cocked. And he was tireless. No one ever questioned his dedication. The stake grew under Ezra, and the Church became well established in Washington."

As stake president, he was forward-thinking. In a practice uncommon at the time, he published a pocket calendar for stake officers and had a small light installed on the pulpit in the chapel of the Washington Ward to inform speakers when their time was spent. After thorough review of his stake, Ezra became convinced that if all members paid tithing, there would be no need for additional Church donations. He suggested such a course to the First Presidency, recommending that such an emphasis on tithing would lead to a condition of financial preparedness for the entire church.

Great emphasis was placed on missionary work in the stake, with the Washington Ward becoming a focal point. Cleon Skousen was stake mission president. Ezra assigned Sterling Wheelwright to give organ recitals and conduct tours through the building, interspersing the music with a gospel message. He himself invited associates to visit church meetings. Ed Babcock, former president of the NCFC, attended one meeting. Afterwards he asked Ezra if the people didn't have anywhere to go—he had had a difficult time getting through the throng in the foyer at the close of the meeting. Ezra explained that Latter-day Saints enjoyed visiting with each other.

Ezra's new position weighed heavily upon his shoulders. Flora wrote her mother, "'T' is so humble in his new appointment in the Church. There is nothing that brings to him more joy than that of doing Church work. He loves it so. It isn't the title that counts with him but it's the joy of being able to help as many as possible see the truth of the gospel." [^7] He seldom traveled without a briefcase full of work and a copy of the Book of Mormon, which he read on trains and in motel rooms late at night.

Ezra's pace was pressing enough to catch the attention of Church authorities in Salt Lake City. J. Reuben Clark advised, "We hear . . . that you are working day and night, days on your own work and nights on your Church work. Remember such a course cannot go on indefinitely." [^8]

But Ezra wasn't inclined to slow down. Always direct in his comments, he maintained an ongoing dialogue with Church leaders. To President Clark he wrote shortly after his call, "Suggestions and advice from you and other leaders at headquarters are much needed, particularly in this Stake, and we will appreciate your frank suggestions as we proceed with our new assignment." Sometimes his letters pertained to the cooperative movement or other political or national affairs that he felt Church leadership should be apprised of. [^9]

On the national front, Ezra's war against subsidies and fight for freedom for the farmer continued unabated. Though he disagreed strongly with Roosevelt's New Deal, in July 1940 he recommended support of the Democratic Party platform planks on surplus management. Late that year he was elected to membership in the National Farm Credit Committee.

The year 1941 was a pivotal twelve months—for the nation, for the National Council. War in Europe intensified, and America responded by sending tons of supplies to the anti-Axis nations. At home government-mandated priorities threatened to cut down on vital supplies needed by farmers.

In response, in the summer of that year twenty-nine of the nation's leading cooperatives met in Chicago to discuss the escalating problem. Too many staples—everything from baling wire to canvas—were scarce. In September the National Committee for Farm Production Supplies was organized with Ezra as secretary. With the slogan "Food to Win the War," the committee determined to impress upon defense officials that for farmers to achieve increased production, they had to have supplies and tools. Discussions between farm groups and the government were often heated. In one session when the farmers' representatives were arguing the need for canvas for lambing sheds, a government official replied in exasperation, "Gentlemen, there is no canvas. You will just have to postpone the lambing." "That's about all some of those on Capitol Hill knew or cared about farm production," Ezra noted with regret.

During the war Ezra worked closely with Donald Nelson, director of the War Production Board, and Raymond Miller, later appointed president of the American Institute of Cooperation. In Miller's judgment, Ezra was a king-pin in keeping the food lines flowing while diverting labor and facilities to the manufacture of farm implements and fertilizers. "I know of no man who contributed more to the solving of these intricate problems," he said. "His cool head had as much to do with keeping our food lines flowing [during the war] as that of any other person in America."

Pulp production became a critical issue, and the War Production Board called upon agriculture to cut additional millions of cords of wood. The demand was immediate and imperative. "Lines of communication with the farm people were kept open largely as a result of the prior work of Benson," said Miller. "Millions of cords were cut and the essential pulp made possible. This is just one of innumerable cases of similar action for which someone else got the credit for work which was expedited by Ezra Taft Benson." [^10]

Perhaps nothing demanded more of Ezra's time during 1941 than his vigorous campaign against price ceilings on farm products. In midsummer, as it became apparent that some form of price ceiling would receive Congressional approval, Ezra loudly insisted that no action be taken unless the wages of labor were also placed under control. His work on this legislation was impressive. Ed Babcock, the past president of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, told an associate, "It was a long, laborious job at which . . . Ezra Benson showed himself to be a top hand. The lion's share of anything which is eventually accomplished should go to him." [^11]

As the war escalated in Europe, President Roosevelt organized a National Agricultural Advisory Committee, composed of the presidents of the four national farm organizations, to meet monthly with him. In addition to the National Council, these included the Farm Bureau, National Grange, and Farmers Union. Initially Judge Miller represented the National Council on this influential committee. Later, at Miller's request, Ezra replaced him.

Then disaster struck. On December 7, 1941, the Japanese bombed military installations at Pearl Harbor, and America was thrown into war. Reed remembers his father standing next to the radio that day, listening intently as the news broke. The implications for agriculture and the nation were devastating. In the National Council's 1941 annual report, Ezra gave his perspective: "For America, the immediate future is not at all cheery. The year 1942 will, without doubt, be one of the most fateful in the history of this great nation. Yet there cannot be one among us today who does not feel that through redoubled effort, unflinching courage, and, above all, with spiritual guidance in all we do, America will win through and still remain a land choice above all others."

But it would take a fight to keep it that way.

As early as January 5, 1942, Ezra began making war-related adjustments in stake activities. With tire and automobile sales curtailed, and following instructions in a First Presidency letter dated January 17, 1942, he reduced the number of meetings held in the stake. The stake presidency counseled members of the stake to put away a year's supply of food and clothing, and get out of debt. [^12]

So many LDS service personnel attended meetings in the stake on weekends that the stake presidency opened up the Washington Ward gymnasium and provided bedrolls so they could have a place to sleep and could associate with one another. On Sunday each visitor had dinner at a member's home. "It was a way of keeping those people close to the Church," Ezra explained. "We had many testimonials from those servicemen that it was the nearest place to home they saw during the war." The Benson house became a second home to military men and women, who were welcome without advance notice. Flora prepared social activities and food; Ezra performed occasional marriages for those who couldn't go to the temple.

Missionary work was a priority, and the Washington Stake boasted one of the largest core groups of stake missionaries found in the Church at the time. Taking seriously the First Presidency's counsel at general conference in April 1942 that "no act of ours or of the church must interfere with this God-given mandate," Ezra dedicated the subsequent stake conference to missionary work. "Probably no stake," he assessed, "has greater missionary opportunities."

Fellowshipping took place with members and nonmembers alike. As Ezra traveled and met Latter-day Saints around the country, those who had family, especially children, in Washington inevitably cornered him to ask two questions: "Do you know my son or daughter?" and, "What are they doing in the Church?"

One of Ezra's highest priorities was keeping the youth active. Gold and Green balls and athletic events were carefully orchestrated. Repeatedly Ezra reminded stake leaders that the future of the Church lay in the youth.

Ezra's stake came to regard him as a caring man who stood firm when he needed to. As Alice Marriott explained, "He was a lovable, personable man." She related how he would put his arm around his brethren and ask how they were. "But he had a mind of his own," she said of him. "Right was right, and wrong was wrong, and there was nothing in between." Ezra would later say, "Be right and easy to live with, if possible, but in that order."

As problems arose, he addressed them. When, for example, one ward developed an "East-West" mentality—that is, that both parts of the country had to be equally represented among the leadership—he was firm: "I told the priesthood I never wanted to hear anything about East and West when they were selecting officers. This is a world church. We are all one great family." [^13]

In time Ezra's high profile in government circles brought awareness of, and later recognition to, the Church in Washington and elsewhere. A corporate official from Chicago called on him one day and asked for names of young men with integrity. Someone had suggested that the man hire a returned Mormon missionary, so at his Washington hotel he had inquired if there were any Mormons in the District of Columbia and was told to contact Ezra Benson. The man did so, and asked Ezra if he could supply the names he needed. Ezra replied, "Not only can I give you three or four names, but I can give you dozens." Often thereafter Ezra commented that "it pays to maintain the standards of the Church and be true to the faith."

As he became better acquainted with members of his high council, Ezra established a deep friendship with J. Willard Marriott, who had parlayed a root beer stand into an impressive chain of restaurants. After many high council meetings, he and Ezra would stop at one of Marriott's Hot Shoppe restaurants for a snack. They talked about everything from politics and religion to business. They thought much alike and enjoyed each other's company. And the two families mixed well. Young Bill Jr. and Richard Marriott played with the Benson boys, and Alice Marriott and Flora got along well. Marriott even invited Ezra to join him in business. "Bill, I'm committed to two million farmers," Ezra responded, "and I know nothing about the food business, except that I like to eat."

As Bill began to prosper, Ezra had to watch him. "He'd want to pay the whole Church budget. Of course I wouldn't let him, but he was always very generous." The two men became very close. "No man ever had a better friend than Bill Marriott," Ezra said many years later.

Few men had more challenges during those years than Ezra Benson. While the Washington Stake of the Church increased in efficiency and growth, problems in agriculture stimulated by the war were never-ending.

Roosevelt set up a number of emergency agencies during the first half of 1942, too many in Ezra's estimation, as he believed that existing agencies would have sufficed. The old saying that there is nothing quite so permanent as a temporary government building seemed frighteningly accurate, and the size of government grew like a rolling freight train out of control.

What little remained of a normal economy vanished after Pearl Harbor. It takes a lot of food to win a war, and the possibility of massive food shortages became a reality, though the Administration was slow to believe it. Judge Miller resigned as National Council president and was replaced first by H. E. Babcock and then by Charles C. Teague, president of the California Fruit Growers Exchange and Fruit Growers Supply Company. The war ended twenty years of agricultural depression. Between 1940 and 1945 farm prices and income doubled; by 1944 total farm income exceeded $20 billion, compared with less than $5 billion in 1932. Increased demand abroad and at home pushed prices up. In October 1942, when Congress granted the President authorization to freeze prices, rents, and wages, Ezra went on a national radio hook-up to vigorously oppose price controls and price fixing. He felt that the best regulator of prices was the free market. "Farmers need more freedom, not more control," he explained.

During 1942 and early 1943, the four major national farm organizations cooperated to keep America's wartime agriculture healthy. In 1942 Ezra was named a member of the executive committee of the American Institute of Cooperation, an educational aggregate of cooperatives, land-grant colleges, and other farm organizations.

In all, the net effect was that Ezra, in behalf of the National Council, attained prominence as a spokesman for the growing segment of cooperative agriculture. In an unprecedented move and flattering vote of confidence, the council's executive committee declared that Ezra was "capable of assuming the burden here in Washington which has formerly been borne by our [council] presidents," and passed a resolution empowering him "to speak and act with full and complete authority." Ed Babcock wrote Ezra that the change wouldn't have been made had the council not been absolutely sure of Ezra's "integrity and ability to speak for the Cooperatives of the United States. I am no amateur in selecting and working with men of quality and I am not inexperienced in judging men. . . . You furnish the Council with the dignified, poised, intelligent and Christian direction to which a great social and economic movement is entitled." The council budget and staff were also increased, giving Ezra an assistant and the council legal representation—Ernest L. Wilkinson. [^14]

The year 1942 brought a major change in Flora's life. Barbara Amussen had been planning to visit her daughter's family in Washington, D. C., but unexpectedly, in early September, she wrote that she would not be coming. She also revealed an impression she had received that Ezra would "be called to a high and important calling in this Glorious Church in due time."

It was but a few days later that Barbara Amussen's deceased husband appeared to her in a manifestation and indicated she would die and join him on the following Thursday. When she described the experience to her daughter Mabel, who also lived in Logan, Mabel responded, "Oh, Mother, you're in good health. You've been worrying about something. Are you ill?" Barbara insisted she was fine, but that she would leave mortality on the following Thursday. Mabel could not believe her at first, so she did not contact Flora immediately. The following Sunday Barbara bore strong testimony in her ward, so strong that when she concluded, the bishop closed the meeting though there was time remaining.

On Monday Barbara withdrew her savings, paid her bills, and had the lights and telephone disconnected. She paid the boy who took care of the lawn, had the plumber turn off the water, selected her own casket and paid for it, and went to stay at Mabel's home. On Wednesday evening, after visiting with Mabel and with her son Charles, she said, "Now, Mabel, I feel drowsy. Don't disturb me if I sleep until the eventide." Those were her last words. She passed away early Thursday morning.

Flora, with Bonnie and Beverly, arrived from Washington around noon that day. When she entered her mother's home, Flora found a jar filled with seventy-five birthday pennies for the Penny Parade of the Primary Association, wooden blocks waiting for the children, and cookies in the cookie jar. "It was as though she was there with us, which eased the pain," Flora wrote. Later, Mr. Baugh, the plumber, told Flora of his last encounter with her mother: "She told me she was going to die soon. Her words of love, counsel and advice were most glorious. I have never been around a more beautiful, spiritual lady in my whole life."

Nevertheless, her mother's death was a great shock to Flora, and it was many months before her daily sobbing subsided. Years earlier Barbara Amussen had assured Flora that as long as Flora needed her, she would remain alive. Yet now she was gone.

By early 1943 the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives had grown significantly. "The Council continues its growth and I am enjoying my work," Ezra wrote, "altho working long hours and under considerable pressure." He continued preaching the doctrine of cooperation, insisting it provided a means of selfhelp through mutual help, rather than dependence upon state aid. [^15]

But with war raging, all was not well on the farm front. On repeated occasions, Ezra, with Albert Goss and Edward O'Neal, had warned the Administration of pending food shortages. Acres of crops had gone unharvested due to lack of machinery, yet it seemed to him that the Administration continued to coddle labor. High wages in defense plants lured farmers away from their fields.

In February 1943, Ezra unleashed his frustrations in his journal: "Government controls and regulations have increased almost daily. The morale of the people, laboring under impossible directives, seems to be at low ebb. Bungling and delay and red tape is having a bewildering effect. Altho internationally the war seems to be progressing satisfactorily, on the 'home front' all is not well. Conditions call for vigorous, courageous action. I fear, however, we haven't the political courage to meet the issue squarely."

On March 12, Ezra, with Babcock and Goss, spent thirty-five minutes with President Roosevelt. Conducting the meeting from behind his large, old-fashioned desk laden with trinkets and symbols of the Democratic Party, the President was congenial. He expressed concern about the food production outlook and requested recommendations for corrective measures.

On March 31 the group met again to discuss the question of food production. Though the conference was constructive, Ezra noted that each time "the question of food prices was raised, the President dodged the issue. It appeared he was afraid of the demands of organized labor."

A third session was scheduled for April 7, causing Ezra to miss the Church's general conference, his first in a long while. But after the meeting he recorded that finally "the Administration is food production conscious, which tho belated offers encouragement. Cooperative leaders were laughed at when last September we emphasized this country faced a serious food situation unless certain fundamental policies were adopted." In this meeting Ezra presented a five-point program designed to resolve the pending food crisis, and all endorsed his plan. But it seemed little more than a Band-Aid on a gaping wound.

Ezra seldom agreed with the President's programs or policies. But despite the friction, Roosevelt once remarked that he would rather talk with Ezra Benson than any farm leader because of his "knowledge of the subject." [^16]

While the pressure of work and Church seemed to never diminish, Ezra spent as much time as possible with his family. Flora, convinced the children needed constancy at home, rarely accompanied her husband on trips out of town, but she and Ezra spent as many evenings together as possible, sometimes joining the Marriotts for dinner or going to a movie.

He had his own way of keeping in close touch with the children. Huge amounts of mail passed between him and the family, and when possible, family members traveled with him. When he was home, some of his and Flora's most satisfying associations were with members of the Church. In a reflective tone Ezra recorded, "I don't know what Heaven will be like [but] I want nothing finer than the associations of the fine . . . Latter-day Saints that constitute the membership of this stake. . . . Some, it is true, have wandered afield, but we are gradually winning them back, to their great joy and our deep satisfaction."

Perhaps few men would have been as well suited to lead the Washington Stake through the war. He had unusual rapport with Latter-day Saint servicemen and -women. And he counseled his flock on temporal matters, advising them to be frugal, conserve and store food, and get out of debt. But the war put a drain on resources, manpower, and patience. "Practically all of our people are working long hours and have very little free time," he noted of stake members. "This is affecting our Church work some, but through better organization and planning the work of the stake is actually improving. The Lord seems to be pouring out His blessings upon us as never before."

In early May 1943, the same day he received a letter from Who's Who in America requesting a life sketch, Ezra heard from President J. Reuben Clark of the First Presidency, asking when he and Flora would next be in Salt Lake City. President Clark added, "I hear only good reports of the work which you are doing, not alone for the Church but on behalf of the industry which you represent." The comment might have served as an omen, but Ezra modestly noted, "Pres. Clark, like all others of the General Authorities, is very kind and generous."

For nearly a year Ezra had had a standing offer from the Southern States Cooperative to manage that influential organization at a salary much higher than his current compensation. The job would mean moving his family to Richmond, Virginia, and perhaps a release from his assignment as stake president. He decided to make an extended farm trip throughout the West and consult with Church authorities while in Salt Lake City. In keeping with his promise to the boys that when they became Eagle Scouts they could accompany him on a major trip, he arranged for Reed, the first Eagle Scout in the Washington Stake, to travel with him.

On June 21, 1943, Ezra and Reed boarded the B&O in Silver Springs, Maryland, bound for Chicago. Ezra looked forward to time alone with his eldest son and a visit with cooperative leaders and Church officials. His mind was preoccupied with matters at hand—postwar agriculture and his future. He could not have known that those decisions had already been taken out of his hands.

Ezra Taft Benson's personal journal, which begins in earnest in 1938, provides the framework for this and subsequent chapters. I also have relied on author interviews with President Benson, Reed Benson, Mark Benson, Barbara Benson Walker, Beverly Benson Parker, Bonnie Benson Madsen, Samuel Carpenter, Alice Marriott, Miller F. Shurtleff, Abe Cannon, Louise Bennion, Winston Robinson, Jesse R. Smith, and personal writings of Flora Amussen Benson. See also interview with President Benson by Dr. Maclyn Burg for the Eisenhower Library, May 21, 1975, and the James B. Allen interview of President Benson, Church Archives.

The following sources were also helpful: manuscript histories of the Boise and Washington, D.C., stakes; issues of Cooperative Digest (1939-1944); annual reports of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives (1939-1944); Ezra Taft Brenson, "Are There Any Mormons in Washington," New Era, August 1973, p. 7; Ezra Taft Benson, "A Peculiar People," Instructor, December 1970, p. 441; "A Year with the Cooperative Council," National Livestock Producer, February 1944, p. 3; "Cooperatives Come to Washington," 50th Anniversary Presentation produced by National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, Washington, D.C., 1979.

Footnotes

"The foremost responsibility of the Twelve Apostles is to bear witness to the divinity of Jesus Christ and to the restoration of His gospel in these latter days."

---
Notas:
[^1] Reed A. Benson to FAB, undated, postmark 1943.
[^2] See Ezra Taft Benson, personal journal, July 26, 1943.
[^3] Reported in Church News, October 9, 1943; also Report of Washington Stake Conference, September 19, 1943.
[^4] R. N. Benjamin to ETB, August 19, 1943.
[^5] Howard A. Cowden to ETB, August 9, 1943, and Louis J. Taber to ETB, August 19, 1943.
[^6] Miller F. Shurtleff to ETB, November 29, 1943.
[^7] LeGrand Richards to ETB, August 9, 1943, and John A. Widtsoe to ETB, July 28, 1943.
[^8] Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay to ETB, August 20, 1943.
[^9] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Least Among You," Improvement Era 46 (November 1943): 679. For information regarding Elder Benson's activities during this conference, see "Two New Apostles Arrive for Church Meet," Salt Lake Tribune, September 30, 1943.
[^10] Frances Elmore to ETB and FAB, October 1, 1943.
[^11] ETB to Ralph Taylor, October 19, 1943.
[^12] George Albert Smith to ETB, February 11, 1944.
[^13] Resolution adopted at Annual Assembly of Delegates of National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, Chicago, Illinois, January 5-7, 1944.
[^14] Homer L. Brinkley to ETB, August 16, 1943.
[^15] Ezra Taft Benson, personal journal, February 25, 1944; also "Prime for Progress," BYU Student Leadership Conference, Sun Valley, Idaho, September 1959.
[^16] ETB to FAB, September 9, 1944.
