Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 11

The Call to the Apostleship

Ezra wasn't much of a worrier, but as he set out on his month-long trip, he was preoccupied. The world was engulfed in war; the prospects of a devastating food shortage had never been greater; the welfare of members of his stake, many of them young and away from home for the first time, played on his emotions; and an attractive job offer had dangled before him long enough that he wondered if he was foolish not to accept. Too many facets of life seemed unsettled.

Nevertheless, as he and Reed headed West, they enjoyed the companionship of traveling together. Though Reed was but fifteen, there was a deep bond between the father and son. As they traveled first to Chicago, then through Texas and Arizona, and subsequently the length of California, visiting as many cities and cooperatives as there were numbers of days, they talked into the late hours, did a little sightseeing, and took in an occasional movie. After seeing one Western, Reed reported to his mother in a letter, "It was so comical about farming that Dad nearly burst his belt. There were some old-fashioned horse races and Dad nearly beat in the chair in front of him for fear the bad men might win. I had more fun watchin' Dad than the movie." [^1]

For sixteen days they toured cooperatives in California—everything from Sunkist to the California Rice Growers. And they also spent an evening with Charles C. Teague, newly appointed president of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, at his ranch in Santa Paula.

Teague, a prosperous citrus farmer, had served as president or chairman of some sixteen agricultural organizations. As Ezra was driven onto Teague's spacious grounds, he gasped at the largest, most beautiful home he had ever been in. During Ezra and Reed's twenty-four-hour visit, Teague drove them throughout his vast holdings of lemon and orange orchards, all the while relating the history of the citrus industry in California. Later that evening, presumably in response to rumors that had circulated throughout the industry, he pulled Ezra aside and told him, "I know you have been offered greater opportunities financially than we are paying you, but we don't want you to leave the cooperative movement. It's no longer a question of salary. You can set your own salary."

Ezra was taken aback by this generosity and confidence. He wasn't comfortable making long-term commitments until he had discussed alternatives with Church officials, but he responded that he had "no desire to leave the cooperative movement."

While in California, Ezra toured housing facilities and labor camps of workers who had migrated to California from the Dust Bowl sections of the Midwest. He had heard horror stories about inhumane treatment of migrant workers. What he saw pleasantly surprised him. "The facilities seemed very satisfactory. . . . I found farmers had a good attitude toward labor, and the relationship between employer and employee was satisfactory. It seemed to be the outside agitators which caused the trouble."

In San Francisco, Ezra addressed two groups of agricultural, city, and state leaders, including some of his former Berkeley professors. Though he was nervous about facing his instructors, his fear left as he began talking, and he spoke freely and frankly at both meetings, making frequent reference to prayer and other spiritual values that influence progress. The response was gratifying.

On July 15, 1943, Ezra and Reed arrived in Utah, and the following day Ezra met with David O. McKay, now a member of the First Presidency. Their reunion was sweet and, as always for Ezra, inspiring, though it aroused the lament, "How I wish we had [men] at the head of this great country of his stature and character."

Then it was off to Idaho for a long-needed visit with family and friends. In Idaho Falls Ezra received a personal tour of the nearly completed temple. Tears welled in his eyes as he contemplated what the imposing structure situated by the falls would mean for the Saints there.

In Idaho, and for the first time since his mother's funeral ten years earlier, Ezra walked through the doors in the old Whitney Ward building. It was a nostalgic occasion that aroused deep emotion and reflection. "Many sweet and never-to-be-forgotten memories surged thru my mind as I sat in the little church and looked into the kindly faces I had learned to love," he wrote. "Here much of the training which has been of great value thru the years was received. These sacred and fundamental principles, instilled into my young soul by faithful and unselfish teachers, will ever be a great blessing to me."

On July 26, he and Reed returned to Salt Lake City and learned that President McKay's office staff had been frantically calling hotels throughout the city trying to locate Ezra. President Heber J. Grant wanted to meet with Ezra at his summer home in a nearby canyon.

"Oh, I can't go up the canyon," Ezra began to explain, "I have a train to catch shortly." After being assured President Grant was just a few minutes away, near the mouth of Emigration Canyon, Ezra relented, and he and Reed were driven there. Ezra was immediately shown into President Grant's bedroom, where the aged prophet was resting. At the President's bidding, Ezra closed the door and approached him, sitting down on a chair next to the bed. President Grant took Ezra's right hand in both of his and, with tears filling his eyes, said simply, "Brother Benson, with all my heart I congratulate you and pray God's blessing to attend you. You have been chosen as the youngest member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles."

The shock registered in Ezra's face. He felt as if the earth were sinking from beneath him. He had had no premonition of the calling. Later he recorded his feelings: "The announcement seemed unbelievable and overwhelming. . . . For several minutes [I] could say only, 'Oh, President Grant, that can't be!' which I must have repeated several times before I was able to collect my thots enough to realize what had happened. . . . He held my hand for a long time as we both shed tears. . . . For over an hour we were alone together, much of the time with our hands clasped warmly together. Tho [he was] feeble, his mind was clear and alert, and I was deeply impressed with his sweet, kindly, humble spirit as he seemed to look into my soul.

"I felt so utterly weak and unworthy that his words of comfort and reassurance which followed were doubly appreciated. Among other things he stated, 'The Lord has a way of magnifying men who are called to positions of leadership.' When in my weakness I was able to state that I loved the Church he said, 'We know that, and the Lord wants men who will give everything for His work.'

"He told of the action taken in a special meeting of the First Presidency and the Twelve two weeks before and that the discussion regarding me had been enthusiastically unanimous. . . . I feel confident that only thru the rich blessings of the Almighty can this ever be realized." [^2]

The President asked Ezra to attend general conference in October, when he would be sustained and ordained. He also told him that his great-grandfather and other faithful progenitors were rejoicing at this appointment of a descendant to the apostleship. And he advised Ezra to continue with the National Council until arrangements for a smooth transition could be made, even if it took a year or longer.

At the conclusion of the visit, Ezra found Reed outside, and they were chauffeured back to President McKay's home. They rode in silence. Ezra was still in a daze when Elder McKay greeted him at the door with outstretched arms and an embrace. President McKay then told Reed what had happened, and father and son embraced.

That night, aboard the train, Ezra retired before midnight, but rest did not come. His thoughts raced from one concern to another. He had always revered the Twelve. Was he worthy to sit in that council? Was he capable? What were the financial implications? He had just paid off their home and for the first time in his married life was out of debt, but they had no savings. How would he afford the children's missions and schooling? What about the impending food shortage and the condition of cooperatives—could he relegate such crucial matters to someone else? How would the children adjust to Salt Lake City? How would this lifetime call affect him? Even forty years later, as he relived the moment of his appointment to the Twelve, tears would well in his eyes as he recalled, "It was the most humbling, overwhelming moment. I couldn't believe it, that the Lord would choose me."

"Slept very little but prayed, wept and did much sincere thinking regarding this great thing which has come to me, a humble weak farmer boy," he wrote in his journal that first night. "With heart full of gratitude I pledged my all to the establishment of the Kingdom of God on the earth and pled with the Lord to give me strength to ever be worthy of this high and holy calling."

When the train arrived in Grand Junction, Colorado, Ezra placed some overdue calls. The first was to Flora. She registered little surprise at her husband's emotional news, admitting she had had a strong impression that something of magnitude would happen on this trip. "She said how wonderful she felt it was and expressed her complete confidence I could measure up," Ezra wrote. "It was reassuring to talk to her. She has always shown more faith in me than I have myself."

Perhaps Flora was less surprised by her husband's call than anyone. While she had never discussed her feelings with anyone, she had had premonitions about her husband's potential and his life mission and had worked to help him to that end. She later recorded, "It's been a lot of hard work and sacrifice and encouragement giving him faith in himself. . . . He wasn't all ready-made when I got him." One Church authority subsequently said, "If we had more women like Sister Benson, we would have more men like Apostle Benson."

Ezra's second call was to Charles Teague, whose words were reassuring: "God bless you. This is a great honor, and you will have our full support."

In the meantime, word of Ezra's appointment had been released to the press. The Church-owned Deseret News, noting that he was descended from Ezra T. Benson and calling him a "national authority" on farm problems, broke the news on July 27, and word spread rapidly from coast to coast. While Ezra and Reed continued their journey home, congratulations poured in to the Bensons' Bethesda home. By the time they arrived home on July 31, the whole world knew, or at least so it seemed.

The call may have taken Ezra by surprise, but others insisted that they had seen it coming. Ernest Wilkinson said that "those of us in Washington who have worked close to him were not surprised." At a stake presidency meeting held after Ezra's departure for the West Coast, stake clerk Don Crowther confided to Wilkinson, "I would not be a bit surprised if the Presiding Officers chose Brother Benson for the other vacancy in the Council of the Twelve." Wilkinson admitted that while he had also felt so impressed, he had supposed the call might be several years hence. "I had become so accustomed to having men of riper years appointed to that Council that I had almost forgotten the age of the Prophet Joseph." [^3]

On August 3, Ezra directed a press release to the board of directors of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives:

Many of you have no doubt seen the press account of my appointment as a member of the Quorum of Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This high and holy calling came as a tremendous and almost overwhelming surprise to me. . . .

I, of course, am deeply grateful for this great honor and, because of my deep religious convictions and love for the church, accept gladly the responsibility. . . . Please be assured, however, that acceptance of this appointment does not mean immediate severance of my relationship with the National Council. . . . Needless to say, it will be with deep regret that I sever my active connections with this unusually fine group of men and this excellent organization.

Ezra's peers responded immediately. Two are representative. C. D. Bennett, editor of Washington Farm Reporter, wrote: "It is amazing to find in a city like Washington, where men become engrossed with affairs of business and government, an executive so identified with his spiritual convictions." A. H. Lauterbach, general manager of the Pure Milk Association, wrote on August 9, 1943: "In many of my talks I have said that world peace will come only through (first) a greater church following and (second) a world-wide cooperative movement. We will miss you and you will be hard to replace but we will have the knowledge that on the council of one of the great churches will sit a man who knows the cooperative movement and who will aid and guide it in its future activities."

Many were openly concerned about the impact of Ezra's departure on the National Council. R. N. Benjamin, executive secretary of the Pennsylvania Farm Bureau, wrote that Ezra had done much to iron out difficulties between cooperatives and that they faced critical tests in the future that called for unity, concluding, "I hope . . . [you will be permitted] to remain in your present position for at least another year." [^4]

Howard Cowden, president of the Consumers Cooperative Association in Kansas City, Missouri, admitted that, because of Ezra, he had "come to have a high regard for the Latter-day Saints. They are as near a truly cooperative body as one will find among religious sects." And from the president of the Farmers and Traders Life Insurance Company, "The Mormon Church will seem a little nearer to me." [^5]

Miller Shurtleff, a member of the Washington Stake who was stationed in the South Pacific, wrote: "A man who can walk with the wealthy of the nation, counsel with the powerful of the nation, carry a full share of the responsibility of feeding the world at war, conduct a home such as yours, serve the Church as I've seen you serve, enjoy the Spirit of the Lord, hoe corn in a welfare garden on a hot Saturday afternoon, and be at all times patient, humble and considerate is a man worthy of being called a . . . servant of God." [^6]

LeGrand Richards, the Church's Presiding Bishop, wrote that if the Presiding Bishopric had been asked to make the selection, Ezra would have been their choice: "No one who knows you can question the sincerity of your testimony and your love for the truth." Members of the Council of the Twelve sent personal congratulations. John A. Widtsoe counseled that service in the Twelve "is not entirely an easy life, for the Church calls upon its servants unremittingly." [^7]

Elder Widtsoe made a strong point. Ezra wondered what toll the move west and his new responsibilities would take on the family. His children were still young. Reed (fifteen), Mark (fourteen), and Barbara (nine) in particular would be uprooted from friends and schools. "Extensive travel on Church work will take me from my family to a great extent," Ezra noted in his journal. "Often this is the beginning of less interest in Church matters by families of Church leaders. I sincerely trust I may be true to my family, keep them close to the Church, and yet fulfil my obligations as one of the General Authorities. This I know will be no easy matter."

But from the outset, there was no lack of family support for Ezra's call. His Aunt Carmen told him that years earlier she had picked him to follow in the footsteps of his great-grandfather. Ezra's boyhood hero, Uncle Serge, wrote just two days after his call, "We do not fear for your success. You have always made good and failure is not for you."

At home, in the confines of their close-knit family unit, the Bensons discussed the honor and responsibility that had come to their husband and father. And many nights Ezra and Flora lay awake. Often she wiped away his tears as he confided fears and lingering feelings of inadequacy. But, as he had already done before—twice when called as stake president, when he had assumed his position with the University of Idaho Extension Division in Boise, and later in a demanding post with the NCFC—he forged ahead. It had become his pattern that if the Lord called, he would rise to the task, and his family provided him the underlying drive and strength to move on. As Barbara remembered, "There was a lot of praying and fasting for daddy."

J. Willard Marriott wrote, "We have all been talking about you and your family and can't tell you how thrilled we are about your appointment. . . . Allie says you are the backbone of the whole stake and she doesn't know how you can be replaced."

On the evening of August 15, 1943, Ezra related the events surrounding his call to the members of his stake high council. His associates' "sincere assurances that the Lord had inspired his prophet to call me was a source of real strength and satisfaction. It was an evening long to be remembered, and I couldn't hold back the tears as I told my wife of it near midnight."

Though the initial shock had subsided, questions of a practical nature prompted Ezra to consult the First Presidency. How soon should he move to Salt Lake City, and should he plan to assume the cost of moving? What was the housing situation in Utah? Should he plan to maintain outside interests to sustain his family financially? How soon would the Washington Stake be reorganized?

The First Presidency responded, point by point. Ezra was responsible for his moving expenses, might consider renting a home until after the war, would receive a modest living allowance, and should continue as stake president until informed otherwise. [^8]

On August 1, 1943, Ezra took the boys to Camp Roosevelt on the Chesapeake Bay. He had intended to spend several days with them, but with the new pressures he stayed only long enough for dinner in the camp mess hall. Later that month he took Barbara with him on an overnight business trip to New York City, and they enjoyed a sightseeing trip on a double-decker bus.

Over Labor Day weekend Ezra and Flora spent four restful days as guests of the Marriotts at their summer home at Lake Winnipesaukee in New Hampshire. Ezra knew coming weeks would be stressful, and the respite was delightful. They swam, cruised the beautiful lake, and talked into the night about the gospel.

In mid-September Ezra prepared once again for meetings with President Roosevelt and other farm leaders at the White House. Their concerns focused around the problem of high postwar unemployment. Business enterprises with war contracts were paying nearly 90 percent of their profits in taxes and would face serious consequences if there were no monies available to retool and convert their industries from war to peacetime operations. The same dilemma faced farmers, and Ezra was concerned about reserving funds to ease the shock of postwar adjustment. Afterwards he noted, "I fear the present leadership has neither the political courage nor the vision to do an adequate job. Every decision seems to be directed toward political expediency and 1944 votes."

Ezra's interaction within the stake offset his frustration on political matters. Quarterly stake conference, held on September 19, was "glorious," and he wondered how he could leave the people in Washington. But he looked forward to new opportunities. As Spencer W. Kimball indicated in an August 2, 1943, letter to Ezra, "I shall look forward to seeing you at the October Conference and it will be my great joy to sit with you and work with you the rest of our lives in the great work to which we have been called."

On September 26, he and Flora left for general conference in Salt Lake City. Among other shortages, wartime had depleted the ranks of available domestic help, and when they could not locate a sitter it looked as though Flora might not be able to accompany her husband. The crisis was averted when one of Ezra's secretaries volunteered to spend her vacation tending the children.

The first day of the 114th semiannual conference of the Church was one of the most significant of Ezra's life. In the opening session Spencer Woolley Kimball and he were sustained as members of the Council of the Twelve Apostles. When Ezra was called upon to address the conference, he was almost overcome with emotion. He managed to deliver a brief message, giving some indication of the spirit with which he assumed his apostolic ministry: "I am grateful beyond my power of expression for the . . . great honor that has come to one of the weakest of your number. I love this work. All my life I have had a testimony of it. . . . I know something of the honors which men can bestow, but I know that there is nothing that can compare with the honors which come to us as servants of the Lord." [^9]

That evening Ezra and Flora gathered with other General Authorities at the home of Elder Stephen L Richards for an evening of music, storytelling, and conversation. They also heard from home that Ezra's secretary was being charmed by her five charges. "I never saw such well-behaved and happy little faces all the time," she reported in a letter. One evening the children surprised her with a birthday cake. "After dinner Reed came out in the kitchen and suggested that I take some milk bottles out, and when I went out he brought in the cake and they all chimed in and sang 'Happy Birthday.' I was really so touched I felt like crying. . . . I spent one of the happiest birthdays I have ever had." [^10]

As the conference proceeded, Ezra and Flora were over-whelmed with the enthusiastic response from friends and family, and were made to feel so welcome that many of their jitters fled. At the end of three days, Ezra's right hand was bruised and sore from shaking so many hands.

On the morning of October 7, after meeting with the Twelve in the temple, all gathered in the office of President Grant. There he first ordained Spencer Kimball an apostle, and then Ezra knelt before the ailing prophet. As the rest of the Twelve and members of the First Presidency placed their hands on Ezra's head, President Grant ordained him as one of the "Twelve Special Witnesses of the divine mission of the Savior," a calling "paramount to everything else upon the earth." He counseled Elder Benson to "from this very moment resolve to make His cause and His labor first and foremost in all your thoughts," and blessed him with "power to make friends for the Church and to accomplish every desire of your heart in righteousness." Then, for nearly an hour afterwards, President Grant counseled the new apostles as they joined the body of men that, with the First Presidency, directed the affairs of the kingdom.

The kingdom at that time consisted of 837,000 members in 144 stakes, most of them in the United States. World War II had retarded missionary work, sacrament meeting attendance was 19 percent, and priesthood attendance was 31 percent. The Brethren usually traveled in pairs to stake conferences. Ezra's calling was not only spiritual in nature but also an administrative assignment, as part of the governing body of the Church.

It had been an overwhelming week, and as Flora and Ezra returned to Washington, they reviewed the events again and again and planned out the next few months. Spencer Kimball had already moved from Arizona to Salt Lake City, and Ezra, too, longed to join the Brethren. But he knew that he must follow President Grant's counsel to sever ties with the National Council only after an orderly transition had been made. As he explained to one associate, "I am deeply grateful for [my call to the Twelve], but as I contemplate severing my active connection with farm cooperatives, I find my feelings very much mixed. The work with the Council has been pleasant from the beginning, not only because I believe wholeheartedly in the movement, but because of the great opportunity of associating with [the] men who constitute its leadership." Nevertheless, he determined to push for a quick but effective transition. [^11]

Back in Washington it was one round of meetings after another. The brisk slap of political reality was in sharp contrast to the spiritual warmth of general conference. Ezra was increasingly sensitive to the differences, as he tried to hold down assignments as stake president, General Authority, and farm executive.

Perhaps as a result of his firsthand observation of the interworkings of government on the highest levels, Ezra's love of freedom burned with increasing intensity. And so did his commitment to men and women in the service, with whom he spent time at every opportunity. On October 17 he filled his first assignment as an apostle when he visited the Annapolis Branch, formed to enable midshipmen of the U.S. Naval Academy and their families to be active in the Church. Ezra felt strongly that there was an army of Latter-day Saint men—"missionaries in uniform," as he called them—stationed throughout the world whose spiritual impact could be dramatic. He told the midshipmen so and encouraged them to serve the Church while they served their country.

In a subsequent letter to servicemen from the Washington Stake Military Committee, dated June 2, 1944, Ezra wrote, "You . . . are the greatest missionary force the Church has. . . . The Church's mission is to renounce war and proclaim peace. . . . [But] there are some things more dear to us than life itself. You are serving to preserve many of these God-given liberties. And, although war clouds are hanging heavy and all seems dark, be assured that God is still at the helm. We are proud of your dual efforts as representatives of the United States of America and soldiers of the cross."

In late October, Ezra was the featured speaker at meetings of the board of directors of the Eastern States Farmers Exchange. In introducing him, the Exchange manager noted Ezra's recent appointment and was highly complimentary of the Church. The force of President Grant's admonition that Ezra "make friends for the Church" began to hit home.

Later George Albert Smith, president of the Council of the Twelve, reinforced this charge, writing Elder Benson, "Your opportunity to mingle with large groups of non-Mormons and people who are influential should be availed of wherever possible. Your mission from now on is to find ways and means to disseminate the truth and warn the people that you come in contact with in as kind a way as possible that repentance will be the only panacea for the ills of this world." President Smith also offered some practical advice: that Ezra sign his name in full, Ezra Taft Benson, to minimize confusion with his great-grandfather, Ezra T. Benson. President Smith spoke from experience—his grandfather was George A. Smith, a former apostle and counselor to Brigham Young. [^12]

During November and December 1943, Ezra's schedule became more hectic as he traveled for both the National Council and the Church. En route to his first stake conference in New York City, he was preoccupied with his assignment: "All day I have worried about it. Only with great difficulty have I been able to center my mind on the work at hand."

There was good news, though. Ezra and Flora were elated to learn that she was carrying another child. Though she was ill and threatened to miscarry, all were delighted at the prospect of a baby. For over a year they had been hoping and praying for additional family.

In late 1943 Ezra learned that he had been elected to the National Committee on Rural Scouting. The honor came as a total surprise, though the nomination was a natural outgrowth of Ezra's longtime support of the Boy Scouts. With his appointment, two members of the Twelve now held national Boy Scout positions. The other person, George Albert Smith, had been a member of the National Boy Scouts of America Executive Board for fifteen years.

At year's end the Bensons were in transition. Flora was struggling with pregnancy-related illness, and some of the children were nervous about moving to Utah. But that didn't dampen their holiday spirit, and after the children lined up single file, youngest to oldest, and marched into the living room Christmas morning to see their gifts, Ezra spent two hours calling bishops, stake officers, branch presidents, widows, and others in his stake to wish them a Merry Christmas.

The new year's first business was the National Council's annual convention in Chicago, Ezra's fifth and last as executive secretary. During a marathon meeting of the executive committee, he recommended that, for the first time in council history, "America" be sung and an invocation offered. The committee agreed.

At this convention Ezra delivered his last annual report to the National Council delegates. Throughout the three-day convention he was deluged with messages praising his five years of leadership. And at convention's end, the delegates passed a resolution that read in part: "During the years that have passed since we first knew [Ezra Taft Benson] we have been privileged to witness the unfolding of his talents and capabilities in a manner which culminated in the universal recognition of him as a man without peer in his field of activities. We have drawn on his resources of energy and have profited by his unerring judgment in meeting the ever-mounting problems facing the farmers of the nation and their cooperatives. His sincerity, resourcefulness and complete honesty of purpose have endeared him not only to us but to everyone with whom he has come in contact, no matter what their station." [^13]

Considering the volatile position he had occupied, Ezra was grateful for the appraisal of his services. The September 1943 issue of Cooperative Digest reported on the National Council's growth during Ezra's tenure—to some 4600 associations representing 2.3 million farmers—which they evaluated as "directly traceable to Benson." The article concluded that selection of a successor would be "extremely difficult." Agricultural News, in the January 22, 1944, issue, editorialized, "Friends and associates of Mr. Benson will be sorry to lose this hard-hitting, clear-thinking farm leader."

Leaders of various member associations assessed and praised Ezra's service. The following, from the American Rice Growers, is typical: "You came into the Council at a time when the outlook was extremely gloomy, and I think very few of us had much real confidence in the future until we saw the way you were taking hold of the situation. . . . Few other people in the cooperative field could have . . . built the Council as efficiently and as rapidly as you have done." [^14]

With the annual convention concluded in Chicago, Ezra hurried to Salt Lake City for quarterly meetings of the Council of the Twelve. He returned home on January 16 at 7:45 A.M. and was there less than an hour before leaving for a conference of the Baltimore Ward. "There was no complaint from my devoted wife and I left and returned at midnight," he noted at day's end.

This kind of pace was one that Flora, Ezra, and the children got used to. Though Ezra had accepted an ecclesiastical calling, his affiliation with agricultural groups would never end, though it would wane. By the end of February he had attended the National Postwar Planning Conference and traveled to meetings in Columbus, Buffalo, and Albany. In Albany he met with New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey at the governor's request. For over an hour Ezra discussed national problems and the Church with Dewey, who seemed fascinated by the Church's welfare and youth programs. Dewey was amazed that, at age forty-four, Ezra would turn his back on a promising future in Washington in favor of a position with the Church. But, looking Ezra straight in the eye, Dewey added, "I'm worried about our youth. They're getting away from us." Ezra responded, "Last week I attended a [Church] dance . . . [with] several hundred young people . . . which was opened and closed with prayer. There wasn't a bottle, a cigarette, or any evidence of vulgarity whatever." Dewey paused momentarily before replying, "Mr. Benson, that's one of the most difficult things I've ever been asked to believe, knowing the world as I do." Ezra left after discussing such things as family prayer and the Constitution. [^15]

On March 5, 1944, in an emotional session of quarterly stake conference, Ezra was released as president of the Washington Stake and succeeded by Edgar B. Brossard. Later that month Ezra took Mark, as a reward for obtaining his Eagle Scout award, on a business trip to Florida. They returned home long enough for Ezra to repack and board the train for another three-day trip to Salt Lake City and his second general conference as an apostle. Her health precarious, Flora remained behind.

Prior to conference Ezra attended meetings of the Twelve in the Salt Lake Temple. The Brethren spoke freely. To the youngest apostle, the meeting reinforced in him "the great adjustments required in the lives of each of the brethren. All bore strong testimony to the truth and humbly prayed for the power to do more and for the advancement of the kingdom."

In those days, the Brethren were not advised prior to conference which session they would speak in. In the third session, President J. Reuben Clark announced Ezra as the first speaker. Elder Benson talked about juvenile and parental delinquency and noted that it was a thrill for him "to face that body of 5,000 priesthood leaders and to feel the power of the Lord's Spirit." During the trip Ezra located a home in Salt Lake City on Military Drive for the family to rent until they could find a suitable home to purchase.

Back in Washington, it was largely a matter of clearing up odds and ends. On April 28, 1944, the Washington Stake held a testimonial for the Bensons at the Washington Ward. It was an emotional event. "We were all crying, every member of the family," Ezra remembered. "I had to remind them that when we boarded the train to leave Boise our oldest daughter Barbara, with her big brown eyes filled with tears, had looked over at me and said, 'Daddy, do you think we'll ever find people we love as much as we do the people in Boise?' It was the same experience all over again."

At Ezra's last meeting with the executive committee of the National Council, he was presented with a gold watch. Bidding his colleagues good-bye, emotion choking his voice, he said, "You are the best group of men in this nation outside the Mormon Church, and I wish you were all in it." Tears flowed liberally as each person embraced Ezra and thanked him for his service. In his farewell statement to the National Council he said, "There are no better, more unselfish or higher principled men in any industry than those who make up the leadership of the farm cooperative movement."

The Bensons' send-off from Washington, D.C., was warm. J. Willard Marriott drove them to the train, and as he and Ezra embraced, both had tears in their eyes. Three days later the family arrived in Salt Lake City and spent their first night across the street from their rented home sleeping on Spencer and Camilla Kimball's living room floor. It took three days to unpack their household goods and get the house in order. Ezra then began full-time work in the Church.

One of Elder Benson's first quorum assignments was to serve as executive secretary of the Melchizedek Priesthood committee, which entailed supervising development of the priesthood handbook and evaluating the question of a Churchwide home evening program. Another assignment was adviser to the general boards of the YMMIA and YWMIA, a role that delighted him.

He took on a full load of visiting stake conferences, assignments that, though somewhat intimidating at first, were not foreign to him. He had hosted numerous General Authorities in his home and stake, and thus felt some confidence in presiding over these conferences. Church procedure was deeply ingrained. In his role as apostle, however, he learned how essential it was to rely on the Spirit for direction.

To prepare for a stake reorganization, Elder Benson reviewed in advance the roster of those serving in the stake. On one occasion, while studying a list of the high council, he received a strong impression that the junior member of the high council was to be the new stake president. Initially he shrugged it off, but the impression persisted. The following day, as Elder Benson and Elder S. Dilworth Young of the First Council of the Seventy, who was with him, interviewed priesthood leadership in the stake, every man, when asked to suggest who might lead the stake, named the junior member of the high council. "I've had many experiences since along the same line," Ezra later said, "and all of them are different. But that was the first experience, and it made a very deep impression on me. I've never had any doubt but what the Lord was directing this work."

Still, there was some "learning the ropes." In June he made his "first mistake in Church procedure" by setting apart a new stake president incorrectly. "The First Presidency were most kind and assured me I was not alone in making such mistakes."

Ezra also learned that he didn't always have the answers. While presiding at a priesthood leadership meeting at a stake conference in Orem, Utah, he was asked some detailed questions about the welfare program. He didn't know all the answers, but bore his testimony that the Church was guided by revelation through a prophet, and that in due time all would see the wisdom of the welfare program. (It would be only a few months later that Elder Benson would understand in a personal way that the words he spoke were true.)

Ezra joined Mark at Scout camp, canned peas at Welfare Square with Elders Harold B. Lee and Spencer W. Kimball, and took the children to local canyons for picnics. Flora, despite her pregnancy, did her best to get the house in order and help the children adjust to Salt Lake City. Reed spent many evenings talking with his mother as she sprinkled clothing for ironing. She seemed to sense when he had things on his mind, and even when there was cause for motherly reprimand, she would conclude with, "I love you, Reed, and the only reason I've told you these things is to make you a little better man." None of the children doubted their mother's devotion to them, and they regularly showered her with letters, cards, and poems.

On August 12, 1944, Flora, after a difficult labor, bore her sixth and last child, Flora Beth Benson. Ezra was elated. He wrote in his journal, "Flora is recovering splendidly and the baby, the largest in the hospital, is perfect."

One of the choicest experiences for the young apostle was the Twelve's weekly meeting in the temple. In their room on the fourth floor, the apostles sat according to seniority in large chairs surrounding an upholstered altar. After dressing in temple clothes and forming a prayer circle around the altar, they changed into street clothes and conducted business. Elder Benson began to understand the intense affection that bonds members of the Twelve. It was a brotherhood he had never experienced previously, and soon these men became almost as dear to him as his own family.

Slight of build and with a slender face and goatee, the apostle who sat in the first chair, George Albert Smith, was, to Ezra, one of the kindest men on earth. Though the elderly president had been an apostle since Ezra was four years old, he welcomed Elder Benson as an equal and made him feel comfortable among the imposing group of men.

"It is a moving thing to go into the temple every Thursday, join with the Brethren there, and enjoy the prayers around the altar," Ezra said. "Often tears flowed as I sat there and contemplated the blessings which were mine." With each week his love for his Brethren increased. On one occasion he explained, "I don't think there's a body of men anywhere on the face of the earth who are as close to one another as the Twelve. We have differences of opinion, certainly, yet there's such a spirit of oneness and unity. It's impossible to describe."

Because Ezra had always traveled extensively, his frequent trips out of town were perhaps less an adjustment for him and Flora than for other families whose circumstances differed. Nevertheless, it was a balancing act—taking the girls for a swim in the Great Salt Lake one day, traveling out of town the next—and the constant coming and going was difficult, sometimes more so than others. The afternoon Ezra brought Flora and Beth home from the hospital, he left on a conference assignment in Idaho. Three weeks later, after giving Beth a name and blessing at church and enjoying Sunday dinner with the family, he left on his first extended trip as an apostle.

The tour of the East Central States Mission, combined with meetings of the American Institute of Cooperation (where he was elected vice-president and a member of the executive committee), took him to visit the Saints in twenty-eight cities in just twenty-six days. At a stake conference session in Wilmington, North Carolina, he suffered from the stifling heat and humidity. While speaking at the pulpit he removed his coat and invited the audience to do likewise. Fifty minutes later, his clothing was wet through. Nevertheless, he thrived on intimate association with the Saints, particularly those who made their living from the soil.

The trip took Ezra through Washington, D.C., and he stopped at their old Bethesda home. "I've surely missed you today, especially as I have viewed old scenes where we spent so many happy hours together," he wrote Flora. "I love you dearly and miss you greatly whenever we are separated. I love you even more since Flora Beth has come and am grateful for your willingness to have a family, no matter what the sacrifice might be." [^16]

Ezra wasn't oblivious to the strain his lengthy absences placed on Flora. A few days later he wrote her, "My being away places a double responsibility on you, dear, but I know the Lord has and will bless you. It is my constant prayer that you will be given strength sufficient to keep close to the children."

In the same letter Ezra told his wife about a surprising telegram he had just received; he was to deliver a talk on the "Church of the Air" broadcast during general conference. "I feel so weak and the time is so short . . . that it seems an almost impossible task." [^17]

These broadcasts were regular features at general conference. In his address, entitled "America, a Choice Land," Ezra outlined the spiritual foundations of America, praised the Constitution as an inspired document, and preached doctrines of repentance and freedom. Quoting a revered U.S. president, he pleaded, "Let us yield then to Lincoln's fervent appeal, 'to humble ourselves before the offended power, to confess our national sins, and to pray for clemency and forgiveness.' As a nation we have been kept as in the hollow of God's hand. But what of the future?" [^18]

Elder Benson's spiritual treatment of a secular topic provoked widespread praise. Many who did not belong to the Church requested copies of his talk. He was pleased with the response. Through subsequent months he continued, in keeping with George Albert Smith's counsel, to pursue agricultural and national interests as his time allowed. He spoke to dozens of Scout groups, attended meetings of the five-man Agricultural Postwar Committee in Chicago, and was retained as a director of the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives. When he was named as a candidate for president of Utah State Agricultural College, he kindly declined, citing the important work to which he had been called.

His assignments in the Twelve increased proportionate to his experience, and the pace intensified. There were missionaries to be set apart, marriages and sealings in the temple to perform, and hundreds of people to counsel in his office. He chaired a committee to issue stake conference assignments, advocated formation of an office of research and statistics, which he observed as being past due, and continued as executive secretary of the Melchizedek Priesthood committee.

Elder Benson also served on a committee to review Elder Joseph Fielding Smith's proposed priesthood course of study. When Elder Benson replied that he would be happy to approve anything "Brother Joseph Fielding writes," he was mildly reprimanded: "That will not satisfy Elder Smith. He insists on a review committee. Please read each lesson as he drafts it, then take it to him with any comments you have." Ezra agreed. [^19]

Elder Benson was determined, at first, never to turn down a request to speak, but that proved unrealistic. Nevertheless, he responded equally to invitations from small high schools or national associations. As he toured missions and attended stake conferences, he looked past the relentless administrative functions to meet the people. "My right hand ached from shaking hands with about 700 people," he reported after one stake conference.

His counsel was always practical. In Cedar City, Utah, he directed local leaders to build a recreational center for the youth rather than leaving their entertainment in the hands of others. In Great Falls, Montana, when leaders requested permission to spend $10,000 on an underground drainage system, he inspected the property and advised them to simply slope the surface grading away from the chapel. When he noticed, during a conference in a small Utah town, that the people were taking the Church for granted, he told them so and called them to repentance.

On May 8, 1945, Germany surrendered, and Elder Benson felt confident that fighting in the Pacific would soon end. Another milestone of major importance occurred the following week when, on May 14, 1945, President Heber J. Grant died. Ezra couldn't believe the President was gone. He had known that the prophet was weak, but the suddenness of his death shocked him. This was the man who had gently, kindly called him to the Twelve. Heber J. Grant had been president of the Church for twenty-six years. Many Saints remembered no other prophet.

Thousands filed past the casket in the Church Administration Building. After the doors closed to the public, the General Authorities, with George Albert Smith and George F. Richards, the senior apostles, leading them, filed in double columns past President Grant for a final look at their beloved leader. The Tabernacle was filled to overflowing for the funeral. Following the services, the Authorities rode through throngs of people to the cemetery. As the procession passed the Catholic Cathedral of the Madeleine, the bells tolled. Elder Benson found the display of affection "most fitting."

It now fell upon the Council of the Twelve to select, sustain, and ordain a new president of the Church. On Monday, May 21, three days after the funeral, Elder Benson went fasting with the other apostles to their council room in the Salt Lake Temple. David O. McKay and J. Reuben Clark, who had served in the First Presidency under President Grant, resumed their positions of seniority, third and ninth respectively, making fourteen apostles in all. Ezra sat in the thirteenth chair. During the meeting, George Albert Smith was ordained president, and he selected Elders Clark and McKay as first and second counselors, respectively. George F. Richards was sustained president of the Twelve.

Elder Benson was impressed with the orderly transition, which was conducted in an atmosphere of harmony. He had seen nothing like it in the secular world, where expediency and politics motivated too many individuals.

In May, Reed injured his foot, and, while hobbling on crutches, obtained a job herding turkeys at his Uncle Valdo's farm. As Ezra was preparing to drive him to Logan, Reed pulled out several books he had selected to read that summer and asked his father's counsel on them. Ezra told him to put all those aside and take only the Book of Mormon. The Book of Mormon was Elder Benson's first scriptural love. He read it on trains and planes and late in the evening before retiring, and consulted it frequently for answers to gospel questions. Wherever he went, he bore testimony of the book.

In June Elder Benson traveled to Alaska, the first visit to that territory by an apostle and a trip so noteworthy that even the Anchorage Daily Times, on June 30, 1945, announced his coming. In Juneau he called on the mayor and governor. In Fairbanks and Anchorage he held standing-room-only meetings in small makeshift chapels and even filled an Episcopal church, where the meeting was attended by the minister and many of his congregation.

As he had done in years previous, Elder Benson planned his itinerary when possible to take him through cities where family members lived. On a trip to San Francisco, he drove to nearby Santa Cruz for a visit with his brother Ben. After Reed entered BYU, Ezra often left early for conferences in the Provo area so he could spend time with his oldest son. When he traveled through Idaho, he stopped to see Margaret or Orval. With his parents gone, he felt responsible for keeping the family together.

On August 14, 1945, word reached Salt Lake City that Japan had surrendered unconditionally. The nightmarish war was over! Horns honked, people danced in the streets, bonfires erupted all over the city, flags flew. The celebration in Salt Lake City—as in the rest of the country—lasted most of the night. Elder Benson, too, was overjoyed. On September 4 he and his family attended a meeting held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle that was sponsored by all Salt Lake churches to give thanks for the cessation of hostilities.

Ezra loved general conference, though it was different when he had to worry about speaking. In the October 1945 conference he suffered "a long period of anxious anxiety" waiting to be called to the pulpit. It was not until the final session that his name was announced. "The fear and overwhelming responsibility of speaking in the Tabernacle and on the air, as six of the sessions were broadcast, almost overpower[ed] me," he wrote in his journal. The next day dozens of visitors seeking advice on spiritual and agricultural issues stopped by his office. In just a short time he had come to be recognized as a man who spoke with power and clarity and who wouldn't pull a punch. The Monday evening after conference, he and Flora entertained some twenty of the Brethren and their wives in a social at their home.

Ezra was mindful of Flora, and when he was home he tried to alleviate some burden by helping her as much as possible. With Reed at BYU, there were still five children at home, ranging in age from one to sixteen. Flora had never fully recovered from complications relative to Beth's birth, and when they purchased and moved to a home on Harvard Avenue, she had been called to the Yale Ward Relief Society presidency, which created more demands on her time.

Ezra took the children for picnics in nearby canyons and parks when possible, helped prepare meals at home, babysat when he could arrange it so she could attend meetings without the responsibility of young children, and helped the children with talks and school lessons. Admittedly, his assistance was sporadic. Flora attended the children's school programs, met with their teachers, and generally tried to provide the support of two. There was never enough time.

It all started to take a toll on Flora. In late November 1945 Ezra noted that she didn't seem at all well, though she resisted the idea of bringing help into the home. "I am away so much that it places an added burden on her, altho I try to help when I'm home as much as my heavy Church duties will permit," he noted.

And the burden was soon to intensify dramatically.

From this chapter on, Ezra Taft Benson's personal journal and the hundreds of addresses he delivered, as well as his personal correspondence files and newspaper and magazine articles about him, are critical to the text. Also important are Flora Benson's handwritten notes, undated, and the James B. Allen oral history interview, 1974.

Footnotes

"In 1946 I visited thirteen countries of Europe. I saw nations flat on their backs economically. I saw people who were near starvation. It is heartrending to see people who have lost their freedom."

---
Notas:
[^1] Howard C. Badger to Eleanor Badger, February 21, 1946.
[^2] Frederick W. Babbel, On Wings of Faith, pp. 20-21.
[^3] Ibid., p. 23.
[^4] Manuscript History of European Mission, pp. 5, 8.
[^5] On Wings of Faith, pp. 38-40.
[^6] ETB to First Presidency, March 21, 1946.
[^7] ETB to George Albert Smith, March 16, 1946. See also Richard O. Cowan, The Church in the Twentieth Century (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1985), p. 208.
[^8] On Wings of Faith, p. 69.
[^9] Ibid., p. 74.
[^10] Tessy Vojkuvka to FAB, July 17, 1946.
[^11] Eben R. T. Blomquist to FAB, September 14, 1946.
[^12] Manuscript History of European Mission, p. 26.
[^13] On Wings of Faith, p. 100.
[^14] See ETB to First Presidency, June 26, 1946.
[^15] Ezra Taft Benson, "Ministering to Needs Through the Lord's Storehouse System," Ensign, May 1977, pp. 82-84.
[^16] On Wings of Faith, p. 116.
[^17] Ibid., p. 132.
[^18] Harold B. Lee to ETB, August 20, 1946.
[^19] ETB to J. Willard Marriott, October 29, 1946.
