Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 12

Mission of Mercy

All of Salt Lake City was in a holiday spirit. For the first time in four years people looked forward to Christmas without the pall of war clouding the season a dismal gray.

Three days before Christmas 1945, President George Albert Smith convened a special meeting of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve. With World War II over, it was necessary to reestablish contact with the Saints in Europe and distribute much-needed welfare supplies, he said, and the First Presidency had determined that a member of the Twelve should go to Europe for an undetermined length of time to supervise this delicate assignment. As the Brethren listened, each wondered who would receive the appointment. Elder Harold B. Lee later said that as he scanned the room, the first man he eliminated was his boyhood friend, "T" Benson. "He had the largest and youngest family," Elder Lee said. "I felt he would not be selected."

No sooner had Elder Lee reached this conclusion than President Smith announced that after careful and prayerful consideration, Ezra Taft Benson had been chosen to preside over the European Mission. Elder Lee was not the only apostle taken by surprise. To Ezra the announcement came as a shock. There was little time to indulge that emotion, however. He was to travel promptly to Washington, D.C., to obtain necessary passports and visas. Civilians had not yet been admitted into the areas occupied by the Allies in Europe, and red tape hampered all travel on the European continent.

There were advantages in calling Elder Benson to this assignment. He was young and vigorous, had strong administrative skills, and was experienced in dealing with government agencies. He knew how to cut through red tape.

That evening Ezra broke the news to Flora. "In a sweet and impressive talk, sanctified by tears," he wrote in his journal, "Flora expressed loving gratitude and assured me of her wholehearted support."

The following weeks went by quickly. The Bensons enjoyed what Ezra felt was their happiest Christmas ever, and the first of January he traveled to Washington, D.C. He had been warned it would take three months to make the complicated arrangements (it was taking that long just to book overseas transportation), but after three days he returned to Salt Lake City with the necessary arrangements completed for himself and the young man who would accompany him as his secretary, Frederick W. Babbel.

When the Benson family filed into sacrament meeting in the Yale Ward the Sunday evening before Ezra's departure, they were surprised to find the chapel filled to overflowing. A smiling President George Albert Smith was seated on the stand. The meeting was a farewell testimonial for Elder Benson, and afterwards all the family except the baby, Beth, stood in the foyer while the congregation filed by to shake hands.

On Monday, January 28, 1946, President Smith set Ezra apart as president of the European Mission, blessing him with safety, energy, and the ability to break down prejudice. He promised: "There is not anything desirable that you will not be able to do with the aid and the help of the Lord . . . if you do your full part." In a letter from the First Presidency, Ezra was further told that his influence would be felt for good by all, and people would sense there was "a power and spirit accompanying you not of man."

Flora witnessed the blessing, and President J. Reuben Clark, recognizing her sacrifice, praised her when he said, "There is none better than you." That night Ezra wrote, "How true he spoke, for truly in all my acquaintances I have never met a more completely devoted woman with greater faith in the purposes of the Almighty."

The evening of January 29, Elder Benson gathered his family around him one final time for prayer. As he kissed and said good-bye to the five younger children, each cried and clung to him. He also called Reed at BYU and talked until they both choked up. "Leaving my children in tears pulled at my heartstrings," Ezra wrote, "but there was not a murmur." As he and Flora were preparing to leave for the airport, President Smith stopped for a final farewell. Tears streamed the length of the prophet's long, slender face as he embraced and kissed his young associate.

At the airport Elder Benson found Elders Harold B. Lee, Mark E. Petersen, Spencer W. Kimball, and Matthew Cowley waiting to give a fitting send-off. It was snowing heavily, and the gloomy night seemed an ominous beginning for what everyone sensed would prove a demanding, perhaps even dangerous, mission. Emotions ran high.

Flora Benson had learned to live with a man who was often away from home. But this time, Ezra would not return in a few days. In fact, no one knew how long he would be away.

As other passengers boarded the United Airlines flight, Ezra stayed behind with Flora, his arm around her protectively. Finally there was no more time. He embraced his Brethren one by one, then turned to Flora. Tears filled their eyes as they held each other for a final moment. Then he was gone.

"It was most difficult to tell my sweet and ever loyal wife good-bye," he wrote in his journal. "I'll never forget looking down as that plane took off and seeing my Brethren standing there in a circle, with my wife. . . . I quietly shed tears as we soared eastward."

Though Ezra and Flora had talked for hours during the preceding weeks, planning and reassuring each other, neither had belabored the probable danger he would encounter in Europe. As he contemplated what 1946 might bring, Ezra recorded, "I go with no fear whatsoever knowing that this is the Lord's work and that He will sustain me." As for Flora, an unusual calm overcame her. "It was a peaceful feeling which came over me when I fondly kissed and said good-bye to my devoted and loving husband." As difficult as their parting was, Flora felt strongly about her husband's assignment in Europe. In her journal she wrote of his "exceeding great call."

But things didn't begin smoothly. If the first leg of Elder Benson's trip, from Salt Lake City to New York, was any indication, this mission promised to be a test of faith and endurance. A blizzard grounded their plane in North Platte, Nebraska. Weathermen forecasted unchanging conditions for two days—an impossible delay if Ezra and Fred Babbel were to make their transatlantic connections. Ezra suggested that they pray for direction. Several long-distance phone calls later, he had secured two seats on a train to Chicago. There, though the storm had caused a three-day halt in air traffic, the sky cleared briefly and they boarded the only plane that departed that day. Elder Babbel would come to understand why some would say of Elder Benson that, with God's help, he accomplished the difficult immediately. The impossible took a little longer.

The storm in Salt Lake City raged on also, and Flora was confronted with chores her husband often performed, such as clearing the driveway of snow. The morning after he left she had a flat tire. "I am beginning to realize that our daddy's absence will be greatly missed in so many ways," she wrote.

The separation tugged at Ezra as well. From New York, he called Flora one more time. "It was so good to hear her sweet voice and feel of her undeviating spirit of faith and encouragement," he noted. "How I miss her and my sweet children. The separation pulls heavy on the heartstrings."

The morning of February 3, Elder Benson and Fred Babbel departed New York City. With transatlantic air travel in its infancy, passengers and flight crew shared the same cabin. Two motors were running rough, and the pilot landed in Newfoundland to check and replace sparkplugs before starting across the Atlantic. "The ride was rough in spots," Ezra recorded, "and caused a bit of anxiety, especially as the captain would turn his light on the motors occasionally as tho all was not right."

But a few moments of anxiety were nothing compared to what the apostle found in Europe. Even in London, where he and Fred Babbel were met by President Hugh B. Brown of the British Mission, and where life had regained a measure of normalcy, Ezra felt he had been transferred to another world.

The first evening President Brown briefed him about conditions in England. The Saints there had weathered the strain of war, and many had remained loyal, though the English people generally were downcast and apprehensive. Food and clothing were being strictly rationed. Ezra would find that everything was in short supply, including patience.

The next few days were hectic. Ezra was anxious to get to the Continent, but he couldn't leave London until he had set up an office. There was an acute housing shortage, and rents were exorbitant; yet the European Mission office needed to be in a respectable district and, for efficiency's sake, preferably near agencies he would deal with frequently. Despite a warning that he would probably not find housing for months, the first day out he rented a ground floor flat at 6 Horseshoe Yard, just a block from the American Embassy.

His next step was to call on government officials, including agricultural attaches, the European news manager of the United Press, and embassy officials, who would help him procure a food ration book and priorities for air travel to Paris. Supper one of the first nights consisted of food allowed by the ration book—bread, butter, cheese, jam, milk, and one-third of a candy bar.

On the morning of February 11, Elder Benson flew to Paris. It was the beginning of travel that would take him, during his first 150 days in Europe, to 102 cities in 13 countries, some of them in the occupied areas of Germany. Complicating what would have been a staggering schedule even under favorable conditions were the facts that highways throughout Europe that had been bombed and strafed with gunfire were nearly impassable, bridges had been demolished, telephone and telegraph facilities were restricted, food was scarce, and all priority space on trains and planes was reserved for military personnel. The challenge of traveling throughout Europe appeared to be a strategical nightmare.

In Paris Elder Benson was met at the airport by a group of Latter-day Saint servicemen, who were elated to greet a General Authority for the first time in several years. An LDS chaplain, Howard C. Badger, secured permission to escort him on his initial tour of the European missions.

In the meantime, Fred Babbel was making travel arrangements in London for their first trip to Scandinavia. He was then to meet Elder Benson at The Hague in the Netherlands. When he arrived in The Hague, he found a telegram waiting with details on Elder Benson's incoming train. Babbel hurried to the station, but the stationmaster insisted the train in question was a local shuttle service, and any passenger arriving from France would come into another station a mile away, where a train from Paris was due. Babbel hurried there, but Elder Benson was not aboard that train. Back and forth he went between the stations, looking for Elder Benson.

Finally he called the Hotel des Indes and learned that Elder Benson had arrived. "How did you get here?" Babbel asked, amazed. "On the train about which I wired you," Ezra replied. "But the stationmaster insisted no passengers from Paris could possibly be aboard that train." "Yes, I know," Elder Benson answered, "they told me that in Paris."

In Paris, Ezra had learned that he and Chaplain Badger would be delayed a full day getting to the Netherlands. Just then he noticed a train preparing to leave for Antwerp, Belgium. The stationmaster warned him against taking the train, as all connections between Antwerp and the Netherlands were cut off. But Ezra felt otherwise, and he and Chaplain Badger boarded the dilapidated train with cardboard windows and wooden slats for seats.

In Antwerp an angry stationmaster insisted the two Americans must backtrack. Again Ezra spotted a train preparing to leave. This one was to stop at the Dutch border, where the Maas River Bridge had been demolished. Again Ezra felt prompted to take it, and over the stationmaster's protests he and Chaplain Badger boarded. As warned, at the Maas River all passengers were forced to pile out, but before long an American Army vehicle approached, and the driver was persuaded to take them to a small village just inside the Dutch border. There they found the local shuttle train leaving for The Hague.

Fred Babbel was amazed at the events, though he would learn to take such developments in stride. During coming months he would see Elder Benson's faith and determination at work countless times.

In the Netherlands, Elder Benson got his first close-up of war's aftermath. The Dutch people had survived terrible conditions during five years of German domination. Entire blocks of homes and offices were rubble. Bridges and wharfs had been bombed. The Germans had confiscated almost everything the Dutch people owned that could be used for the war effort. To escape capture by the Nazis, many young men had lived on the Underground. In a meeting with the Netherlands Mission presidency, Ezra learned that some of the Saints had even placed their lives in jeopardy in order to continue Church activities and save Church properties from being confiscated. The chapel in Rotterdam, however, had been destroyed, and the former mission office in The Hague seriously damaged.

In the meantime, Fred Babbel learned that their flight reservations for Denmark had been cancelled and they couldn't expect passage for at least ten days. Ezra insisted they must leave immediately, and he retired to pray about it. The next morning he contacted officials of the Dutch Military Airlines, the only airline with planes to Copenhagen, who insisted there were no seats available on any outbound flight. "You Americans seem to forget that we've had a terrible war over here," he was told. Ezra headed for the American Embassy, where his credentials gained him immediate audience with the ambassador. He explained that a plane was leaving at noon for Copenhagen and it was urgent they be aboard. The ambassador called airline officials, who finally relinquished two seats, but insisted that they could not provide a third. Undaunted, Ezra hurried back to the airport. Again airline officials insisted only two seats were available, but Ezra smiled and said firmly, "But we must all go." A strange look came over the official in charge, who said, "Well, then, you'd better hurry!" All three hurried to the waiting plane and climbed into bucket seats.

The welcome for the apostle in Copenhagen was enthusiastic. The people of Denmark had survived the war perhaps better than those of any other European nation. The Danish Saints had even sent welfare packages to distressed Latter-day Saints in Holland and Norway. Membership had steadily increased, and tithing receipts in the Danish Mission had more than doubled. Ezra was astounded at the faithfulness under the conditions. The Danish Saints considered their circumstances a direct fulfillment of a prophecy that Elder Joseph Fielding Smith had made at the outbreak of the war—that because Denmark had allowed missionaries being evacuated from Germany and Czechoslovakia to enter, its people would not suffer for lack of food during the war.

Members and nonmembers alike came to hear the apostle speak. As he entered the chapel that Sunday, the entire congregation stood while the mission Relief Society president gave him a bouquet of red tulips and white lilacs. Elder Benson was overcome with emotion at the thought of a people ravaged by war presenting him with a gift, and in his journal he wrote, "I shall always have sweet memories of this day with the Saints in Copenhagen. Never have I witnessed greater devotion to the Work and deeper love for the leaders of the Church."

From Denmark, Ezra and his companions boarded a train for Stockholm. With the temperature onboard near zero, the ride was extremely uncomfortable. They were met at the Stockholm railway station by Eben R. T. Blomquist, president of the Swedish Mission, and Einar Johannson, president of the Stockholm Branch. The Saints in Sweden had also survived the war in respectable fashion. Tithing had increased by 300 percent, and they had maintained nearly twenty full-time local missionaries throughout the war. Convert baptisms had also increased. Food and clothing were plentiful, though fuel was in critical supply. The day before Elder Benson's arrival, the people had been permitted to bathe in heated water for the first time in several years.

Though he was in Sweden less than forty-eight hours, Elder Benson held three press conferences, visited with the U. S. Minister and the agricultural and military attaches, presided at a public meeting, and held a missionary conference. Elder Fritz Johannson's opening remarks touched President Benson deeply, and when he rose to speak, he felt impressed to issue an unexpected call: "As a servant of the Lord I call upon you, Brother Fritz Johannson, to go to Finland as a missionary to open the way for the preaching of the gospel." Only one small branch existed in Finland, and President Benson felt that many in that country were ready to accept the truth. Elder Johannson accepted the call and departed soon thereafter.

Returning to the train station, Ezra found a large contingent of Saints waiting. They formed a large semicircle and sang, in English, "Farewell to Thee," waving handkerchiefs until the train was out of sight. Ezra's brief stay in Sweden touched him deeply, and he wrote that night, "Never have I become more attached to any people in so short a time."

Next stop, Norway. The Norwegians had endured severe restrictions imposed by the Germans. Elder Benson did what he could to uplift their spirits. His impact on the Saints was immeasurable. Chaplain Badger wrote his wife, Eleanor, "Have seen lots of tears of joy shed this last week by members of the Church in being privileged to meet with Elder Benson, after they had been separated from Church Headquarters . . . for so long. Elder Benson has untiring enthusiasm in the work." [^1]

During his first month with Elder Benson, Fred Babbel observed the apostle's ability to confer comfortably with heads of state and Church members alike. He concluded that he had "never met a man of God who was so humble . . . a man who has such an all-consuming love for the children of our Father. Since our arrival he has been able to do more in less time, and that more thoroughly and effectively, than I had ever dreamed to be possible." [^2]

Even several decades later, the European Saints who had been present when Elder Benson visited them could remember vividly the dramatic effect his visit had upon them. Many of them felt that he was an emissary of the Savior.

The three Americans returned to Copenhagen in an unheated plane with metal flooring and sides, and as it reached seven thousand feet, the temperature inside plummeted to 20 degrees below zero. "Our ride from Oslo to Copenhagen" Ezra noted, "was the coldest I ever expect to make. . . . Some of the men took their shoes off and rubbed their feet to keep the blood circulating. I kept my feet moving constantly for two hours and fared fairly well."

Their return flight to London wasn't much better. Fred Babbel recorded, "When we finally landed . . . we were a sad-looking lot. At each step our knees would buckle under us. Each foot felt like a large block of ice, and there was virtually no feeling in our legs. Never had I experienced such difficulty in walking. By bathing our legs in cold water . . . we were gradually able to restore some feeling in our limbs." [^3]

The European Mission history summarized their initial tour of northern Europe: "During the past two or three weeks we have ridden in unheated trains, trucks and airplanes . . . but in every instance we were greeted upon arrival with such love and warmth of spirit that any hardships encountered in our travels were soon forgotten. Probably the gospel has never been so fully appreciated by the Saints in Europe as during the recent war period. Already we have come to love them deeply." [^4]

Back in London an armload of mail, including Valentines from Flora and the children, captured Ezra's attention. Tears filled his eyes as he thought of home. But there was much to be done in preparation for traveling into the occupied areas of Germany. Just five days later, after working through mounds of red tape, the trio left for France.

Ezra was appalled by what he saw as he arrived in Dieppe, France. "We saw on every side the ravages of war—bridges, highways, cathedrals, homes laid waste," he wrote in his journal. "We could see countless islands of black and holes in the green pastures where bombs had missed their railway target. Rebuilding has started but years will be required to do so." He was told that the destruction in France was mild compared to what he would find in Germany, but it was difficult to imagine anything worse.

Elder Benson's primary objective in Paris was to gain access to the occupied areas of Germany, but when he requested permission from the U.S. colonel in charge of communications with Germany to enter those areas, the officer blurted incredulously, "Mr. Benson, are you crazy? Don't you realize there has been a war here? No civilian travelers have entered these areas. All travel is restricted for the military."

Nevertheless, Elder Benson quietly asked if he could have permission for travel if he arranged for his own car. Cars were impossible to purchase in America, let alone Europe, the colonel retorted. Ezra countered, "If I could arrange transportation and military permission, do you think we might make it?" Annoyed but amazed, the colonel agreed. In a matter of days Ezra had purchased two of the first Citroen autos off the production line and arranged for everything else the colonel required—as well as leased a commodious home to serve as French Mission headquarters.

In the small but new auto, Elder Benson, with Chaplain Badger and Fred Babbel, drove to Basel, Switzerland, and from there, with Max Zimmer, president of the Swiss Mission, set out for Karlsruhe, Germany.

As they crossed the German border, the men found sickening scenes, like a vivid horror movie. Freiburg lay in blackened, twisted ruins, with haunted-looking people shuffling along its streets. Children fled in terror as their car approached.

In Karlsruhe, which was reduced to rubble, Elder Benson finally managed to park next to heaps of twisted steel and concrete. He climbed over the debris and hurried in the direction of faint strains of "Come, Come, Ye Saints." The Saints knew that he might arrive in time for their meeting, and inside a badly scarred building he found three hundred people. Most were dressed in rags; some were emaciated and in the advanced stages of starvation; and all were visibly shivering from the cold, as they had waited for hours for Elder Benson. "As we walked into the meeting," Ezra wrote in his journal, "every eye turned to us. I shall never forget the look in their faces as they beheld for the first time in [seven] years a representative of the General Authorities. It was not me, but the fact that a representative from Headquarters had arrived."

Elder Benson was so deeply moved that he found it difficult to speak, but he managed to preach a sermon of hope, love, and endurance, promising that supplies were coming soon. And he bore testimony: "As I look into your tear-stained eyes and see many of you virtually in rags and at death's door, yet with a smile upon your cracked lips and the light of love and understanding shining in your eyes, I know that you have been true to your covenants. . . . You—many of you—are some of the Lord's choicest witnesses of the fruits of the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . . God is at the helm. He is leading us. He will not permit His Church and kingdom to fail." Elder Benson shook hands with everyone—some of the Saints getting in line two and three times. [^5]

As he did throughout Europe, Elder Benson pronounced many blessings—on women whose husbands were missing, on children, on many who were on the verge of starvation. In many cases he was the first priesthood holder the Saints had seen in a long time, and he ministered to their spiritual as well as temporal needs. Through it all he heard no bitterness, though the Karlsruhe Saints had lost almost everything. Instead, they insisted that the Saints in Berlin were worse off. After a tearful good-bye, Elder Benson and his party returned to Switzerland. They were silent as they drove. In a letter to the First Presidency Elder Benson admitted, "The job of taking care of our Saints even as to their most meager needs is overwhelming, and as we contemplate their rehabilitation it becomes staggering." But, he added, "The Lord is blessing our efforts, and I am sure he will continue to do so if we do our best." [^6]

Back in Basel, everyone went to work. An agreement was reached with the International Red Cross to supervise the movement of Church welfare supplies into the occupied areas. On March 14, Elder Benson cabled the First Presidency to rush the first shipments through the port of Antwerp. [^7]

On March 15 the foursome—Elder Benson, Max Zimmer, Chaplain Badger, and Brother Babbel—left for Frankfurt. This time their small car was loaded with as much food as they could carry. Though Frankfurt had not been listed among Europe's worst-bombed cities, they were shocked at what they found. The city was in sickening shambles.

Permission to proceed further into the occupied zones had to be obtained. In Frankfurt, Elder Benson drove to headquarters of the United States Forces, European Theatre, to seek audience with Joseph T. McNarney, the four-star general in charge of American forces in Europe. When an aide rudely denied Ezra's request to see General McNarney, by saying it would take at least three days to arrange such an appointment, Elder Benson went back to the car and suggested that they pray for guidance. Moments later, he returned to the general's office, where a different aide received his request. Within fifteen minutes he was ushered in.

It was evident, however, that General McNarney was annoyed at being disturbed. And when he heard of Elder Benson's proposed itinerary throughout Germany, Austria, and Czechoslovakia, he looked incredulous. But as his visitor continued to speak with conviction and feeling, the general softened visibly. Finally he said, "Mr. Benson, there's something about you that I like. I want to help you in every way I can." When Ezra explained that the Church had storehouses bulging with foodstuffs and clothing that could be shipped within twenty-four hours, the general was amazed. "Mr. Benson, I have never heard of a church with such vision," he responded, agreeing to authorize the Church to distribute supplies through its own channels. He cautioned Ezra that he and his companions would be the first American civilians to travel to Berlin by car, and that the military could not be responsible for their safe passage. But he also approved the Church's bringing two mission presidents into Germany, pending approval of the United States State Department and Joint Chiefs of Staff.

On March 19 Elder Benson proceeded further into the occupied areas, stopping in Hannover. "People walking about in the ruins," he recorded, "seem almost as tho they were from another world. My heart grows heavy and my eyes fill with tears as I picture in my mind's eyes these scenes of horror and destruction." With only two hours' notice he held a meeting with the Saints in a partially bombed schoolhouse. "The spirit of the meeting was marvelous to feel and behold. How I longed for power to lift these good people from their heart rending state," he wrote. That night he slept on a straw tick covered by a smelly blanket. In some of these meetings the Saints could find nothing but potato peelings to use for the sacrament.

Then it was on to Berlin. What he found there was indescribable. Miles of the city lay in utter waste. "Drove through once beautiful Berlin," he wrote the first night. "The wreckage . . . cannot possibly be understood unless seen. My soul rebels as I attempt to describe it. Truly war is hell in all its fury."

Months later, after witnessing dozens of similar scenarios, he wrote to Flora, "I'm so grateful you and the children can be spared the views of the terrible ravages of war. I fear I'll never be able to erase them from my memory."

In three days of meetings with military officials in Berlin, Elder Benson secured permission to resume the Church program there. Over seventeen hundred Latter-day Saints in Berlin were unaccounted for, and he marveled that anyone had escaped war's wrath at the epicenter. His journal observations are descriptive: "I witnessed scenes that seemed almost outside this world. . . . I saw the pomp and beauty of once proud Berlin at one time heralded by God-less leaders as the product of the 'master race' that would throw the principles of Christianity out the window and conquer the world by force, now a mass of sad wreckage. . . . I smelled the odor of decaying, human bodies. . . . I saw old men and women with small hatchets eagerly digging at tree stumps and roots in an effort to get scraps of fuel and then pulling them home for miles on anything that would roll. . . . Later I faced in a cold half wrecked 3rd floor auditorium off a bombed street 480 cold half-starved but faithful Latter-day Saints. . . . It was an inspiration to see the light of faith. I heard their harrowing experiences including murder, rape and starvation of their loved ones. Yet there was no bitterness or anger but a sweet . . . expression of faith in the gospel."

Next stop, Nuremberg, where the Nazi war trials were in process. The scenes of devastation persisted, and the group's travel was seriously retarded as they dodged shell craters in roads, made tiresome detours around bombed bridges, and routinely spent over a dozen hours a day in a cramped car plagued with flat tires. They stopped only to meet with Saints wherever they could find them and to negotiate with officials.

Often their only food was the K-rations they carried in the trunk; more than once they made breakfast, lunch, and dinner of the Army cuisine, which made up in nourishment what it lacked in flavor. They rose early and worked late, seldom getting more than five hours' rest a night, and were usually so tired by day's end that a flimsy cot or the floor sufficed for sleep. In a letter to his wife, Fred Babbel wrote, "All in all we are having it really rough . . . to see members of our Church in the last stages of starvation, eyes bulging out, legs and ankles swelling, and becoming so listless that it is a major effort to speak. . . . The pace we are keeping is terrific. . . . When one sees all the starving and suffering . . . he is driven to work day and night." [^8]

The element of danger, though ever-present, seemed to concern Elder Benson only occasionally. Despite warnings that caused him anxiety, he and his associates traveled into Czechoslovakia, where Russian guards stopped them repeatedly but each time allowed them to proceed.

Once his plane plowed through a thunderhead and was struck by a large bolt of lightning. A fireball about the size of a basketball bounced between the metal sides of the plane as it lost control, hurtling toward the ground. But the pilot brought it under control just in time to avoid the treetops.

Some things were even more frightening. Dachau, where the Americans saw the crematorium where 238,000 Jews were exterminated, was one of them. "The scenes and statistics given made us shudder to realize how far men will go in evil and sin when they discard the eternal truths of the gospel," Ezra wrote in his journal.

Flora wrote her husband frequently, often several times a week, and her letters were encouraging and optimistic. She also sent packages filled with everything from gum and hard candy to needles and thread.

Because he was seldom in one place very long, Ezra's mail was often delayed several weeks. One day he stopped at the mission home in Basel after a lengthy trip through Germany and found a large pouch of mail waiting. One of Flora's letters struck instant fear in the apostle. Their daughter Beth was critically ill with pneumonia. The letter had been written two weeks earlier.

He remembered, "I was scheduled within two hours to be the main speaker at the beautiful new chapel in Basel. Hundreds of people from many parts of Switzerland would be there to learn about our visit [to Germany, Austria and Czechoslovakia] just completed. I was torn with such anxiety that I felt unable to participate unless I could be assured of my child's welfare. Yet to get word at this late hour was a practical impossibility. Previous phone calls to the United States had required one to two days to complete. . . . Faced with such a problem I realized I must seek my guidance and assurance through my Heavenly Father. As I prayed at my bedside in the quiet of my room, I received the overwhelming impression to place a phone call without delay. Much to my joy, and somewhat to my astonishment, the call was completed in less than ten minutes. My wife's voice was as clear as though she were in the room at my side. What a sense of gratitude and relief I felt to learn that the crisis had just passed! Our beloved baby daughter would live." [^9]

At home, Flora had had her hands full. For days and nights she had given the baby sulfa and administered mustard plasters every other hour. With little sleep, the ordeal had taken its toll on her. President George Albert Smith had administered to the baby, and when President J. Reuben Clark called Flora's bishop to ask what compassionate service the Relief Society might render, he learned that Flora was a member of the presidency. "How much do you think one woman can take?" President Clark asked. "Release her. She's carrying a burden twice that of most women."

The greatest burden was the long separation from her husband. Never had Flora been separated from Ezra for such a long time and without means of adequate communication. Calls to Europe were expensive and connections usually poor. Her great source of sustenance was in writing to him, and often she wrote late into the night. Her letters were those of a woman deeply in love with her husband and devoted to helping him in his difficult assignment. And they were the writings of a woman with faith.

"I have been given an abundance of added strength during Beth's sickness from our Father in Heaven," she wrote. "I have felt His Spirit so close to me at times in protecting, directing, guiding and comforting me that I have marveled at it."

Ezra's letters home were an elixir to her. "T dear, you and your letters mean everything to me," she wrote him. "I couldn't carry on without them. Life to me is so worthwhile having you as my husband." After receiving two letters the same day, she wrote back, "I've just been walking on air today since I received them. I have read [and] reread them—just can't get my work done [and] I don't seem to care."

Constantly she reassured her husband that all was well at home. "May you have a peace of mind always, T, and know that things are going well with us. Don't worry about us," she told him.

And she left no doubt about the source of her confidence and strength. "Honey dear, if we do our part, the Lord never fails us."

And yet there were lonely, difficult times at the home on Harvard Avenue, times when one of the children would find her crying silently as she ironed at night. Elder Levi Edgar Young of the First Council of the Seventy once told Flora that "the wife and mother who stays home and watches over the career of her little children is the bravest character in the world."

Some of Flora's everyday activities demanded a quiet kind of bravery—providing comfort to the children, though she herself at times was in need of comfort; juggling finances and sending Ezra money as she could; carrying the load of teaching and disciplining the children; rallying the family, trying to be both father and mother. Beverly, then eight, wrote her father, "I miss you very much but I know you were told to go to London. We are doing a play in school and inviting our Mother's and Daddy's. I wish my Daddy could see the play in school."

One of Barbara's friends asked if her father would be home for Christmas. When she replied she didn't know, the friend advised, "Tell your daddy to work day and night so he can come home sooner."

Ezra was working nearly day and night, and the results were showing. When general conference convened in April 1946, frequent mention was made of his activities in Europe.

Following the concluding session, Flora wrote him, "Yesterday was the happiest day I've experienced since you left, because we heard so many good things about you the whole day. . . . Were we excited and thrilled when Pres. Smith announced that Brother Badger had just arrived that morning at 3 o clock [and] that he had been with you just three days ago."

Chaplain Badger visited with Flora, and afterwards she wrote her husband that the officer had told her Ezra was "working too hard—both day [and] night. He said when you get a big job accomplished you never stop for rest—but continue on with greater determination. He couldn't say finer [and] grander things of a man. I told him it wasn't new, how grand you were, to me."

And others from the Continent sent word to Flora. Tessy Vojkuvka from Czechoslovakia wrote her: "We must thank you in our broken English for the sacrifice you make in giving your husband . . . to us foreign people in Europe. . . . Br. Benson brought to us so much happiness, he encouraged us so, that we have now new strength again to work for our Heavenly Father." [^10]

Eben R. T. Blomquist, president of the Swedish Mission, wrote: "No matter where [your husband] has gone, as he has watched the little children, he has picked them up, he has talked to them, he has shown them pictures of his own family; and where these dear ones would remind him of his own at home, I could see the smile on his face and also the longing to be with his own again. . . . I doubt there could be anyone who could endear himself so much in the hearts of all the people in Europe as your husband has done." [^11]

After April conference, Flora told Ezra that President Smith worried that he was working too hard. How hard was too hard, Ezra wondered, when the Saints were suffering—physically and spiritually? It drove him to work nearly around the clock.

There were so many kinds of problems to handle. In one area so many false practices had slipped into local Church units during their years of isolation from headquarters that Ezra lamented that if the war had persisted much longer, there would have been "crowns and crosses" on every pulpit. [^12] In remote areas of Scandinavia and Germany, the sacrament hadn't been administered for over a year due to lack of priesthood authority. Throughout the Continent there were mission homes and land to purchase, chapels to rebuild, construction materials to procure from somewhere. National welfare organizations in Norway demanded that the Church distribute some of its supplies to the people at large through their networks, though there was evidence of improprieties in their manner of distribution. It took lengthy conferences, but Elder Benson changed their minds.

There was a struggle with bureaucratic red tape in nearly every country. Some governments allowed the missionaries to reenter; others would not. With the food shortages in Great Britain, visas were limited to a few weeks, virtually halting the missionary program until Elder Benson persuaded officials to grant more visas. In large part, his mission was a constant challenge of diplomacy.

The food shortage was a prime topic all over Europe, and at the urging of the First Presidency, Ezra accepted an invitation to represent the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives at the International Conference of Agriculture Producers in London in late May. Many delegates from European nations subsequently invited him to contact them further when he visited their countries. In September, by special invitation, he joined the American delegation to the Conference of Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations in Copenhagen. From there he wrote Flora, "I am mixing in a good bit of church work. . . . I spoke to the [American delegation] re my observations in Europe. We were together for 4 hours . . . spent discussing spiritual and moral problems and our church."

Ezra was strong. Those traveling with him struggled to keep pace. After several months in Europe, Fred Babbel was down to 130 pounds. But at times, the privations of the Saints were almost too much for even Ezra to bear. He missed the weekly temple meetings with his brethren, and as the weight of his errand wore on him, he frequently suffered from insomnia. "From my observation," wrote Fred Babbel, "he not only talked matters over with the Lord, but the Lord was not unmindful of him and was pleased to reveal to him things beyond the normal comprehension of man. After each such experience he appeared to gain new strength." [^13]

Letters and packages from Flora and occasional phone calls home also sustained him. Flora counseled him, inspired him, and gave him increased confidence in himself. As time passed, though separated, their love deepened with the sweet affection born of absence. Both were of strong spirit and mind, but Ezra's continued absence was never easy for Flora. One of Barbara's letters revealed that sometimes her "mother was pretty sad," but we "all try to cheer her up the best we can."

Usually, though, Flora cheered herself on. When loneliness closed in, she wrote to Ezra. And he responded in kind. "Darling girl, I love you with all my heart and ever miss you and doing for you. Sometimes I wonder what people do who are separated from their wives and not engaged in the work of the Lord." In another letter he acknowledged her effect on him: "I could never have accomplished what I have with anyone else. We've done it together. . . . To you who [have] remained in the background goes most of the credit for anything we accomplished. Your love and constant devotion mean more to me than life itself."

Many times Flora's support was manifest in very practical ways. In Hamburg Elder Benson found five hundred Saints thin, weak, and hungry. Near the conclusion of one meeting he asked the children under eight to line up in the middle aisle. As they walked past, he distributed gum, candy, and fruit from Flora's packages, breaking pieces in two to make it go around. "These sweet, eager, but polite little ones almost broke my heart as they looked up with their large eyes and pale faces," he wrote to Flora. "Then I had all mothers with babies come up and I distributed a bar of soap to each and a few safety pins, needles and thread. . . . Flora dear, you'll never know how much those few little things mean." In his journal that night he wrote, "Surely when the Lord chooses the most faithful these His suffering children will be among those most blessed."

On another occasion, as Elder Benson and his associates drove toward Kiel, Germany, they saw dozens of people combing the ditch banks. He described the scene in a letter home: "Some take ordinary grass and weeds and cut it up to mix with a little chicken feed and water which is their meal. I noticed between meetings some would take out of their pocket a little cup partly filled with chicken feed or cereal and water which they would eat cold. . . . I didn't intend to write all this sad picture. I have tried to spare you at home most of the heart-rending scenes in Europe today. But somehow I just couldn't hold it this morning. It's terrible to contemplate. I know the Lord permits the righteous to suffer as he pours out His judgments on the wicked."

On June 21, 1946, the first shipments of welfare supplies for the Saints in Germany and Austria arrived in Geneva. With the needs so acute, every precaution was taken to insure maximum security and efficiency in distribution. Ezra insisted that there be no concentration of large quantities of food or supplies in the occupied areas. An ongoing stock of supplies was to be maintained in Geneva. And he closely monitored products being shipped, adjusting quantities of foods, types and sizes of clothing, and so forth. [^14]

When the first shipment of welfare supplies arrived in Berlin, Elder Benson took acting mission president Richard Ranglack to the battered warehouse that, under armed guard, housed the precious goods stacked nearly to the ceiling. "Do you mean to tell me those boxes are full of food?" President Ranglack asked. "Yes," Ezra replied, "food, clothing, bedding, and a few medical supplies." To prove his point, he pulled down a box of dried beans. As Ranglack ran his fingers through the contents, he broke down and cried. Ezra opened another box, this one filled with cracked wheat. Ranglack touched a pinch of it to his mouth. When he could finally speak, he said, "Brother Benson, it is hard for me to believe that people who have never seen us could do so much for us." [^15]

On Monday evening, June 24, Elder Benson witnessed the most poignant scene to date when he stopped in Langen (near Frankfurt) to meet with ninety Latter-day Saint refugees who had fled Poland and East Germany. His heart went out to them, living as they were in the most unfavorable conditions imaginable—four families in a thin-walled one-room frame structure with a leaking roof. There were no sanitary facilities or water nearby. A small stove in the middle of the rough floor provided the only heat, and everyone slept on the floor.

Technically the refugees were in Langen illegally, but they had already planted gardens and shown a desire to help themselves. Elder Benson received permission for them to stay, and he tried to better their condition. He recorded his plans to help: "I hope we can in spite of military restrictions, get some lumber or barracks and more food, blankets and clothing to provide at least one room for each family. We'll try and purchase immediately in Basel . . . curtain material and wire for dividing the large rooms into a bit of privacy."

Elder Benson dealt with many people who had been abandoned and destitute, but there were many outpourings of the Spirit as he and his companions attended to physical as well as spiritual needs. One Sunday morning in Herne, Germany, a children's chorus set the tone for a memorable meeting. Elder Benson walked to the pulpit and, referring to the children, said, "I hope you were listening carefully as the children were singing. Let me assure you they were not singing alone. The angels were singing with them. And if the Lord would touch your spiritual eyes and understanding, you would see that many of your loved ones, whom you have lost during the war, are assembled with us today." [^16]

The war exacted a demanding price from the Finnish people. The Germans entered Finland the summer of 1941 and remained there until 1944. At first, the Finnish people saw the Germans as protection against neighboring Russia, but now they were paying dearly for three years of German domination. Ezra found that there was an acute food shortage, communications and transportation were unreliable, and the people suffered from anxiety over the future.

On July 16, 1946, at a site not far from Larsmo, Elder Benson dedicated Finland for the preaching of the gospel. He described the events in his journal: "We formed in a half moon on the large flat rock, from which we could see in all directions for long distances. As in the quiet of early morning the glory of God's sunlight shown thru the trees. . . . During the prayer we were overjoyed in our humility to feel powerfully the Spirit of the Lord as we were all moved to tears. Several sobbed like children."

The Finns won Ezra's heart. The group of fourteen faithful Saints there, though ravaged by war, had been 100 percent tithe payers and had 100 percent attendance at church. The morning of his departure many gathered at the train station at 4:30 A.M. to bid him farewell. More tears were shed as they sang "God Be With You" and the dilapidated old train rolled down the track. About his departure Ezra noted, "As I waved a final goodbye as they went out of sight I thought silently, these are the kind of saints I should like to associate with in Eternity."

For several months Ezra sought permission to enter Poland, but repeated attempts to secure visas from the Polish embassy had been unfruitful. After yet another failure, Fred Babbel recorded the following: "I sensed deeply with him that we were faced with a seemingly insurmountable problem. After moments of soul-searching reflection, during which neither one of us broke the silence, he said quietly but firmly, 'Let me pray about it.' Some two or three hours after President Benson had retired to his room to pray, he stood in my doorway and said with a smile on his face, 'Pack your bags. We are leaving for Poland in the morning!' At first I could scarcely believe my eyes. He stood there enveloped in a beautiful glow of radiant light." [^17]

The two men made their way to Berlin. There the ranking general at Polish Military Mission Headquarters said it would take at least fourteen days to clear visas to enter Poland. Ezra asked if he might call on the general again, and the officer agreed. Two days later, when Ezra returned, he procured the necessary security clearances within ten minutes. Soon thereafter the Americans booked passage on the one plane a week that flew to Warsaw.

In Warsaw Elder Benson and his companion stayed at the Polonia Hotel in a small room shared with seven other men. The pillage and devastation they saw seemed almost too much to bear. Ezra wrote to Flora, "As one walks about the city the most sickening odors meet you from debris, dead bodies in the ruins and filth. Because of the lack of sanitary facilities the people generally are filthy. . . . Cripples are everywhere. . . . One feels so helpless amidst it all, that you find yourself wanting to leave or shut yourself from it in your room."

In Warsaw a missionary representing a Protestant church was incredulous when he heard that Ezra intended to visit scattered Latter-day Saints throughout Poland in a week's time. This man had been in Warsaw for over a month and hadn't been able to so much as secure a Jeep to take him beyond the city limits. But Elder Benson was determined, and U.S. Ambassador Arthur Bliss Lane proved sympathetic, promising to help secure transportation if he could.

Through one means or another Ezra and Fred Babbel traveled throughout Poland. On Sunday, August 4, accompanied by Francis Gasser, an LDS military employee from Berlin, they left by Jeep for southern Poland in an attempt to locate members. At dusk they arrived in the village of Selbongen (now Zelbak). The streets were deserted, but they spotted a woman cowering behind a tree. She was terrified until Elder Benson identified himself. Suddenly she exclaimed, "The elders have arrived from Zion!" kissed his hands, and ran from door to door, crying, "The Brethren are here!"

Within minutes the nearby church, what was left of it, was filled with overjoyed Saints who were hugging each other and crying. The small group had prayed and fasted for "the Lord to send the Brethren," and after handshakes all around, Elder Benson spoke to them. During his remarks two armed Polish soldiers entered the door. Elder Benson could see that the people were instantly filled with fear. He paused long enough to motion the soldiers to front-row seats, then continued speaking on freedom. The soldiers left without disturbance.

Ezra recorded in his journal: "We listened to the most harrowing accounts of the dastardly deeds of Russian soldiers. . . . Women and even little girls . . . were ravaged. . . . Cases were reported where as many as 10 soldiers one after the other forced relations with young girls . . . and in some cases while parents looked on at the point of a bayonet. . . . Never in all my life have I heard of such terrors, many of which included cold-blooded murder of husbands as their wives looked on helplessly."

Ezra did what he could for these and other isolated groups of Saints before leaving Poland. When he again ran into the Protestant missionary at the Warsaw airport, the man was astonished to learn how extensively Elder Benson had traveled throughout the country.

Months later, when a second trip to Poland was cancelled, Ezra realized how miraculous his trip to Poland had been. Again he wrote Flora: "I'm not going [back to] Poland. The authorities advise against it and the Polish military officials here seem to be against it. In fact, they've told me that I shouldn't have traveled freely in Poland contacting our German Saints as I did before. . . . When I talked with my good Polish friend who is head of the Polish Military Mission, he tells me that the officials in Poland are surprised I traveled about the nation without being stopped. And apparently they are somewhat displeased. But as our Ambassador said to me yesterday, 'Mr. Benson, it's fortunate for you, I suppose, that you were not familiar with all their restrictions or else you would not have been able to contact your people in Poland at all.' So again the Lord has worked things out for us in a most peculiar way."

In early August Elder Benson learned that Elder Alma Sonne, an Assistant to the Twelve, had been called to succeed him in Europe. The news was unexpected. He had planned to be in Europe for another six months and believed there was much left to do. But he was delighted to be going home. In a moment of rare reflection, he admitted that the previous months had been "a bit rough and rugged, but the Lord has sustained me in a most remarkable way."

But because word of the change came so suddenly, Elder Benson wondered if his performance had been acceptable. Then an unusual experience allayed his fears, and he recorded it in his journal: "Last night, in a dream, I was privileged to spend, what seemed about an hour, with Pres. George Albert Smith in Salt Lake. It was a most impressive and soul-satisfying experience. We talked intimately together about the Great Work in which we are engaged and about my devoted family. I felt the warmth of his embrace as we both shed tears of gratitude for the rich blessings of the Lord. . . . The last day or so I have been wondering if my labors in Europe have been acceptable to the First Pres'y and the Brethren at home and especially to my Heavenly Father. This sweet experience has tended to put my mind completely at ease, for which I am deeply grateful."

Shortly thereafter Elder Harold B. Lee wrote Ezra, "The brethren are united in the feeling that you have performed a glorious mission and a work that could hardly have been accomplished by one of lesser courage and ability . . . and with undaunted faith in the power of the Lord to overcome obstacles." [^18]

At home Flora had driven herself to exhaustion. Before Ezra left for Europe, they had learned she needed an operation—complications from childbearing. Then the call to Europe had come, and the doctor had agreed to postpone surgery. But in mid-October he warned that because of the strain of the previous months, her condition had deteriorated. He insisted on operating immediately.

Flora took the news fairly well, but when Ezra received word, he was distraught. It took two days to get a call through to his wife, and then the connection was so poor that they could barely understand each other. "We could hardly talk for crying," he wrote, "but her last words were, 'Don't tell the Brethren, but stay and fill your mission.'"

Ezra felt extreme concern over an unfinished mission and his wife's condition. He told Bill Marriott by letter, "I fear it would almost break her heart if she felt that I was called home before my mission was fully completed." He worried that if he left Europe without orienting Elder Sonne, sensitive contacts with government agencies might be jeopardized. [^19]

Ezra fasted and prayed for guidance and then called Elder Lee to ask if he would talk with the doctor and also administer to Flora. Neither man could hold back the tears as they struggled to make themselves understood long distance. The next day Ezra received a sad letter from Flora, written in a moment of loneliness. "How I wish I could be close to her!" he lamented that night.

It was several days before Ezra learned that Elder Lee had given the blessing, and a few more days before he heard that the doctor had agreed to delay the operation until he could return home.

With each week the pangs of separation were eased by the knowledge they would soon be together. "Mark Petersen said in a letter that he saw you and you were looking fine and counting the days until I return," Ezra wrote to Flora in late September. "The days are being well counted, dearest, because I'm doing it too."

Elder Sonne arrived in London on November 16, 1946, and three days later he and Elder Benson left for a three-week orientation tour of the nine missions. It was Ezra's last visit with the European Saints, and everywhere he went they showered him with affection. In Frankfurt, a tear-filled audience listened to him deliver his last address. "I had some difficulty in speaking because of the emotion that welled in my bosom," he said later. He shook hands with each of the four hundred present before leaving, though his arm was already sore from days of handshaking.

In a final message, Elder Benson bid his beloved Saints farewell: "Here we have found faith, loyalty, and devotion unsurpassed in the annals of Church history. Only through a testimony that God lives and has . . . established His Church can men and women stand amidst the rubble, which was once happy homes, with hope and courage. Only with a faith in the ultimate consummation of the Lord's purposes can people, with all their earthly possessions swept away, continue with spirits sweet and hearts free from bitterness. . . . I promise you the richest blessings of eternity inasmuch as you continue faithful."

On December 9 Ezra wrote Flora one last time from Europe. "I'm constantly singing and walking on air in contemplation of our sweet meeting. . . . Sweetheart, I thank the Lord for you and thank you for your undeviating loyalty and support. . . . I love you so very much—more than when I left, if such a thing is possible."

Elder Benson departed London for New York City on December 11. In ten months he had traveled 61,236 miles by plane, train, ship, automobile, bus, and Jeep. Mission presidents were functioning in most European Missions; some ninety-two box-cars full of food, clothing, and bedding had arrived in Europe; missionaries were proselyting in many countries; and the Saints had a renewed spirit of hope. [^20]

The night of December 12, Flora made the final entry in her "mission" journal: "I can hardly wait for my adorable husband to arrive. I don't believe I can sleep all night." She was waiting when he stepped off the plane at 6:00 A.M.

Six years later, in general conference of October 1952, Elder Benson told how the experience in Europe had changed him and how he appreciated even more deeply his testimony, the priesthood, and the gospel. And he reflected on memories, many of which went nearly beyond his power to describe: "I presume you have never had the great and trying experience of looking into the faces of people who are starving when you are unable to give them even a crust of bread. We faced that as we first met with the Saints in parts of Europe. But when the welfare supplies came, it was a time never to be forgotten. . . . I can see them now in tears, weeping like children. . . .

"The aftermath of war is usually worse than the actual physical combat. Everywhere there is the suffering of old people, innocent women and children. Economies are broken down, the spirits of people crushed, men and women bewildered. . . . It is a saddening thing to see people who have lost their freedom. . . .

"[But] the Saints. . . . taught me a deeper appreciation for this intangible thing we refer to as a testimony—this thing that provides an anchor for men and women during times of great stress, trial, and hardship. . . . I saw people peacefully happy in their hearts, while standing amidst the ruins all around them. I heard people bear testimonies to the goodness of the Lord unto them, although they were the sole remaining member of a once prosperous and happy family. . . . I came to know. . . that men and women who have a testimony of this work can endure anything which they may be called upon to endure and still keep sweet in spirit." [^21]

It was nine months after Ezra's return that Elder Harold B. Lee summarized the significance of his associate's emergency mission: "I think the most signal thing he has done in his present career is his mission to Europe. . . . The hazards of this mission, the obstacles that had to be overcome . . . all called for a particular kind of missionary service. Ezra Taft Benson performed all that and more in a mission that took him away from a little family at a time when his absence entailed the kind of support that only families such as his were prepared to give." [^22]

This account of Ezra Taft Benson's emergency mission to postwar Europe is drawn from his and his wife's personal journals as well as correspondence between them; the Manuscript History of the European Mission; Frederick Babbel, On Wings of Faith (Bookcraft, 1972); Howard C. Badger, European Experiences with a Latter-day Prophet (published privately); Don C. Corbett, "Visit of Elder Ezra Taft Benson to Berlin, Germany, in 1946," unpublished account; Frederick W. Babbel, "Europe's Valiant Saints Forge Ahead," Improvement Era 49 (October 1946): 622-23; Ezra Taft Benson, "I'll Go Where You Want Me to Go," Church News, November 23, 1946, p. 8; Ezra Taft Benson, "Special Mission to Europe," Improvement Era 50 (May 1947): 293; "Elder Benson Reports Europe in Devastation," Deseret News, December 14, 1946; Frederick W. Babbel, Oral Interview by Maclyn P. Burg, Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, November 12, 1974, and February 5, 1975.

Footnotes

"The outlook for the world is not encouraging, but we know what the answer is. There is only one answer, and that is the gospel of Jesus Christ."

---
Notas:
[^1] Oktar and Tessy Vojkuvka to ETB, January 1, 1947.
[^2] See Ezra Taft Benson, personal journal, March 19, 1947.
[^3] Richard L. Evans to ETB, May 4, 1951.
[^4] See Cooperative Digest, October 1947.
[^5] ETB to FAB, November 6, 1947.
[^6] ETB to FAB, November 29, 1947.
[^7] See Ezra Taft Benson, Crossfire (New York: Doubleday, 1962), pp. 6-7.
[^8] ETB to Dr. C. Arild Olsen, August 9, 1948.
[^9] John A. Widtsoe to ETB, February 21, 1949.
[^10] ETB to A. A. McPherson, November 14, 1949.
[^11] Neal A. Maxwell, personal journal, September 14, 1947, as quoted in Neal A. Maxwell to ETB, March 1, 1985.
[^12] S. S. Knight to Karl D. Butler, November 1, 1949.
[^13] As related in Devotional Address, Brigham Young University, December 12, 1950.
[^14] Joel Richards to ETB, June 8, 1950.
[^15] Ezra Taft Benson, "Special Mission to Europe," Conference Report, April 1947, p. 157.
[^16] Laura Brossard to FAB, July 9, 1950.
[^17] See Conference Report, April 1951, p. 154.
[^18] Lester Hoverstein to Richard L. Evans, July 8, 1951.
[^19] John A. Widtsoe to ETB, February 6, 1952.
[^20] George F. Richards to ETB, June 2, 1946.
[^21] Robert D. Hales, in a message delivered in the Finland Helsinki Mission during James and Beverly Benson Parker's service in presiding over the mission, 1978-81.
[^22] Church News, February 20, 1952; also J. Reuben Clark file, Box 193, Church Archives.
