Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 13

Young Apostle

For the same reason missionaries proclaim their era of full-time proselyting the best years of their lives, Ezra's ten months in Europe was the most growing period of life for him and his family. Never before had his faith, endurance, and energy been so greatly put to the test. As a diamond is formed under great pressure, so was this "diamond in the rough," as Flora had called her rough-hewn farm boy, refined under pressure of another sort.

And while he had met the challenge in Europe, Flora had done the same at home. As they talked, planned, and dreamed until near daybreak his first night back, they were elated to be together, immensely thankful for each other's support, and grateful to Him who had given them the assignment and then helped them prove equal to the challenge. As much as they had cared for each other before, both sensed something wonderful had happened to their relationship. It was nothing they could describe, but the feeling was overwhelming. Between them, there was a new bond.

Flora hoped Ezra would slow down now. He was much thinner than before. Aunt Carmen said her nephew "looked bad. . . . I could have wept for him. But when I mentioned it he insisted, 'I'm fine.'" The First Presidency felt the same, and after Ezra had given preliminary reports, they advised him to take some time away from the office for relaxation and to see Flora through her surgery, which was scheduled after Christmas.

With Mark and Reed tending the girls, Ezra and his wife stole away to Cache Valley for a four-day retreat. They visited relatives, read and wept over each other's journals from the period just past, and relaxed.

On Christmas Eve they returned home to find the house spotless, tree trimmed, presents wrapped, and children anxious for their return. Coming after so many months of separation, this Christmas was indeed a joyful holiday. And, as Ezra and Flora anticipated the departure of their eldest son for the mission field, they knew it would be some time before the whole family would enjoy Christmas together again.

With the celebrating behind, Flora entered LDS Hospital in Salt Lake City on December 29. Her operation the following morning, which lasted three hours, was successful.

On New Year's Eve, Ezra reflected in his journal on the year just past: "As I close this volume I sit in my lovely home in the quiet of a peaceful winter night. It is a bit lonely with Flora . . . at the hospital. . . . This has no doubt been the most eventful year of my life to date. . . . Altho I have been put to many inconveniences and hardships, so called, because of the devastation of war, yet I feel sure my ever-faithful and devoted wife has had the hardest end of the mission. She has been true blue in every respect, and I'm grateful for her, the unity in my family, and their constant support."

As though the scenes weren't still vivid in his mind, letters from European Saints flooded Ezra with memories of all he had seen. One from Czechoslovakia is typical: "Our English is not very good, but we hope you can understand all the desire of our hearts and souls, to make you feeling happy and contented after the many hardships and sorrows you have had on your many trips in Europe. We will never forget you and the sweet spirit we felt in your presence." [^1]

Flora returned home on January 8, 1947, and while she was convalescing nicely, Ezra had never regained his strength since returning from Europe. For months he had run on raw energy and nerves, and the strain had finally caught up with him. Even news on January 21 of his appointment to a three-year term as a trustee of the American Institute of Cooperation didn't perk him up.

It was difficult to find time to relax. But when his energy had not returned by February, and Flora was still recuperating, the First Presidency insisted he take time off. The doctor prescribed three weeks. Ezra consented to a week's vacation in Arizona with Flora and without meetings, speaking engagements, or paperwork. It was their first real vacation together since Reed was born. They soaked up the desert sun, rested, and listened to Book of Mormon records. Ezra returned to Utah physically and spiritually refreshed.

It was a good thing, because he was in demand on all fronts. In February 1947 he was one of the few American civilians who had seen the occupied areas of Europe firsthand. It seemed that everyone—from organizations to universities—wanted his time. Members of the press dogged him; speaking requests came in by the score. Above all, he was anxious to resume a full load of church work.

The Church was surging forward with unprecedented growth and vigor. In 1946 the number of missionaries in the field was 2,244; by 1950, over 5,100 were serving. In 1949 nearly two hundred meetinghouses were completed; just three years later the total reached nine hundred. With postwar social trends and a sharp increase in the number of marriages (and hence, divorces) placing stress on families and youth, the Church emphasized a regular "family hour" and bolstered its youth programs. (In October 1947, in "Responsibilities of the Latter-day Saint Home," Elder Benson had delivered one of the few conference addresses in decades on the value and importance of home evening.) And 1947 was a benchmark year—the centennial of the pioneers' entry into the Salt Lake Valley. Every effort was made to pay fitting tribute.

On February 20, 1947, Ezra left for his first extended trip since Europe, traveling to stake conferences in Chicago, New York, Florida, and Washington, D.C., where Flora joined him. The pace was hectic. In Chicago he presided over his first stake conference in over a year, and after speaking at four meetings, performing ordinations and blessings, and inspecting Church properties, he called it a "glorious experience." In Rochester, New York, he toured the Peter Whitmer, Joseph Smith, and Martin Harris farms, which the Church owned but which were unprofitable as agricultural enterprises. After observing the operations, he forwarded recommendations to the First Presidency.

When Elder Benson had returned from Europe, one of his first recommendations had been formation of a mission in Finland. The Brethren agreed, and President McKay assigned him to find a mission president who could speak Finnish. But thus far the search had been unsuccessful. As Ezra and Flora left Washington, on a rare trip when she accompanied him, their train stopped in Indianapolis. The conductor assured them they had ten minutes before it departed, so they left to get a newspaper. When they returned five minutes later, the train was pulling out of the station with all of their belongings onboard. Ezra had only a few dollars in his pocket. Then he remembered a friend from his farmer cooperative days, placed a call, quickly obtained a short-term loan to purchase plane fare to Chicago, and wired the Chicago Stake presidency of the change in his itinerary.

A counselor in the presidency met them at the airport, and through Flora's friendly questioning they learned that he had lived in a small Finnish community in Colorado, was of Finnish descent, and spoke the Finnish tongue. At stake conference Ezra called on the counselor to speak; afterwards he wired President McKay, "I've found the president for the Finnish Mission." It always amazed Ezra how the Lord intervened to move the Church forward. [^2]

In mid-April 1947, Ezra resumed the role he had held before his 1946 mission as executive secretary of the Melchizedek Priesthood committee. Throughout the summer the committee prepared a new Melchizedek Priesthood handbook, a project that required sensitivity and scholarship. Ezra was concerned about it from inception to completion, but he was pleased with the finished product.

On June 22, 1947, he recorded in his journal that his six-week lapse in entries was due to the fact that "never have I experienced such a busy period." In addition to visiting stake conferences in several states, he had given addresses at high school and seminary graduations, Boy Scout meetings, BYU graduation, the MIA's June Conference, and Idaho Pioneer Day in Franklin, among others. June 22 also marked the day of Reed's missionary farewell to Great Britain.

President George Albert Smith made an appearance at Reed's farewell and spoke briefly. A member of the Bensons' ward, he said there was no more exemplary family in all the Church than the family of Ezra Taft Benson. Ezra was pleased, but he noted in his journal that night, "Most of the credit goes to my ever devoted wife."

As the pace continued, Elder Benson was seldom home for more than a few days at a time. After an extended trip to the Pacific Northwest, he made it back to Salt Lake City in time to take Flora to dinner on her birthday. In early July the family spent five days vacationing at Yellowstone National Park and Jackson Hole, Wyoming. But even there, his evenings and weekend were filled with speaking assignments.

On July 24, 1947, however, the centennial anniversary of the pioneers' entry into the Salt Lake Valley, Ezra's attention was focused strictly on the celebration. He felt that his life was personally intertwined with the lives of the pioneers. As he and Flora joined 50,000 others for the dedication of the This Is The Place monument at the mouth of Emigration Canyon, he thrilled at the inspiring services. He was but three generations removed from his great-grandfather, and his mind was filled with thoughts of the Church's progress during its first century. Ezra T. Benson, his great-grandfather, had been in the first company of pioneers to enter the valley; just the year previous, he (Ezra Taft Benson) had directed the first efforts to reestablish ties with the Saints abroad. Would his great-grandfather be pleased with his efforts? He hoped so.

It was a rare trip out of town on Church business that didn't include assignments to speak at agricultural meetings. Ezra was highly respected in national agricultural circles. Elder Richard L. Evans of the First Council of the Seventy relayed a comment his brother made after speaking at the National Institute of Animal Agriculture at Purdue: "Wherever I go in such circles I find that Ezra Taft Benson is held in high esteem, that he enjoys influence and personal prestige and confidence and acceptance." [^3]

In late August, with Mark traveling with him, Ezra delivered the concluding address at the annual meeting of the American Institute of Cooperation in Colorado. He did not seek to entertain his audience. What he had just seen in Europe, and what he had previously observed in the nation's capital, worried him. He feared Americans were gradually losing their freedom, and he sounded a bold warning: "More attention . . . should be given to those eternal principles of freedom and liberty, those inalienable rights vouchsafed in the Constitution. In other words, more attention to the fact that this is a choice land. . . . We should guard against a spirit of indifference and false security. . . . The outlook for world peace and security is darker now than at any time since 1940. The gravity and seriousness of the International situation seems to be increasing almost daily. . . . The days ahead will demand the faith, prayers, and loyalty of every American." [^4]

Regardless of his audience, Ezra was unafraid to preach spiritual values, particularly as they related to America and the Constitution.

The last four months of 1947 passed quickly, with Ezra continuing to honor as many speaking requests as he could handle. The speech making and traveling were taxing physically, mentally, and emotionally, but he seemed to thrive on it. He worked incessantly—on trains and planes, in hotel lobbies and rooms, and for short snatches between meetings. For example, en route to Kansas City to speak to the 2,000-delegate Consumers Cooperative Association, he worked on the train; when he arrived at eight A.M. he prepared his address. By eleven A.M. a stenographer from the co-op was assisting him, and by three P.M. his remarks were finished. At four o'clock the next morning, when he couldn't sleep, he wrote Flora, "I [can't] go back to sleep so here I am thinking of the loveliest, most devoted wife and sweetheart in all the world. My! but I miss you. The speech is over. It is a real relief." [^5]

With Ezra's heavy travel schedule, Flora continued to receive dozens of letters from her husband. They came on stationery from across the country—from New York City's Waldorf-Astoria to the Hotel Durrant in Flint, Michigan. But at least they came. In late November, from Gallup, New Mexico, he wrote, "I love you a bit more each trip away and each journey home, so it's really mounting up." [^6]

It seemed there was never enough time for family. His children were growing, and he worried about being there when they needed him. When he was home, he attended their school activities and PTA meetings and talked for hours with them.

With Reed serving a mission in England, Mark began preparing for his mission and compiled pages of questions about the scriptures. Ezra spent many hours answering the questions and outlined a six-week study plan for his son. He loved teaching youth—and though, hour for hour, he perhaps spent more time with the young couples who came to his office seeking counsel than he did with his own children, still nothing delighted him more than one-on-one time with family members.

On March 2, 1948, Ezra left for agricultural meetings in Omaha with seven-year-old Bonnie in tow. Members of the media in Nebraska were fascinated that Ezra Benson would babysit. Prior to meeting the press, he helped Bonnie get ready the best he could. After the interview, photographers asked if they could take photos of her. To Ezra's surprise and delight, a photograph of her made front-page news. After his address, he was asked to bring Bonnie to the speaker's table and introduce her. She received a round of applause.

Ezra had to snatch moments with his children when he could, and traveling with them was often the best way for meaningful interaction. He was holding down not only his share of church assignments but also a demanding secular schedule that would have fatigued many men. His description of the events of one day is typical: "I can't remember when I've been more tired. I have spoken in four different meetings on different subjects, and each talk was listed as a principal talk. At 8:30 I spoke to the Ricks College studentbody and Leadership Week visitors; at 9:30 to Scout leaders; at 1 p.m. to the agricultural meeting and at 2:10 to a general meeting in the tabernacle. Drove to Idaho Falls tonight and . . . spent the evening working on the paper I am to present . . . in Omaha."

He spoke to poultry groups, chambers of commerce, Boy Scouts, and sacrament meetings and stake conferences from coast to coast, constantly switching gears from agricultural to religious settings, from audiences of thousands to those of fewer than a hundred. During his travels, he attended firesides, softball games, priesthood meetings, and essentially every range of meeting and activity the Church had to offer. He was comfortable giving administrative and spiritual instruction to leaders, but he was happiest among the general membership. There was always time to bless a child, counsel with an unhappy couple, or comfort those who were ill. His journal contains hundreds of brief notations about stopping at hospitals to visit the sick.

Elder Benson's responsibilities at Church headquarters steadily increased. In January 1948 he was appointed chairman of a committee to review all reports and statistics. He was also senior advisor to the YWMIA and YMMIA programs.

On March 18 he noted that his stomach had been bothering him for several weeks and "seems to become more distressing. It is especially noticeable when I am under nervous strain. The Dr. after a preliminary examination expressed fear of an ulcer." But Ezra pressed on.

The April 1948 general conference was the first to make use of television, and a screen was installed in the Assembly Hall on Temple Square for overflow crowds. Ezra, despite extensive experience in front of audiences, was anxious about it all. He noted in his journal, "This is a great blessing to the people. To me it adds to my worry and anxiety to realize that I am not only on the air during my remarks but being photographed also. The strong television lights directed toward the pulpit are a constant eye strain."

In late April, while eating breakfast, Ezra suddenly felt sharp pains in his back, shoulders, and chest. With difficulty he made his way to the couch until the doctor arrived. Three days later he submitted to extensive tests. The doctor concluded it was only a warning to slow down.

That spring Mark received a call to serve in the Eastern States Mission. On Sunday, May 2, the day he turned nineteen, a testimonial was held in his behalf, with the largest attendance Ezra had witnessed for a missionary farewell. Ezra left early to speak at another farewell, but he returned in time to greet those gathered at a reception at his home. Nine days later Mark spent his last evening with the family. "There came a bit of a lump in my throat as I realized it is his last night with us for two years," Ezra wrote.

But there was little time to be homesick for either of his sons, as there was much to be done, not the least of which was Ezra's ongoing support of anything that built youth. In the fall of 1949 a conflict developed between the Boy Scouts of America, which changed its age groupings in a way that affected the Primary, the Church's organization for children, which supported the Scouting programs. Elder Benson was very concerned, as he noted in his journal, that "the entire Scouting program may be abandoned." He often said, "It's better to build boys than mend men." No effort was too great if it related to Scouting. He even took time to write an Eagle Scout recommendation for his paperboy. Ezra's devotion to the Boy Scouts had not gone unnoticed. On May 23, 1949, he was elected to the BSA National Executive Board, and Flora joined him in New York City for his installation.

While in the East, the Bensons paid a courtesy call on President Harry S Truman, extending LDS President George Albert Smith's greetings and talking about the importance of the family unit. Later they enjoyed a serene moment in the Sacred Grove, scene of Joseph Smith's vision of the Father and the Son in upstate New York. "As Flora and I were left alone in the Sacred Grove," Ezra recorded, "the peace of heaven seemed to pervade. There was borne in upon our hearts the influence of the Holy Spirit to such a degree that tears of gratitude filled my eyes as we stood silent arm in arm in this sacred spot where the most glorious vision ever given to man transpired."

Tender moments such as these strengthened Ezra's growing commitment to the gospel, his family, and his country, which he considered inseparable. Following Joseph Smith's experience in the Sacred Grove, the gospel had been restored—not insignificantly, Ezra felt—in a land of freedom where men were able to choose their own destiny. In an article titled "Survival of the American Way of Life," published in the Improvement Era in June 1948, he outlined the precarious political and social paths America was taking: "It is heart-rending to see people who have lost their freedom of choice . . . who feel no security; who have no home they can call their own . . . ; whose hearts are filled with hatred, distrust, and fear of the future. . . . With all of its weaknesses, our free enterprise system has accomplished in terms of human welfare that which no other economic or social system has even approached. . . . Good government . . . guarantees the maximum of freedom, liberty, and development to the individual."

Elder Benson's desire to protect the Constitution, and to defend, at all cost, individual freedom, fueled his patriotic interests. He monitored national developments almost daily and was a keen observer of political climates. He supported Thomas Dewey for U.S. president, though he felt Dewey was a middle-of-the roader whose ideologies were perhaps closer to the New Deal than the planks of Dewey's own party. As early as 1944 Dewey had asked Ezra to outline a national agricultural program, and four years later he requested Elder Benson's service on an agricultural advisory committee. Ezra discussed the matter with the First Presidency and also told them about a rumor he had heard that Dewey, if elected, would offer him a Cabinet post. The First Presidency approved his serving in the government if the opportunity arose.

Ezra did not lust for office. He had often said, "Blessed is he who expecteth nothing, for he shall never be disappointed." And he wrote in his journal, "I have no political ambitions except as such activities might redound to the good of the work of the Lord and this great nation preserved to permit the Restored Church to become established and fill its great mission."

Dewey evidently held Ezra in some regard. He visited the Benson home on a campaign swing through Utah (Mark remembers police cars in front of the home and reporters waiting outside), and accepted Ezra's advice that he add a spiritual emphasis to his messages. [^7] At a later date, Ezra met in Chicago's Stevens Hotel with Governor Dewey and the agricultural advisory committee. Dewey asked for suggestions on the farm aspect of his campaign. But when Ezra offered one, an aide interrupted, "Don't rock the boat."

All indications pointed to Dewey's victory over Truman. After the meeting in Chicago, Dewey told Ezra he would like to talk with him about a Cabinet position. A member of the Republican National Committee also contacted Ezra about the possibility, but Ezra suggested they wait until after election results were in. The man laughed and said, "It's in the bag." For years thereafter that expression made Ezra shiver. It was indicative of complacency—something he feared could cost America much more than an election, perhaps even its freedom.

From Chicago, Ezra traveled to New York City to complete negotiations on purchase of a mission home for the Eastern States Mission. When he had first been assigned to find property there, he had asked George Albert Smith, teasingly, "Where do you want it—on Fifth Avenue?" But, in fact, that is where Elder Benson did locate property. At 973 Fifth Avenue, across from Central Park, stood an elegant, six-story mansion that the State of New York had considered making a historical site. The asking price was $175,000. Ezra indicated that the Church couldn't pay that price but might be interested at a lower figure. The property was finally offered at $105,000 cash, which Ezra accepted. A subsequent appraisal valued the property at double that amount.

On November 2, still in New York City, Ezra listened to election returns in his hotel room. He even strolled over to Dewey headquarters, where the mood was festive. That all changed, however, when, in one of the great political upsets in American history, Truman emerged the victor. All talk—and worry—about a Cabinet position was suddenly irrelevant. In many ways Ezra was relieved. There was no uncertainty now about his future.

Without further political concerns, Ezra stepped up his pace—speaking, speaking, and more speaking, missionary interviews, committee work, temple sealings, priesthood ordinations, and weekend trips to stake conferences. And he continued to have great interest in the European Saints. He checked on members there and worked long-distance with government agencies. To the deputy chief of the Religious Affairs Section in Germany, for example, he insisted that the German people needed spiritual reeducation and requested permission for Latter-day Saint representatives to enter Germany "to promote not only the Church program as such, but to teach the principles of freedom and liberty." [^8]

Many Saints from Europe emigrated to the United States, and others visited Utah to go through the temple. In December 1948 Ezra and Flora spearheaded a reunion for Saints from Europe who had relocated in Utah and arranged for President George Albert Smith to attend. The Bensons shook hands with each person. "Many of them have just arrived . . . and were almost overcome by this get-together and the joy of being in Zion," Ezra wrote.

Had Ezra not been well organized, it is doubtful he could have managed his schedule. But he seemed to have a knack for sizing up situations, making quick decisions, and getting things done. When each of the Twelve was asked to respond to one particular assignment and Ezra's report was the first submitted, Elder John A. Widtsoe quipped that Elder Benson could go to the head of the class, adding, "Your comments are excellent." [^9]

It was Ezra who realized that responsibilities of the Twelve had become so unwieldy that a full-time executive secretary was needed. He got the idea approved and helped hire and train the man selected for the position. Few things escaped his attention. Yet he also had the common touch. He went out of his way to praise and reassure those he met in his travels. After a mission tour through the South, for example, he wrote to a couple in North Carolina, "Of all the branches we visited . . . none impressed me more deeply than what I saw and heard in Elizabeth City. It is putting it mildly to say that I am proud of both of you." [^10]

Being a General Authority sometimes exacted its price. Ezra worried about his finances, as the living allowance he now received was significantly less than his former salary. With two sons on missions, his savings were being rapidly depleted. "Since we. . . moved to Salt Lake," he recorded in his journal, "it has been necessary . . . to draw on our small savings each month at the rate of well over $1,000 per year. If this continues for long we'll not be able to help the children with their college." At years's end, with the situation unresolved, the Bensons only sent Christmas cards to family and very close friends. After moving to Salt Lake City, the Benson children noticed fewer presents under the tree.

Elder Benson was also worried about having to be away from home on church assignments so frequently. As he prepared to leave for a stake conference in Monticello, Utah, Flora hovered over him, finally admitting, "I've never felt so strange about you leaving on a church assignment." En route, Elder Benson came within a foot of being killed by a runaway semitrailer, which hit his car so hard that the force of his body against the seat broke the welding loose.

Few assignments were so dangerous, but all were demanding. They required sensitivity to the people and receptivity to the Spirit. In one Colorado stake, new facilities were needed, which required relocating stake headquarters. The stake president feared disunity in the stake because of the problem, so he had not yet broached the subject with his high council. Elder Benson called the group together, and within forty-five minutes he received unanimous approval for the change.

Neal A. Maxwell, then a young missionary in Canada, was influenced by Elder Benson in a way that affected him for many years. He recorded the events of a district conference: "Elder E. T. Benson asked me my age and if I'd had any service experience. Thought it rather unusual. As they sustained new officers I was stunned by the reading of my name to be a new District President. . . . Set apart under the voice and hands of . . . Apostle Benson. Received splendid blessing." [^11] (Neal Maxwell would later serve as a counselor to Reed Benson in the Washington D.C. Stake mission presidency, and Mark Benson would be called as a counselor to Bishop Maxwell. Elder Maxwell would then serve with Elder Benson as a member of the Council of the Twelve Apostles.)

In an effort to help youth, Elder Benson got behind a proposal for a Churchwide softball tournament and, with the help of many others, saw it through. "Something miraculous happened today," he wrote Flora from aboard the Los Angeles Limited. "I tried to call [Oscar] Kirkham this A.M. in Salt Lake [regarding the softball tournament]. We were stopped in the R.R. station in Rawlins, Wyoming. I was thinking of the softball program when I looked out of my window into the club car across the platform and saw only the back of the head of a man who I felt impressed was Bro. Kirkham. Without being sure I rushed out and rapped on his window and sure enough it was him en route home. We had a short visit [talking softball] before our trains left in different directions." The first all-Church softball tournament was held in September 1949, with President George Albert Smith throwing out the first ball.

Things didn't always work that smoothly. Asked to deliver his second CBS "Church of the Air" radio address in connection with April 1949 general conference, Elder Benson was informed by radio officials that his talk was too forceful for a national radio audience. "I revamped it somewhat—to my disappointment," he lamented. "Apparently they wanted me to say that which will please everyone, including the offenders of the moral code." His address, entitled "Our Homes—Divinely Ordained," strongly outlined the critical effects home life has on society.

Ezra Taft Benson didn't care to mince words. In the keynote address to the American Institute of Cooperation's summer meetings in Madison, Wisconsin, he delivered a powerful and clear message in support of free enterprise. One observer wrote his reaction to Ezra's remarks: "If no other address than Mr. Benson's were delivered before the Cooperative Conference . . . it must have been an epoch-making event, not only as regards Cooperative Marketing but as a crystal clear call back to sane thinking, for every American citizen." [^12]

In September 1949 the Twelve determined that, due to the rapid increase in Church membership, General Authorities would attend stake conferences semiannually rather than quarterly. The First Presidency, presumably concerned that Elder Benson's never-ending pace would eventually take its toll, also insisted that he take some days away from the office. He relented. He spent one Tuesday at home working twelve hours in the yard, and found time to relax occasionally with the children. He made stilts for Bonnie's birthday, took the three oldest girls to the state fair, saw Little Women with his wife and daughters, and took them all to outings at a local amusement park and to the beach at the Great Salt Lake.

Ezra felt it was also important that his extended family stay close to one another, and he visited his brothers and sisters as often as he could. Once, while on the way home from a church assignment in Idaho, he felt impressed to detour to Mink Creek to see his sister Margaret. He didn't know that earlier in the day, with her husband out of town, she had become seriously ill, leaving her small children largely unattended. "I prayed desperately for help to come," Margaret later told her brother in a letter. "I was so relieved to see you. You gave me a blessing and I was much better the next morning. You stayed overnight and next day about noon went on your way home."

Ezra was proud of his family, particularly his children. He noted every achievement, large or small. If they took the tiniest part in a roadshow or school play, he made mention of it. When Barbara earned the Church's "individual achievement award" and was singled out in sacrament meeting as the only girl with 100 percent attendance in all of her meetings, Ezra recorded it in his journal as though she had won national recognition.

Perhaps nothing touched him more, however, than his sons' service as missionaries. In late December 1949, Flora accompanied him to New York City, where they went to a concert by the Utah Centennial Chorus, a missionary choir of which Mark was president, at a meeting of the National Association of Manufacturers in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. Then, just days later, Ezra and Flora stood at Pier 98 as the Queen Mary docked from England. "We were thrilled to get a glimpse first thing . . . of our son Reed returning from Europe after 2 1/2 years . . . as a missionary. . . . We were soon on the ship with our passes and embracing our wonderful son whom we are so proud of." During his mission Reed had opened a branch at Oxford and was supervising elder over the Newcastle District, the same district his father had presided over in 1923. There were Saints who still recalled the earlier Elder Benson, whom they considered one of their own. When he arrived in New York, Reed was called by President George Albert Smith to serve a short-term mission. He was assigned to be a companion to Mark to help establish full-time missionary work in Washington, D.C., where Mark was serving as district president.

In 1950, with the beginning of a new decade, Elder Benson's varied involvements persisted. Speaking requests continued to arrive at his office, many of them invitations to come back a second time. He enjoyed telling the story of one livestock association in Utah that he had addressed the year before. When the officers invited him to again keynote their annual meeting, Ezra sent his regrets, indicating that it would probably be better to find another speaker as he hadn't kept record of his remarks and wouldn't want to be repetitious. A few days later the association president replied, "We have checked with a number of our members and we find there aren't any of them who remember anything you said last year, so you come right along." [^13]

With all the speaking and other assignments, Elder Benson was in Salt Lake City scarcely half the time. Frequently he arrived home in time only to pack for another trip. From Idaho he wrote to Flora, "Forgot to tell you, I took your apples from the utility room, also 2 bananas and a piece of cheese. These will serve several breakfasts."

At a stake conference in Los Angeles, two close relatives, neither of them active in the Church, came at his invitation. "As I saw them enter I prayed silently for strength to speak powerfully and if possible touch their hearts," he noted. "I have never been blessed with greater freedom and they seemed impressed."

He centered his remarks to graduates of Utah State Agricultural College on building spiritual values: "It is a basic principle that you cannot help a man permanently by doing for him what he could do, and should do, for himself. Dependence upon the state for sustenance means the eventual surrender of political freedom." The president of the Northwestern States Mission wrote Elder Benson after reading a copy of his talk, "I was pleased to note that you did not hesitate to quote the word of the Lord. . . . What you presented was given in such a way that no one could take offense." [^14]

To Ezra, there was no dichotomy between speaking of fundamental gospel principles and warning of forces threatening the American way of life, and he made that clear. His practical messages frequently reinforced the theme that America is a land of destiny, and that a resurgence of spiritual values among its citizens is the only sure way to preserve freedom. At an annual cooperatives banquet in Spokane, he addressed the same theme. "I was deeply grateful," he recorded, "when some of the leaders later spoke of my humble offering as 'spiritual statesmanship' where as a matter of fact it was nothing more than Mormonism unlabeled."

To the Saints, he was even more direct. "The outlook for the world is not encouraging," he said, "but we know what the answer is. There is only one answer, and that is the gospel of Jesus Christ. Peace must come from the heart. Men's hearts must change, and righteousness must rule in the lives of the people of the world before peace can come." [^15]

There was rarely any let-up. After stake conferences in Ogden, during which he performed thirty-nine ordinations and settings-apart, he wrote, "This and public speaking is the most exhausting work I have ever done, not excluding thinning beets, pitching hay, or heaving 120 lb. sacks of grain. My labors in the Church, joyous as they are, take something out of me which is different in effect. I wish I could do it without limit and not tire." Later he lamented, "I find myself wishing the days were longer and less sleep was required for my health."

It was hard to be separated so frequently from his family. From Philadelphia, where he attended national meetings of the Boy Scouts, he wrote Flora, "Last night at the dinner I was really homesick for you as I saw so many of the men with their wives. . . . I went to my box and to my joy there was a letter from the sweetest girl in all the world. . . . I went to my room and thought of you for hours and again when I awakened this morning."

In April 1950, Flora returned to the hospital for a second operation, "a part of the price for bearing six children and working so hard for our family," Ezra observed. He spent an anxious day while she was in surgery, and was grateful that only five days later she was sufficiently recovered to go home. But her strength was not sufficient in June to allow her to accompany him to the East Coast to bring their sons home from their missions. Barbara and Beverly made the trip, however, and while their father attended BSA national meetings and visited over a thousand LDS Scouts at camp, the girl stayed with Ed and Laura Brossard in Washington. Laura later wrote Flora, "I shall always remember a beautiful picture I glimpsed as I went through the hall to the kitchen one night and saw the two little figures kneeling at their beds in prayer, far from home, but the teachings of their home always with them. . . . You know how some pictures we never forget? I knew this was one of those I would always carry with me." [^16]

En route home, the five Bensons visited LDS historical sites in Kirtland, Ohio, and Nauvoo, Illinois. Reed and Mark read Church history as they drove. At the Kirtland Temple, which the Saints had built in the 1830s before they were forced to leave that city, Ezra noted that in his "mind's eye," he "pictured the transcendent beauty and magnitude of what transpired" there—the Savior's appearance to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. In Nauvoo the travelers tried to imagine where Ezra T. Benson's home would have been, and in Carthage they reviewed events leading to the martyrdom of Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum. "It is a real joy to travel, visit historical points, eat and pray with the four children," Ezra wrote. "The trip is proving of the utmost value to the girls with whom the boys talk about the church and discuss the gospel." As they traveled, he jotted ideas that might help the Church's proselyting efforts.

When they arrived home on June 11, it was the first time in nearly three years that the family had all been together. "It seems so good," Ezra noted simply, "to all be together again, especially as we knelt in family prayer."

In early August 1950, Ezra and his sons took a saddle-pack trip into the high Uintah mountains of eastern Utah. They planned to fish, hunt rocks, and hike, but they had scarcely arrived when a messenger reached them with word that George F. Richards, president of the Twelve, had passed away. The vacationers cut their trip short and returned to Salt Lake City. Elder Benson had often referred to President Richards as a man who nearly approached perfection, and he had never forgotten the tender, fatherly kiss he had received from him as he left for his relief mission in Europe.

As the years passed, Ezra became increasingly bonded with his associates in the Twelve. He often said that when he was in Europe, or away from Salt Lake City on Thursday, when the Twelve met, he could feel the strength and warmth of his colleagues praying for him. Outside of his family, he missed them more than anyone. On January 12, 1951, after a sweet testimony meeting of the Twelve in the temple, he noted, "It has been a glorious meeting in which the Spirit has been richly in evidence and we have been drawn close together. . . . I have, I believe, never enjoyed 5 hours more. I thank the Lord for my Brethren. I love them and am grateful for their association, love and confidence. Today I believe we all could say with John of old, 'We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the Brethren.'"

The health of the prophet, George Albert Smith, deteriorated in 1950 and 1951, and he was able to attend temple meetings less frequently. At the President's request Ezra administered to him twice in early 1951. On April 2, the two counselors in the First Presidency, J. Reuben Clark and David O. McKay, visited President Smith at home, but he did not recognize them. Two days later, on his eighty-first birthday, President Smith passed away. As soon as Ezra received word, he walked over to the Smith home, just two blocks away. Peace pervaded the home, but it was an emotional time for Ezra as he reminisced about the man who had administered to his sick baby daughter while he was an ocean away.

On April 8, the apostles met in the temple to reorganize the First Presidency. David O. McKay, as senior apostle, took his place in the first chair around the semicircle. He was ordained president of the Church, and he subsequently announced his selection as counselors—Stephen L Richards as first counselor and J. Reuben Clark as second. The room was suddenly deathly silent, for Elder Clark had served as first counselor to two presidents. The next day, in the solemn assembly where the new officers were presented to the members of the Church, President McKay asked President Clark to handle the procedure of sustaining the First Presidency. Later in his remarks President Clark said that in the service of the Lord it is not where you serve, but how. [^17]

After the proceedings, Ezra wrote: "Some . . . had expressed . . . deep concern over placing Pres. Clark . . . as second counselor. There was expressed a feeling 'It will kill Brother Clark' and also 'The people will not be reconciled.' Some questioned the wisdom of Pres. McKay making any explanation of seniority in the Twelve as a factor. However, thanks be to God, Pres. McKay went ahead as he was first impressed to do, and the people not only approved unanimously but the most powerful witness of the Spirit literally melted the audience to tears and all left reassured and confident God's will had been done. Such a spirit of loyalty and love I have never seen exhibited before."

With every year, it seemed, Ezra Benson's influence and reputation spread, both within and outside the Church. He received the Boy Scouts' highest regional award, the Silver Antelope, on April 24, 1951; the University of Wisconsin awarded him one of six honorary citations for agricultural leadership on February 6, 1952; and the American Institute of Cooperation elected him chairman of the board of trustees on August 14, 1952. Consequently, as he carried out his assignments as a member of the Council of the Twelve, he, and in turn the Church, attracted media attention. Everything from small hometown newspapers to national wire services reported on his comings and goings. For example, the Syracuse (New York) Post-Standard of September 10, 1951, called him "the famous Mormon leader." The Minneapolis Morning Tribune dated September 13, 1951, reporting on his dedicatory address for a chapel there, headlined an article "How Does Mormon Church Differ From Other Faiths?" and outlined basic gospel principles. From the Topeka (Kansas) Capital of September 17, 1951, came the headline "Mormons Set Examples" and an accompanying article about Ezra Benson's message on free enterprise.

In June, after Ezra received an honorary degree from the College of Osteopathic Physicians and Surgeons in Los Angeles, a man who attended the graduation wrote Elder Richard L. Evans, "One of your apostles, Ezra T. Benson, delivered the commencement address last month for the graduating class of my alma mater . . . and he definitely stirred the. . . cerebrations of the profession as I've never seen it stirred before in the field of moral ethics. Men of science need to be often reminded of moral values." [^18]

The Brethren were aware of Ezra's high profile. Regardless of his audience, he didn't hedge on incorporating gospel principles, frequently quoting scripture, in his message. Often his text was the Book of Mormon, and he drew liberally from its message about America's destiny. After a national training conference of Scout Executives, Elder John A. Widtsoe wrote, "I have scanned your address. Congratulations. You are doing a splendid work for the Cause of the Church. . . . Such services as you give will establish us in many important places." His postscript concluded, "As I read your address, my pride in you increased." [^19]

Flora's pride in her husband also continually increased, though neither she nor Ezra enjoyed being separated so frequently. When he traveled with Elder and Sister Mark Petersen to Hawaii to dedicate the Kalihi Ward chapel, Flora remained at home, and Ezra lamented, "Hawaii just doesn't seem as I'd hoped without you here. I fear the people notice my lack of enthusiasm."

When Elder Benson left on November 15, 1951, for an extended tour of the Southern States Mission that would keep him from home on Thanksgiving, he asked if the children would stagger their letters so he would receive one every other day. After Thanksgiving he wrote, "The Thanksgiving letters were perfect and a real inspiration." When he arrived in New York City on December 6 and found no letter from Flora, he chastised her slightly: "Am disappointed not to have word from you here as there was none in Wash. D.C."

But despite their frequent separations, Ezra made no attempt to adjust what he had come to view as his lot in life. On February 19, 1952, after a hectic month in which he had let his journal lapse, he noted he had been too busy to write, adding, "It has always been of more interest to me . . . to do things . . . than to write about them."

He relied heavily on Flora. He wished she could travel with him more often, but he was also grateful that she was so devoted to the children. It was difficult balancing a demanding church and secular life with the rearing of a young family—a trying life-style for anyone—and he realized that her judgment, energy, and commitment were the keys to their stable family life. Apparently Ezra and Flora's efforts were noticed. President George F. Richards of the Council of the Twelve had told Ezra, "I remember my visit to your home in Washington. . . and the favorable impressions I received as to your home life. I do not remember having such impressions in any other home." [^20]

The children also recognized their mother's influence. Mark wrote from the mission field, "As I grew into young manhood it was you who encouraged me on, who gave me self-confidence, who told me again and again that I could succeed. . . . You've always kept plugging, mom. You've always kept me plugging."

As the children grew older, even with their typical adolescent growing pains, they stayed in line. They excelled in school and other activities. Reed was freshman class president at BYU, won the extemporaneous speaking contest there, and was voted the friendliest man on campus. During the Korean War, he served as a chaplain in the Air Force. Mark was Junior Prom chairman at BYU, won the Heber J. Grant Oratorical contest, and chaired BYU's homecoming festivities (which Reed emceed). He received the Henry Newell scholarship, and went to Stanford University, where he obtained his master's degree. Barbara and Beverly were both presidents of girls organizations at school, and during her first year at the University of Utah, Barbara was elected class vice-president. Later, at BYU, she was elected homecoming queen and named "friendliest girl on campus." Bonnie would serve as an eighteen-year-old Relief Society president at a BYU ward.

It was not always easy for the Benson children to live in their father's shadow. They came to realize that everything they said or did would not only be a reflection on him, but on the Church as well. Years later a General Authority gave insight into what it must have been like to grow up in the Benson home when he commented about one of the daughters: "She is not an ordinary woman. She was reared in a home with a father who is a prophet, seer, and revelator. She had to be an unusual spirit to get into that home. It's not easy being born into a family like that. . . . She's had to be perfect ever since she was a little girl." [^21]

Ezra loved being with his family and drew strength from them. After one stake conference during which he had spent two days soothing hard feelings among some of the priesthood leaders, he realized how blessed he was to have a loyal family. "It must be most difficult to serve as [stake] president without the full support of your leaders. . . . It is a feeling closely akin to that experienced by parents when their children fail to . . . give them full support."

His family's support was becoming increasingly essential. As he continued to speak out on the future of America and its freedom, some Latter-day Saints began to question why a religious leader was addressing what they considered to be political topics. President Clark had stated the government was straying into so many areas affecting the lives of Church members that it was becoming almost impossible for a Church leader to stay out of "political matters." Ezra agreed.

In fact, Ezra's philosophies fell much in line with President Clark, who regarded the New Deal as anticonstitutional. Across the top of a Church News article reporting one of President Clark's addresses, one that criticized the United Nations for limiting the United States's sovereignty, Ezra penned, "This I believe." [^22] In his address President Clark outlined his frame of reference: "I am . . . pro-liberty, pro-freedom, . . . pro-local self-government, and pro-everything else that has made us the free country we have grown to be in the first 130 years of our national existence. It necessarily follows that I am anti-internationalist, anti-interventionist, anti-meddlesome-busy-bodiness in our international affairs. In the domestic field, I am anti-socialist, anti-Communist, anti-Welfare State. I am what the kindlier ones of all these latter people with whom I am denying any association or sympathy, would call a rabid reactionary (I am not, in fact, that)."

Ezra might have been classified in a similar manner. He repeatedly spoke out against the United Nations, though this outlook was not widely accepted in the early 1950s. [^23]

Elder Benson's love for America burned deep in his soul. Rarely did he visit the nation's capital but what the spirit and feeling in that city didn't move him. One evening in October 1952, while in Washington, D.C., he walked the mall between the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial. A feeling of deep reverence burned within him, a feeling of love and loyalty. He later related: "Suddenly the history of this country seemed for a moment to merge into one great whole for me: Our beginnings as a nation under Washington, our preservation under Lincoln. . . . As I gazed on that great statue of Lincoln, sitting upright in his chair, . . . I read and pondered the inscription on the wall behind and above his head. . . . I went to the other plaques inside the Memorial and read each. One contained the Gettysburg Address, another the words of the second inaugural. As I pondered those beautiful phrases, there came into my heart a surge of gratitude such as I had never known before, for the privilege of being a citizen in this land, for the priceless blessing of being an American." [^24]

At general conference in April 1952, Ezra's message, entitled "America, What of the Future?" warned against threats to America's freedom. Though he felt the message was well received, he knew that some might criticize him. "However, I could not do otherwise and follow my impressions. If I come in for criticism, so be it," he wrote in his journal.

Criticism was the least of his worries. Popularity was not a priority, but principles were. Elder Benson believed the Church was moving into a new era, as he told a gathering of BYU alumni, an era in which it must fearlessly take its message throughout the world and an era in which America must solidify its commitment to free enterprise, freedom, and the sanctity of man's agency to choose for himself rather that be limited by government dictums.

Though in his formative years Ezra Taft Benson had not imagined himself venturing much beyond the farm, his life had already taken uncharted paths. And though he had never sought appointment or acclaim, both had embraced him. He had no way of knowing what honors of men would soon come or that the attention of an entire nation would push him and his family into a spotlight that would focus international attention upon the Church.

This chapter relies on primary source material from Ezra Taft Benson's personal journal, personal correspondence between him and Flora Amussen Benson, and his correspondence files and addresses. See the following of his addresses; "Responsibilities of the Latter-day Saint Home," Conference Report, October 1947; "America: Land of the Blessed," Conference Report, April 1948; "Responsibilities of the Priesthood," Conference Report, October 1948; "Our Homes—Divinely Ordained," CBS "Church of the Air" broadcast, April 3, 1949; "Leadership, and the Needs of Youth," MIA June Conference, June 19, 1948; "Face the Future Unafraid," Conference Report, October 1950; "Faith in the Youth of Zion," Conference Report, April 1951; "Challenge for Cooperatives Today," American Institute of Cooperation, Utah State Agricultural College, Logan, Utah, August 30, 1951; "America, What of the Future?," Conference Report, April 1952.

Footnotes

"No real American wants to be subsidized."

---
Notas:
[^1] Bernard Law Montgomery, Memoirs (Cleveland: World Publishing Company, 1958), p. 484. See also Ambrose, Eisenhower the President, p. 17.
[^2] Ezra Taft Benson, Crossfire, p. 5.
[^3] Ibid., p. 12.
[^4] Washington Post, November 26, 1952.
[^5] As quoted in Deseret News, November 27, 1952. See also "Meet the New Secretary and His Family," Farm Journal, January 1953.
[^6] Cincinnati Post, November 26, 1952. See also "Agriculture Acclaims the New Secretary," Cooperative Digest, December 15, 1952, p. 8; "Ike Picks Ezra T. Benson, Political Unknown, for Agriculture Post," Wall Street Journal, November 25, 1952; "Benson's No Stranger to Capital," Washington Daily News, November 25, 1952; "Benson for Agriculture," Washington Post, November 26, 1952.
[^7] William Harllee Bordeaux to Robert Tate Allan, September 11, 1953.
[^8] As quoted in Improvement Era, January 1953, p. 28.
[^9] "Ezra Taft Benson: Agricultural Statesman," unpublished tribute written by Raymond W. Miller at request of David W. Evans. Benson Family Collection.
[^10] Deseret News, November 30, 1952.
[^11] See J. Willard Marriott to ETB, November 24, 1952; George Romney to ETB, November 26, 1952; Tom Heath to ETB, November 25, 1952.
[^12] See Paul Friggens, "Meet the New Secretary and His Family," Farm Journal, January 1953, p. 28.
[^13] See Ezra Taft Benson, "Principles of Cooperation," Improvement Era 48 (November 1945): 653; Friggens, Farm Journal, January 1953; Salt Lake Tribune, November 26, 1952. See also Ezra Taft Benson, "Speech Material—Facts Regarding Agriculture," 1956, Item #31, "Free Enterprise Based on Spiritual Qualities."
[^14] Time, March 30, 1953.
[^15] Maxwell M. Rabb to ETB, July 16, 1982.
[^16] Crossfire, p. 45.
[^17] Ibid., p. 50.
[^18] Hearing before the Committee on Agriculture and Forestry, United States Senate, 83rd Congress, January 15, 1953.
[^19] Angus Deming, "The Revolutionary Farmer," Wall Street Journal, January 19, 1953.
[^20] For some of Secretary Benson's early press coverage see the following: "Elder Benson's Going to Catch It!," Saturday Evening Post, March 28, 1953, p. 22; "Benson's Mail Backs Him Overwhelmingly," Washington Daily News, February 19, 1953; "Too Much Corn, or Too Much Benson?," The Nation, March 21, 1953; "Secretary Benson Tells About Changing the Farm Policy," U. S. News World Report, March 6, 1953, pp. 24-37; "Benson: Prayer, Persuasion and Parity," New York Times Magazine, June 14, 1953; "Bravo, Cousin Ezra! He Promises a Sane New Day for Agriculture," Barron's, February 16, 1953; "Hold On, Ezra, Help's Coming," Richmond News Leader, February 21, 1953.
[^21] See "Secretary Benson's Faith in the American Farmer," Farm and Ranch, September 1956, reprinted in Reader's Digest, October 1956, pp. 84-88.
[^22] See Dwight D. Eisenhower to ETB, February 2, 1953.
[^23] "Apostle at Work," Time, June 13, 1953, pp. 25-28.
[^24] As quoted in Communism and the Constitution (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1964), p. 23.
