Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 14

Welcome, Mr. Secretary

On November 4, 1952, Dwight David Eisenhower was elected president of the United States. The World War II military hero defeated Adlai Stevenson soundly, collecting 442 electoral votes to Stevenson's 89, and bringing with him a Republican Congress (though by a slim margin).

During his two terms as Chief Executive, Eisenhower was to enjoy immense popularity, establishing himself solidly in the affections of middle-class, mainstream America. The General inspired confidence. Colleague Bernard Law Montgomery surmised, "He has the power of drawing the hearts of men towards him as a magnet attracts the bits of metal. He merely has to smile at you, and you trust him at once." [^1]

That trait, among others, served Ike well as he selected his cabinet. Not one appointment was a personal friend. His choice for Secretary of Labor was, in fact, an Adlai Stevenson-supported Democrat. Some of his most prominent appointments were men he had never met.

On Thursday evening, November 20, 1952, Elder Benson received an unexpected call from Utah Senator Arthur V. Watkins informing him there was a sudden ground swell of support that he be named Secretary of Agriculture. The news came as a complete surprise, and when the Senator inquired if he would be available to accept the post, Elder Benson replied that only President David O. McKay could answer that question.

The following morning, he encountered President McKay in the Church Office Building parking lot. The prophet, too, had received a phone call the night before about Elder Benson's availability for a cabinet post. "My mind is clear in the matter," he told his associate. "If the opportunity comes in the proper spirit, I think you should accept." Elder Benson shook his head and replied, "I can't believe it will come. If it were Dewey asking, it would be different. But I've never even seen Eisenhower, much less met him." [^2]

On Saturday, Ezra and Mark E. Petersen traveled to Provo to divide the Sharon Stake and form what would be the Church's 200th stake. It was there that Flora reached Ezra by telephone. President-elect Eisenhower was trying to contact him. Ezra quickly found an empty room, spent some moments in solitude and prayer, called President McKay to confer with him, and then returned the call to New York City.

Milton Eisenhower, the president-elect's brother, asked Elder Benson if he could interview with Ike on Monday afternoon at two. Ezra agreed, called President McKay again, and hurried home. He and Flora called their sons. Reed, a chaplain, was stationed at Lackland Air Force Base in San Antonio. Mark was attending Stanford. Ezra asked the boys to fast with the family—not that he would get the appointment, but that he would make the proper decision. Then he left for the East Coast.

On Monday afternoon Ezra sat in the outer office of Eisenhower headquarters at the Hotel Commodore in New York City. Earlier he had lunched with Milton Eisenhower. Ezra had assumed he was one of several being interviewed for the cabinet post, but Milton made it clear that he was Ike's choice for Secretary of Agriculture.

As he waited to meet Eisenhower, Ezra perhaps asked himself, What am I doing here? His agricultural work had thrust him into political circles before, but he had never been politically ambitious. He was acutely aware that the farm situation was explosive, and the next Secretary would inherit a hot seat. How much power would he have to change farm programs? Would he be dealing with a Congress motivated more by political expediency than principle? Would he be expected to rubberstamp programs or policies he didn't endorse? Most importantly, he was completely devoted to his calling as an apostle. Why give up that peaceful association for what promised to be a turbulent experience? Only at President McKay's instruction was he here at all. The mixing of farming and what Ezra considered to be unsound economic policies in recent years had built up farm surpluses, reduced farm income, and in general created a political dilemma.

On the other hand, Ezra believed that Americans had a duty to serve their country. And President McKay had counseled him to assess the spirit of what Eisenhower had to say. These thoughts were rushing through his mind as the door opened. He was unprepared for his first impression of Eisenhower. He wrote in his journal that day, "I saw a powerfully built person, a little under six feet, with a smile fresh and warm as a sunny summer's day. . . . I liked him immediately."

Eisenhower quickly came to the point. Would Ezra accept the appointment as Secretary of Agriculture? Rather than answer directly, Elder Benson enumerated reasons why he shouldn't be appointed. First, he had supported his distant cousin, Senator Robert Taft, who ran against Eisenhower for the Republican nomination. Second, all other things being equal, he did not favor having a military man in the White House. Third, he came from a comparatively insignificant agricultural state, and a Secretary of Agriculture from the Midwest would perhaps be more acceptable—and he even knew three men who wanted the job. And finally, he was an ecclesiastical leader, and he wondered about the wisdom in calling a church official to the cabinet.

On the last point, Eisenhower looked directly at Ezra and replied, "Surely you know we have the great responsibility to restore the confidence of our people in their own government, and that means we've got to deal with spiritual matters. You can't refuse to serve America!" [^3] There it was. Eisenhower's statement was compelling to a man with deep spiritual and patriotic loyalties. President McKay had said that if the request came in the proper spirit, he must accept. In Ezra's judgment, that condition had been met. But there was one more question he must put to Ike: Would he ever be expected to support legislation he didn't approve of? Eisenhower assured him that that would not be expected of him.

Scarcely twenty minutes after the interview had begun Eisenhower accompanied his selection for Secretary of Agriculture into an adjoining room and announced the appointment to the press.

Ezra hurried back to the hotel and called his wife. "Flora," he said, "General Eisenhower has asked me to be in his cabinet, and I've accepted." There was no hesitancy in her voice as she responded, "I knew he would, and I knew you'd accept. It must be the Lord's will. How do you feel?" "I feel more like praying than anything else," he replied.

Ezra's second call was to FBI director J. Edgar Hoover. "Run a complete security check on me," he insisted. When Hoover replied that wouldn't be necessary, Ezra responded, "I'd appreciate it if you'd do it for me and all of my top appointments. There must be no question about my background."

By evening newspapers from coast to coast headlined the news that Ike had named the first clergyman in a century to a cabinet post (Edward Everett, Secretary of State in 1852, was pastor of Boston's Brattle Street Unitarian Church), and reporters scrambled to learn more about this dark-horse appointee from Utah. By the time Elder Benson returned to Salt Lake City, writers from Time, Life, U.S. News World Report, the Christian Science Monitor, and other publications were clamoring for interviews.

Though the Mormon apostle was an unexpected choice, his selection was greeted with almost universal approbation. Some writers even glamorized his pioneer, dirt-farmer beginnings. And there were inevitable comparisons between him and the last ranking Mormon official to occupy political spotlight, Reed Smoot, an apostle and U.S. senator.

While most analysts agreed with the Washington Post that few cabinet appointees would "face a bigger challenge," most also predicted Secretary Benson would prune the U.S. Department of Agriculture's sprawling bureaucracy. [^4] The press evaluted him as politically inexperienced but agriculturally astute and a breath of fresh air in Washington, even if he was one of the biggest post-election surprises. Paul Friggens, western editor of Farm Journal, one of the most respected agricultural publications, wrote, "It will be interesting to see the new secretary manage the U.S. Department of Agriculture by principle rather than political expediency." [^5]

Others were cautious. The Cincinnati Post warned that Eisenhower may have made a "grave misstep" by naming a religious leader to his cabinet and thereby breaching the sacrosanct barrier between church and state. But even that writer concluded with a qualified endorsement: "Mr. Benson will make a good secretary of agriculture, and . . . if he introduces oldfashioned Mormon polygamy into the nation's farmyards it will be a refreshing change from the birth prevention policies for pigs popularized by . . . [former Secretary of Agriculture] Henry Wallace." [^6]

A few observers were openly critical. The general secretary of the American Council of Churches, for example, was indignant, though misinformed, when he said, "Informed Christians are perfectly aware that . . . pagan religions are no more hostile to the Biblical evangelical Christian faith than is Mormonism. . . . I think it is rather unfortunate that the President named him as a member of his Cabinet." [^7]

There was, however, universal agreement on one thing: Ezra Benson knew agriculture, and for the first time in many years the Secretary of Agriculture was more than a political appointee. He knew what it meant to work from sunup to sundown, and then tighten his belt when flagging farm prices didn't pay the bills.

The Denver Post of November 26, 1952, reported that Ezra's appointment had already spawned something of a miracle. "President Allan B. Kline of the American Farm Bureau Federation and President James G. Patton of the National Farmers Union agree that his qualifications are splendid—the first time for years these two gentlemen have agreed on anything." The executive vice-president of the National Farm Grange said, "We think that Benson's high character will make him one of the great, if not the greatest, agriculture secretaries." [^8] And Raymond W. Miller added, "Ezra T. Benson is not and never can become a politician, but he is a statesman and a man of rare integrity. . . . It augurs well that he has been set aside for national service at this critical time. Surely he is a man of destiny in the hands of God." [^9]

Latter-day Saints watched with great interest and pride. Perhaps most important amid all the excitement was President McKay's quiet but full approval of the appointment. He stated, "The appointment is a distinct honor to him and one he will fill with credit to himself and to the nation. We are happy that a prominent member of the Church has received this position." [^10]

Bill Marriott told his good friend that everyone he had talked to was "beaming with enthusiasm" at the appointment, and George Romney wired, "You have brought honor to the entire church." People from his hometown were also buzzing. "Golly, T," wrote Tom Heath, "no need to tell you how well the announcement was received in Franklin County. Over at the Whitney Store and in town [there was] . . . nothing but praise. How proud your dad would be!" [^11]

Ezra was still in a state of shock. It was all so overwhelming! Suddenly his well-ordered though fast-paced life was turned upside down. On December 1, he told students at a BYU devotional assembly, "I didn't want to be Secretary of Agriculture. I can't imagine anyone in his right mind wanting it." It was a statement he would repeat hundreds of times during subsequent years.

In the meantime, he faced a number of unanswered questions. In less than eight weeks he would take the oath of office. Where did he begin? How should he select a staff? The first few nights, sleep came only in fits and starts. Often he arose hours before dawn to write notes to himself.

Early on, Elder Benson sought a blessing from the First Presidency. Assisted by J. Reuben Clark, President McKay pronounced words of comfort and counsel on the apostle's head: "You will have a responsibility, even greater than your associates in the cabinet because you go . . . as an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. You are entitled to inspiration from on high, and if you so live and think and pray, you will have that divine guidance which others may not have. . . . We bless you, therefore, dear Brother Ezra, that when questions of right and wrong come before the men with whom you are deliberating, you may see clearly what is right, and knowing it, that you may have courage to stand by that which is right and proper. . . . We seal upon you the blessings of . . . sound judgment, clear vision, that you might see afar the needs of this country; vision that you might see, too, the enemies who would thwart the freedoms of the individual as vouchsafed by the Constitution, . . . and may you be fearless in the condemnation of these subversive influences, and strong in your defense of the rights and privileges of the Constitution."

The prophet's words were comforting, the declarations insightful. Elder Benson did feel that his appointment was an evidence that "people have come to recognize [Mormons] for what we are, our standards, our ideals, our philosophy."

Two thousand congratulatory telegrams and a similar number of letters arrived at the Church Office Building the first two days following the announcement. The response was as intimidating to Ezra as it was heartwarming. So many people expected so much of him. And while he wasn't talking policy yet, his philosophies were already on public display.

In the media reports, a common thread emerged. As one prestigious farm periodical stated, "Ezra Benson is going to shock Washington. He's in the habit of deciding everything on principle." [^12] The Wall Street Journal (November 25, 1952) indicated that the Secretary's views appeared to be vague, but others scanned his recent addresses for clues to his agricultural philosophies. As early as October 1945, in a general conference address, he had preached the principle of self-reliance, counseling the Saints to avoid the temptation to "run to a paternalistic government for help" and admonishing, "Let us Latter-day Saints stand on our feet. . . . The principles of self-help are economically, socially and spiritually sound." And he had gone on record against subsidies ("I don't think any real American wants to be subsidized") and for free enterprise ("Nobody owes [farmers] anything for crops they don't grow, or goods they don't produce, or work they won't do"). Throughout his term, Ezra would staunchly defend the free enterprise system. "We are a prosperous people because of a free enterprise founded on spiritual, not material, values," he said. "It is founded on freedom of choice—an eternal, God-given principle. The founding fathers, inspired though they were, did not invent the priceless blessing of individual freedom. That gift to mankind sprang from the God of Heaven and not from government." [^13]

In 1848, while on a mission to the East, the first Ezra T. Benson observed firsthand how Congress appropriated funds. "They have been in session ten weeks, and have spent $500,000," he wrote a fellow apostle, frustrated at the slow pace and government extravagance. His great-grandson had little more patience with bureaucracy.

For a man who opposed big government, Ezra was taking the reins of an enormous department. The USDA housed onetenth of its 78,000 employees in the combined Administration and South buildings in Washington, D. C., containing between them nearly five thousand rooms and eight miles of corridors. The remainder were scattered in ten thousand locations throughout the United States and in fifty countries. His 1953 budget, $2.1 billion, was, next to the Treasury, the largest for any civilian department. He and his staff would oversee food needs for 160 million Americans.

Ezra's responsibilities were mind-boggling. It would take months, even years, for him to grasp everything that fell under the USDA umbrella. After he had been in Washington several months, his chauffeur drove him home one day by way of the National Arboretum. It was spring, and brilliant azaleas were in full bloom. Impressed, Ezra asked who was responsible for the establishment. After a pause the chauffeur responded, "You are, Mr. Secretary."

The department had many divisions that Ezra would direct. He was responsible for the nation's largest money-lending agency, the Commodity Credit Corporation, making him the "biggest butter, cheese, and dried-milk man" in the country, as he described it. He was also responsible for the largest conservation operation in history; for protecting the nation against insects, diseases, and crop failures; for inspecting meat, insuring crops, grading, and classing commodities. The USDA employed 350 scientists to develop improved strains of crops and breeds of animals, as well as hundreds of economists, and ran one of the country's largest adult-education programs and electrification projects. Above all, he would bear the yoke of bailing farmers out of a mess that was threatening the survival of American agriculture.

Why was American agriculture in precarious shape? In short, Ezra believed, there was too much "big brother" in government. During World War II the government, to encourage peak production of food, guaranteed to protect prices of farm products at an artificially high level. Price supports were, simply, a government buy-back guarantee—the amount the government would pay for commodities if farmers couldn't get that much on the open market. Accordingly, a compulsory fixed price support of 90 percent of parity on basic crops was instituted.

(The concept of parity was developed during World War I as a balance between the prices received by farmers and prices paid by them. Such a balance, it was assumed, existed between 1909 and 1914. This became the base period. The price of wheat, then, would be 100 percent of parity when the selling price of a bushel of wheat would buy as much of other goods as it did during that period. Ezra explained, "As good a [definition as] I've ever heard came from a farmer who said that if a bushel of corn would buy a work shirt in the period 1909 to 1914, then a bushel of corn should still buy a shirt today.")

After World War II, food demands fell sharply while production actually increased, causing commodity prices to fall steadily in relation to the economy. Yet the Truman administration extended high fixed price supports through 1954; as a result, by that year the government had accumulated so much surplus cotton, wheat, and other staples that it could have filled America's market needs for a full year. When Ezra took office, the government owned a startling 37 million pounds of butter, 7 million pounds of cheese, and 56 million pounds of dried milk. [^14] To complicate the situation, the government had trouble selling the crops without losing great sums of money and disturbing world markets, so they stored the commodities, costing taxpayers millions of dollars annually. (It cost $66.9 million in 1953 alone to store USDA's surpluses.) The precarious balance between supply and demand was mercilessly out of control. Agriculture, as Ezra described it, was a Grade A mess.

Ezra knew he couldn't solve the dilemma by himself, and he was anxious to consult with as many agricultural experts as possible before assuming office. On December 2, 1952, he left on a twenty-day tour of the United States to confer with farmers, educators, marketing and commodity experts, processors, economists, and retailers. He wanted to hear the farmers' complaints himself, ask questions, and begin to sort through the chaos. He also hoped to select an agricultural advisory committee and to staff his office.

Hundreds of top men came to his hotel rooms—from Los Angeles to Atlanta—for interviews. Ezra asked detailed questions, making copious notes in longhand. In New York he met with former President Herbert Hoover and General Douglas MacArthur. Hoover showed great interest in Ezra's plans to reorganize the Department of Agriculture (later giving it a boost by announcing his endorsement to the press), and talked to him like a father to son. "MacArthur was an eagle," Ezra wrote in his journal. "Majestic in bearing, direct and piercing in facial expression, he was about the youngest seventy-two-year-old I have ever met. . . . He was, in a moment, expressing feelingly his love for the United States . . . and his conviction of the immense values of free enterprise and the dangers of big government." He also commented that if he could ever be of service to Ezra, he was but a phone call away and would go to Washington or anywhere else to help him on a moment's notice. MacArthur's generosity and confidence moved Ezra deeply.

In city after city Ezra worked sixteen-hour days. Despite the schedule and pressing demands, he returned to Salt Lake City to perform the marriage of his son Mark to Lela Wing from Raymond, Alberta, Canada, in the Salt Lake Temple. Mark was the first of Elder Benson's six children to marry there.

Back on the road Ezra looked for staff members. His team came from varied backgrounds. Though his personal assistants—Arthur Haycock, Milan Smith, Lorenzo Hoopes, Daken Broadhead, and Miller Shurtleff—were Latter-day Saints, most of the staff were not.

Ezra had his own way of conducting job interviews with those whose professional credentials spoke for themselves. He was interested in character and values. When he met with Dr. Don Paarlberg, professor of Agricultural Economics at Purdue, for example, Ezra asked just three questions: Are you happily married? Are you active in your church? Do you like your job? When Paarlberg answered yes to all three, Ezra invited him to join his team as staff economist.

The travel paid off. After a month on the road Ezra's view of agriculture was more comprehensive, though his initial judgment was reinforced—that a healthy dose of free enterprise was just what U.S. agriculture needed.

The cabinet appointment plunged the Bensons into Washington's circle of social elite. They were expected to attend the inaugural, and Ezra was shocked to learn that boxes at the inaugural ball were going fast—at three hundred dollars each. He and Flora decided against purchasing one. A reporter wrote that the cabinet consisted of "nine millionaires and a plumber," but Ezra found that curious. He was no plumber, but he came closer to that than a millionaire.

Another telegram requested Ezra's attendance at a pre-inaugural meeting of the new cabinet on January 12, 1953, in New York City. During a rare moment of privacy prior to the luncheon, Ezra and Eisenhower exchanged comments about the spiritual aspect of their challenge, and Ezra was impressed to ask if it might not be fitting to begin cabinet meetings with prayer. Ike didn't commit himself, but moments later, as the meeting convened, he looked at Ezra and said unexpectedly, "I am asking our Secretary of Agriculture to open this first meeting of the cabinet with prayer."

Maxwell M. Rabb, secretary to the cabinet, later recalled in a letter to Ezra how "electrifying" it was when Eisenhower called on Secretary Benson to open that meeting. "There was a murmur of approval and then several of your colleagues crowded around you at the conclusion of the meeting to tell you how moving your words were." [^15]

All too soon it was time for Secretary Benson to move to Washington. Flora joined him for the inauguration, and Reed, a chaplain in the Air Force stationed in San Antonio, flew in to be with his parents. But Flora and the girls would remain in their Utah home through the school year. Mark was continuing his graduate studies at Stanford.

Nearly 750,000 people, including President David O. McKay, gathered for the inaugural festivities. Ezra and Flora, riding in a convertible, took their places in the procession down Pennsylvania Avenue after the formal inauguration at the Capitol. With hundreds of thousands waving to them, Elder Benson found it all exhilarating—and overwhelming. "It seemed to be a dream," he wrote later. "Yet even in the exciting spell of the moment the awareness of the responsibility that had come to me hovered like a shadow overhead. There would be a time when the crowds were gone." [^16]

The following day, Reed and Flora accompanied Ezra to the Gold Room in the east wing of the White House. There, at 5:30 P.M., Ezra Taft Benson stood behind Abraham Lincoln's cabinet table as Chief Justice Fred M. Vinson administered the oath of office. President Eisenhower then shook Ezra's hand, smiled, and remarked, "Hello, Mr. Secretary. Welcome to a tough assignment."

It was that simple. In just minutes Ezra had become the fifteenth man to serve in his post.

The next morning Flora and Reed rode with Ezra to the USDA headquarters in the black Cadillac limousine provided for the Secretary. Reed was due back in San Antonio, and Flora would leave the following day, but Ezra wanted them both with him his first moments on the job. As they entered his spacious office, he stopped and stared at the large leather chair behind an imposing desk. Slowly he crossed the room and sat down. As he fingered the phone with dozens of buttons and intercoms, tears came to his eyes. What did the future hold? He told Reed he would be happy if he could go back right then to Salt Lake City. "I felt like somebody who was suddenly asked to take over a train hurling through the night at ninety miles an hour with the throttle stuck open and the brake lever thrown out the window," he said. There were two and a half billion dollars' worth of surpluses on hand, another four billion dollars' worth coming in, and almost three billion more in prospect before he could get a handle on things. On his first day a staff member hurried in with a foot-high stack of requisitions for extra government storage bins.

Too soon Ezra was driving Flora to the airport. It would be five months before she and the girls would join him. After they said good-bye, he watched for some time as the plane rolled to the end of the runway and took off. Finally he returned to the apartment he had rented. He could think of nothing but Flora. "Everywhere I turned I saw evidences of her thoughtfulness: the way she had arranged my clothes, . . . brought in food, placed family pictures, . . . and the loving note she had written. And then, for the first time, it was suddenly more than I could bear. The job ahead seemed too big, the load too heavy, loneliness too sharp a pain. I broke down and wept aloud." [^17]

Thus began one of the most strenuous and lonely periods of his life.

Most cabinet members enjoy a short time when elected officials and even the press observe a wait-and-see period. But for Ezra, the honeymoon was short.

Even during his confirmation hearings prior to the inauguration, his reception on Capitol Hill had been less than warm. When Senator Milton R. Young of North Dakota tried to pin him down on his views on price supports, Ezra refused to respond until he had more time to evaluate present legislation. The senator made it clear that Ezra's silence was affecting his willingness to vote for confirmation. Senator Allen J. Ellender of Louisiana blasted Ezra for criticizing the current program without offering solutions. But Ezra wanted time to devise the right solution and not be stampeded into action that would compound the problem. The confirmation hearing, which lasted almost two hours, was fairly unpleasant, but in his closing statement, Ezra left no doubt about his perspective: "I do not expect to spend my time trying to protect my job, because any time the . . . President is through with my services I will be greatly relieved and happy to return to what I was doing. But I am determined to use my every energy in the interests of agriculture and in the interests of the Nation." [^18] The Wall Street Journal gave Ezra high marks on his performance: "The Mormon dignitary answered the senators quietly, slowly, deliberately. Whatever his feelings, his outer calm was never ruffled. And he very definitely stuck to his guns." [^19]

In fact, during his first week in office Secretary Benson came out with guns blazing. On his first day he revealed detailed plans to rein in the sprawling USDA bureaucracy and reorganize the department's twenty agencies into four administrative units, each headed by a staff officer who reported to him. In the same memo announcing the reorganization (this and other interoffice communications were dubbed "Epistles from the Apostle" by USDA staffers), he jarred USDA staff members by stating that the people of America had a right to expect of public servants "a full day's work for a day's pay."

USDA employees were at once fearful that the reorganization would eliminate jobs and miffed at what they considered criticism of their working habits. The press hopped on the statement, which exacerbated the problem. Under a headline "Mr. Benson Enters, Swinging," the Richmond News Leader on January 26, 1953, reported, "These moves are as encouraging as they are unexpectedly swift. . . . It's been a long time since anything like [this] has been heard in Washington, and it is sweet music to the taxpayer's ear." When he learned that some employees were angry, Secretary Benson explained that he had intended only to stress his feelings on the work ethic rather than criticize past performance. He was learning that every word had to be twice weighed.

There were many adjustments, such as getting used to being called "Mr. Secretary" and increasingly finding that politics was a rough-and-tumble arena. In a matter of weeks he had come to almost expect to find his name, not always treated kindly, in almost any major newspaper or magazine. (Throughout his term he would receive extensive press coverage. He appeared on the cover of Time twice, as well as on the covers of U.S. News World Report and other leading magazines.) [^20] His job, it seemed, grew bigger with each day. On January 25, 1953, after eating breakfast in a lonely apartment, he wrote Flora, "I just can't keep the tears back, and yet I realize it's all so unnecessary when I stop to count my blessings." He added, "The papers have more about me today. There are some who are trying to smoke me out on several issues that are most controversial."

Ezra selected his team carefully and prayerfully. Joining Paarlberg on the staff were True D. Morse, Under Secretary of Agriculture; J. Earl Coke, assistant secretary; John H. Davis, Ezra's hand-picked successor at the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, as president of the Commodity Credit Corporation; and Clarence M. Ferguson, administrator of the Extension Service. A believer in the scriptural injunction to "pray oft," he asked his staff when they gathered for their first session if anyone objected to opening their meetings with prayer. No one dissented. And so began a practice that Ezra perpetuated for eight years. He invited each staff member to take turns offering the invocation. Only once in advance did an aide decline. And even then, the man later told the Secretary privately that he was ready to take his turn.

How did Ezra's associates regard the practice? Some may have initially been put off by an observance considered unorthodox, if not provincial, and out of place in a business office. But one assistant wrote: "Some of us hadn't prayed aloud since our 'Now I lay me down to sleep' days. We stumbled and fumbled for words. But the Boss never let on that he noticed. And after a few trials everybody was at ease. Has it helped? Well, I'd say that when you start a meeting that way, people aren't stuck up with the pride of their opinions. You pretty quickly come to an agreement as to what ought to be done in any situation." [^21]

Secretary Benson had other habits his associates perhaps found unusual. Barring emergencies, he refused to work on Sunday, and he was reportedly the first dignitary to have his interview for "Meet the Press" prerecorded rather than appear in person on the Sunday news program. Also, he would not be photographed holding a glass that gave the appearance of alcohol.

His behavior apparently inspired modifications in the actions of others. Often a top aide would come dashing through the outer office to keep an appointment with him, douse a cigarette in an ashtray, and explain, "I can't smoke in the Secretary's presence." Others remarked they were trying to cut down on smoking or drinking coffee, because if the Secretary could abstain, they could too. When a third-level employee developed a drinking problem and his work suffered, his supervisor recommended dismissal. Secretary Benson called the man in and talked at length about his responsibility to his family, his job, and himself. The man became a productive employee.

Not all of the Secretary's innovations took hold so quickly. When the cabinet convened for their first session at the White House, Eisenhower plunged into the agenda without calling for an invocation. Ezra was "deeply disappointed." The omission bothered him for days. Finally he wrote the President and suggested that each weekly cabinet meeting be opened with prayer. Ike responded that he was quietly investigating other cabinet members' feelings about the practice. [^22] At a subsequent meeting, the President said simply, "If there is no objection, we'll begin our deliberations with prayer," and that practice was followed throughout his presidency.

Ezra felt strongly about prayer, and his associates came to appreciate that quality in him. Said one, "He spends as much time on his knees as he does on his feet." [^23] And on Thursday mornings Ezra's thoughts often turned to his colleagues of the Twelve, who were meeting in the Salt Lake Temple. He knew they would be praying for him, and he could count on their strength. From the beginning of his USDA tenure, he and his staff would need that strength, for they were fighting an uphill battle.

If Secretary Benson had agreed in principle with the policies established by his predecessor, his job would have been largely administrative. But he didn't. He was convinced that government intervention in and control of agriculture threatened to undermine the moral fiber of farmers. "It just isn't good for government to do for people what they can and should do for themselves," he said again and again. In this vein, his economic philosophies were strictly in line with those of his spiritual leader, President David O. McKay, who had said, "We are placed upon this earth to work. . . . No government owes you a living. You get it yourself by your own acts." [^24]

"Any country which pursues policies that cause the self-reliance, initiative, and freedom of its people to drain slowly away is a country in danger," Ezra said. [^25] He believed, as he always had, that farmers were the backbone of America—the figurative salt of the earth. Frequently he stated that he was delighted his lot had been cast with the rural people of America. And it was time to relieve the farmer of government regulations—particularly high rigid price supports—that undermined individual initiative and let the free market regulate trade.

Yet Eisenhower had temporarily saddled his Secretary of Agriculture with high, rigid price supports. During a campaign speech in Kasson, Minnesota, Ike had stated flatly that his administration would stand behind the existing price-support legislation guaranteeing 90 percent of parity through 1954. To complicate matters, Ezra realized that farmers had come to depend on these federal subsidies.

On February 5, 1953, fifteen days after taking office, Secretary Benson held his first press conference (he would hold more press conferences than any other cabinet member). Nearly a hundred reporters filled a room in the USDA's Administration Building for what promised to be the Secretary's first statement on price supports. Ezra didn't let them down, delivering a carefully worded statement on his agricultural policy. He indicated the USDA would make good on Eisenhower's campaign promise to uphold rigid price supports through 1954, but then stated his view that such supports should be used only to protect the farmer against disaster and to stabilize the volatile commodities market—not to guarantee the farmer a living. He would support flexible price supports based on market performance, but not rigid supports. He expressed his belief that freedom was more precious than life itself, and that no person who depends upon the state for sustenance is free. "The supreme test of any government policy," he stated, "should be, 'How will it affect the character, morale, and well-being of our people?'" [^26] Most reports of the press conference were favorable.

Secretary Benson then turned his attention to his first major speech as Secretary of Agriculture, an address before the Central Livestock Association in St. Paul, Minnesota. The price of beef had been sliding for months, and this crowd of cattlemen could be hostile. On February 11, nearly three thousand crowded St. Paul's municipal auditorium.

The Secretary ad-libbed generously, extending his prepared thirty-five-minute address to an hour. He stated candidly that cattlemen should produce meat for the free market and not for government bounty, and concluded with a stirring plea that he would sound again and again: "We must return to the fundamental virtues that have made this nation great. There is a Force in the universe which no mortal can alter. This nation does have a spiritual foundation." [^27]

The ovation was warm and the next morning's newspaper report congratulatory. Even Senator Edward J. Thye, who had given him some trouble in his confirmation hearing, admitted, "Ezra, this talk had everything you could ask for."

But when Secretary Benson flew back to Washington, the roof fell in. He was soundly chastised on Capitol Hill. Many Democrats, incensed about his firm views on price supports, were furious. Senator Eugene McCarthy jibed sarcastically, "Benson is like a man standing on the bank of the river telling a drowning man that all he needs to do is take a deep breath of air." [^28]

Even some Republicans joined in. Senator Frank Carlson of Kansas called Ezra's St. Paul speech a political blunder and claimed the Secretary had shaken the confidence of farmers.

The congressional outrage puzzled Ezra. The parts of his speech criticized most were those lifted verbatim from the policy statement he had read at the press conference just six days earlier—from which there had been no backlash. Evidently the depth of feeling attached to price supports went far beyond what he had imagined. He was beginning to see that while the economics of the farm situation were straightforward, the politics of the problem were not.

As the first cabinet member to arouse controversy, Ezra and his views filled the press by the end of February. One of the nation's most prominent journalists, purportedly quoting a White House aide, called him "expendable" and predicted that he would be "promoted" to an ambassadorship. He went so far as to say that the Secretary of Agriculture would be the first cabinet member to resign. Headlines such as "Too Much Corn, or Too Much Benson" (The Nation) and "Elder Benson's Going to Catch It!" (Saturday Evening Post) appeared in nearly every major publication. [^29]

But there were also favorable reports. Said Barron's on February 16, 1953, "[The Secretary] has been talking some very positive good sense about farm policy. . . . After twenty years of Henry Wallace Co., it's time!" In addition, two organizations that represented the lion's share of American farmers—the Farm Bureau (with 1.6 million members, the largest of the general farm organizations) and the American Cattleman's Association—consistently backed him.

Even more significant than the views of the press were those of farmers themselves. Incoming mail at the USDA was running fifteen to one in Ezra's favor. In fact, throughout his term, his mail always heavily favored his policies. For example, a young couple who had invested all they had in a farm wrote to say it was good "to hear somebody talk to us as tho we had some intelligence. We don't think the farmer has been riding a gravy train, as we hear said [but] . . . we are 100 per cent for any man who has the courage to tell us we are capable of standing on our own feet rather than merely surviving with Government aid." As a Life magazine editorial put it, "The politicians have been complaining . . . Benson is no politician, which may mean he is qualifying for higher honors." [^30]

Nevertheless, the intensity of the debate that raged around him was discouraging. Ezra couldn't remember ever feeling so low. He was being attacked daily in Congress, Washington insiders were placing bets on how long he would last, and he was working fifteen to eighteen hours a day—which was better, however, than coming home to an empty apartment. He longed for Flora and made no bones about it. On one television appearance in which new cabinet members were introduced, he mentioned how much he missed his family. One viewer wrote Flora, "Nothing he could have said, even if he had a dozen top flight public relations men, . . . would have been so effective as his simple and truthful statement that you were at home with your children . . . and that he was a lonely man." [^31]

Letters flew back and forth between them. In one, Ezra said, "[Your support does] so much [to] encourage me at a time when the load and worry seem almost too much to bear." When he was especially down, he would call home. Flora did her best to keep his spirits up. "You mustn't worry," she would say. "The President is still behind you, isn't he?"

What did the president think about the controversy? Was Ezra an embarrassment to his administration? Finally the White House called. The president wanted to see him. As Ezra walked into the Oval Office, Eisenhower took off his glasses and looked at him sternly. Then he broke into a chuckle and said, "Ezra, I believe every word you said at St. Paul. But I'm not sure you should have said it quite so soon."

Presidential advice notwithstanding, Ezra didn't wait long to say it again. He felt he spoke the truth, and it needed to be said now. On February 21 in Des Moines, where he was greeted by picketers, he spoke to a packed ballroom with hundreds standing in aisles. Again he pulled no punches, stating that rigid price supports should be used only to protect farmers, not to guarantee them a living. The Des Moines Register farm editor wrote that "he sold himself to his audience even though some of those present probably differed with him politically." [^32]

One thing was clear: Ezra had the proverbial—and in his case fitting—long row to hoe. While some hailed his plans to decentralize agriculture, there were those who did not. Ahead of him lay the immense task of reeducating much of the public, Congress, and even the president.

Ezra's was a spartanlike existence. He arose by five-thirty every morning, put in an hour of homework, and was at his office by seven-thirty. He usually spent two hours dictating correspondence for his two secretaries. His days became so hectic that he begrudged time to eat, and he began holding staff meetings two evenings a week. Unless he was obligated to attend an official function, he left for home between seven and nine P.M., stopping for a quick meal and then working before retiring. One evening he wrote in his journal, "The pressure of work continues heavily with emerging problems arising daily. I only wish we didn't have to sleep. We are making headway, however, and I am encouraged the Lord is blessing our efforts."

But just as often it seemed that he was doing little more than hanging on, with an incessant round of emergencies, meetings, decisions, politics, social responsibilities, more decisions, and pressure, always pressure. When he could, he slipped out to Bill Marriott's Virginia ranch for horseback riding and a few hours of solitude. There was little he enjoyed more than a hard ride in a Western saddle astride a high-spirited Tennessee Walker named Trigger, a horse nobody else seemed to be able to handle.

Secretary Benson only wished he could handle the immense agricultural problem as easily. If it wasn't one segment of agriculture demanding government help, it was another. Dairymen, for example, were in as precarious a position as cattlemen. But he held firm to his line, proclaiming that it had become too easy "to merely spend taxpayers' money to bolster markets," and calling on farmers and ranchers to look to other solutions. Ezra himself was always on the lookout for marketing opportunities. When he found no milk available during a flight to Wisconsin, he wrote every airline president and urged each to remedy the situation. At Pennsylvania State College he could find no vending machines on campus that dispensed milk, mentioned the fact in his address to the National Dairy Science Association, and received the promise that machines would be installed. (Comedian Bob Hope joined Ezra in helping promote the American Dairyman's Association. He quipped, "There may be an organization with more branch offices, but there are none that have more outlets.")

The political crossfire exhausted Ezra and stood in sharp contrast to the spiritually rejuvenating work he had done for the past ten years. On March 1, Elder Harold B. Lee sensed his colleague's needs while visiting stake conference in Washington, D.C. In his remarks to the Saints, he put the situation in perspective: "There will be many who will belittle [Brother Benson] and will try to destroy him and destroy his reputation and destroy his influence in his high place. . . . Those who do will be forgotten in the remains of Mother Earth, and the odor of their infamy will ever be with them. But the glory and majesty attached to the name of Ezra Taft Benson will never die so long as Brother Benson continues to live the gospel of Jesus Christ. . . . And you and I who are in this congregation will live one day to see what I have said verified." [^33]

In his journal that evening Elder Lee recorded, "Brother Benson was needing the uplift of the conference, and I did all I could to build him up before the people." His comments bolstered Ezra, who two days later wrote Flora in good spirits, "All is well, darling. Please don't worry about me."

A continuous stream of letters from his children also buoyed him up. Reed wrote, "Just a brief note to tell you how proud I am of the work you're doing. . . . Stay with her, Dad. The heart of America is . . . beating for you." [^34] Mark wrote after reading one of his father's latest speeches, "It's full of spiritual and patriotic meat that ought to wake some Americans out of their lethargy. . . . Lela and I saw you in the newsreels . . . last night. You looked superb—I was so thrilled I started clapping." [^35] (It was also in this letter that Mark broke the exciting news—Ezra and Flora were going to be grandparents.)

The news from home wasn't always so good. On March 3, Ezra was awakened at two in the morning by a call from the family physician in Salt Lake City. Flora and Barbara had been in a car accident. Flora was still unconscious, and Barbara had a broken shoulder and lacerations. Ezra immediately arranged for both to receive blessings, and he called Reed to ask that he take emergency leave from his chaplain duties and hurry home. Then, following a period of prayer, he tried in vain to sleep. The following day he kept a full round of appointments, though fasting. That evening he returned home to await word. At nine-thirty the call came. Both were doing fine. "It was the longest night and day I spent in Washington," he wrote. [^36]

Ezra's family's support was felt in many ways. He knew that they prayed for him constantly and in all situations. At one general conference, when he rose to speak, the message "Pray for Dad" automatically swept down the row from person to person where his family sat.

In April Elder Benson returned home for his first general conference since leaving for Washington. Being with his family and the Brethren rejuvenated him. How he had missed them all! After conference he wrote, "I have wished many times that the conference might go on for five or ten days. It is almost like going into another world to leave the activity and pressure of Washington . . . and enter upon the peace and quiet of a general conference of the Church." [^37]

Back in Washington, Secretary Benson and his staff pushed doggedly ahead. They continued to implement their reorganization of the USDA, streamlined the Soil Conservation Service, and established a Foreign Agricultural Service. On a bizarre note, a nest of counterfeiters was found operating within the Department. "This was definitely carrying free enterprise to an extreme," the Secretary joked. "We had no desire to see headlines . . . claiming that Agriculture was reducing the cash depletion of the Treasury by printing its own." And when he found, to his dismay, that he sat on the board of directors of the Virgin Islands Corporation, which among other properties operated a rum distillery, he urged the corporation to divest itself. "Being in the liquor business, even thus remotely and involuntarily, was too much for me," he wrote. [^38]

In one of his first appearances before a congressional committee, Secretary Benson was accused of sidestepping questions on price supports. After the first go-around he noted, "My personal commitment to the President was for two years' service, but there were signs that I might not be around that long." He would have many confrontations with Congress. Don Paarlberg later assessed these sessions: "The essence of Secretary Benson was religious belief and ethical conduct. The essence of most people in the legislative branch was political pragmatism. In testimony before the committees he and the congressmen would sail by one another like ships that pass in the night." [^39]

One of the first senators to attack Ezra on the Senate floor was James Eastland of Mississippi, who called the Secretary an enemy of the farmer. Ezra subsequently told his staff that he wanted to accept the first invitation that came to speak in Mississippi. His aides objected, but he didn't hesitate to face his detractors so long as he was armed with the truth. He always felt that if the truth were given equal time, it would fare well. In April 1953 the invitation came—to address the Delta Cotton Council in southern Mississippi. Ezra accepted, and Senator Eastland invited him to stay at his plantation home.

The evening prior to the speech, Secretary Benson invited the senator to review a copy of his address. The next day, with twenty thousand gathered to hear him, the Secretary faced the coldest crowd on the hottest day he could remember. But in introducing him, Senator Eastland said, "My friends, today you're going to hear something you won't like, but it will be good for you because it's the truth." Ezra could not believe what he had heard. He later said he had never been so shocked in his life. He appreciated the senator's courage in making this reversal; Eastland would become one of his best defenders and closest congressional friends.

While Secretary Benson stood firm in his views, his messages did not bear the mark of an unreasonable man. His first interest was to improve conditions for the farmer. He was unencumbered by other motives. In an address to the National Conference of Christians and Jews on May 11, 1953, he explained: "My position on subsidies has been made very plain. . . . I do not think the American farmer is satisfied to depend on subsidies as a way of life. He wants a fair price at the market. But there is a tendency to dramatize agricultural subsidies because they are out in the open where everybody can see them. . . . But let us not overlook the nonfarm subsidies we taxpayers are charged with and the danger that they present to a free economy. . . . Perhaps many of them are still needed today. All I am saying is, 'Let's take a look at the whole picture.'"

Ezra was a convincing speaker. Lorenzo Hoopes, his personal assistant, said that the Secretary was his own best representative. He prepared tirelessly for presentations and often adlibbed, sometimes at length. Don Paarlberg felt that Ezra was most effective when he laid his prepared speech aside and spoke from the heart, "with eloquence, about our wonderful farm people, about America, about freedom, the Constitution, individual responsibility—all of which he called our heritage. . . . The audience would listen attentively." [^40]

Ezra Benson was not a wishy-washy leader. He delivered hard facts that he believed farmers wanted to hear. And whether they agreed with him or not, many farmers sensed his sincerity. Sometimes his audiences were intimate—a few persons gathered on courthouse steps in small communities; other times he addressed thousands, such as in Eau Claire, Wisconsin, where an audience of sixty-five thousand gathered to hear him speak at the National Plowing Contest.

In the summer of 1953 the Midwest was suffering from a drouth so severe that some farmers were going out of business. During June, Secretary Benson toured Texas, a state almost immobilized by the lack of rain. One Texan quipped that it was so dry and dusty where he came from that when it did rain, only 60 percent of it was moisture. In Lubbock, Ezra spoke to an audience gathered under a large building with a tin roof. With the TV lights focused on the speaker's platform, it was "almost literally hot as Hades." He took off his coat and tie, rolled up his sleeves, and did his best to talk despite the oppressive heat.

He had been warned to expect hostile crowds in Austin, but before leaving the area, he felt impressed to suggest to the governor that he declare a day of fasting and prayer, and assured him that rain would be forthcoming. Three days later San Antonio had two inches of rain. A local paper reported, "Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson apparently has contacts that are literally out of this world. When Benson left San Antonio on Sunday he promised south Texas farmers and ranchers immediate drouth aid. Less than 24 hours later it rained for the first time in months."

Space does not allow for an exhaustive listing of published materials extant on Ezra Taft Benson's term as Secretary of Agriculture. The following books, articles, press conferences, addresses, and clippings are those to which I referred most extensively. In addition, I relied heavily upon Secretary Benson's personal journal, which for this period was particularly detailed; his books Freedom to Farm (New York: Doubleday, 1960) and Crossfire: The Eight Years with Eisenhower (New York: Doubleday, 1962); extensive correspondence between Secretary Benson and Dwight D. Eisenhower; and talks given by Flora Amussen Benson and Reed A. Benson during this period.

The National Archives in Washington, D.C., house speeches, correspondence, memoranda, and other official papers detailing Secretary Benson's activities, and occupy over three sections of shelves, each eight feet high by forty feet long. I have not examined all of those materials, though I have used extensive sources from the National Archives and Library of Congress, particularly recordings and videotapes of newsreels, speeches, and appearances on "Meet the Press" and the "Longine-Wittnauer Hour." Doug Thurman at the National Archives was most helpful in sorting through Benson-related videotapes. Many pertinent papers relative to Secretary Benson's service in the cabinet are located in the Church Archives and/or the Benson Family Collection.

Interviews were conducted with and/or written recollections received from Miller Shurtleff, Don Paarlberg, D. Arthur Haycock, Lorenzo Hoopes, Aled Davies, Karl Butler, Wendell Eames, Barry Goldwater, Harvey Dahl, Robert W. Barker, Richard H. Headlee, Byron F. Dickson, George Goold, and Alice Sheets Marriott. See also Oral History Interview, Frederick W. Babbel, Dwight D. Eisenhower Library, Abilene, Kansas, and Ezra Taft Benson Oral Interview, June 23, 1967, Columbia University.

The following resource materials were helpful: Ezra Taft Benson, Farmers at the Crossroads (New York: The Devin-Adair Company, 1956); Edward L. Schapsmeier, Ezra Taft Benson and the Politics of Agriculture (Danville, Illinois: Interstate Printers Publishers, 1975); Stephen E. Ambrose, Eisenhower the President (New York: Simon Schuster, 1984); Piers Brendon, Ike: His Life Times (New York: Harper Row, 1986); Stephen E. Ambrose, Nixon: The Education of a Politician 1913-1962 (New York: Simon Schuster, 1987); David W. Evans, "Ezra Taft Benson—Agricultural Statesman," Improvement Era 56 (January 1953): 27; Bert Tollefson, Jr., "Indestructible Ezra Taft Benson," unpublished manuscript, Benson Family Collection; David Alma Christensen, "An Analysis of the Speaking Style of Ezra Taft Benson: 1943-68," Master's thesis, Brigham Young University, 1980.

Footnotes

"You can't run the farms of America from a desk in Washington."

---
Notas:
[^1] Crossfire, p. 143.3
[^2] Untitled talk delivered by Flora A. Benson, May 1962.
[^3] See, for example, Newsweek, November 2, 1953.
[^4] Josephine Ripley, "Eisenhower Faces Task of Saving Benson," Christian Science Monitor, October 15, 1953; also cited in Crossfire, p. 149.
[^5] Barbara Amussen Benson to ETB, November 9, 1953.
[^6] Crossfire, p. 150.
[^7] Chicago Sun Times, as quoted in Crossfire, p. 171.
[^8] "Everybody Picks on Benson," American, June 1954, p. 26.
[^9] Crossfire, p. 175.
[^10] Ibid., p. 184. For additional information, see "Mr. Benson's Flexible Flyer," Fortune, March 1954, p. 88; "The Truth About the Farm Business," U.S. News World Report, October 8, 1954, pp. 80-88.
[^11] Crossfire, p. 195.
[^12] See Don Paarlberg to author; also Crossfire, p. 203.
[^13] "Benson Turns a Tide," Collier's, September 17, 1954, p. 96. See also "Victory for Benson," Washington Post, July 9, 1954.
[^14] Crossfire, p. 213.
[^15] Lorenzo Hoopes to author, April 16, 1986; Crossfire, p. 218.
[^16] Dwight D. Eisenhower, The White House Years: Mandate for Change 1953-1956 (New York: Doubleday Co., 1963), p. 354.
[^17] "It Was the Biggest Strength of the G.O.P. and Confounded Benson's Political Foes," Wall Street Journal, November 4, 1954. See also Crossfire, p. 221.
[^18] Crossfire, p. 221.
[^19] See ETB to Dwight D. Eisenhower, November 26, 1957; Dwight D. Eisenhower to ETB, December 4, 1957.
[^20] This and the preceding anecdote are related in Don Paarlberg to author, April 21, 1986.
[^21] "The Benson Formula for Serenity," New York Times Magazine, April 11, 1954.
[^22] "Everybody Picks on Benson," American, June 1954.
[^23] ETB to Stephen Reed Benson, August 18, 1982.
[^24] Mark E. Petersen to ETB, November 4, 1953.
[^25] See William J. Shannon to ETB, September 24, 1954; also J. William Flanders to Milton Eisenhower, September 25, 1954.
[^26] Mamie Eisenhower to FAB, May 17, 1954.
[^27] "LDS Home Night Demonstrated to President and Mrs. Eisenhower," Deseret News, February 13, 1955.
[^28] 28. Time, February 23, 1953.
[^29] 29. The Nation, March 21, 1953; also Saturday Evening Post, March 28, 1953.
[^30] 30. See letter quoted in Washington Daily News, February 29, 1953; "Respect Comes the Hard Way," Life, February 16, 1953.
[^31] 31. Madge Ballard to Flora A. Benson, January 28, 1953.
[^32] 32. Crossfire, p. 79.
[^33] 33. Transcript of remarks by Harold B. Lee, March 1, 1953, Washington, D.C., Stake Conference.
[^34] 34. Reed A. Benson to ETB, March 18, 1953.
[^35] 35. Mark A. Benson to ETB, May 22, 1953.
[^36] 36. Crossfire, p. 86.
[^37] 37. See Elaine S. McKay, "Pray for Dad," New Era, January/February 1981, p. 7; also Ezra Taft Benson, "Face the Future Unafraid," Improvement Era 53 (December 1950).
[^38] 38. Crossfire, p. 97.
[^39] 39. See Crossfire, p. 102; also Don Paarlberg to author, April 21, 1986.
[^40] 40. Paarlberg to author, April 21, 1986.
