Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 15

Calm in the Crucible

In June the Benson family moved to Washington—Flora's tenth move since her marriage. Barbara stayed in Utah to attend BYU. It was such a relief to have his family close by again. Ezra relied on Flora's encouragement and her judgment. And she helped him in practical ways. She often sat up nights when he could no longer stay awake, reading folders of material he couldn't squeeze into his eighteen-hour days, and writing constructive ideas. Next morning orderly digests of the material would be in his briefcase.

Others were relieved to have the Secretary's family close at hand. He seemed easier to get along with. His aides noticed that when Flora stopped by the office, it was as though a new light turned on inside him. They came to understand that when, after discussing an important matter, the Secretary said, "I'll not decide now; I'll sleep on it and decide tomorrow," that meant there would be a talk with Flora and prayer that evening. In retrospect Ezra wrote, "Having Flora . . . nearby gave me new confidence. . . . I became more decisive, surer of myself, more willing to tackle the tough challenges." [^1]

Before leaving Utah, the family had discussed what kind and color of car to purchase. Ezra indicated any color was fine, as long as it was black. He put it to a vote in one of their regular family councils, and lost. They flew to South Bend, Indiana, and picked up a bright red Studebaker Champion. "Somehow, I couldn't get comfortable in that machine," Ezra said. Neighbors and friends remarked how out of character it seemed to see the Secretary of Agriculture driving a red car. As a joke, someone sent Ezra a pair of bright red suspenders to wear while motoring in the Studebaker.

The Bensons settled into a modest red brick home near Rock Creek Park. Prominently featured in the living room were an old spinet piano and a leatherbound volume of the Book of Mormon. The home also had chandeliers that used to be in the home of the individual who wrote the lyrics to "Home Sweet Home."

Some privileges that went with Ezra's position didn't set well with Flora—such as the chauffeur assigned to provide transportation for the family. She didn't like the idea of her children being chauffeured to school or of herself being driven around Washington. For months she drove the children everywhere. But the chauffeur was sitting at the office with nothing to do, so Flora finally relented. "Our demands were so pressing," she said. "A chauffeur could get you places quicker, better and safer. I could be driven to the doors of embassies and other functions [and not worry about parking]. . . . [Being] late is an unpardonable sin socially in Washington." [^2]

Barbara, home from BYU, cried when her father said she had to ride in the Cadillac. "We look like something we're not. People will think we're snobs and rich, and we aren't either." She ducked her head the entire way. None of the children liked being driven to school, and they made the chauffeur let them out blocks away. Said Beth, "I was proud of who I was, and proud of my parents, but I wanted people to like me for me and not because of who my father was."

As time went on, the Benson children became the focus of frequent social attention. Photographs of the girls filled the Washington Post and the Evening Star society pages, but when they were approached about being debutantes, Flora said no. She did, however, allow Beverly, following vocal training in New York City, to make her formal singing debut at a private concert for dignitaries and congressmen in the Anderson House. Afterwards her parents kissed her on both cheeks, and this expression of affection was caught by press photographers. Photos appeared the following morning in a number of newspapers around the country. Ezra and Flora were particularly touched by a response from Emma Ray McKay, wife of David O. McKay, who wrote Beverly: "Is it fair to the rest of us that some are born with . . . a good voice and lovely character, and enough common sense not to be spoiled by it all? You are one of those lovely beings." At school the children intentionally maintained a low profile. Beverly attended Roosevelt High School for a year before her teachers realized who her father was.

Schools in Washington were vastly different from those in Utah. Most dignitaries sent their children to private schools, but Ezra and Flora did not follow suit. The Benson children found themselves attending public schools with peers they didn't know. But the girls participated fully, and Bonnie was even voted "friendliest girl" in her high school.

The transition was demanding for Flora as well. She insisted on maintaining the house herself without hired help, despite a demanding social calendar. She often sent Beverly or Bonnie as their father's partner at embassy dinners and receptions, but there were some appearances she couldn't avoid. "I was trying to do all the jobs of a good homemaker . . . and at the end of the day look rested, poised, relaxed, and properly groomed," she said. It was something Ezra appreciated. Her support would be invaluable to him in the days ahead.

By early fall 1953, reports in the press about Secretary Benson were mixed. Some applauded his hard-line policies. Others blamed him for Eisenhower's drop in the polls and claimed he was single-handedly jeopardizing Republican chances in the 1954 congressional elections. [^3] Rumors that he was on his way out persisted. When the House Agriculture Committee released two resolutions demanding that the Secretary put price supports under livestock, Eisenhower was furious. This was an open break with Ezra and hence the administration. While the President staunchly backed his cabinet member, the choir of strident newspaper voices sang forth. "Eisenhower Faces Task of Saving Benson," cried the Christian Science Monitor, representative of dozens more. [^4]

Washingtonians weren't the only ones interested in Ezra Benson's battles. Latter-day Saints around the country watched with keen interest, many of them understanding little more than that their apostle was under fire. There were those who disagreed with his agricultural policies and others who couldn't get used to their ecclesiastical leader getting battered about on Capitol Hill for all to see. Apparently Ezra was sensitive about this. In his general conference address in October 1954 he admitted, "My one anxiety is that I may inadvertently do something . . . that will cast an unfavorable light or bring discredit upon the Church. . . . I pray that this may never happen."

On November 8, 1953, after a stake conference in Orem, Utah, Barbara wrote, "Elder Harold B. Lee was the speaker. . . . Most of his talk was about you and the wonderful job you're doing and how we should all pray for you and be behind you 100%. He really scolded those that were critical." [^5]

Presumably worried about the impact his activities might have upon those close to him, Ezra wrote his brothers and sisters on November 9, 1953: "I hope you will not become unduly depressed when you read items deeply critical of me. . . . This seems to be a part of the office and will be so, particularly during the ensuing year."

After they returned to Utah in the early sixties, Flora acknowledged how the strain had affected their immediate family: "Politics can be brutal. . . . Our family had many a cry and heartaches with fasting and earnest prayer, but the rewarding and sunny days came often."

Late in 1953 Ezra gave Eisenhower a graceful out, indicating that he would resign if the president saw fit. "That will never happen," Ike snapped. "I don't want to hear any more about it." [^6]

The pressure leading to a Benson resignation intensified in October 1953 when a caravan of 350 cattlemen, most of them "suitcase" cowboys who had gotten into the cattle business to make a fast dollar when prices were high, and who now moaned at dropped prices, marched on Washington to demand that Ezra place price supports under beef. The USDA auditorium bulged with protesters, the press, and curious department employees. Despite the extensive media coverage of the cattlemen's caravan, the Secretary would not be stampeded. After hearing out the group's spokesmen, he addressed the problem at length, outlining sound principles that would benefit cattlemen in the long run. The department was subsequently flooded with letters from cattlemen nationwide who insisted those in the caravan represented no one but themselves, and who said they had seen fluctuating prices before and were willing to weather the storm. The crisis ended as suddenly as it had begun—but not before the media, Congress, and farmers across the country saw Ezra Taft Benson stand for principle rather than bow to political expediency.

The day before the cattle caravan invasion, Ezra and Under Secretary True D. Morse spent an hour during a cabinet session presenting a detailed report on the agricultural situation. For months Secretary Benson had worked to convince Eisenhower that flexible price supports were the answer to the surpluses, and finally the president endorsed his views. It was the most significant date in his first year as secretary.

Before the fickle political pendulum swung again, and with Ike solidly in his corner, Ezra determined to get in his punches. At his prodding, President Eisenhower agreed to outline the administration's farm program in a message to Congress on January 11, 1954.

Ezra wanted Eisenhower to make a strong speech. But getting it past White House aides, who wanted to tone down his policies to make them more attractive to Congress, was a task laced together by endurance and strategy. However, after repeated battles with the president's staff, Ezra had his way. The address called for flexible price supports on major commodities, a gradual shift to a modernized formula for figuring parity, and no change in the policy on perishable commodities.

A blizzard hit Washington, D.C., on January 11, but inside Congress the temperature was considerably warmer as the president delivered, point by point, the administration's new farm program. Secretary Benson had wanted the farm program to be regarded as the administration's rather than his, and that strategy paid off. Response to the address was surprisingly favorable. An editorial from the Chicago Sun-Times is typical of others: "The program makes a lot of sense to us, and we urge Congress to take Ike's advice and give it early approval." [^7]

Round one was over. But it would take a long fight to get the program through Congress. One evening soon after, Ezra and Flora had a talk. He felt that if he could educate farmers, they would back the president's program. But that meant traveling to every agricultural state and talking with anyone who would listen. Flora encouraged him to take his message to the people, and she would keep things on an even keel at home. One reporter wrote, "Although Flora Benson is extremely retiring in public, in private she is considered to be the pivot on which the family moves. . . . Friends of the family agree that she acts as the leavening influence on her husband. Said a friend, 'Every once in a while, when it's needed, . . . she says, "Now, look here, T!" and that seems to do the trick.'" [^8]

Immediately Ezra embarked on an exhausting tour. He made dozens of major speeches throughout the country, testified before congressional committees, gave radio and television interviews, and made it home for only a few nights before heading out again.

The strain of having her husband away so much was difficult for Flora. She explained, "It's a killing job but the Lord will see us through. If my husband's services are going to benefit our country, then we can make a contribution by sacrificing his company without complaint."

Repeatedly he preached the doctrine of self-reliance and freedom—that an individual's freedom to choose for himself, as outlined in the Book of Mormon, was God's greatest gift: "Ye are free; ye are permitted to act for yourselves; for behold God hath . . . made you free." Often he spoke to antagonistic farmers who resented the threat of losing government guarantees for growing crops. To those who said his policies were poor politics, he appealed to their sense of right and wrong: "Do you seriously believe that the American farmer . . . [is] so foolish . . . that [he] cannot, or will not, choose what is right over so-called political expediency? I refuse to believe that what is right is not good politics." [^9]

But Ezra's principled, single-minded farm program had trouble in Congress. A newsletter of wide circulation reported that "things are looking bad for Benson and company on Capitol Hill—to put it mildly. Their farm program now stands less chance than ever for approval." [^10]

Finally, Eisenhower went on television to appeal to the people, declaring, "Many have told me that it would not be good politics to attempt solution of the farm problem during an election year. The sensible thing to do, I have been told . . . was to close my eyes to the damage the present farm program does to our farmers. . . . In this matter I am completely unmoved by arguments as to what constitutes good or winning politics. . . . Though I have not been in this political business very long, I know that what is right for America is politically right." [^11]

Despite the president's plea, only four days later the House Agriculture Committee voted to raise price supports on dairy products. The break with the administration was complete.

In the meantime, Secretary Benson continued to take his program to the people. Against advice from his staff, he went to Denver to speak to the National Farmers Union, whose 750,000 members consistently opposed his policies on price supports. Even the president asked if he were ready to face a "bunch of rebels." But after a hard-hitting address, the Secretary received a rousing standing ovation. It was all he could do to hold back the tears as farmers gathered around him afterwards.

While at Pennsylvania State University to deliver a speech, Ezra toured the dairy barns. When members of the press challenged him to milk a prize Holstein, he took his position, grinned, and told them to move back or he'd squirt them. As they backed about ten feet away, he overheard one reporter boast, "He'll never reach us here." Ezra recorded, "When I got going pretty well I suddenly shot a spray of milk and got him good."

Despite such lighter moments, the controversy over the farm program raged on in Congress, and subtlety was not Secretary Benson's forte. Then President Eisenhower gave him a lesson in strategy. He marked a square and an X on a piece of paper. The X was their objective, and the square their forces. "It might seem that the simplest thing to do is to go straight toward the objective," he explained. "But that is not always the best way to get there. You may have to move around some obstacle. You may have to feint and pull the defense out of position. Sometimes you just wait and catch the enemy when he isn't expecting you. That may have to be the way you work at this farm problem." [^12]

As it turned out, Secretary Benson was forced to employ various tactics, including compromise, when he couldn't get all he wanted. On August 9, 1954, the vote on what had become known as the Agricultural Act of 1954 went to the Senate. The Bensons fasted that day; Reed sat in the Senate gallery, sending hourly reports to his father; and Ezra spent hours on the telephone with Senators rallying votes. At seven-thirty that night word came that the Senate had passed, by a vote of 49 to 44, flexible price support legislation.

The next day, under the headline "Foolish Ezra, They Said of Mr. Benson—But He Beat the Farm Bloc," Scripps-Howard columnist Howard Lucey wrote: "They . . . called him stupid and denounced him as the worst Secretary of Agriculture in history and demanded that President Eisenhower fire him. But Ezra Taft Benson stood his ground and took the pounding. Today he has emerged as hero of the biggest legislative victory the Eisenhower administration has had." Collier's saw it as a moral victory: "It would have been easier for the Secretary . . . if he had been willing to let the rigid 90 per cent of parity support remain operative. . . . But the issue as Secretary Benson saw it was not wholly or even mainly political. It was first economic, and ultimately moral." [^13]

As the fickle arena of politics will have it, Ezra Taft Benson was suddenly a champion, and election-year candidates came to his office seeking endorsements and photographs. His farm program was the hottest election issue in farm states, and welcoming the opportunity to expound upon the principles involved, he hit the campaign trail. From early September until November 2, he made speeches daily, except Sundays. "Such campaigning is a terrible ordeal," he wrote, "but it is so exhilarating while going on, you don't know how tired you are until you stop." [^14]

In the meantime, Secretary Benson had a run-in with Eisenhower's chief of staff, Sherman Adams. Ezra refused to stand behind price supports for eggs, and Adams chided him to get off "his puritanical white horse." At this the Secretary instructed an assistant to prepare a letter to Ike stating he wouldn't back down—"and make it strong." When a White House staff member suggested Ezra was still a political liability, Eisenhower responded, "Ezra is the shining star in the firmament of my administration." [^15] (In due time Adams would inscribe on a picture that Ezra was "Rugged and Right.")

There were some who believed Eisenhower retained Secretary Benson because he functioned as a political lightning rod and drew attention away from other Eisenhower policies that might have harmed the president's appeal. But it seems clear there was mutual respect between the two men. The only criticism Ike is known to have made publicly about Secretary Benson is what was written in his memoirs when he recorded that the Secretary's views were "earnestly held and argued, though not always with the maximum of tact." [^16]

Ezra sat out election day in 1954 with some anxiety. The farm program was a principal issue on trial in rural areas. The Republicans lost control of Congress, but the returns from agricultural states were surprisingly favorable. Senator Guy Gillette of Iowa, an eighteen-year Democratic veteran considered invincible, had opposed Secretary Benson. He was unseated. Republican strength prevailed in major Midwestern farm states. Senator Clinton Anderson, a Democrat from New Mexico who had supported the new program, was decisively reelected.

On the day after the election, the Wall Street Journal proclaimed that the biggest election victory went to "Ezra Taft Benson and his farm program. . . . Rural America made it plain amid all the other confusion . . . that it was not repudiating Mr. Benson." The Chicago Sun-Times headlined, "Benson Gets the Last Laugh," and NBC commentator Lloyd Burlingame concluded, "Hundreds of politicians won victories for themselves. . . . but Secretary Benson won a victory for the United States of America." [^17]

After the election, Ezra wondered if it wasn't time to return to Salt Lake City. He felt that the elections had vindicated his program and significant legislation had passed Congress—and he had only promised President Eisenhower two years. In a November meeting he told the president that he would be happy to be relieved of his responsibilities. The president quickly shot back, "If you quit, I quit," adding, "If it is necessary I'll go to Salt Lake myself to urge that you continue as my Secretary of Agriculture." [^18]

As some of the most prominent Mormons in the nation, the Bensons and their religion were repeatedly in the spotlight. As the embodiment of family, home, and the American way, the Bensons were the focus of perhaps the most positive attention the Church had ever received throughout the country. A lengthy Saturday Evening Post article, published on March 28, 1953, retold the Joseph Smith story in its entirety, elaborating on doctrines such as the eternal nature of man, the Word of Wisdom, and the building of Zion on the American continent. Literally hundreds of news reports included in-depth discussions of the Church.

The Secretary seized every appropriate opportunity to talk about the gospel and the Church. When a university radio station in the Midwest asked if it might broadcast his favorite scriptural reading, he selected the Joseph Smith story, which is found in the Pearl of Great Price, one of the Church's standard scriptural works. Ezra sent Eisenhower lengthy excerpts from the Book of Mormon prophesying about America's destiny. After receiving one such letter, Ike responded: "Thank you for drawing on your wide knowledge of the Book of Mormon to send me certain prophecies and revelations. The quotations I have read with the greatest of interest, with special applications to the growth and the problems of America." [^19] Dozens of world leaders received copies of the Book of Mormon—heads of state, ambassadors, even newspaper editors.

Perhaps another reason Ezra Benson continued to attract media attention was because, after a year of intense fire (one reporter called it the "hardest pounding any Administration official ever took in his first year of office"), he had remained surprisingly calm. Observers didn't know what to make of his serenity. A fellow cabinet officer told him, "Every night when I go to bed I thank God I'm not the Secretary of Agriculture!" But with Ezra, peace came in doing what he felt was right—and letting the consequences follow. As Flora reminded him frequently, "Don't worry about the world's opinion of you as long as you're right with the Lord."

Inevitably, the boiling cauldron of farm politics spilled into the Benson family life. Beverly often attended press conferences and congressional hearings, many of which blasted her father. It tore at her heart. But she, with her brothers and sisters, had implicit confidence in him. "When you know your dad is right, you know he's going to rise above it all," she said.

Beth was young enough to not understand everything, but old enough to dislike the criticism. "It hurt me deeply," she recalls. "Home should be peaceful, an escape. But some pressures couldn't help but come in. Dad put on a lot of weight, which was part of his stress relief."

In fact, Ezra's position put the entire family under strain. When, for example, gunmen from Puerto Rico opened fire in Congress, wounding four, police officers were immediately assigned to all cabinet members and their homes.

But Flora created a sanctuary to which Ezra could retreat. The social invitations she received could have taken her out of the home constantly, but she often sent one of the girls with Ezra to White House dinners or embassy receptions so she could stay home, where she felt she was most needed. At these receptions, the Bensons met some of the world's most renowned personalities, including Queen Elizabeth and Prince Philip, Winston Churchill, and the King and Queen of Greece.

When a young Army private, James Parker, began to court Beverly, he observed the Bensons firsthand. Beverly's first date with him was to a July Fourth celebration where Secretary Benson was the speaker. Parker felt somewhat intimidated by the chauffeurs and police escort. Afterwards, as the family returned home, he worried about feeling comfortable in the Secretary's home. They had barely stepped inside when the Secretary invited him into the kitchen, and Jim thought he was in for an interrogation. However, he breathed easier when the Secretary set things out on the counter and asked him if he would like some bread and milk. The following Sunday Jim was invited to dinner. After the meal Sister Benson said, "Okay, T, it's your turn to do dishes. Jim, you can help." Another date was also memorable: "I came to pick Beverly up for a date, and she wasn't quite ready," Jim remembered. "Sister Benson pulled out the vacuum and asked if I'd mind cleaning while I waited. It was that kind of family environment."

The principal stabilizer for the family was the gospel and the priorities and focus it gave them. Regardless of how intense the pressures became, their lives were rooted in something much greater than politics and Washington. The gospel message gave them an eternal purpose and perspective. "We did a lot of praying and fasting," Beverly recalls. "We must have spent four of the eight years on our knees. We needed each other, and had to pull together."

There were other pressure valves. Beth and her father often took walks through nearby Rock Creek Park. She loved the private time with him, and he relished the solitude and surroundings. Occasionally at night Beverly gave her father a private organ recital at the Washington Ward chapel. The music seemed to soothe his nerves.

The Marriott ranch was also a refuge. Occasionally the family went there for the weekend. Ezra rose early to ride horses, and Beth sometimes stayed up all night so she wouldn't oversleep and miss those early-morning rides with him. They did him wonders. He felt that he had to get away from Washington to maintain his perspective.

Perspective was hard to come by at times, when he was constantly being labeled as a moralist, a do-gooder. Political cartoonists had a heyday with him. Yet Ezra maintained his composure. Don Paarlberg usually accompanied his boss to testify before congressional committees. One of his responsibilities was to "hold the book," a compilation of facts and statistics, tabbed and indexed for ready response. He sat directly behind the Secretary and communicated by notes and whispers. He recalled, "Committee members sometimes badger a witness. They bear down especially while television cameras are rolling. Sometimes, when the treatment got rough, I could see the red color rising above Secretary Benson's collar. He would pause, swallow, wet his lips and answer in calm tones. Coming back in the Secretary's car after one experience, an aide commended him on his poise. The Secretary said, seemingly more to himself than to others, 'A soft answer turneth away wrath but grievous words stir up anger.'"

Ezra's humor surfaced at unexpected times. At a congressional hearing Senator Hubert Humphrey, an outspoken critic, said, in words to this effect: "Secretary Benson, we hear much about exploration in Antarctica. Your stocks of surplus wheat would probably keep very well down there where it is so cold. Have you thought about shipping your wheat down there for storage?" "Yes I have, Senator," Ezra replied. "And I've thought of sending you down there to oversee the operation." Senator Humphrey laughed louder than anyone else. [^20]

It was such behavior that caught the fancy of the press. In an article entitled "The Benson Formula for Success," the New York Times Magazine explained the Secretary's inner calm: "One reason is his religion. . . . He acts like a man whose conscience is always clear—his testimony today will be the same next week or the week after or a year from now. He doesn't have to remember what he said to an opposition Senator at their last meeting. This is a built-in ulcer-saving device not always found in Washington." [^21]

A reporter from American magazine followed Ezra around his office and was unprepared with what he found: "Many high executives, I've noted, strike an attitude of outward calm during interviews, but it's easy to sense the unleashed powder keg underneath. . . . [However, Benson] wasn't fooling; he was calm. He spoke in a quiet, confident, unruffled voice. His brow never knotted up at the knottiest questions. . . . There might have been a touch of Pollyanna about the man, but there was no pomposity. And if he had little emotion, he certainly had warmth. I marked him as a man who'd never feel the sting of an ulcer."

The magazine reporter asked the Secretary his secret. "It's easy to keep calm," Ezra replied, "if you have inner security and peace of mind. . . . I try to do the thing I believe to be right and let the chips fall where they will." The reporter concluded that it was obvious the Secretary's" 'inner security and peace of mind' came largely from his religion." [^22] Indeed, Ezra's inner stability and strength came from his reliance on the gospel and the teachings of the Savior. As the Book of Mormon taught, "Peace be unto you, because of your faith in my Well Beloved."

Years later Ezra would counsel his eldest grandson, who by that time had become a nationally syndicated political cartoonist, "We pray that in spite of the barbs that are directed your way, you will keep that sweet, humble spirit of the gospel mixed with your usual good humor." He knew whereof he spoke. [^23]

The First Presidency followed with keen interest the activities of their apostle in Washington. In his personal journal under date of August 19, 1954, President McKay recorded his remarks to a meeting of the Council of the Twelve: "I expressed gratitude to the Lord for the success that has attended . . . Brother Benson. . . . I suppose it is not overstating the fact when I say that only the present responsibilities of the President himself exceed those which Brother Benson is carrying. . . . Out of it all stands before the American people Brother Benson's integrity and honesty of purpose. Even those who have opposed him in his policy admit that nobody can question Brother Benson's honesty . . . and in that declaration and radiant manifestation of character he has brought great credit to himself, the Council, and the Church."

On another occasion President McKay attended a meeting in the State Department. A senator made special mention of the administration's spirituality and attributed it in part to the influence of Secretary Benson. President McKay told Ezra he had hardly been able to hold back the tears.

A letter from Elder Mark E. Petersen to his colleague counseled him to not become discouraged, declaring that he was doing more good "than one hundred missionaries in the field." [^24]

The Benson family hadn't been in Washington long before they realized how potent their missionary opportunities were, but Flora was determined to keep her children insulated from the pageantry of her husband's high-profile position. That, of course, was virtually impossible. But she wanted six children who had their feet on the ground and their heads out of the clouds. There were unusual social experiences, however. They had a standing offer to use the White House swimming pool, occasionally spent a day on the "Susie E," the presidential yacht, and enjoyed a few weekend trips to Camp David. Flora approved of her children having growing experiences, but she resented intrusions that drew them too far into the limelight.

For that reason, when Edward R. Murrow approached Secretary Benson about featuring the family on his popular Friday night television show, "Person to Person," Flora responded with a flat refusal. Ezra dropped the subject, but Reed sensed a missionary opportunity and doggedly promoted the idea of showing America an inside look at an LDS family's home evening. Finally Flora conceded.

The show was televised live on September 24, 1954, with only an informal run-through—no rehearsal. Three television cameras were set up in the Bensons' living room and library. The garage was filled with electronic equipment, and a production crew of ten was on hand. On the show, Flora introduced the family. The girls sang "Sittin' on Top of the World," Barbara sang "Italian Street Song," Beth tap-danced and sang, Reed and Mark explained the Church's missionary program, and the family sang "Love at Home."

With time winding down on the program, and realizing this as her last opportunity to cover a few salient points, Flora responded to Murrow's question, "Do you have any domestic help?" with a spirited reply: "No, we do not have a maid. We feel that we learn by doing. We prepare all of our own meals, and plan them. . . . We play together, sing together. We're a very religious family. We have daily prayer—individual and together—because we feel that a family that prays together stays together. I feel that's true of a nation." It was a typical home evening, as the Bensons saw it. That, however, is not how several million viewers perceived it.

Murrow called from New York later to say it was his finest show. Eisenhower told Ezra, "Besides all the rest of it, it was the best political show you could have put on." The December 1955 issue of Look reported, "The best shows often come from homes where one least expects to find them. The visit to Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson turned out to be one of the most popular. . . . It made a moving family portrait that was much more entertaining than most calls on show-business celebrities." United Press International reported that the show featuring the Bensons brought Murrow more fan mail than any other in history. Hundreds of letters came to the Secretary's office. One read: "May a Catholic priest tell you and your family how inspiring and wholesome your visit was via television tonight? I never expect to live to see one of my own faith elected President. I would like to see candidates of your timber, and indeed you would be assured of my vote." A man who identified himself as being from the grass roots wrote Milton Eisenhower: "My resolve to write you was crystallized this morning when one of the men in our office asked me if I saw the program. . . . He said, 'I didn't realize there was anyone in Washington like that.' I think the wholesome picture presented of a Christian, close-knitted family serving their country in a high post was a sobering sight to many." [^25]

Many letters were addressed specifically to Flora, such as one that read, "Your sincere warmth and spiritual attitude of family must have endeared you to many listeners. . . . I prayed that very night that I might be the mother you are." And another stated, "Did you stop to realize that your television performance, seen by millions of people, was a stroke of missionary work of the first magnitude?"

In addition to the show's missionary impact, it boosted Ezra's popularity in the South, where the conservative population responded enthusiastically. A short time later, a Republican party official from the South said that Ezra Taft Benson was so popular he could be elected to any office there.

The Murrow show brought the Bensons front and center as spokesmen for conservative religious thought. Unusual incidents followed, such as one at a banquet in Chicago. Just before the Secretary rose to speak, a waiter whispered, "Mr. Secretary, would it be helpful to you to know that thousands of people are praying for you?"

Many letters referred to the Bensons' sincerity. Elder Benson attributed it to genuine family loyalty that showed through. Regardless of how busy he was, he kept Wednesday nights open for family nights. When he could, he cancelled obligations that conflicted with family events—such as an important social function the same night as Bonnie's daddy-daughter party. Residents near the church were perhaps startled that evening to find the Secretary of Agriculture and his daughter collecting green toothpicks and shoelaces for a scavenger hunt.

After several years in Washington, Ezra worried that he wasn't spending enough time with his children and even noted in his journal that Flora had talked to him about freeing up more time. He tried to do better.

At home the kitchen was the center of the family's activity. Ezra had a favorite dish—whole wheat bread and honey, covered with milk, and topped off with raw onions. It was a family tradition for him to bite into an onion and begin, "You know . . ." The children would chime in and repeat," . . . the onion is the most neglected vegetable in the world." Then Ezra would take another bite and say, "Glad to see you're finally learning. Here, have an onion," and everyone would laugh.

After Reed was honorably discharged from the Air Force and he joined the family in Washington, D.C., he spent much time with his sisters, and even held early-morning classes with them where he taught gospel subjects and shared notes he had used in his lectures as a chaplain. He also bought each a number of Church books to help them begin their individual libraries. The girls formed a Book of Mormon club—complete with a theme song, which they wrote.

Benson family nights opened with prayer and scripture reading. Frequently the meetings ended with the family all laughing until tears came to their eyes. Flora often turned on the record player for dancing. She and Ezra loved to dance. Flora said they danced their troubles away. A Washington columnist noted that at a White House reception, the Bensons were the first to take the dance floor.

In family council the family discussed finances, who was dating whom, how late the girls could stay out, how much time could be spent in front of the TV, time limits for phone calls, and so forth. The children agreed among themselves that they wouldn't date until they were sixteen and that any suitor had to be approved by the family. There was no dating out of the Church for the Benson girls.

While Flora was loathe to plunge her family into the Washington social scene, there were some obligations she couldn't decline. She hostessed her first luncheon for cabinet wives in May 1954. Though most such luncheons were catered, she determined to invite these women to her home and, with the help of her daughters, prepare everything herself. Flora's preparations were painstaking. Reed even flew in from San Antonio to assist. When Ezra protested at the fuss, Flora insisted that it was her chance to host an enjoyable gathering with appropriate standards.

When the women arrived, she greeted them warmly and explained that things were different in her home—that there were no cocktails, playing cards, smoking, or tea and coffee—but then added, "We'll try to make it up to you in our way, and we hope you enjoy our home."

The girls helped serve the meal, and all of the children performed. BYU's Madrigal Singers were in Washington on tour, and they also sang (with Barbara as soloist). Mamie Eisenhower was so taken with the BYU group that she promptly invited them to the White House that afternoon, accompanied them on the tour of the mansion, and waved from the front porch as their Greyhound bus drove away. Later she wrote Flora her thanks: "This is just a note to tell you again how much I enjoyed your beautiful luncheon. . . . The food which you and your daughters prepared was delicious, it was all so good that my dinner was very unattractive to me that evening. I loved seeing your little house. The atmosphere of peace and love abiding within made all of us come away with a deep feeling of joy." [^26]

The Bensons had other opportunities to mingle socially with the Eisenhowers, usually at formal White House dinners. One exception took place on December 21, 1954, when the Eisenhowers joined the Bensons at the Marriott ranch. After dinner, the family put on an hour of old-fashioned entertainment. The Secretary even led the group singing "John Brown's Baby Had a Cold upon Its Chest," complete with hand actions. [^27]

That night, as the family was driven home, Secretary Benson contemplated the more serious side of his work and the president's recent assurance that he wanted him to stay in Washington. Ike's words of support were encouraging, but he wondered if he could hold up under two more years.

Footnotes

"I feel it is always good strategy to stand up for the right, even when it is unpopular. Perhaps I should say, especially when it is unpopular."

---
Notas:
[^1] LeGrand Richards Memo, March 10, 1955.
[^2] See "Secretary Benson Reports on the Big Blow of 1955," U.S. News World Report, May 6, 1955.
[^3] Harvey Dahl to author, April 21, 1986.
[^4] See Ezra Taft Benson, "Respect for Standards," New Era, June 1978, p. 11.
[^5] Edgar B. Brossard to ETB, August 4, 1955.
[^6] Miller F. Shurtleff to author, tape-recorded reminiscences, June 5, 1986.
[^7] "Capitol Bride to Marry in Simplicity," Chicago Daily News, September 8, 1955.
[^8] Mamie D. Eisenhower to FAB, March 8, 1955; also Church News, July 30, 1955.
[^9] Church News, November 12, 1955.
[^10] See Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, October 29, 1955.
[^11] Crossfire, p. 273.
[^12] Crossfire, p. 115.
[^13] See Bert Tollefson, Jr., "Indestructible Ezra Benson," unpublished personal reminiscences, Benson Family Collection.
[^14] Crossfire, p. 294. See also Ezra Taft Benson, "The Official View on How 'Soil Bank' Is Working," U.S. News World Report, May 31, 1957.
[^15] Crossfire, p. 304.
[^16] Everett M. Dirksen to ETB, January 27, 1956.
[^17] "Secretary Benson Treated Shabbily in Abusive House Committee Hearing," Yakima Daily Republic, March 6, 1956.
[^18] See, for example, Secretary Benson's 1956 Speech Fact Book, item #5, "Agriculture Not for Sale."
[^19] Ambrose, Eisenhower the President, p. 300.
[^20] "The Eisenhower Shift," Fortune, April 1956, p. 267.
[^21] Ezra Taft Benson, "Personal Reminiscences," unpublished, pp. 40-41, Benson Family Collection.
[^22] Crossfire, p. 321.
[^23] Ibid., p. 322.
[^24] "Secretary Benson's Son Makes Hit with GOP Women's Conference," Baltimore Evening Sun, March 9, 1956; also Homer H. Grunether to ETB, March 9, 1956.
[^25] "Reed Benson's Life Underwent Change After His First Talk Two Months Ago," Twin Falls Times-News, May 13, 1956; David O. McKay to ETB, July 2, 1956.
[^26] See "Cabinet Wives Astir," Newsweek, October 15, 1956, p. 43.
[^27] As quoted in Deseret News, June 15, 1956.
