Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 16

Respect Comes the Hard Way

After literally climbing and, to a certain extent, conquering the mountain of opposition surrounding the farm program, Ezra hoped he might enjoy, for a period at least, some relative peace. But this was not to be. After the November 1954 elections, Congress was now controlled by the Democrats, and it remained to be seen how much success Ezra would have on Capitol Hill.

In the meantime, Secretary Benson's attention was focused beyond Washington, D. C. For some time Eisenhower had encouraged him to travel internationally on goodwill missions and expeditions to increase agricultural exports abroad. On February 19, 1955, the Secretary left on an eighteen-day tour that would take him to Cuba, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Trinidad, Costa Rica, Venezuela, Colombia, Panama, Nicaragua, Guatemala, and Mexico. In each country he met with presidents, ministers of agriculture, ambassadors, and U.S. businessmen. As he toured experimental livestock stations, farms, canneries, and the like, he discussed ways to increase U.S. exports without upsetting the balance of trade—always assuring his hosts that the U.S. would not dump its huge surpluses abroad.

An experienced traveler, the Secretary knew how to arrange an efficient, effective itinerary. When his hectic schedule of diplomatic responsibilities allowed, he met with Church groups of Latter-day Saints ranging from 450 in Mexico City to four in Barquisimeto, Venezuela, where the members drove 250 miles to be with him in an informal Sunday worship service in his hotel room.

Elder Benson reported his visits with the Saints to President McKay. Regarding this trip, President McKay recorded in his journal: "Received a letter yesterday from Fred Schluter, who has been down in Central and South America and went with Brother Benson on some of his appointments. Brother Schluter in his letter praises Brother Benson very highly. Said he was delighted with the way in which he met those audiences and gave the answers to their questions, and there is no question in his mind . . . that the people of . . . those countries . . . will recognize Brother Benson as the strongest man in President Eisenhower's Cabinet." [^1]

Upon the Secretary's return, Eisenhower was similarly pleased with his report, holding him for an hour after a luncheon honoring Prime Minister Robert G. Menzies of Australia to discuss Ezra's observations.

The drouth lingered on in the Great Plains and in the South with severity reminiscent of the Dust Bowl in the 1930s. In April 1955 Ezra, accompanied by True Morse, Ken Scott (director of Credit Services), and his assistant Harvey Dahl, inspected the disaster firsthand. In Denver they met with governors from six Midwestern states, and then boarded buses to travel through eastern Colorado, Kansas, and New Mexico. [^2]

In Lamar, Colorado, where Ezra was to address a meeting of some fifteen hundred farmers, they learned that dissidents from the Farmers Union intended to break up the meeting and embarrass the Secretary. No disturbance occurred, but the demonstrators followed them to their next meeting in Tucumcari, New Mexico. Concerned, Ezra asked Harvey Dahl (as a Latter-day Saint) to find someone in Tucumcari to offer an invocation and conduct music so the group could sing "America." The meeting began on such a patriotic note that the protesters were completely disarmed. That evening, after giving a midnight telephone interview to U.S. News World Report, Ezra retired, closing his hotel window to keep the dry sand from blowing in and covering everything.

It was Dahl's responsibility to make recommendations on counties in the drouth-stricken plains to receive government aid due to agricultural disaster. Dahl later recalled the Secretary's instructions to him on his first day on the job: "If you err, Harvey, err on the side of mercy." [^3]

In August 1955 Ezra left on a second international trip, this one to Europe, accompanied by Flora. They visited Scotland, England, the Netherlands, Denmark, France, Italy, and Switzerland, calling on governmental officials and reviewing the state of agriculture throughout those countries.

Several events were memorable. The Bensons spent a day in Koge, Denmark, the home of Flora's father. It was her first visit to the little community, and as they toured the home where Carl Amussen had lived, she struggled to hold back the tears. Later she wrote her brothers and sisters, giving a vivid description of the surroundings. That evening in Copenhagen they spoke to a congregation that filled the LDS chapel to capacity.

In Rome the Secretary delivered the keynote address to representatives of seventy nations at the International Federation of Agricultural Producers. A luncheon in Ezra's honor followed the morning session. During the hour when cocktails were usually available, he noticed that no liquor was being served and mentioned the omission to his host, Dr. Sen of India. Dr. Sen replied, "Mr. Secretary, today we honor you and respect your standards." At the banquet table only soft drinks and fruit juices were available, and Ezra again told Dr. Sen, "Surely the men expect to have their usual hot drink." "No, Mr. Secretary. I am the host. You are the honored guest, and at this luncheon we honor you and respect your standards." The tribute touched Ezra deeply. [^4]

The trip's highlight, however, came on Sunday, September 11, in Bern, Switzerland, where Ezra spoke in dedicatory services for the Church's new Swiss Temple. He recited some of the history of his great-grandfather, Serge Louis Ballif, and as he spoke he had the impression that some of his ancestors were present in spirit. He later said he had never felt the veil any thinner.

As they flew back across the Atlantic, Ezra pondered how much Europe had changed since 1946, when he had seen the continent reduced to rubble. He recalled the touching moments when the Saints had cried as they saw the boxes of welfare supplies shipped from the States. The Church's welfare program, he felt, was literal evidence of Solomon's prophetic statement, "Where there is no vision, the people perish." Thousands would have perished had there been no vision and hence no welfare supplies.

But how ironic, Ezra thought, to have worked so hard to stave off starvation among the European Saints, and to now face the problem of huge surpluses sitting idle in government bins. Nine years earlier he had seen people eating chicken feed. Now he was overseer to enough foodstuffs to feed Americans for a year. He felt like the proverbial Joseph of Egypt, except he had had too many years of plenty without any famine in sight. Not that he was hoping for famine, but he knew something had to be done about the surpluses, and done quickly.

Through aggressive marketing programs implemented by Secretary Benson and his staff, between July 1953 and fall of 1955 the Department of Agriculture moved into the open market commodities valued at $4 billion. They sold oil, butter, and cheese at breakneck speed. But what they dispensed in dairy products was more than offset by rapidly growing quantities of grain, primarily wheat and corn. By 1955 the government owned enough wheat to provide for two years' domestic consumption, and the writing was on the wall—the Secretary had to seek additional legislation to deal with the surpluses.

When he couldn't get Congress to adopt realistic price supports, Ezra was forced to seek other solutions—some of which called for compromise. As he and his staff reviewed alternatives, they returned again and again to a solution Ezra found reprehensible: paying farmers for not producing. For a long time he couldn't bring himself to accept the idea, much less recommend it. But in August 1955 he set economist Don Paarlberg to work evaluating the possibilities with instructions to find a solution as unobjectionable as possible.

While Ezra's popularity was a constant roller-coaster ride, there was no question that he was having a positive effect on the administration. A June 1955 Gallup poll indicated that should Eisenhower run for reelection the following year, he would have 57 percent of the Southern vote. Eisenhower's popularity in the South was due in large measure to Ezra Taft Benson, according to Dr. Omer Clyde Aderhold, president of the University of Georgia. Pressed to explain, as most Southern states had opposed flexible price supports, he answered that the popularity was due to the Secretary's personal character, his family, and his belief in God and religion as portrayed on Edward R. Murrow's TV show "Person to Person." [^5]

Ezra spent Saturday, September 24, 1955, at home with Bonnie and Beth. Flora was in Utah with Beverly, who was entering BYU, and helping Barbara make preparations for her forthcoming marriage. About five o'clock in the evening, John Foster Dulles called. President Eisenhower had had a heart attack.

Ezra was shocked at the news, but after contemplation and prayer, he felt unusually confident that the president would recover. Miller Shurtleff remembers the Secretary making that prediction to his staff on Monday. "I don't know if he would consider that instinct or inspiration, but the Secretary assured us Eisenhower would regain his health." [^6] The public wasn't so sure; the following Monday the Dow Jones share index fell by over thirty points—its worst day since the 1929 crash.

The next day Ezra and the girls flew to Salt Lake City. Barbara's wedding plans had been covered widely by the press, and Washington socialites were still buzzing that this eligible young woman had opted for such a quiet, simple wedding. "Barbara Benson . . . will be married this month without the society crush and protocol problems that have marked weddings of daughters of other high government officials," wrote the Chicago Daily News. [^7] Even so, her announcement list, which started at twelve hundred, escalated rapidly from there. On September 29, 1955, Ezra performed the marriage of his eldest daughter to Robert Walker, a Canadian physician, in the Salt Lake Temple.

The Bensons were becoming distinguished for their unique social standards. When Mamie Eisenhower invited Flora to lunch at the White House, aware that Flora didn't play bridge, she penned a personal note on the invitation: "Dear Flora: Won't you come and join me for lunch. Maybe we will play Scrabble or Bolivia. I would love to have you come to lunch even if you don't play [card] games." At another White House luncheon Flora's placecard read: "She's as busy as can be, with family and Church/At singing and cooking she's famed/It's lucky for us that what Utah has lost/Our National City has gained." [^8]

On October 26, 1955, Flora was honored by the National Home Fashions League as Homemaker of the Year. She responded that the award was a "wonderful recognition of one of the highest callings a woman can hold." Ezra and Reed witnessed the presentation. Secretary Benson's presence was considered unusual, for not in five years had a husband of the recipient been present. [^9]

A month later, at Fitzsimmons Army Hospital in Denver, Secretary Benson saw President Eisenhower for the first time since his heart attack. Ike seemed pleased to see him. During their half hour together, Ezra relayed President McKay's greetings and mentioned that prayers in his behalf had been offered in every session of the recent general conference of the Church. "In fact," he said, "I guess no man living or dead within my memory has had so many prayers ascend to heaven as you, Mr. President." The president expressed his deep gratitude. [^10]

Ezra found it natural to talk with the president of the United States about such things as prayer. Those who associated daily with Ezra saw how frequently he turned to prayer. As he left one morning to fill a potentially explosive appointment in Minnesota, an associate handed him a letter that read in part, "As you enter into a very difficult weekend, we want you to know that a lot of us are hoping and praying for you. Remember always that many of your friends feel that a great source of your personal strength is that you walk beside God, whereas most of the rest of us only report to Him." [^11]

Another reason Ezra was successful in turning hostile audiences into inquisitive, even sympathetic ones, is that he spoke the farmers' language. Prior to the meeting in Minnesota, he toured several farms operated by Farmers Union members who opposed his program. He walked into barns, picked up handfuls of mixed feed, inspected and smelled it, and asked the farmers about their rate of gain on livestock. Invariably they were amazed that the Secretary knew what he was talking about. Ezra overheard one farmer tell his wife, "He knows as much about the dairy business as I do. We compared production records of our Holsteins with those he used to milk in Idaho."

One flabbergasted Iowa farmer was cultivating corn when the Secretary climbed a barbed wire fence and waved him down, stopping to visit beside his tractor.

In Deadwood, South Dakota, the Secretary was taken in a four-horse stagecoach to the fairgrounds, where he was to speak. He took over the reins, and as they entered the grounds he loosened the line and let the horses run at full speed around the track—to the delight of the audience and "probable terror of the driver. No matter how poor the speech might be, I had established myself with this group," Ezra said. [^12]

One evening in Beloit, Wisconsin, when a dairy farmer invited the Secretary to inspect his farm, Ezra replied that he would be out to help with the milking. At 5:30 the next morning the headlights from Secretary Benson's car threaded through the darkness. When he found no activity around the barn, he walked over to the house and knocked on the door. An embarrassed farmer soon made his way out to the barn with the Secretary of Agriculture. [^13]

At the conclusion of a trip to South Dakota, a farmer who had visited with the Secretary said afterwards, "I have been against Benson, but he made a believer out of me today."

Ezra's success one-on-one with farmers was so high that some close aides believed that if he could have met all of America's farmers in person, there would have been a public outcry of support for the administration's farm policies.

Unfortunately, that wasn't logistically feasible. Ezra was constantly trying to convince Congress to fill large gaps in the farm program. In early December 1955 a cabinet meeting convened at Camp David, with agriculture the predominant item of discussion. Ezra and his top aides carefully outlined the situation and explained the need for additional farm legislation. They recommended that Eisenhower's first special message to Congress in 1956 be on agriculture. The president agreed.

On January 9, 1956, President Eisenhower made nine recommendations to bolster the farm program, including one that revolved around a new concept, the soil bank. The premise was simple. A farmer would take X amount of acres out of cultivation and calculate what his net return, in bushels, would have been. He would then receive in compensation the normal net return, in bushels, from surplus stocks or its cash equivalent. The objective was to use up the surplus and not create more. The USDA estimated that the soil bank would reduce total cultivated acreage by 12 percent, cut the surplus, and lead to an upsurge in commodity prices. But critics labeled it a Benson gimmick, one certain never to get through Congress.

In truth, the Secretary wasn't the soil bank's strongest advocate. He too had doubts but for different reasons than congressmen who seemed to make a holiday of sending the Secretary of Agriculture back and forth between the wood shed and the doghouse. While admitting that the soil bank was the proposal most likely to pass Congress and dispose of the surplus, Ezra added, "I could not get as enthusiastic about it as some of my staff. Maybe just the idea of paying farmers for not producing—even as a one-shot emergency measure—outraged my sensibilities. The only real justification was that the government itself had been so largely responsible for the mess farmers were in." [^14] And Congress had not passed the legislation that might have precluded having to resort to the soil bank.

It was fallacious to talk about the farmer as though he were a single type. Crosscurrents swept agriculture from all directions and affected farmers in various parts of the country differently. For example, research conducted by Farm Management magazine showed that two-thirds of the 50,000 Western farmers polled thought Secretary Benson was doing a good job. But in Iowa, where declining hog prices had hurt farmers, a poll in Wallace's Farmer at the end of 1955 indicated only 7 percent felt he was on track.

On January 25, 1956, nineteen Republican congressmen from the Midwest arrived unannounced at the Secretary of Agriculture's office to demand that he place price supports under hogs. Ben Jensen, a representative from Iowa, pounded the desk and told Ezra, in words to this effect, "If you don't put supports under hogs, not one of us will return to Congress next year." Ezra almost responded that he could think of worse things, as he reflected on an inscription he had placed on his appointment stand: Oh, God, give us men with a mandate higher than the ballot box. "We're not asking, we're demanding that you take action," Jensen continued. "If you don't, we're going to the White House."

Everybody was going to the White House, Ezra thought to himself. He told them that that's what they'd have to do, because he refused to place supports under a perishable product. The congressmen stomped out.

The day didn't get much better. Edward R. Murrow was doing a segment on the farm problem on a "See It Now" program, and Ezra was invited to comment at the end. The show reached an emotional pitch, leaving the impression that the administration's policies were forcing farmers off the land. One scene portrayed an Iowa family selling everything, down to the baby carriage. As the show wore on, Ezra fumed. This was, he felt, carefully planned television drama, not fact; and in the five minutes allotted him at the end, he called the show "demagoguery at its worst." (Upon checking on the farm family, Ezra found they were actually doing well and were leaving the farm only to accept a new job. They left for California in a new Pontiac. There had, in fact, been a greater exodus off the farm during the previous administration than during Eisenhower's.)

The day after Murrow's program, the Republican National Committee demanded equal time, and CBS acquiesced. But the rebuttal, which subsequently aired on Murrow's show, was anti-climactic. The USDA's elaborate presentation, with graphs and charts, ended up on the editing-room floor when CBS had to cut four minutes from the program. And the teleprompter malfunctioned while Ezra was speaking. "[The program] wasn't exactly a turkey," he surmised, "but it completely convinced me I was no TV star." [^15]

From there, the climate regarding Ezra and the USDA went from lukewarm to icy cold. The shift in temperature was aided by an ignominious blunder within the USDA.

Late the previous year the Secretary had publicly invited farmers to send him suggestions on how to improve the farm program. The response was overwhelming, and secretaries were assigned to read and classify each letter, then prepare the appropriate form-letter acknowledgment.

John Fischer, editor of Harper's Magazine, wrote a letter in which he enclosed an editorial he had written calling farmers "our pampered tyrants," adding that too often they sold their votes to the highest bidder. The letter was tossed into the wrong pile by mistake, and it received the following acknowledgment: "I have read the article by John Fischer in the December issue of Harper's with a great deal of interest. It is excellent." The letter went out over Secretary Benson's signature.

Fischer was no doubt astonished when he received a letter from the Secretary of Agriculture agreeing that farmers were "irresponsible feeders at the public trough," and he promptly published it in the February 1956 Harper's. Republicans were outraged; the Democrats howled. Again, the "Fire Benson!" cries went out. But Ezra marched up to Capitol Hill, explained the blunder, and diffused the controversy.

While some politicians did not feel it was expedient to openly agree with Secretary Benson, others rose to his defense. In a radio address on the "Facts Forum" program, Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois delivered a dignified defense of the Secretary, stating: "Last year while I was abroad I noticed that one of the favorite indoor sports was to pan America. At home the favorite political indoor sport is to pan Ezra Benson. . . . It would, in my judgment, be stark tragedy to lose Ezra Benson. . . . Anyone can direct the affairs of the Department of Agriculture in a time of high prices when war and the corpses of young men are the foundation for such prices and high prosperity, but it takes the consummate moral courage of an Ezra Benson to wrestle with the farm problems now on our doorstep, which he did not create but which he inherited. . . . To lose his conscience, his moral stamina, and his determination to find right answers would be tragedy indeed." [^16]

It was unfortunate that some congressmen didn't agree with Dirksen's appraisal. Just days later Ezra was ambushed while testifying before the House Agricultural Committee. Columnist Roscoe Drummond reported that as soon as the hearing convened, it was clear the committee was after Benson. Boos, catcalls, and other disturbances were permitted from the audience during the five hours he was on the stand. An exchange student from Oxford University who observed the proceedings commented, "In England we treat our prisoners with more respect than this committee extended to a member of the United States Cabinet." [^17]

On February 29, 1956, Eisenhower had announced his intention to run for reelection. Just three days later Ezra visited with President McKay, who advised him to stay in Washington as long as Eisenhower wanted him.

Ezra spent March and April that year fighting to save his agricultural legislation of 1954 and push through additional measures that the president had proposed in his message to Congress on January 9. All of the politicizing about the farm program frustrated Ezra. He repeatedly declared, "I abhor the efforts to place agriculture on the political auction block. Farmers' votes cannot be bought by the highest bidder. Our agriculture is neither Republican nor Democrat—it is American. And it is not for sale." [^18] On March 19 the Democrats, trying to kill the administration's legislation, passed a bill in the Senate that Ezra felt was the "worst piece of farm legislation ever approved by either House of Congress." Despite his lobbying and campaigning among GOP leadership, less than a month later the House passed a similar version of the 1956 Farm Bill, a bill that would likely undo nearly everything Secretary Benson had accomplished legislatively during his first four years.

In his mind, the only recourse was for the president to veto the bill; and during subsequent days, he and Under Secretary Morse tried to convince the White House staff of that. Sherman Adams, the president's chief of staff, couldn't believe Ezra would recommend that the president veto a farm bill in an election year, though earlier Eisenhower had told his aides, "The Democrats are going to do a very simple thing—write a bill that has something for everybody, and if I then veto it, a lot of people will be mad." [^19]

The entire issue was so critical that Secretary Benson flew to Atlanta, where the president was vacationing, to discuss it with him personally. While he hadn't said as much, Ezra knew this was an issue over which he might well resign. His only hope was appealing to Ike's sense of morality. Just days earlier an article in Fortune had compared the two men: "Benson has more characteristics of the President, and in his outlook is more like the President, than any other man in the Cabinet. . . . Both have a deep faith. . . . The Boss and Ezra have the same ability to stand up to an answer dictated by conscience and faith; no other men in the Cabinet are the equals in that respect." [^20]

When Ike saw Ezra, he immediately said, "I've been opening my mail, and there's not one letter here recommending that I veto the farm bill." Ezra asked if there were any letters from farmers. There weren't. Then he explained his vehement opposition to the bill: "This isn't a bill for farmers. It's a political gesture. Most farmers are too smart to fall for it."

The president disliked going against his staff, but Ezra was persuasive: "This bill is not right. It's not right for farmers. It's not right for the country. The only right thing to do is veto it." [^21]

Ike agreed to veto. His staff, chagrined, advised that he at least wait until after the Republican National Committee meeting, which was being held in Washington, D.C. Again Ezra intervened, arguing that it was unfair to spring such an action on his own party after they had left town. And again the president decided against his staff and in favor of the Secretary's judgment.

On April 16 Eisenhower sent his veto to Congress. However, presumably to soften the blow, he raised minimum price supports on wheat, cotton, corn, rice, and peanuts. "This was the first, and I guess the only, time I was really disappointed in the President," Ezra wrote. "His veto was an act of raw political courage. Why negate it in part by putting off the inevitable dropping of support levels?" [^22]

Immediately support for the president began to filter in from farmers across the country. However, Congress was stunned. Senator Ellender warned that he would have Secretary Benson in front of the Senate Committee to defend the president's veto within forty-eight hours, and he made good on his threat. Seldom had the Senate Agricultural Committee drawn such a crowd. Every chair was filled. TV cameramen jockeyed for position. There were so many spotlights that one reporter got sunburned. A Washington reporter wrote that when Ezra walked in, he "looked as if he was loaded for Senatorial bear. He wore his gray testifying suit, his dark red cravat. . . . Then the Secretary began reading an 8-page statement. 'I appreciate the opportunity to come before this committee . . .' This brought on laughter." Despite testifying for over three hours, Ezra said the confrontation "wasn't too bad." [^23]

In late May Congress passed the Agricultural Act of 1956, a piece of administration-supported legislation providing for a soil bank. While the bill was far from what Secretary Benson or President Eisenhower wanted, both agreed it contained more good than bad. While he was anything but a political pragmatist, the Secretary was learning that, at times, half a legislative loaf was better than none. Perhaps there was some value in getting Congress to agree to a "lesser law," with the hope of progress from there.

In the meantime, he had unwittingly bolstered his ranks. One day in March, bad weather delayed his flight to Chicago. Realizing that he would not make it back to Washington in time for a speech to the National Federation of Republican Women, he called Reed, who was now working for the National Republican Congressional Committee, and asked him to pinch hit.

When Reed was introduced, the audience groaned in audible disappointment. But the response when he finished was markedly different. One newspaper reported, "Second only to the pandemonium that broke loose when President Eisenhower made his surprise appearance at the conference was the thunderous applause which greeted the young Benson at the end of his talk. He had wowed them." Departing from his father's prepared speech, Reed struck out on his own, explaining the farm problem in terms everyone could understand and saying things about his father that his father couldn't say about himself. "Reed," continued the reporter, "is a stirring speaker with a wonderful sense of timing. He injects just enough humor (and his jokes are good) to balance the serious side of the subject he is discussing." Ezra personally observed his son's success, arriving at the meeting just after Reed took his ovations and hundreds of women were swarming around him. [^24]

Reed preached farm doctrine while keeping his audience entertained. One of his typical quips: "Dad gave the President five reasons why he shouldn't be Secretary of Agriculture. . . . The number has increased since then."

Speaking requests for Reed began pouring in. Five hundred came from California alone. By May he had so many requests, he couldn't have filled them all if he were to speak three times a day, six days a week, until the November election. As it was, he logged nearly 100,000 miles in some forty states between March and November 1956. [^25] (On August 30, 1957, Congressman William S. Hill of Colorado placed one of Reed's talks in the Congressional Record.) After reading news clippings on Reed's activities, President McKay wrote Ezra, "I share your pride in (Reed's) success! He is a credit to his distinguished parents and to the Church!"

As Reed became increasingly involved in political activities, he and his father developed a unique bond born of shared concerns, experiences, and convictions. In many ways Reed echoed his father. They thought alike and they trusted each other implicitly. Ezra wrote in his journal, "[Reed's] understanding of me, my strengths and weaknesses, and my desires for a free agriculture coupled with some of the wisest counsel I've ever received, made him a most valued political adviser."

Flora also began accepting a few of the speaking requests that came her way. She, too, had a very down-home approach. In April she traveled with other cabinet wives to Toledo for a state GOP convention. After reading her prepared speech, she said, "Now, let's start talking. I'm a farmer's wife," and she proceeded to tell stories about cooking for threshers and living on the farm. "We may live in Washington now but I don't have a maid," she said. "And when Mamie Eisenhower comes for dinner, the girls and I just pitch in and cook it." The audience cheered. [^26]

A columnist from the Cincinnati Enquirer said Flora had done a better job tackling the farm problem than any Republican who had stepped forward to date, adding, "It might be a good idea for Mr. Eisenhower to get the Benson family a maid and send Mrs. Benson out to spread the gospel for the Republican farm program." [^27]

At a luncheon in Ohio, Flora sat next to the editor of the Toledo Blade, a paper that had been highly critical of the administration's farm program. After she gave him a vigorous short course on her husband's policies, the editor admitted that she had changed his mind. [^28]

Ezra was grateful for all the support he could get. Election years seemed to bring demands for his scalp. The Democrats saw the farm problem as their ticket to election success, and prior to the November 1956 election, they played the farm issue at campaign pitch. The Democratic Party platform expressed devotion to farmers and called for guarantees of prosperity. Ezra recorded in his journal, "It left me disgusted. It was a tossed salad made up of inaccuracies, half-truths, platitudes and promises impossible to fulfill."

Eisenhower apparently later told Earl Butz, then dean of agriculture at Purdue, that "high Republican after high Republican" came to him during 1956 demanding Ezra's resignation. Through it all the president supported his embattled Secretary of Agriculture. At a press conference on September 27 Eisenhower said, uncategorically, "I have never thought of him as a political millstone. . . . [He is] one of the finest, most dedicated public servants I have ever known, a man who is thoroughly acquainted with every phase of agriculture, and puts his whole heart into doing something that he believes will be good for the long-term benefit of the farmers of America." [^29]

Evidently some farmers didn't feel that way. At a gathering of farm families in Eldora, Iowa, about thirty farmers seated on the front row got up in the middle of Ezra's remarks, made crude gestures, and marched through the audience. At a speech in Spencer, Iowa, a heckler hollered, "You're one of 'em," three times when Ezra mentioned that some people didn't like to see farmers make any money. [^30] Adlai Stevenson, the Democratic presidential candidate, quipped, "The only way to break up the New York Yankees is to get Ezra Taft Benson to manage their farm system." Nevertheless, many farmers gave the Secretary credit where credit was due. As one Iowa farmer indicated after a face-to-face meeting with him, "You've got to give him credit. He sticks to his guns. He doesn't back down." After hearing the Secretary speak to a group of 175 from the front porch of a farmhouse, another farmer said, "He sure shows a lot of guts. I thought it was as good a speech as I've ever heard. I'm voting for Eisenhower."

As the election neared and political temperatures heated up, the entire Benson family hit the campaign trail. The girls sang at rallies. Ezra raced around the country at breakneck pace; by October 1956 he had traveled 312,000 miles, more than any other cabinet member with the exception of Secretary of State John Foster Dulles. Reed stumped and ripped previous farm policies with statements such as, "Any political party . . . that wants to take credit for the high farm prices during the war better take credit for the war also." When Flora campaigned with cabinet wives, they were dubbed the "Kitchen Kabinet." One major news magazine reported that when Bonnie Benson said her prayers in the morning, she prayed for her father, who was campaigning; her brother, who was campaigning; and her mother, that she would "do and say the right thing today." [^31]

Again, Flora's message was persuasive. "Not only has my husband been under strong pressure, but the children and I have shared those pressures too," she told one audience. According to one report, "Three times she brought the house down." "Isn't she marvelous?" exclaimed a woman near the speaker's table. [^32]

On election day, Ezra and Flora visited Ike and Mamie at their suite in the Sheraton-Park Hotel in Washington. When it became clear Eisenhower would defeat Stevenson by a landslide, Ezra tallied the Republicans' losses and gains in farm states. Some Republicans who had supported the administration's farm program were defeated; others were reelected. But by and large, the president's team won solidly in the farm bloc. There was no change in the numerical division in the Senate, and the Democrats picked up only four seats in the House. Ezra regarded the election as a victory for his policies.

Two weeks later another event of major significance to the Bensons occurred. Barbara delivered her first child, and as Flora made preparations to visit her daughter and granddaughter, Ezra quietly chuckled at his wife's elaborate planning. She left the refrigerator loaded with food, precooked many meals, and left detailed instructions for the younger girls, who would have to prepare Thanksgiving dinner. Yet even with warm memories of a successful election and a new grandchild, all was not well.

On October 23, 1956, in the Hungarian capital of Budapest, two thousand university students initiated a march protesting Communist domination. Thousands of shopworkers joined them until eighty thousand moved through the streets. When police fired shots into the throng, a bloody revolution erupted. First it was bare hands and stones versus revolvers and machine guns. When it appeared the freedom fighters would win, Soviet tanks and heavy artillery rolled in and the "revolution" failed.

Weeks went by, and Ezra was ashamed of the United States' apathy toward the Hungarian revolutionaries. "We had encouraged the captive nations to believe that we would spring to their defense if and when they made a real surge for freedom," he wrote. "Now when the Hungarians had seemed almost on the verge of successful revolt, we had simply stood aghast while the Communist juggernaut rolled over the freedom fighters. I was sick at heart." When he encouraged Eisenhower to respond to Russia's brutality, Eisenhower asked him to draft an appropriate statement, and with minor changes Ezra's blistering denunciation was released. There was no government project he helped initiate outside of the Department of Agriculture that gave him more satisfaction.

As 1957 dawned, with the emotion of election year passed, the USDA entered an era of good feelings. Secretary Benson had minor disagreements with Congress, but most relations were courteous, if not conciliatory. It wasn't until the end of February that he had a confrontation with a congressional committee, this one a grilling from the House Committee on Appropriations, but little was accomplished. Don Paarlberg left him a short note afterwards: "It would be a hard pull without your leadership." [^33]

Flora attended most of her husband's press conferences and also sat through what other cabinet wives considered the next thing to purgatory—an unfriendly congressional committee. "[Ezra] often says when he looks down on me it gives him strength," she told Newsweek. "I pray for him to remember what he should and give the answers he should. I go through all the emotions with him. When I come home I'm pretty worn out," she admitted. [^34]

The spring and summer of 1957 were a welcome and calm respite from the storm for the Bensons. In April, Ezra took Beverly and Bonnie on a week's trip through Virginia and further South. Mark graduated from Stanford with a master's in educational administration and, though he had a scholarship offer to attend Boston University, opted for a commission sales job. Ezra was delighted his son took a route that immersed him immediately in free enterprise.

Then shortly after Labor Day, Ezra had unexpected contact with President McKay. One morning the White House called to say the Church president was in Washington and wished to see Eisenhower. The prophet's purpose, as it turned out, was to request Ezra's release from the cabinet.

Later, President McKay described to Elder Benson his meeting with Ike. Eisenhower had indicated that he and Secretary Benson were "just like this," he said, interlocking the fingers of his hands, and Eisenhower didn't know where he could find a suitable replacement. President McKay then agreed that Eisenhower should have first call on the apostle's services: the Church could make adjustments easier than the country could.

Nevertheless, Ezra confronted Eisenhower about returning to Utah. The president asked him to remain at least another year, when they would again review the situation. "I would like you to stay to the bitter end," the president said. "Do you think the end will be bitter?" Ezra asked, smiling. "Not one bit," Ike answered. "Just wait and see." [^35]

It was only a matter of time before Secretary Benson found that the president's "bitter-to-the-end" comment held some truth. At a corn-picking contest in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, while the Secretary was making a speech, several eggs sailed over the speaker's platform, one of them splattering slightly on the suit of the South Dakota governor and another on Ezra's hat.

The story made headlines. In the end, Secretary Benson felt in debt to the marauders. He had learned that abuse typically rallied fair-minded people to his cause. In this case, the audience had been cold prior to the incident, but warmed up considerably afterwards. Hundreds of letters arrived at the USDA, with 90 percent running in favor of the Secretary. One woman from San Francisco wrote, "From now on I will pray harder for you and other sincere representatives of our great government. . . . P.S. I'm a Democrat."

Ezra later wrote that the egg incident wasn't as bad "as one might guess. Of course, no one in his right mind wants to be publicly flayed regardless of how strong his convictions may be." [^36] Beth was more upset than anyone that someone would throw eggs at her father.

Despite these periodic run-ins with angry farmers and those with members of Congress and members of the press, there were other occasions when Secretary Benson won the expressed admiration of observers. Broadcaster Paul Harvey autographed a copy of his book Autumn of Liberty to Ezra, "To my friend Ezra Taft Benson—who makes it feel good to be an American." Inside the book Harvey had written, "Ezra Benson is a rare man in politics, thoroughly sincere, uncompromising, and above all, a good man."

Inevitably, when Ezra was introduced on television or radio talk-show programs, the announcer acknowledged, even praised, his stamina, integrity, and staunch defense of principle. On the "Longines-Wittnauer Chronoscope," a television interview program, on August 2, 1954, the moderator introduced Ezra by saying that, in the opinion of many, "no member of the Eisenhower Cabinet has shown more political courage than our guest tonight. For a time he was the most criticized member. But he stuck to his guns and never wavered in his convictions."

At an address before the National Press Club on March 23, 1956, Ezra was introduced as follows: "We have high respect for a man who started behind the plow and worked up. . . . The Secretary of Agriculture is known as a man who says what he thinks. A public official who does that makes news. . . . The Secretary of Agriculture draws a full house when he speaks from this podium." And two years later, at another National Press Club luncheon, the man introducing him said, "Despite the heat [Secretary Benson] has taken, he has . . . stood his ground. Surely it can be said he is a man of great integrity. And he has guts."

In these situations with members of the press, Ezra was articulate and convincing, and he responded calmly but firmly to repeated questions and used humor to win over the audience. At his first National Press Club luncheon on March 24, 1953, at which time he was to make an address and then submit to a grilling from the audience, he began, "When I was persuaded to come to this occasion, I was told I wouldn't need to make a speech. But now I'm convinced to speak through the whole time allotted so there will be no questions."

And at times the press supplied their own humor. Secretary Benson inadvertently called a press conference one spring day that coincided with President Eisenhower's ceremonial first pitch on the opening day of baseball season. Ezra didn't realize his error until the morning of the press conference, and he wondered how many reporters would attend. The first reporter who walked into the press room teased Ezra, "What's the matter, Mr. Secretary, couldn't you get tickets?" [^37]

In October 1957, Ezra, Flora, Beverly, and Bonnie left on a four-week, around-the-world trip. Sometimes the children groaned when a new excursion came up, as these journeys were anything but vacations. Flora admitted, "A trip with my husband meant few hours rest, no relaxation, and a constant rush with heavy schedules every day. I told him if he wanted our daughters to go, that we girls should at least be given a little time to see places of historical interest. He said we'd have to do it at 6:00 A.M. before the day's work began." The trips, however, were educational. The Bensons literally circled the globe, gained an increased appreciation for the worldwide nature of the Church, spoke and sang in countless meetings, were honored at numerous state dinners and receptions, and made new friends for America and the Church.

The purpose of the October 1957 tour was to develop additional opportunities for agricultural trade throughout the world. The family visited twelve nations—Japan, India, Pakistan, Jordan, Israel, Turkey, Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal, France, and England, as well as Hong Kong. Whenever possible, they stayed in Latter-day Saint mission homes. On Sundays, when no government business was conducted, they met and worshipped with the Saints.

In Amman, Jordan, Ezra conferred with King Hussein, and later the Bensons were guests of Minister of Agriculture 'Akif al-Fayiz at a feast under a goats' hair tent on the Jordanian plains fifteen miles from Amman. Bedouins indicate their wealth by the size of their tent and the number of poles required to support it. This lavish banquet, held in a nine-pole tent, consisted of sheep smothered in rice and toasted almonds, served in large vats around which ten or so persons sat on beautiful rugs and cushions.

The Secretary and his party visited a kibbutz in Israel; a refugee settlement near Karachi, Pakistan, which he described as one of the most poverty-ridden areas in the world; and land-marks such as the Acropolis in Athens. In Japan he operated a rice-threshing machine.

For Ezra, a highlight occurred in Israel, where he met with Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion. Their visit took place in the hospital, where Ben-Gurion was recuperating from a bombing injury. They discussed world conditions and, when Ben-Gurion directed the conversation that way, Old Testament prophecies. Ezra elaborated on scriptures in two of the LDS standard works, the Doctrine and Covenants and the Book of Mormon, that related to the gathering of the Jews, and referred to Elder Orson Hyde's dedication of Palestine in 1841 for the return of the descendants of Judah. When he returned to the United States, Ezra sent Ben-Gurion a copy of the Book of Mormon, to which the Jewish leader responded, "The sudden emergence of Mormonism was for me a deep enigma—and still remains so. Apparently the ways of the Lord are unfathomable." [^38] Ezra couldn't help but think of the prophecy that the gospel would be "brought out of obscurity and out of darkness." (2 Nephi 22:12.)

It is no wonder that Ezra was taken with Ben-Gurion. The Israeli leader embodied many traits he considered basic to enlightened leadership. He wrote, "He impressed me also as a man who has a clear insight into what Israel needs to do. He was not groping for answers. . . . He was not afraid to oppose his own people, or his Cabinet, or anyone else. . . . You knew exactly where he and you stood." [^39]

The Secretary returned from his tour pleased with the results and confident that he had opened new avenues for selling U.S. agricultural products. He also sent a seven-page letter detailing his activities to President McKay and recounting his experience with Ben-Gurion. In his April 1950 general conference address, entitled "Jews Return to Palestine," Ezra had stated that the post-World War II migration of Jews to Palestine was a fulfillment of prophecy. Many civic leaders and Jewish people had requested copies of the talk. He now told President McKay, with no false modesty, his confidence that his family had been "effective ambassadors of good will" for the Church, as they had been for the United States.

When their plane touched down on November 16, Beth was waiting on the tarmac. As soon as she saw her parents step out of the plane, she started running toward them, tears on her cheeks. Ezra reached her first and pulled her up into a big bear hug. "With all the wonders of the world," he wrote, "that moment was suddenly the best of the entire trip."

The Secretary caught some flak for taking family members along on government trips. But he knew Eisenhower felt otherwise, and had even requested that Ezra take them for the goodwill it created. No one could question that under Ezra's direction and, presumably, as a result of his international travel, U.S. farm exports had multiplied measurably. In the year beginning July 1, 1954, they increased by $200 million; in 1955-56, by another $350 million; and in 1956-57, by $1.33 billion. At times in 1956 and 1957 there were scarcely enough ships available to transport farm products abroad. On April 10, 1957, Ezra was awarded the High Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic, the highest decoration of the Italian government, in recognition of his assistance in helping Italy solve its food shortages with U.S. surpluses.

Nevertheless, there was no welcome home party from his trade trip. Prior to his leaving, the anti-Benson campaign had been revived when William Proxmire, campaigning, among other things, on an anti-Benson theme in the heavily Republican state of Wisconsin in an election to replace the late Senator Joseph McCarthy, defeated his opponent. Fearing erosion of further farm bloc states, congressmen pleaded with Eisenhower to replace Secretary Benson. Senator Karl Mundt wrote Sherman Adams, "I am completely convinced that we cannot even come close to electing a Republican House of Representatives or a Republican Senate in 1958 unless Secretary of Agriculture Benson is replaced by somebody who is personally acceptable to the farmers of this country." [^40]

These constant calls from certain politicians for his resignation had no doubt become wearisome to Ezra. Until the end of November he spent many sleepless nights. Was anything worth all this turmoil? It was one thing to resign willingly, but quite another to quit under pressure. Such a departure would be tantamount to admitting his farm program had failed. He later wrote, "There followed some ten days of soul-searching and prayerful consideration. . . . Everything I did, everywhere I went, seemed to put the question to me—which is right, to stay and fight on in a cause in which conceivably I had outlived my usefulness, or to return to the sphere in which I knew lay my true vocation?" [^41]

On December 3, 1957, Ezra called a press conference to announce that he intended to continue as Secretary of Agriculture. He restated why he persisted in advocating policies that were not necessarily popular or expedient: "I do not believe one bit that telling the truth ever hurt any political party. I intend to continue to tell the truth." [^42]

On a happier note, Secretary Benson sent a special Christmas message to all USDA employees describing scenes he had witnessed on his recent trip—Japanese schoolchildren eating lunch made from American farm products; a modern wool and cotton laboratory in Karachi, made possible through American assistance; boys in Turkey who proudly displayed their 4-K pins. The Secretary was proud of his department's work. "I hope you will forgive my reminiscences," he explained in the Christmas card. "I wanted to share them with you because I wanted you to feel that we each have a share in the future and we each have an unuttered though sincere gift of appreciation from our friends in other lands. The hope of the future lies very simply in the spirit of brotherly love."

As 1958 began, Ezra was still smarting from recent attacks. He had become the Eisenhower administration's most popular whipping boy. Typically, those who were loudest in their criticism were politicians, not farmers or agricultural leaders. But though major organizations such as the Farm Bureau continued to back the Secretary, there were always those farmers who attacked him as soon as commodity prices fell. And because the farm bloc states wielded power at the ballot box, he once again got caught in the web of election-year politics. It was one of Washington's most baffling political mysteries that he continued to face, and triumph over, the cries for him to resign.

Each new year brought the inevitable for Ezra—wooing Congress and devising strategy. And in January 1958, for the third time, Eisenhower sent a special message on agriculture to Congress. Again he called for lower price supports.

The day after Eisenhower's address, Secretary Benson appeared before the Senate Agricultural Committee. He had prepared a twenty-four-page statement, but committee chairman Ellender dispensed with procedure and encouraged the committee to feel free to pin the Secretary down. The heckling began before Ezra could finish page one. Ellender accused him of being a liar, Hubert Humphrey called his claims "false advertising," and Stuart Symington labeled him "insincere." When one committee member returned to the hearing after an hour's absence, he interrupted to ask where they were in the text, adding that when he left they had been at the bottom of page two. They were then at the bottom of page three, and so it went all day. One reporter observed, "Through all this Benson kept his temper, although a close observer might have noticed when the firing was heaviest the secretary's lower lip was thrust out a fraction of an inch and the back of his neck reddened. But his voice usually remained calm and patient." [^43] Beverly watched from the audience as her father was grilled from 10:05 A.M. until 5:34 P.M.

If Ellender and his cohorts felt they had come out on top, they were soon disillusioned. Headlines cried that the Secretary had been cruelly pilloried. Then in February, reports circulated that twenty or so influential Republican congressmen had met in emergency caucus to plan strategy that would force his resignation. Representing the group, Minnesota's Walter H. Judd and Nebraska's Arthur L. Miller found the Secretary in his office and spent forty minutes imploring him to resign.

President Eisenhower again stood up for his Secretary of Agriculture, saying: "When we find a man of this dedication, this kind of courage, this kind of intellectual and personal honesty, we should say to ourselves, 'We just don't believe that America has come to the point where it wants to dispense with the advice of that kind of a person.'" [^44]

But the opposition didn't back down. The very next day, February 27, 1958, Ezra received a demanding letter from Congressman Miller: "The 30 Republican members of the 11 Midwest farm states are asking that you present your resignation to the President. Will you do this?" Ezra didn't mince words in his reply: "I assume that you would not be pursuing your opposition to me and to the Administration's farm program so diligently if you did not feel that you were serving the best interests of the Nation's farmers. I, sir, am just as firmly convinced that the direction taken by the Administration's farm program is the best for the long-range interests of our farm people." [^45]

While some Republicans called for his head, the Democrats made plans to beat him at his own game, introducing legislation to freeze all price supports at 1957 levels, regardless of supply and demand, and increase corn acreage allotments. They hoped the "freeze bill" would either force an unpopular Eisenhower veto during an election year or result in a compromise.

Secretary Benson wasted no time blasting the proposed legislation. Senator Edward J. Thye scolded him for not putting aside personal considerations and cooperating with the "Administration in solving current economic problems." In reply, Ezra reaffirmed he would never support a program unless he believed it to be in the best interest of farmers. While he and Eisenhower agreed to stand against the freeze bill, the Senate confirmed it, 50 to 43.

Subsequently, Ezra sent the president a detailed letter outlining seven reasons for opposing the bill. It was two days before Ike responded, and in doing so he gave his outspoken Secretary a mild reprimand and another lesson in strategy: "Sometimes in the workings of a democratic society, it is not sufficient merely to be completely right. We recall that Aristides lost the most important election of his life because the Athenian people were tired of hearing him called 'The Just.'" In the future, Eisenhower concluded, Ezra should avoid positions of inflexibility and leave some room to maneuver. [^46]

Nevertheless, when the House passed the freeze bill, the president vetoed it—and the veto held. Amid it all Ezra traveled to Salt Lake City to perform Reed's temple marriage in April 1958 to May Hinckley—appropriately, a farmer's daughter from Utah and a granddaughter of the apostle Alonzo A. Hinckley.

Politics are a fickle taskmaster. During the second quarter of 1958, farm prices rose 10 percent over the previous year, and Secretary Benson's popularity enjoyed a similar resurgence. On May 1, in a hearing before the House Congressional Committee, he didn't receive one critical comment. Some congressmen even commended him for his performance. Having gone prepared for the worst, he was totally surprised by the reception.

Suddenly Ezra found himself fielding questions that would have seemed absurd just months, even weeks, before. In one news conference Claude Mahoney of the Mutual Broadcasting System startled him by asking if he had thought of running for the presidency. Others had approached him privately about the same, and some members of the press were referring to him as a possible leader of the conservative wing of the Republican Party. A nationwide poll revealed that "top Republican leaders" favored keeping Ezra Benson as Secretary of Agriculture by a six-to-one margin. And twenty-five to one, they believed farmers were better off than ever. "What a difference a couple of dollars in the prices of hogs and cattle make," Ezra told himself. [^47]

When Congress passed the Agricultural Act of 1958 with large sections of Ezra's program intact, the New York Herald Tribune called him "something of a political miracle worker. . . . Now talk is heard about him being a party asset," with some even suggesting that "Secretary Benson would be a good Vice-Presidential choice in 1960."

Columnist Roscoe Drummond wrote that because Ezra stood by his convictions, he had "emerged as the most influential member of the Eisenhower Cabinet," explaining, "Mr. Benson did not shrink from crossing wills and matching strategy with the powerful Speaker of the House, Sam Rayburn. When the House was about to do what Mr. Rayburn did not want it to do, namely, vote down a bad farm bill, Mr. Rayburn angrily warned that it must be either this bill or nothing. Mr. Benson riskfully stood his ground and said, let it be nothing. Mr. Rayburn had to back down." Drummond concluded that Ezra held "a large reservoir of the moral and intellectual integrity of the Eisenhower administration." [^48]

Charles Bailey, Washington correspondent for several Midwestern papers, said no member of the Cabinet had given the "shirt-sleeves backroom operators of the GOP more night-mares. . . . But there he sits, 5 1/2 years later, not only still in office but possessed of the legislative scalps of some of the toughest warriors in congress." Hubert Humphrey allegedly called Ezra "the toughest two-fisted political operator in Washington." [^49]

Even outside of the United States, Ezra's efforts were being hailed. A writer for the Calgary Herald in Alberta, Canada, stated on September 3, 1958, "It seems quite probable [Ezra Taft Benson] will be looked upon as one of the greatest, if not the greatest, secretaries of agriculture the U.S. has ever had. Certainly Mr. Benson is making it clear that he is a great man for these days."

The sudden popularity brought a respite from six years of political warfare, but Secretary Benson was skeptical about its duration. He said only, "In the hour of a man's success is his greatest danger." [^50]

Nevertheless, speculation about Ezra's political career persisted. A Washington television personality cornered him after church for a comment on the "ground swell" of support underway to nominate him for the vice presidency. The attention was flattering, Ezra admitted, but he "didn't know how to handle it."

The subject came up during a conversation with President McKay on Columbus Day when the prophet asked his associate about the rumors. Ezra repeated that he had no political aspirations. As he remembers it, President McKay smiled gently and said, "No answer could be better than that. Just keep on as you are and we'll wait for the Lord to tell us what the future holds." [^51]

Again, as elections neared, Secretary Benson barnstormed the country, crusading for sound principles that touched not only agriculture but also the nation. He pleaded for integrity in government, fiscal responsibility, and peace. And again and again he preached that Americans were "a prosperous people because of a free enterprise system founded on spiritual, not just material, values. Let us tell that to the world. Let us show the world that our system is based on freedom of choice—free agency—an eternal God-given principle." [^52]

Though the pace was frenzied, toward the campaign's end he took time for an unusual and serene interlude. He had suggested that the Tabernacle Choir perform for President Eisenhower in the White House, and on the evening of October 26, the choir gave an hour performance at a black-tie affair. Ezra and Flora, with their daughters, joined the Eisenhowers and selected guests. Repeatedly during the program, the president turned to Ezra and expressed his pleasure, particularly after the choir sang "The Battle Hymn of the Republic." At the hour's end, he asked the choir to sing on, which they did for another fifteen minutes. Afterwards the President and Mrs. Eisenhower mingled with the choir and other guests for about an hour.

The Republicans weren't singing nearly so sweet a tune after the 1958 election, when the Democrats picked up fourteen seats in the Senate and fifty-one in the House. The GOP was shell-shocked. At a fund-raising dinner in New Jersey, Ezra philosophically reminded fellow Republicans, "It takes adversity sometimes to bring into focus the principles for which we stand." [^53] Despite his optimism, he realized that the implications for agriculture were frightening. The hope of pushing the Eisenhower farm program through to completion had suffered a heavy blow. The Democratic Congress was unlikely to support any of the administration's measures.

On Christmas Eve, with the Marriotts, the Benson family went ice skating at the Marriott Motor Hotel. For the first time in years Ezra donned skates, and about an hour later he took a bad fall, dislocating his shoulder. The injury required a cast that circled his abdomen and extended from his shoulder down to his elbow.

By New Year's Eve, still suffering from pain, he left a Church party early to go home and rest. But that evening he did contemplate the year just passed. Certainly 1958 had been a strange mixture of criticism and adulation. Perhaps it was providential, however, that the past six months had treated him kindly and given him his first extended breather while in office. The coming year didn't look to be nearly as tranquil.

In addition to sources listed for chapter 14, see "A Homemaker Looks at Farm Policy," address by Flora A. Benson to National Republican Women, September 12, 1956; "Crafty Ezra Benson," Fortune, April 1958, pp. 120ff.; "Agriculture: Revolution, Not Revolt," Time, May 7, 1956, p. 29; "The Magnificent Decline of U.S. Farming," Fortune, June 1955.

Footnotes

"The supreme test of any government policy, agricultural or otherwise, should be: 'How will it affect the character, morale, and well-being of our people?'"

---
Notas:
[^1] See, for example, "Elder Benson's Going to Catch It," Saturday Evening Post, March 28, 1953.
[^2] Crossfire, p. 445.
[^3] Ezra Taft Benson, "He Is Risen," 39th Annual Hollywood Bowl Easter Sunrise Service, Los Angeles, California, March 29, 1959, Church Archives.
[^4] See Larry P. McDonald to ETB, November 2, 1979; also Crossfire, pp. 468-70.
[^5] As quoted in Improvement Era 42 (February 1939): 94.
[^6] F. Enzio Busche to ETB, April 9, 1981.
[^7] For a detailed account of the European trip, see Crossfire, pp. 472-88, including quotations relating to the experience at the Central Baptist Church in Moscow.
[^8] Tom Anderson, reprinted in Straight Talk, October 2, 1986. See Crossfire, pp. 606-8.
[^9] "An American Visitor Wrings Tears in Crowded Church Near Kremlin," Washington Star, October 4, 1959; also "A Church Service in Soviet Russia," U.S. News World Report, October 26, 1959, p. 76.
[^10] As quoted in Crossfire, p. 458.
[^11] Ibid., p. 508.
[^12] Ibid., p. 531.
[^13] Ibid., p. 537.
[^14] ETB to Joseph Fielding Smith, August 14, 1960.
[^15] Flora A. Benson, untitled address, delivered May 1962.
[^16] F. Enzio Busche to ETB, December 2, 1986.
[^17] A survey of the vote in counties in which over 50 percent of the population was classified as rural-farm in the 1950 census in eight states in the Midwest revealed that the following percentages of the vote went Republican: Iowa, 58.8 percent; Kansas, 65.6 percent; Michigan, 68.1 percent; Minnesota, 52.2 percent; Nebraska, 64.6 percent; North Dakota, 56.1 percent; South Dakota, 60.2 percent; Wisconsin, 56.7 percent. As cited in Crossfire, p. 553. See also Seattle Daily News, August 29, 1960.
[^18] "Benson Polls Were Vindicated," undated clipping in vol. 46 of Ezra Taft Benson scrapbooks.
[^19] Barry Goldwater to author, April 28, 1986. See also Barry Goldwater to Delos Ellsworth, July 20, 1976.
[^20] See Deseret News, November 30, 1960.
[^21] These included Doctor of Laws degrees from the University of Utah (June 9, 1953), University of Maine (June 10, 1956), University of Hawaii (March 22, 1957), Utah State University (June 7, 1958), and Fairleigh-Dickinson University (February 10, 1959); Doctor of Agriculture degrees from Iowa State College (June 12, 1953) and Michigan State College (February 10, 1955); Doctor of Science degree from Rutgers University (October 6, 1955); and Doctor of Public Services degree from Brigham Young University (June 2, 1955).
[^22] Dwight D. Eisenhower to ETB, January 4, 1961.
[^23] Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, January 11, 1961.
[^24] Ezra Taft Benson, untitled address delivered in Washington Stake conference, Washington, D.C., December 4, 1960, Church Archives.
[^25] See Congressional Record, January 20, 1961, 87th Congress, 1st session.
[^26] Ibid. See also "Benson Sums Up Agricultural Action," Christian Science Monitor, January 14, 1961.
[^27] Conference Report, April 1960.
[^28] See Crossfire, p. 327.
[^29] Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, September 27, 1956.
[^30] "Benson Is Heckled 1st Time in Iowa," Chicago News, October 12, 1956.
[^31] See Congressional Record 103, no. 162 (September 19, 1957): A76683; also Newsweek, October 15, 1956; "Mrs. Benson Steals Spot in Kabinet," Salt Lake Tribune, May 27, 1956.
[^32] "Tough Talk," Newsweek, October 15, 1956, pp. 42-44.
[^33] Crossfire, p. 351.
[^34] "Are Wives Important," Newsweek, February 18, 1957, pp. 32-33.
[^35] Crossfire, pp. 360-61.
[^36] See "Benson Gets Plaudits after Egg Throwing," Houston Press, October 28, 1957; also Washington Star, August 17, 1958.
[^37] Paul Harvey, Autumn of Liberty (Garden City, New York: Hanover House, 1954), p. 91. See also "Longines-Wittnauer Chronoscope," August 2, 1954, (NLE) 200-LW-489, National Archives; National Press Club recording, March 23, 1956, Library of Congress; National Press Club recording, February 6, 1958, Library of Congress; National Press Club recording, March 24, 1953, Library of Congress; Ezra Taft Benson address to Seattle Rotary Club, October 1, 1958. Additional items of interest include "Meet the Press," March 28, 1954, Library of Congress; "Longines-Wittnauer Chronoscope," May 20, 1953, (NLE) 200-LW-434, National Archives; Universal Newsreels, January 9, 1953, and November 22, 1955, National Archives.
[^38] David Ben-Gurion to ETB, January 14, 1958.
[^39] Crossfire, p. 363. For a published account of this trip see Ezra Taft Benson, "We Saw the Church Around the World," Instructor, March 1958, pp. 68-70.
[^40] Karl E. Mundt to Sherman Adams, October 23, 1957.
[^41] 41. Crossfire, p. 373.
[^42] 42. Washington Post, December 4, 1957.
[^43] 43. Daily Oklahoman, March 9, 1958.
[^44] 44. Public Papers of the President of the United States, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1958, p. 187.
[^45] 45. See Arthur L. Miller to ETB, February 22, 1958; Arthur L. Miller to ETB, February 27, 1958; ETB to Arthur L. Miller (undated). As quoted in Crossfire, pp. 389-90.
[^46] 46. See Crossfire, pp. 395-96.
[^47] 47. Akron Beacon Journal, May 11, 1958; also Crossfire, p. 401.
[^48] 48. "The Once-Scorned Benson Now Rated Political Asset," New York Herald Tribune, August 20, 1958.
[^49] 49. Des Moines Register, exact date unknown.
[^50] 50. Life, June 2, 1958.
[^51] 51. Crossfire, p. 408.
[^52] 52. See Ezra Taft Benson address to National Federation of Republican Women, Boston, September 25, 1958, p. 8.
[^53] 53. Ezra Taft Benson address to New Jersey Republican State Committee Fundraising Dinner, February 25, 1959.
