Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 17

Spiritual Statesman

With Eisenhower's lame-duck term came a political restlessness. Richard Nixon and Nelson Rockefeller jockeyed for power in the Republican Party; Democratic candidates, bolstered by their party's convincing showing in 1958, engaged in their own power struggle.

Secretary Benson faced a dilemma. Should he take on stiff opposition in the Democratic Congress and try to push through more of his farm program, or be satisfied with what he had accomplished and rest on his laurels? Some Republicans claimed that for their party to resurge, they must compile a liberal record during 1959 to have any hope of giving the Democrats a good run in 1960. To Ezra's dismay, his party began indulging such philosophies.

The cabinet spent four hours one day in January debating federal participation in school construction. When no one else opposed the concept, Ezra delivered a blistering assessment of federal aid. The proposal was eventually blocked, but it disturbed him that his peers seemed to favor increased government involvement. He feared that most Americans didn't understand the fatal flaw in government spending. As he explained, "The federal government has no funds which it does not, in some manner, take from the people. And a dollar cannot make a round trip from Oklahoma . . . or even Maryland to Washington and back without shrinking in the process." He believed that the power to subsidize was the power to control. [^1]

Whenever he spoke, Secretary Benson tied this concept into his farm message. He often wondered who was listening, but decided he couldn't live with himself until he had done everything he could to fight for a sound economy and less government interference for the individual. For that reason, in early 1959 he determined that if he was to push any more of his farm program through Congress, it was now or never, for there would be little hope of enlightened farm legislation passing during a presidential election year.

Yet, the farm situation was still a political hot potato in 1959. To complicate matters, 1958 had seen one of the most prolific spurts in agricultural production in history. With an increase in output of 8 percent, nearly twice the increase recorded during the entire decade of the 1920s, the result was a market glut and falling prices. Secretary Benson's popularity took a new plunge.

Everyone, it seemed, wanted to solve the surplus problem and thus "save" the farmers. In March 1959 the freshmen Democrats spent a weekend together writing a farm bill, but they couldn't agree even among themselves. Several Republicans on the House Agriculture Committee worked out a wheat bill, but when Ezra read it, he threw up his hands. He described it as a weak, watered-down hodgepodge of compromises.

Despite all the debate in Congress, there were indications that farmers themselves saw wisdom in the Secretary's policies. The Farm Journal conducted a survey that showed that nearly 80 percent of those polled wanted greater freedom and less government in agriculture. Fifty-five percent of those responding voted for "no supports, no controls, no floors, free market prices; get the government clear out." Another 15 percent favored emergency supports in case of disaster. [^2]

Again Eisenhower sent a special message on agriculture to Congress, and this time he pulled no punches. One item of the message pleased Ezra immensely—the Food for Peace program. Ten months earlier he had suggested that farm surpluses be used to establish and reinforce friendly ties with foreign nations. Eisenhower would propose the concept to the United Nations on September 22, 1960, and John F. Kennedy would later expand the program to support both humanitarian effort and economic development in more than eighty countries. Ezra felt that Food for Peace was one of the most popular and far-reaching ideas to come from the Eisenhower administration.

With politicians from both parties scrambling to push something through Congress, a bill was finally passed—one that Ezra considered "progress in reverse"—and once again he advised the president to veto. Eisenhower's advisors insisted that he must not veto, that it would be better to show the country that responsibility for the inefficient bill belonged solely with the Democrats. Ezra was outraged. How could the president endorse a faulty measure that would harm farmers? On June 25 the president vetoed, and the veto held.

Secretary Benson's religious beliefs were widely known, and on some occasions his high-profile position gave him opportunity to preach the gospel to secular audiences. For example, on March 29, 1959, he delivered an address to some twenty thousand at the Easter sunrise service at the Hollywood Bowl. From the huge, half-moon-shaped shell at the Bowl, surrounded by thousands of calla lilies, he preached a sermon outlining the ministry and atonement of the Savior. "No other single influence has had so great an impact on this earth as the life of Jesus Christ," he taught. "We cannot conceive of our lives without Him. . . . True, we live in a critical age. Almost every day brings a new crisis. We have had Korea, Indo-China, Lebanon, Quemoy, and now Berlin. Notwithstanding this, we face a more serious, far-reaching danger—the danger of forgetting the source of our blessings." [^3] To Secretary Benson, the source of those blessings was Jesus Christ. Ezra advised the Savior's personal commitment to principles.

In mid-September 1959, Nikita Khrushchev visited Washington. When Eisenhower asked Secretary Benson to supervise Khrushchev's trip to the USDA Beltsville Experiment Station in Maryland, Ezra's enthusiasm could have been put "in a small thimble," for he had opposed the dictator's visit to the United States.

The morning of September 16, Khrushchev, accompanied by his wife, two daughters, a son, and a son-in-law, arrived in Beltsville. Beverly, Reed, and May accompanied Ezra to greet him. In his welcoming remarks, the Secretary made several pointed references, among them, "Our farmers are free, efficient, creative and hard working. . . . Under our capitalistic free enterprise system they have developed an agriculture unequaled anywhere in the world."

Khrushchev made no response, but as the tour began, he came alive, joking with the three hundred reporters present. Though Khrushchev boasted several times as he inspected the station, "We do better than this," or "I know all about this," Ezra surmised that both he and the Chairman knew better, that there was a definable gap between U.S. and U.S.S.R. agriculture.

The contact with Khrushchev underscored Ezra's dislike of the Soviet system. At one point Khrushchev boasted to the Secretary, "Your grandchildren will live under communism." "On the contrary," Secretary Benson replied, "my grandchildren will live in freedom as I hope that all people will." The Soviet leader responded, "Americans are so gullible. They are in the process of being fed small bits of socialism and one day will awaken to find themselves living under a totalitarian order." [^4]

After the visit to Beltsville, Reed jumped in his father's official car to catch a ride back to Washington and found himself seated with Mrs. Khrushchev, Mrs. Andrei Gromyko, Alexei Adzhubei (Khrushchev's son-in-law and editor of Izvestia), two of Khrushchev's children, and a translator. Thrown together, Reed decided to mention the Church by asking what they thought of the Russian author Tolstoy. The Russians were effusive in their praise. Then Reed quoted Tolstoy's remarks to the president of Cornell University, that "if Mormonism is able to endure unmodified until it reaches the third and fourth generation, it is destined to become the greatest power the world has ever known." [^5] His guests responded, "Tolstoy wrote much better than he spoke." Reed persisted, relating the story of the apostasy from the Christianity of ancient times and the restoration of the gospel in modern times. When Mrs. Gromyko asked if he believed in God, Reed outlined the LDS doctrine of the Godhead and told about the Book of Mormon.

When Adzhubei finally suggested that they let the communists take care of this world and the Mormons the next, Reed persuaded him to accept enough copies of the Book of Mormon for the Khrushchev family. (They were delivered in person on a later trip.)

Years later Elder F. Enzio Busche told Elder Benson that following Khrushchev's trip to the United States, Alexei Adzhubei visited in the home of famous German newspaper editor Lambart Lensing in Elder Busche's hometown, Dortmund. "Mr. Lensing told me later, knowing that I was a Mormon, that Alexei Adzhubei mentioned to him that America as a whole did not impress him very much and that the only thing that touched him deeply was the Mormons and their philosophy of life." [^6]

The week after Khrushchev's visit to the United States, Secretary Benson, accompanied by Flora, Beverly, Bonnie, and four staff members, left on an ambitious trip to seven European countries, including the Soviet Union. To offset the costs of their chartered military plane, Ezra invited ten reporters to accompany him, each of whom contributed a modest fee. The plane, formerly President Truman's official carrier, the Independence, included a stateroom occupied by the Secretary and his family, rows of seats for the others, and a compartment that served as a conference room for staff and press briefings.

Though Ezra noted in his journal the night before leaving that he wasn't excited about the trip, this, of all his trade excursions, was to leave the deepest impression upon him.

Between September 23 and October 9, 1959, the troupe visited Yugoslavia, West Germany, Poland, the Soviet Union, Finland, Sweden, and Norway.

In Yugoslavia the Bensons met with President Tito, who, after private conversation, led them on a tour of his elaborate gardens. Later U.S. Ambassador Karl L. Rankin told Ezra, "You must have got on famously with Tito. In the two and a half years I've been ambassador I know of no other American who has been invited to view the private gardens." [^7]

In Berlin they witnessed the stark distinction between the East and the West. In Warsaw they toured a Jewish ghetto, with vivid scenes of the devastation Ezra had encountered thirteen years earlier flashing through his mind. Throughout Poland they met farmers who displayed obvious pride in their rundown acreage. Guards stood at entrances to flour mills, illustrating how serious the country's food shortage was.

Then it was on to Moscow. Theirs was only the second U.S. Air Force plane to fly into Moscow since World War II, and the Soviets insisted on placing a Russian crew on board to assist the American crew. As soon as the plane rolled to a stop in Moscow, two Russian soldiers entered the aircraft and inspected passports. Moments later the Bensons were standing on the tarmac, staring into glaring television lights. Vladimir V. Matskevich, the Soviet Minister of Agriculture, welcomed the entourage, and Secretary Benson made a brief response.

No expense had been spared in receiving and entertaining the Secretary. His party stayed at the Sovietskaya Hotel, reserved principally for visiting dignitaries. But while the lobby was furnished lavishly, wooden floors in the hallways creaked and the elevators were slow-moving cages with swinging wooden doors.

In the Russian capital, the Benson party toured an elaborate, seventy-seven-pavilion exhibition of Soviet agriculture; enjoyed box seats usually reserved for ranking communist officials at the Bolshoi Theater for a performance of Prince Igor; and observed the Soviets' agricultural machinery, such as a three-row sugar-beet topper. Recalling the back-breaking work of his youth, Ezra was fascinated with the machine and asked Minister Matskevich if he could observe one in operation. Yet on each trip out into the countryside Ezra was put off. On their final trip out Matskevich finally agreed to let his guest observe the beet topper and pointed to one operating some distance away in a large field. Before anyone could stop him, Secretary Benson was out of the car and marching through the field. There he saw the topper dropping beets in piles. Some weren't topped at all and others were damaged. Women were following behind to salvage what they could. The scene was enlightening to the Secretary and embarrassing to Matskevich.

From the time he arrived, Ezra repeatedly requested that he be taken to visit one of the two Protestant churches in Moscow. Finally, as his party was being taken to the airport for their departure, he again asked to stop at a church. Reluctantly, his driver swung into a narrow alley behind an old stucco building—the Central Baptist Church. It was raining, but the chill left as the Secretary's party entered the church which was filled to overflowing with mostly middle-aged and elderly people. Ezra understood that Soviet citizens attended these services at some risk; anyone who looked to a career of any kind avoided the slightest suspicion of belief in Christianity.

The American group caused an immediate stir in the old church. A newsman present described the scene: "Every face in the old sanctuary gaped incredulously as our obviously American group was led down the aisle. They grabbed for our hands as we proceeded to our pews which were gladly vacated. . . . Their wrinkled old faces looked at us pleadingly. They reached out to touch us almost as one would reach out for the last final caress of one's most-beloved just before the casket is lowered. They were in misery and yet a light shone through the misery. They gripped our hands like frightened children." [^8]

Surprisingly, the minister invited Secretary Benson to speak. Knowing there was some danger, Ezra turned to Flora and asked if she thought he should do it. Without pause she answered, "You bet, T!" And he made his way to the pulpit.

Never had he stood before an audience like this. As he scanned the crowd of anxious faces, it took some moments for him to control his emotions. These were good people, he felt immediately, subjected to a society that deprived them of unrestricted worship. The emotional impact was almost more than he could bear. Then he began to speak about hope and truth and love. As he talked about the Savior and the hope of life after death, tears flowed freely throughout the church.

"Our Heavenly Father is not far away," the Secretary promised. "He is our Father. Jesus Christ, the Redeemer of the World, watches over this earth. . . . Be unafraid, keep His commandments, love one another, pray for peace, and all will be well."

Women took out their handkerchiefs and nodded vigorously as they moaned "Ja, ja, ja!" He looked down at one elderly woman, her head covered by a scarf and with a shawl about her shoulders, and spoke as though directly to her: "This life is only a part of eternity. We lived before we came here. . . . We will live again after we leave this life. . . . I believe very firmly in prayer. I know it is possible to reach out and tap that Unseen Power which gives us strength and such an anchor in time of need." He concluded, "I leave you my witness as a church servant for many years that the truth will endure. Time is on the side of truth. God bless you and keep you all the days of your life."

By this time tears were streaming down Ezra's face. When his entourage finally filed down the aisle, men and women waved handkerchiefs and grasped the visitors' hands in an action that spoke more than words. Spontaneously they began to sing "God Be With You Till We Meet Again." The language was foreign, but the tune and meaning were unmistakable. The Americans entered their cars with not a dry eye among them. Finally a newsman broke the silence, commenting, "I believe they were the only really happy people we saw in Russia." [^9]

"I shall never forget that evening as long as I live," Elder Benson later wrote. "Seldom, if ever, have I felt the oneness of mankind and the unquenchable yearning of the human heart for freedom." Others felt similarly. Cynical newsmen who had complained about "going to church with Ezra" (and who had skipped out on LDS services in West Berlin) stood and wept openly.

Grant Salisbury, in U.S. News World Report on October 26, 1959, wrote, "It turned out to be one of the most moving experiences in the lifetime of many of us. One newsman, a former Marine, ranked it with the sight of the American flag rising over the old American compound in Tientsin, China, at the end of World War II." On the drive to the airport one of the interpreters, a young Russian woman, said simply, "I felt like crying."

Tom Anderson, editor of Farm and Ranch magazine, wrote, "Imagine getting your greatest spiritual experience in atheistic Russia! . . . The Communist plan is that when these 'last believers' die off, religion will die with them. What the atheists don't know is that God can't be stamped out by legislated atheism. . . . This Methodist backslider who occasionally grumbles about having to go to church, stood crying unashamedly, throat lumped, and chills running from spine to toes. It was the most heart-rending and most inspiring scene I've ever witnessed."

When they reached the airport, nearly all the newsmen traveling with Ezra told him it had been the greatest spiritual experience they had ever had. He was profoundly grateful for the circumstances that had allowed him to leave his testimony with those people. He knew he would never forget the experience.

Secretary Benson returned to the United States with renewed confidence in free agriculture. At the trip's conclusion Ovid Martin, a reporter who had covered USDA activities for over twenty years, outlined his perception of the Secretary's extensive European trip: "The Benson tour was unique. . . . The Secretary spent a lot of time and effort getting out into the country to meet the farm people. Leaders there said no American official of such rank had ever done this before. . . . Doubtless, the picture of a high American official stopping at a small farm, walking out through a muddy barnyard to introduce himself to the peasant farmer and discussing his crops and livestock with him, had spread far and wide through rural areas of [these] countries. . . . Mrs. Benson . . . accompanied him on these rural treks. While he was talking with the farmer, Mrs. Benson was getting acquainted with the wife and children. . . . The comment was heard that personal visits of this nature did much more good than some of the financial aid the United States extends to some of the countries." [^10]

Despite the high marks newsmen gave the Secretary's efforts, a few vocal congressmen back home were unimpressed or uninterested. Some sneered at the farm trips as paid vacations, although those who traveled with him knew differently. Farm prices were sliding, and the "Benson must go" campaign had revived.

But there were other concerns demanding Ezra's attention. In late October he spent a week at Walter Reed Army Hospital for treatment of a gall bladder infection. Two months later surgery became necessary. While he was recovering from the operation, his critics persisted. When he read a newspaper report that members of the Republican National Committee wanted his resignation, he promptly called the committee chairman, Senator Thruston B. Morton, and asked him to come meet with him at the hospital. There he asked Morton how many members of the committee had requested his resignation. "Three," was the reply. "Three out of one hundred and fifty-five?" Ezra responded with unbelief. At that, he lectured Morton on the principle of doing what was right, not what was right for politics, and informed him that the only thing he was "resigned" to do was continue toward a prosperous, free agriculture. "Having got this off my chest," he wrote, "I felt well enough to go home."

In the meantime, the Secretary learned that voters in Iowa's Fourth District had elected a Republican to fill the unexpired term of a Democratic congressman who had died in office. The outcome seemed to indicate that, at the least, the Secretary's policies wouldn't be the political liability to the Republicans, come election time, that his detractors predicted.

Time magazine on December 28, 1959, summarized the events: "On Benson's Black Sunday he was in Washington's Walter Reed Hospital, convalescing from a gall bladder operation and brooding about the campaign by high-level Republicans. White Wednesday was a good day. . . . Home from the hospital, he pored happily over the news from Iowa. Out in Chicago at its yearly convention, the . . . American Farm Bureau Federation unanimously adopted a pro-Benson wheat plan. . . . In Washington, Chairman Morton . . . urged fellow Republicans to 'sell' Benson in the farm belt, not sell him out. When Benson heard that news, an austere but unmistakable smile of victory spread across his face."

Some hoopla always attends the onset of a new decade. The 1960s were no different. For the United States, however, the decade would prove a turbulent era—a presidential assassination, the Vietnam "police action," a missile crisis in Cuba, mounting tension between the United States and Russia, an explosion of civil rights demonstrations, and campus unrest.

For Ezra Benson, too, the 1960s would be less than tranquil. It would be a time of transition, and as pleased and relieved as he was about the prospect of returning to full-time church work, his last year in high government office would bring deep moments of reflection about his service in the Eisenhower cabinet. Some of them were poignant.

On January 7, 1960, Ezra and Flora made their way to the Capitol for Eisenhower's last State of the Union message. How well had their administration used their seven years? He knew that the president felt his program had been fragmented and implemented piecemeal. Ezra felt the same way about the farm program. The year would bring his last international trade trips, his last appearances before congressional committees, his final involvement in the nation's most influential policy-initiating body, and certainly the last chance to have significant impact on the current farm program.

The wheat problem was still critical. In cooperation with the White House, the USDA planned one final presidential message on agriculture, to contain a last-ditch attempt to solve the wheat problem. Progress ceased, however, when Vice President Richard Nixon, the Republicans' probable presidential candidate, was lukewarm about standing behind the administration's program.

After tossing for hours one night because of a disappointing cabinet meeting and frustration over the interference of politics with sound agriculture, Ezra rose and drafted a letter to Nixon. In essence, the letter summarized his perception of the state of U.S. agriculture and his feelings about his years in the cabinet:

For seven long years my associates and I, in USDA, have fought against great odds, a combination of weak-kneed Republicans and socialist Democrats, to bring some sense into a senseless program for our farmers. . . .

For twenty-five years both parties have tried to coddle and baby the most efficient farmers in the world by imposing upon them a program they don't want and don't need. Our attempts at Government price fixing and control of production through regimentations are colossal failures. Yet, in spite of this fact, last Tuesday some of our own leaders seemed almost ready to give up all we've gained in the last seven years and embrace another phony program. . . .

The whole sordid mess is beginning to be understood by the American people and especially the farmers of the "politically important Midwest." As Republican leaders we'd better wake up to this fact and support programs that are economically sound and right. As President Ike said to me in 1953, "If a thing is right it should be done. And if it's right it will prove to be good politics." I can only add that if the time ever comes when what is right is not good politics, it will be a sad day for America!

Writing the letter was therapeutic, but Ezra decided not to mail it.

Despite tension within his own party, some of Ezra's fiercest opponents showed signs of mellowing. When he faced Jamie Whitten in the House Agricultural Committee for one of the last time on March 9, 1960, Congressman Whitten admitted, "One of the hardest things many of us have to do after we get to be adults is to recognize that we have been wrong sometimes." He then admitted, as Ezra had repeatedly warned, that acreage controls and price fixing hadn't worked. Despite that concession of sorts, Ezra left the hearing disappointed. That night he recorded, "When I consider the way this Committee operates, I sometimes wonder how our government does as well as it does. . . . They rehash and reinsert in the record old material that has been gone over again and again. I emphasized two or three times after presenting my written statement that I had no desire to plow old ground."

But the Secretary also acknowledged his own shortcomings. About that hearing he later wrote, "I was willing to admit that we had made mistakes, too. Perhaps I had seemed on occasion to be too uncompromising. . . . As for our critics, I have no personal bitterness toward any man and I hope no one is bitter toward me. As I have said before, I love all God's children—but I love some more than others." [^11]

Meanwhile another question was circulating in Republican circles. Some perceived that Richard Nixon was trying to distance himself from Eisenhower's battle-weary Secretary of Agriculture. Nixon had established an independent advisory committee on agriculture, and open speculation was that he intended to repudiate his own administration's farm policies.

On Capitol Hill, Congress had reached a fevered pitch over the agricultural problem, making last-ditch attempts to pass legislation that would endear them to the farm bloc. But when all was said and done, no new legislation passed in either house, thus ending agricultural legislation during Secretary Benson's term.

With his influence on legislation over, Ezra turned his attention to the coming election. It wasn't until July 1960 that he gave his observations on the race for the Republican nomination: "Having traveled possibly as widely in the United States as any other Republican in the past 7 years, I am convinced that Governor [Nelson] Rockefeller would stand the best chance of defeating Senator [John F.] Kennedy." [^12]

But it wasn't to be. Richard Milhous Nixon received the Republican presidential nomination, with Henry Cabot Lodge as his running mate. Secretary Benson didn't have much time to contemplate the series of events, however. The Saturday following the Republican national convention, accompanied by Flora and Beth, three staff members, and eight members of the press, he left on an eighteen-day trade trip to Europe and the Middle East to evaluate development of the new European Common Market.

In Israel, Secretary Benson once again conferred privately with Prime Minister Ben-Gurion and President Ben-Zvi. Ben-Gurion and his wife, Paula, hosted a small dinner at the King David Hotel for the Bensons, who found her "no less fascinating than her husband," Ezra wrote. "She is amazingly frank, disturbingly so to some persons, but Flora and I happen to be rather frank ourselves, so we got along famously." [^13]

Ezra's diplomatic position gave him immediate entree to heads of state throughout the world, and as he visited with world leaders, he made no pretense or apology about his high ecclesiastical position. While he may not have initiated conversations about the Church, he did willingly respond to questions that arose. Reporters took note of the fact that he stopped everything on the Sabbath. Whenever he attended LDS meetings abroad, his activities got wide coverage. The press often billed him as "Secretary Apostle Benson."

After his meetings in Israel, he wrote to his quorum president, Joseph Fielding Smith, from Tel Aviv to report on the proceedings: "I have been even more warmly and cordially received than on my first visit. . . . I was taken immediately to an hour-long visit with President Ben-Zvi, head of the Israeli nation. He presented me with volume one of his work on the gathering of the tribes called 'The Exiled and the Redeemed.' I had the pleasure of explaining to him that the account could not be complete without including those covered by the Book of Mormon. . . . The Lord is working miracles in this sacred land. . . . It is my feeling that no people are thought of more highly in Israel than we are." [^14]

Elder Benson's repeated association with leaders of the Israeli nation only served to deepen his interest in and respect for the Jewish people. It's as though he had an affinity for them. He sent copies of the Book of Mormon to Jewish leaders and repeatedly explained the LDS doctrine of the gathering of Israel—that Joseph's nation would gather to America, and Judah's to the Holy Land. (Of the nine children that Reed and May would adopt through doctor friends around the country, one would have Jewish and Arabic lineage.)

This was Beth's first trip abroad, and she took advantage of every minute. She had been pestering her father about teaching her to milk a cow. While driving through the Dutch countryside Ezra noticed a farmer milking a line of twenty cows, so he asked the driver to stop, took Beth's hand, introduced himself to the farmer, and gave Beth her chance at milking.

The Egyptian government, grateful for the Secretary's efforts on agriculture in their country, presented him with an Arabian stallion. Ezra felt awkward about accepting for himself, but rather than offend his benefactors he accepted the gift for the United States and donated it to Michigan State University, where Arabians were bred.

The Bensons returned home exhausted but pleased with their efforts. Two years later Flora commented on her perception of the impression their family made during their travels: "We have given Church literature to top leaders of other nations and countries in all our travels around the world. Gospel conversations have reached the ears of kings and queens and national leaders through our meeting them at White House dinners, embassy dinners, receptions, travels, etc. On meeting the Queen of Greece at a White House dinner, she learned I was a Mormon. Her eyes brightened up and she told me how our church had helped her country when they were desperately in need of food." [^15]

There is no way to assess the expanding, long-range impact on Church growth of Secretary Benson's worldwide travels and high visibility. The following, told by Elder F. Enzio Busche of the First Quorum of the Seventy, is just one example of Elder Benson's influence: "After nearly two years of sincere investigation of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I was finally coming to the point where I realized I needed to be baptized. I was associated in the printing business which my father had started thirty years earlier. We had in our business just achieved a major breakthrough in acquiring as a new account one of the most respected businesses in Germany—the Reemtsma Company, whose major product was cigarettes. My father felt it was necessary to inform the top manager of this business about my plans to join a church with a nonsmoking commitment, for he felt our competitors would love to use this information against us. When my father confronted the chief executive officer of this company with the news, he enthusiastically congratulated my father for my decision. My father was surprised and asked what he knew about the Church. The man, Mr. Rudolph Schlenker, said that years before he had been assistant to the German Minister of Economy and was assigned for several years to Washington, D.C. He had met the Secretary of Agriculture, Ezra Taft Benson, whom he remembered as being a member of that Church. He said anyone who would become a member of the same church of which Ezra Taft Benson was a product could make no better choice." [^16]

Kenneth Scott, an employee of the USDA, had for years been urged by his family to join the Church. It was only after serving closely with Secretary Benson that he decided to be baptized—and, in fact, he credited the Secretary's example with being the deciding factor. One of Kenneth Scott's sons, Richard G. Scott, was later called as a General Authority.

Ezra returned from his extensive European trip to a climate of intense political electioneering. For the first time in eight years, he didn't hit the campaign trail. He watched the race carefully, however, and evaluated Kennedy's proposed farm program as the weakest link in his armor. On the other hand, Vice President Nixon, he believed, was making critical blunders by not exposing the flaws in his opponent's farm program and not campaigning on principle.

Looking ahead to the time when he would return to full-time church service, Secretary Benson worked to clear his schedule of appearances at strictly political meetings. He also arranged to take a final trade trip to South America just prior to the election. When a "Benson for Governor" movement surged among grass-roots supporters in Utah, he responded that he couldn't even consider running.

Bonnie, Reed, and May accompanied Ezra on the trip to Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, Chile, and Peru. In each country the Secretary met with the president, cabinet members, and usually the ministers of agriculture and trade, as well as made at least one contact with Latter-day Saints. In Montevideo on a weekday evening the LDS chapel was filled to overflowing with Saints eager to hear from an apostle. Throughout the tour large groups, many of them Latter-day Saints bearing flowers and other gifts, gathered at airports to greet the Secretary.

As much as he enjoyed his international visits, Ezra was always delighted to return to home. Often the words of Sir Walter Scott ran through his mind:

Breathes there the man, with soul so dead,

Who never to himself hath said:

This is my own, my native land!

Whose heart hath ne'er within him burn'd

As home his footsteps he hath turn'd,

From wandering on a foreign strand!

On the day of one of the nation's closest presidential elections, Ezra reported his South American trip to President Eisenhower; escorted Flora and Beverly to a luncheon in his honor at the Chinese Embassy; and later joined Eisenhower and Henry Cabot Lodge in Lodge's suite. The Bensons watched election return until 4:00 A.M., and they finally retired with no clear victor having been decided.

Early the next morning Ezra learned Kennedy had won. Interestingly, nearly the entire farm bloc had voted Republican. [^17] Columnist Roscoe Drummond concluded that "the Benson revolt never took place. . . . Almost across the board it was the anti-Benson Congressmen who lost. In Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Ohio the only Democratic Congressmen defeated were those who had opposed Benson policies on every key vote." [^18]

Years later Senator Barry Goldwater, then chairman of the Senatorial Campaign Committee, said, "Ezra had as much honesty as any man I have ever known. It was his absolute stick-to-it-iveness that won the farmers over when every Senator running for reelection was begging me to get rid of him. We reelected . . . Senator[s] from . . . agricultural state[s] because Ezra Benson was right, and he convinced them he was right." [^19]

Secretary Benson didn't wait around for the accolades. Two days after the election he left on his last official trade trip, this one to the Orient and South Seas. He was tentative about this excursion. Eisenhower's announced intention to visit Japan earlier that year had created such opposition that the president's trip had been cancelled, so Ezra wasn't sure what kind of reception he would receive. But his apprehensions were unwarranted. In Japan, and throughout the Orient and South Pacific, he and Flora were feted royally.

In Taiwan they saw everything from a humble farmer's primitive home, where the family took pride that each person had his own washbasin, cup, and toothbrush, to the president's palace, where he was received warmly by Chiang Kai-shek. Chiang spoke kindly of the United States and, contrary to rumors that he had become disillusioned about the United States' stand against the spread of communism, was gracious to his American guests. Ezra found him kind and "gentlemanly."

In the Philippines Ezra and Flora toured the Canlubang sugar plantation. En route, their car passed a huge sign that read "Welcome Ezra Taft Benson." Closer to the plantation another large sign proclaimed "Welcome" and a band started playing. Ezra got out of his car to shake hands with schoolchildren along the road, not realizing they were lined up for over a mile. He finally got back in the car, tired but humbled by the welcome.

In Hamilton, New Zealand, the Bensons met Elder Spencer W. Kimball, who, with his wife, was there to assist with the dedication of a chapel. Elder Benson was delighted to be in the company of his colleague, even if for just a few hours.

When the Bensons returned to Hawaii on November 26, 1960, after having negotiated sales of U.S. farm commodities to various countries and laying groundwork for future exchanges, his career as an official ambassador for U.S. agriculture was over. In eight years he had visited over forty countries. He went directly to Chicago, where he was inducted into the prestigious Agricultural Hall of Fame, maintained by the Saddle and Sirloin Club. There an oil portrait was hung along with some three hundred others of persons whose contributions to agriculture had been deemed significant. Harold B. Lee, Ernest L. Wilkinson, and William I. Meyers, dean of the Horticulture Department at Cornell, paid tribute to him at the presentation banquet, with Ezra responding.

Elder Lee's address was memorable. It was he who had prophesied nearly eight years earlier that Ezra Taft Benson's name would live on and rise above the words of his critics. Elder Lee spoke frankly to this prestigious group, and declared that while Elder Benson had occupied an important government position, he was now coming home to something much greater. President McKay recorded in his journal: "It was a real missionary meeting among prominent people." Ezra responded, "We didn't go to Washington to win a popularity contest. We went there to serve agriculture and serve America. I have no regrets. . . . Now [I] devote my time to the only thing I love better than agriculture." [^20]

Among other recognitions throughout his term, Secretary Benson's efforts were recognized by nine universities that awarded him honorary degrees. [^21]

After seven years and ten months of arduous, sometimes controversial, but highly productive service, it seemed only fair that the last two months of Secretary Benson's tenure in Washington were peaceful. He was showered with kindness. When he made an unexpected appearance at an American Farm Bureau meeting in Denver, the audience responded with a rousing ovation. "My hide is no thicker than anyone else's, and I do not like to fight continuously. And that's what it's been," he later wrote.

The Secretary was especially pleased with a personal letter from Dwight D. Eisenhower, who said, "As Secretary of Agriculture for the past eight years, you have been of immeasurable aid to me, and in accepting your resignation, effective January 20, 1961, I wish to thank you for the many contributions you have made to the Nation, and especially to its rural population. Among the vital programs that you have worked for so effectively, these immediately come to mind: The Rural Development Program, which has been the first concerted effort to provide low-income farming areas with technical assistance; the Food for Peace Program, which has helped raise the value of farm exports over the past seven years to $26.5 billion, a record for any seven-year period; many of the sound flexible price support programs now working toward better balanced production and consumption; and the greatly intensified research programs that are responsible for expanding markets. . . . Although Agriculture still faces many problems, through your determined and dedicated work . . . the way has been pointed toward solution of our farm problems." [^22]

During his last three weeks in office, Secretary Benson tied up loose ends. Meetings with his closest advisors were poignant, as he expressed gratitude for their loyalty and hard work.

On the evening of January 9, 1961, in the USDA reception room, Ezra and Flora greeted seven hundred key officials and staff members he had worked with in the department. He was delighted when they paid for and presented him with his cabinet chair, the American flag that had flown over the Department of Agriculture, and a trophy case from his office. Though he had faced some obstacles with department members during the beginning, it was apparent that those feelings had been reversed.

On January 11 the members of the cabinet and their wives gathered at Blair House for a black-tie testimonial dinner honoring President and Mrs. Eisenhower. Ezra presented them with a gift from the cabinet, two ancient sterling silver beverage coolers inscribed with the names of the cabinet members. In making the presentation he remarked, "I think I speak for all present when I say that our feelings are a bit tender tonight. There is a certain amount of emotion inevitably connected with a gathering such as this. . . . We merely desire in a private and personal way to tell you that our lives have been made richer by the privilege of knowing you, working with you, and sharing with you some of the joys and sorrows, hopes and heartaches, triumphs and disappointments, which have come in the past eight years. We want you to know how we have admired and benefited from your steadfastness of purpose, your faith in the Almighty, your sincere concern for people as people, and your deep sense of dedication." In conclusion, Ezra took advantage of a lighter moment and referred to the beverage coolers: "I naturally assume they will be used for milk and other choice farm beverages." [^23]

Two days later the cabinet gathered for a final time, the 227th in their official capacity. Once more they took their places around the long oval table. Ezra sensed the irony as he sized up his colleagues. He had been in office scarcely a month when the predictions of his demise had begun. Now, he and Postmaster General Art Summerfield were the only two of the original cabinet who remained. During eight long years, within that room there had been heated debates and solemn meetings on matters of grave importance. He had been privy to highly classified, confidential information about international conditions. The world had become much smaller to him.

A brief overview of the cabinet's accomplishments was recited. Five of eight budgets submitted by the administration were in balance, and the 1962 budget forecasted a billion-dollar surplus. The president recounted that morning's meeting with the new Republican members of Congress, two of whom specifically attributed their election to supporting the "Benson farm program."

At the meeting's end, feelings were tender as the men shook each other's hands and followed the president out. As Ezra walked the familiar White House corridors, a lump swelled in his throat. He knew he would miss Dwight D. Eisenhower.

But he was returning to a work much more important than the political hotbed he had endured for eight years. At the closing session of a Washington Stake conference, he bid the Saints there farewell, telling them, "I go back to my duties in the Twelve. . . . I've been grateful beyond my power of expression for the support I've had in my own home during very crucial and difficult times from my wife and my children." In conclusion, he put the past eight years in perspective: "If I had it to do over again, I would follow very much the same course." [^24]

For all the criticism he had taken for eight long years, the number of tributes that praised Secretary Benson's endurance, tenacity, judgment, and performance may have surprised him a little. Literally dozens of salutory commendations were published in papers from coast to coast.

Now that the battle was over, he was called "the greatest agricultural statesman of all times" and a "spiritual statesman," among other laudatory terms. "No one has brought more integrity, more soundness of thought and more patience with adversity to the agriculture Cabinet post than has Benson," read one account. And another predicted that he would "go down in history as one of the most able men to serve in that most difficult office. Certainly he is one of the most principled." [^25]

The Dallas Morning News of February 20, 1961, reported: "What a man that old Mormon secretary of agriculture turned out to be. . . . Where Benson had a free hand, he showed intelligence, fidelity and results. . . . It is only fair to say that, but for the stubborn old, honest old, dedicated old Ezra Benson, we would still be storing butter, eggs, cheese and heaven knows what all besides."

A tribute entered in the Congressional Record on January 20, 1961, called him "intensely patriotic" and proclaimed that "none of Mr. Benson's predecessors served the . . . Nation's agriculture with a higher sense of duty or with greater credit." And the San Bernardino Sun concluded, "When Benson returns to Utah, this Nation will lose the services of an American who was not afraid to think straight in a world of political confusion. This, in brief, is the Benson story." [^26]

But the finest tribute, as far as Elder Benson was concerned, came from President David O. McKay, who stated in general conference that Elder Benson's work in the cabinet would "stand for all time as a credit to the Church and to the nation." [^27]

Footnotes

"To have been on the wrong side of the freedom issue during the war in heaven meant eternal damnation. How then can Latter-day Saints expect to be on the wrong side in this life and escape the eternal consequences?"

---
Notas:
[^1] "Home Town Hails Elder Benson at Testimonial Dinner in S.L.," Deseret News, April 6, 1961.
[^2] Improvement Era 64 (June 1961): 431.
[^3] See New York Times, July 16, 1959; transcript of Sullivan show as quoted in John A. Stormer, None Dare Call It Treason (Florissant, Missouri: Liberty Bell Press), p. 52.
[^4] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), pp. 146-47.
[^5] Journal of Discourses 21:8.
[^6] As quoted in Improvement Era 39 (August 1936): 488.
[^7] Conference Report, April 1948, p. 182.
[^8] David O. McKay, see Conference Report, April 1942; Conference Report, April 1950; "The Enemy Within," Instructor 91 (February 1956): 34; Improvement Era 65 (December 1962): 903.
[^9] "The Book of Mormon Warns America," adapted from address given at Brigham Young University, May 21, 1968.
[^10] Ezra Taft Benson, "The American Heritage of Freedom—A Plan of God," Improvement Era 64 (December 1961): 953. Wanda Duns to author, April 30, 1986.
[^11] See "We Must Protect U.S.," U.S. News World Report, April 23, 1962.
[^12] David O. McKay, "Man's Free Agency," Improvement Era 68 (December 1965): 1073, 1099.
[^13] Ezra Taft Benson, "America—A Man and an Event," Improvement Era 68 (December 1965): 1150.
[^14] David O. McKay, Conference Report, October 1966, p. 5.
[^15] Ezra Taft Benson, "Protecting Freedom—An Immediate Responsibility," Improvement Era 69 (December 1966): 1144-46.
[^16] Iain B. McKay memo, 1987.
[^17] Church News, June 16, 1945.
[^18] Ezra Taft Benson, "Not Commanded in All Things," Improvement Era 68 (June 1965): 537.
[^19] See, for example, Barbara Selka to FAB, February 1, 1972; Hubert L. Hinds to ETB, March 17, 1971.
[^20] See Church News, April 13, 1963; also Conference Report, April 1963, pp. 109-14.
[^21] Memorandum, August 30, 1963, Ezra Taft Benson Personal Files.
[^22] As cited in Newquist, Prophets, Principles and National Survival, pp. 291, 293-94.
[^23] Excerpts from addresses given at farewell testimonial for the Bensons, December 15, 1963, vol. 80, Ezra Taft Benson scrapbooks. See also "Elder Benson Assigned to European Mission," Church News, October 26, 1963; "Benson Named to Head European Mormon Unit," Los Angeles Times, October 25, 1963.
[^24] Minnie P. Burton to FAB, October 27, 1963.
[^25] See European Mission History, January 30, 1965.
[^26] Ibid., March 31, 1964.
[^27] ETB to First Presidency, February 13, 1964.
