Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 18

Preaching the Principle of Freedom

After eight turbulent years in Washington, D. C., Elder Benson left with a clear conscience that he had given agriculture and the country his best effort. He was anxious now to return to the work he loved most, and he looked forward to its comparative tranquillity. Or so he thought.

In mid-February, 1961, Flora and the girls returned to Utah, leaving Ezra behind to complete the sale of their home and wrap up business affairs (including accepting an appointment to the board of directors of Corn Products International).

With his business finally concluded, Ezra began the drive west on March 3, 1961, fully expecting to visit his sister Lera and her seriously ill husband in Salem, Wisconsin, near the Illinois line. But just before the junction where he could detour to Lera's, he received a strong impression that he should not visit her but should drive on. He followed the prompting and soon found himself in the middle of a frightening windstorm. Later he learned that he had driven through the tail of a cyclone that had lifted cars off the highway and torn roofs off houses. His proposed route would have taken him into the direct path of the storm. "I am grateful tonight for the promptings of the Spirit," he recorded in his journal.

The trip across country was tedious, much of it through bad weather, though it felt good to be behind the wheel of his own car after riding behind government chauffeurs for eight years. He arrived in Salt Lake City on March 9, and at mid-night was still plowing through stacks of mail. One letter informed him he was to preside at a stake conference that weekend. An assignment so soon came as a surprise, but Elder Benson supposed it was best to get right back to work, though he felt "covered up and pressed down." The house was filled to overflowing with boxes of USDA papers and memorabilia. "It almost makes me weak as I contemplate the responsibility and worry of the transition," he recorded.

The transition was bound to take time. For eight years he had been immersed in an intensive, influential capacity with his energies, mental and physical, essentially focused on civic responsibilities. As Secretary of Agriculture, he had authority to make speedy decisions and take prompt action when need be. To move abruptly from that office to full-time church service promised to be as difficult as the reverse had been. He was by now one of the senior apostles; only three had more tenure than he. Five members of the Quorum had passed away since he received the call to the cabinet. His first day back at the office he recorded, "Seemed good but a bit strange to be at the new office in the Church Office Bldg. today. They've done their best to anticipate my needs but it is a great change. The Church moves slowly—but surely."

It was thrilling for Elder Benson to rejoin the Brethren, and gradually he reoriented himself to the work. He rejoiced in meeting again with the Twelve in the temple. And one of his first days back he gave the missionary committee the names of nearly nine thousand individuals he had worked with as Secretary and suggested that missionaries contact them and use his name as an introduction.

But the weight of eight pressure-filled, fast-paced years in the cabinet began to show, and Ezra's physical resistance fell to an all-time low. He was exhausted and had little appetite. One morning in the temple he felt so weak that he rested for two hours before returning to his office. Later that day his physician admitted him to the hospital. He couldn't remember feeling so completely tired—though after Flora stopped to visit, he wrote in his journal, "She's a tonic." The doctor diagnosed physical exhaustion and prescribed two weeks of rest. Ezra didn't argue—if the rest could wait until after general conference.

One thousand people attended a banquet the night before general conference to honor Ezra and Flora and their family and welcome them home. The standing ovation that greeted them moved him. President Henry D. Moyle, representing the First Presidency, called Ezra Taft Benson "a man of deep spiritual qualities and leadership," adding, "He rendered the same service civically to his nation as he rendered spiritually to his fellow men. We welcome him home with open arms." [^1]

In his conference talk, Elder Benson thanked his quorum, Latter-day Saints around the world, and his family for their prayers and support in his behalf. He singled out Flora, who had always "come to the rescue, especially during crucial periods—and we have had a few." Indicating that hundreds had commented that it was good to have him home, he said, "It isn't half as good to have me home as it is for me to be home." Then he added, "I have had a conviction . . . that I was where the Lord wanted me to be. I hope and pray I will always be where he wants me to be." [^2]

After conference Ezra and Flora spent six days in Phoenix, relaxing and listening to Book of Mormon recordings. The breather was therapeutic. After the short vacation, he immersed himself fully in the work of the Twelve, though the transition still challenged him. "I continue to make the adjustment to my duties in the Twelve," he wrote on July 1. "I little dreamed it would be so difficult. Eight years is a long time to be away. Calls for speaking assignments from all over the nation pour in constantly." Because of the volume of requests, he was able to accept fewer than 5 percent of the invitations he received.

In September 1961 Elder Benson was appointed, along with Elders Spencer W. Kimball, Mark E. Petersen, and Delbert L. Stapley, to tour the missions and stakes in North America and oversee the missionary program. This, with his other assignments, required extensive travel, and once again he was on the road more than he was home. As he visited stake after stake, he often spoke on two themes: reactivating priesthood holders and the Book of Mormon. Quoting the Prophet Joseph Smith, he promised that if a person would abide by its precepts, the Book of Mormon would draw one closer to Heavenly Father than any other book.

Certain problems throughout the gospel kingdom caught his attention. One of the most critical, he felt, was the low percentage of temple marriages. He noted his concerns in his journal and spelled them out in a letter to President Joseph Fielding Smith.

Temple marriage was extremely important to Elder Benson. One of the goals he and Flora had set as parents was that all of their children be married in the temple and that there be no "empty chairs" in the eternities. He officiated at Bonnie's marriage to Lowell Madsen in June 1961, and in September of that year, at Beverly's marriage to James Parker—both in the Salt Lake Temple. Elder Benson had now married five of his six children there. Only Beth, a high school senior, remained unmarried.

With each year Ezra and Flora were increasingly proud of their children. They had come to regard them as peers, even confidants, consulting with them on decisions of consequence. When the Eisenhower Library requested his official USDA papers, they asked the children for their opinions before turning the papers over. When questions arose about selling a family cabin in a nearby canyon, Ezra and Flora sought their advice. No matter was too insignificant for their input. They consulted almost daily with their children, and the family continued to grow even closer through shared experiences.

Ezra Taft Benson would never again have the luxury of speaking unnoticed. As an apostle for almost two decades and a national figure for eight years, he had made enough friends and enemies that no matter when he spoke, someone was listening. Increasingly, his topic was freedom and the divine nature of the U.S. Constitution. His education on socialistic forms of government had been gradual but firsthand. While serving with the National Council of Farmer Cooperatives, he had realized that subversive, albeit subtle, influences were threatening the U.S. government.

His awareness of these problems was heightened in 1946 during his ten months in Europe, where he witnessed the pitiful condition of those who had lost their freedom. He sensed that the Communists were eager to capitalize on the postwar exhaustion in Europe and to expand, and he warned the European Saints of the potential threat. They assured him that it would not happen in their countries. Yet, by 1948, a number of countries—Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Poland, and Czechoslovakia, among them—had fallen under the influence of the Soviet Union.

Later, as Secretary of Agriculture, during travels and meetings with world leaders in over forty nations, Ezra observed the advance of socialistic practices. His agricultural attaches in Havana supplied compelling evidence of Castro's communistic leanings at the same time Castro was denying he was a Communist. The New York Times was hailing Castro as a "Cuban patriot" and "decidedly anti-communist," and Ed Sullivan was giving the cigar-smoking despot a king's welcome on his popular television show, praising him as having "the real American spirit of George Washington." [^3] Ezra passed what he had learned on to President Eisenhower and Secretary of State Christian Herter. By 1959 Castro had ousted Batista and established a Communist-dominated dictatorship in Cuba.

Further, when Nikita Khrushchev visited the United States, Khrushchev himself had boasted to Secretary of Agriculture Benson that Ezra's grandchildren would live under communism. And Elder Benson had witnessed the tendency in his own country toward increased government involvement in the lives of its people.

Most convincing to Elder Benson was the fact that throughout Latter-day Saint history, presidents of the Church had advocated the freedoms guaranteed by the U.S. Constitution, which they proclaimed divinely inspired, and warned against the advance of anything that threatened man's liberty. Joseph Smith stated that the "Constitution of the United States is a glorious standard; it is founded in the wisdom of God. It is a heavenly banner." [^4] In 1879, President John Taylor followed on that theme: "When the people shall have torn to shreds the Constitution of the United States the Elders of Israel will be found holding it up to the nations of the earth and proclaiming liberty and equal rights to all men. . . . This is part of the programme, and as long as we do what is right and fear God, he will help us and stand by us under all circumstances." [^5]

In 1936 the First Presidency, comprised of Heber J. Grant, J. Reuben Clark, Jr., and David O. McKay, issued an official statement declaring, "The safety of our divinely inspired Constitution and government and the welfare of our Church imperatively demand that Communism shall have no place in America." [^6]

President George Albert Smith's feelings about the Constitution were consistent with those of his predecessors: "I am saying to you," he taught in April 1948 general conference, "that to me the Constitution of the United States of America is just as much from my Heavenly Father as the Ten Commandments. . . . When that is my feeling I am not going to go very far away from the Constitution, and I am going to try to keep it where the Lord started it." [^7]

No Church president had been as vocal on these subjects as David O. McKay, who counseled repeatedly and forcefully in favor of the Constitution and against any threat to man's personal agency. In the April 1942 general conference, for example, he told the Saints, "To deprive an intelligent human being of his free agency is to commit the crime of the ages. . . . So fundamental in man's eternal progress is his inherent right to choose, that the Lord would defend it even at the price of war." Eight years later President McKay stated, "No greater immediate responsibility rests upon members of the Church, upon all citizens of this Republic . . . than to protect the freedom vouchsafed by the Constitution of the United States." In 1956 he reaffirmed in a statement in the Instructor magazine, "Next to being one in worshiping God, there is nothing in this world upon which this Church should be more united than in upholding and defending the Constitution of the United States." And on another occasion President McKay stated: "In these days of uncertainty and unrest, liberty-loving people's greatest responsibility and paramount duty is to preserve and proclaim the freedom of the individual, his relationship to Deity, and the necessity of obedience to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ." [^8] There were literally dozens of other occasions when President McKay reiterated these warnings.

Elder Benson took President McKay's teachings seriously. In addition, his frequent study of the Book of Mormon had given him insights about freedom. In an address entitled "The Book of Mormon Warns America," he would explain: "To be on the Lord's side, a person must be able to distinguish between programs based on the Lord's plan for freedom, which is the [U.S.] Constitution, and those based on Satan's plan for tyranny. . . . He must inform himself and do his own independent thinking. . . . One of the best sources of information. . . . is the Book of Mormon. A person can learn more about what is really happening in America from the Book of Mormon than he can from . . . newspapers." [^9] To Elder Benson, the battle for individual agency was all-important—and that which threatened freedom caught his wrath. He believed that the fight to preserve the God-given principle of agency and freedom was a matter of principle, not politics. Agency was central to the gospel. Should the children of God have untrammeled agency, or should they be coerced into following a predetermined path? This question had precipitated the war in heaven, and it was still causing conflict throughout the world.

In the October 1961 general conference, Elder Benson explained: "In the war in heaven the devil advocated absolute eternal security at the sacrifice of our freedom. Although there is nothing more desirable to a Latter-day Saint than eternal security in God's presence . . . yet the very God of heaven, who has more mercy than us all, still decreed no guaranteed security except by a man's own freedom of choice." [^10]

In addition, Elder Benson viewed freedom as an essential factor in the Church's ability to take the gospel to all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples. The Lord had established His base of operations in America, and if individual freedom and agency were curtailed in the United States, the spread of the gospel might be threatened.

There was nothing half-hearted about Elder Benson's defense of freedom, free enterprise, fiscal responsibility, the Constitution, and agency, or his opposition to the underlying premise of socialism and communism. From 1960 through 1969, fifteen of his twenty general conference addresses focused on one or more of these topics. The same themes dominated his talks at BYU and around the country. He spoke frequently, frankly, and forcefully. And his views were widely reported by the press. One general conference address, for example, was reported and discussed in U.S. News World Report. [^11] At least five of his addresses during the same period, 1960 through 1969, were inserted in the Congressional Record, and eventually some fifteen addresses were included there.

Elder Benson felt that his pleadings were on solid ground—not only because previous prophets had issued similar warnings, but because President McKay continued to voice the same cautions. At least a dozen times during the 1960s President McKay's general conference messages centered on one of the following subjects: the divine nature of the Constitution, agency as the key to man's probation, governments that threatened peace and the spread of the gospel, and the proper relationship of government and religion. His and Elder Benson's messages were carved from the same stone. Two examples of the complementary nature of their conference addresses illustrate this.

In his opening address at the October 1965 general conference, President McKay taught: "I do not know that there was ever a time in the history of mankind when the Evil One seemed so determined to take from man his freedom. . . . Man's free agency is an eternal principle of progress, and any form of government that curtails or inhibits its free exercise is wrong. . . . Freedom of choice is more to be treasured than any possession earth can give." He went on to state that "pernicious efforts and sinister schemes are cunningly and stealthily being fostered to deprive man of his individual freedom and have him revert to the life of the jungle." [^12]

In that same conference Elder Benson stated: "May I endorse with all my heart the masterful keynote discourse of our beloved prophet, President David O. McKay. . . . Once again the prophet has warned us about our loss of freedom and has left us without excuse. God grant we may be wise enough to heed his counsel. Let us become alerted and informed regarding the insidious influence abroad in this and other lands which would rob us of all we hold dear." [^13]

In October 1966, President McKay warned: "Efforts are being made to deprive man of his free agency. . . . The two most important documents affecting the destiny of Americans are the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution of the United States. Both of these inspired, immortal papers relate primarily to the freedom of the individual." [^14]

Elder Benson followed the same text: "I take as my theme . . . the inspiring opening address by President David O. McKay. . . . In spite of the . . . counsel of modern-day prophets during the past more than 100 years, there are still some who seem to feel that we have no responsibility to safeguard and strengthen our precious God-given freedom. There are some who apparently feel that the fight for freedom is separate from the gospel. They express it in several ways, but it generally boils down to this: Just live the gospel; there's no need to get involved in trying to save freedom and the Constitution. . . . Of course this is dangerous reasoning. . . . In the war in heaven, what would have been your reaction if someone had told you just to do what is right—there's no need to get involved in the fight for freedom." [^15]

Although there were those who didn't share Elder Benson's concerns or agree with his pleadings, his views were consistent with those of earlier LDS leaders, and he believed that members and nonmembers alike were looking to the Church for counsel on the subject of freedom. The best source for guidance, he felt, was President McKay, and he followed the prophet's direction.

In November 1962, Elder Benson went on a six-week tour of four missions and six stakes in Australia and New Zealand. Because of his international stature and ecclesiastical position, wherever he went, the press followed, with articles in the media on his activities. The headline "Mormon Apostle on Tour of N.Z." from Wellington's Evening Post of October 26, 1962, was typical.

One nonmember who heard Elder Benson speak said, "I will never forget it. Tears streamed down Elder Benson's face as he bore testimony of the restored gospel. I left that meeting with an overwhelming conviction that I had at last found the truth. His talk prompted me to study, search and pray. I felt that if such a great man could feel that way about the Church, then there had to be something in it." This man subsequently joined the Church and later served on numerous general Church committees. [^16]

Elder Benson's long trip away from home was eased by frequent letters from Flora. After reading of her and Beth's Christmas holiday plans, he replied, "You and Beth are surely the chargers. How do you expect an old man of 63 to keep up with you?" But he had done some planning of his own. Packages were en route from New Zealand, each purposely mismarked. "If you can resist it, don't open till I arrive. Then I'll tell you who they are for," he teased.

In Australia Elder Benson faced a situation that was impeding the spread of the gospel: a low quota had recently been imposed on the number of missionaries allowed in the country. Just before he arrived, a group of LDS missionaries had played the national basketball team of Australia. While Elder Benson was in the country, Sir Robert Gordon Menzies, the Australian prime minister, and his cabinet hosted a dinner honoring him. Sir Robert commented about the game and commended the Mormon team. Elder Benson joked that had the Church in Australia had more missionaries to choose from, the team would have defeated the Australians more easily, and then asked why the number of elders was limited. The Prime Minister said he knew of no reason that the number of missionaries was limited, and within three days the quota restriction was eased.

In Perth, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, who was serving as mission president, joined Elder Benson as a guest of His Royal Highness Prince Phillip Duke of Edinburgh and Prime Minister Menzies at the Seventh British Empire and Commonwealth Games. Elder McConkie was impressed at the ease with which Elder Benson mingled with world leaders.

When he returned home, Elder Benson found little time to savor the spiritual satisfaction of a fruitful tour. As Christmas approached, he relented and let Flora and Beth open their gifts Christmas Eve rather than wait until the next morning. Then he and Flora left on a hurried trip to Calgary to visit Barbara and her family. Ezra loved Christmases in Canada, where he took a horsedrawn cutter for a spirited ride. The diversion was welcome.

Since he had left Washington, Elder Benson had repeatedly spoken in defense of freedom. He avoided speaking at partisan gatherings of any kind, but in nonpartisan settings he was anxious to teach that the principle of agency was a religious, not a political, issue. He supported the separation of church and state, so far as the establishment and financial support of a state religion was concerned. But where government and/or political issues affected the lives of church members, he said, religious leaders could and should comment. As President J. Reuben Clark had explained: "Today government has touched our lives so intimately in all their relationships and all these governmental teachings have been so tabbed political, that we cannot discuss anything relating to our material welfare and existence without laying ourselves liable to the charge that we are talking politics." [^17]

At the April 1956 general conference, Elder Benson's address, "Not Commanded in All Things," listed seven reasons Church members were slow to step forward patriotically—one of which was the controversial nature of the "freedom battle." But he believed there was folly in such logic: "To have been on the wrong side of the freedom issue during the war in heaven meant eternal damnation. How then can Latter-day Saints expect to be on the wrong side in this life and escape the eternal consequences?" [^18]

Unfortunately, there were those whose views were not compatible with his words of warning. Some felt that an apostle should refrain from speaking or commenting on what they considered to be political themes. Conversely, many others were attracted to the Church because of his strong stand. For example, after hearing Elder Benson speak on freedom on a televised session of general conference and subsequently reading his book Title of Liberty, one family sought out the missionaries and were baptized a week later. Another man was first attracted to the Church after reading one of Elder Benson's patriotic sermons in the Congressional Record. And a number of others wrote Elder Benson to say their interest in the Church had been initiated by his patriotic stand. [^19]

When Elder Benson delivered a stirring sermon at April 1963 general conference, "Righteousness Exalteth a Nation," in which he called for Americans to return to righteousness as a prerequisite for national peace and prosperity, President McKay requested that the talk be reprinted in its entirety in the Church News, an unusual practice, and one rarely extended, at that time, beyond the First Presidency. [^20]

As Elder Benson continued to educate himself by reading numerous volumes on international affairs and economics as well as antisocialist materials, he forwarded pertinent information to his colleagues. Since the death of President J. Reuben Clark on October 6, 1961, perhaps none of the Brethren had the practical and political background Elder Benson had in this area. What religious principle, he wondered, was more central to the gospel than agency? And how could the Church, or Church members, afford to be lackadaisical about anything that threatened to deprive man of his freedom?

Additionally, and most importantly, Elder Benson knew he had a mandate from the prophet. On more than one occasion President McKay privately encouraged him to speak out on freedom. On August 30, 1963, for example, Elder Benson indicated in a personal memorandum that he had once again met with President McKay and indicated he would "never say another word on the subject [of freedom] if that was President McKay's wish. [President McKay] said he wanted me to continue to speak out with the assurance I had his support as I have had in the past." [^21] Elder Benson's first priority was following the prophet, as a journal entry on October 2, 1963, indicates: "My one desire is to do what the Lord and His mouthpiece, President McKay, would have me do."

On October 18 Elder Benson learned that President McKay did, indeed, have a new assignment for him. "Brother Benson, I have a great surprise," the prophet began. "President McKay," Ezra responded, "this church is full of surprises." Both men laughed and then President McKay announced that Elder Benson had been selected to preside over the European Mission with headquarters in Frankfurt, Germany.

The assignment was a surprise, but Elder Benson indicated his great pleasure at the assignment, which was to begin near year's end. That night at dinner he asked his wife and Beth how they would like to live in Germany for a couple of years. "With you two?" Beth asked with delight. "Terrific!"

"The thought of going to Europe with my parents, and having them all to myself, was too good to be true," Beth remembered. Her formative years had fallen during Ezra's cabinet service, and she was delighted at the prospects of two relatively tranquil years in Europe with her parents.

Despite Elder Benson's conviction that his warnings about freedom were critical, he was concerned that, as a result of his critics, his effectiveness as a spiritual leader not be hampered. In mid-December 1963, for example, priesthood leaders in Logan, Utah, became skittish when a group threatened to protest at an upcoming address Elder Benson was to deliver in the Logan Tabernacle. He assured the local leaders that his remarks would be appropriate for any sacrament meeting, and told them he would hold the meeting in a tent, if need be. "It is amazing to me," he wrote in his journal, "the lack of courage some of our brethren have in this serious controversy involving the future freedom of our people." On December 13, Elder Benson spoke in the Logan Tabernacle as promised and received one of the longest standing ovations of his life.

During the early 1960s several books were published by Elder Benson, containing some of his hardest-hitting addresses on freedom and values essential to protecting the American way of life. These included, among others, So Shall Ye Reap, Title of Liberty, and A Nation Asleep. Further, he was delighted when Prophets, Principles and National Survival, a collection of Church leaders' warnings on freedom, was published. More than once he recommended it to the Saints during his general conference addresses. Though some apparently disagreed with his repeated attempts to speak on freedom, Elder Benson explained, "I feel it is always good strategy to stand up for the right, even when it is unpopular. Perhaps I should say, especially when it is unpopular." [^22]

Throughout this period he kept a grueling pace—attending stake conferences on weekends; making frequent trips to both coasts for board meetings of Corn Products International, the Boy Scouts, and Olson Brothers, Inc. (the nation's largest independent packer of eggs, to which board he had been named in July 1962, with the approval of President McKay); supervising the MIA programs and all-Church softball tournaments; and making dozens of speeches. And there were many arrangements to make before he could assume his new position in Frankfurt.

Before leaving for Europe, the Bensons were honored at a farewell testimonial in the Parley's Ward. President N. Eldon Tanner, second counselor to President McKay, paid tribute to the Bensons: "I really know of no more courageous and capable proponent of any cause which he thinks is right than Brother Ezra Taft Benson. I know of no more devoted and loving mother and wife than Sister Benson. I know of no more capable, loyal, united children than their children." [^23]

By the time Elder Benson left to assume his position, he was anxious to devote himself fully to missionary work. Yet as he left the United States, perhaps some wondered why he hadn't quietly let the subject of freedom drop from his speeches. Though it was sometimes lonely issuing his warnings, Elder Benson's single-minded concerns and convictions motivated him to speak out. He felt that time always vindicated truth. To him, there was but one course. He chose to stand on eternal principles.

When Elder Theodore Burton, the current president of the European Mission, and his wife learned they were to be released and the Bensons had been called to succeed them, Sister Burton wrote Flora, "You both seem so right for this time and can bring so much prestige to the office. . . . The general public opinion of our Church will be greatly helped by your being here." [^24] Indeed, improved public relations was one area in which Elder Benson had measurable impact while in Europe.

As president of the European Mission, Elder Benson was responsible for four stakes and twelve missions—six in Germany (Bavarian, Berlin, Central German, North German, South German, and West German), and the Austrian, Danish, Finnish, Swedish, Swiss, and Norwegian missions, with some fifteen hundred missionaries and forty-five thousand Saints. Conditions had long since stabilized throughout Europe in the years since his mission of mercy right after World War II. But while Church membership worldwide was growing rapidly (during the 1950s, 1960s, and 1970s, membership increased more than 50 percent per decade), progress in Europe was modest by comparison. In 1960 fewer than 10 percent of the European Saints resided within stakes. Reemerging prosperity throughout Europe contributed to religious indifference among the people, and lax moral standards counter to the gospel message.

Cultural factors notwithstanding, when the Bensons arrived in Frankfurt on New Year's Day 1964, they hit the ground running. How satisfying Ezra found it to return to the continent he had traversed that bittersweet year of 1946 and find evidence of an economically revived people! But there was little time for reflection. The Burtons were leaving for home in two days, and almost immediately Elder Benson began his briefings with Elder Burton.

Elder Benson was no novice at public relations, and as had been predicted, his presence brought widespread exposure to the Church in Europe. His arrival was duly noted by dozens of leading periodicals. And as he traveled from country to country, he renewed acquaintances with heads of state, ministers of agriculture, and other ranking officials. He selected a director of mission publicity and information whose purpose was to improve the Church's image in Europe. By mid-1964 the European Information Service was operational, and six months later had been responsible for almost 60 percent of 298 articles (5,737 column inches) published in Europe about the Church. The information service also placed Church literature in libraries and hotels and publicized Church events. [^25]

In the first six weeks Elder Benson visited all twelve missions, reviewed building programs and local problems, held press conferences, met dignitaries, investigated land prices for new Church buildings, and interviewed dozens of missionaries. Wherever he went, the press followed, curious about the apostle who had been U.S. Secretary of Agriculture. After his initial tour he recorded, "I have been more than pleased with the publicity [for the Church]. . . . Everywhere the press seems to have been favorable. . . . In Berlin we were on a national hookup, and in Switzerland we were on a short-wave program for all of Europe on two different occasions." [^26]

After his first tour of the missions under his watchcare, President Benson outlined the state of the missions to the First Presidency and made the following observations and recommendations: Some stakes were weak. Only missionaries in good health should be sent to Europe. Among people of prominence, the Church was virtually unknown. Payment of tithes was weak. Mission presidents and missionaries should use local products as much as possible, such as European automobiles rather than large American cars. The servicemen needed to be more involved in Church activities and missionary work. And the Church needed the image of permanency. "These are but a few hurried observations," he wrote. "The churches of the world have lost hold on their people, and these people need the truth." [^27]

President Benson spent most of his time either out among the people or seeking exposure for the Church. In February 1964 a German television station, Deutsches Fernsehen, aired a thirty-minute program during prime time in which he delivered a concise summary of the Church. Network officials admitted their invitation had come as a result of what they had seen in the press since the Bensons' arrival in Frankfurt.

Ezra and Flora were often included on the guest lists of prominent Europeans, though socializing had never been important to Sister Benson. She wrote Reed, "We are invited out to so many nonmembers' socials, dinners, etc. I wonder why the Lord selected Dad [and] me to do this social converting—because I know a lot of women would enjoy this type of thing better than I do. But I throw myself into it with all I've got, and the Lord has blessed me." [^28] In March 1964, for example, Ezra and Flora attended a dinner at the luxurious home of the Consul General of Chile. Eighteen of the most prominent businessmen in Frankfurt were there, and the Bensons spent nearly three hours in gospel-oriented discussion, including a private hour with the Consul General. The next morning Ezra sent literature about the Church to him and other guests, and he and Flora reciprocated by inviting influential Germans to the European Mission Home.

Ezra was a fearless mission president and missionary. He would talk to anyone about the gospel, regardless of station or position. Under his direction, a colorful brochure about the Church was developed. When it was published, Elder Benson sent copies to Dwight D. Eisenhower, J. Edgar Hoover, Time's Henry Luce, columnist William F. Buckley Jr., Reader's Digest editor Dewitt Wallace, and others. To associates such as the dean of agriculture of the University of Tehran, he sent Church pamphlets and a copy of Crossfire, the autobiographical account of his USDA years, eliciting a warm response: "Your letter . . . once again enlivened our memories to the distant friendly land of Utah, to its people, the disciples of the LDS Church who have not ceased a moment to be pioneers not only in their home country but abroad." [^29] President Benson's stature as a former cabinet member gained him entry to key decision-makers who might otherwise have proven inaccessible. As he laid groundwork for a mission in Italy, the Minister of Italian Agriculture, Dr. Mario Ferrari-Aggridi, arranged appointments for him with the four senior officials in the Italian Department of Church Affairs.

During one visit to Italy, President Benson met with the U.S. Ambassador and the Italian Minister of Religion in Rome. The president of the Italian Mission accompanied him. One observer later related, "Much to the surprise of our group President Benson was greeted with open arms. It was evident he had the love and respect of both men and a friendly exchange took place, as well as assurance that our missionaries would be welcome to proselyte in Italy." [^30]

Flora and Beth added their own touch. They helped President Benson host guests, spoke at mission and district conferences, and created a warm environment in the mission home. Flora traveled with her husband frequently, and often waited patiently in the car or a foyer for him to conclude his meetings, typically visiting with members, taking an interest in the missionaries, and spending time with the people. Always they were on the go. Beth did her share too. She was called as a missionary, and she proselyted and worked in the office.

Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and his wife, Marjorie, visited the Bensons in Frankfurt during the Christmas season of 1964. Sister Hinckley later wrote Flora her thanks: "After going through the Orient and across Asia, where there was so little evidence of Christmas, and then to suddenly find ourselves in your beautiful home with the Christmas tree and the lights, and music and the red-ribboned staircase, and . . . most of all, the sweet spirit and peace of a Latter-day Saint home, was something that will always remain with us. After weeks in hotels, and strange cities you could not possibly know how we felt when we saw you at the airport. . . . One only has to step inside your home to realize what a wonderful contribution [Beth] is making to the success of the Church in Frankfurt. She adds something that we 'oldsters' cannot give." [^31]

Long automobile trips were commonplace for the Bensons. They and their mission president hosts were often traveling either to or from conferences or the airport. On these automobile trips Ezra's love for singing was manifest as he led everyone in his favorite songs—everything from "I Want a Girl Just Like the Girl That Married Dear Old Dad" to "Springtime in the Rockies." The more caught up in the song the group became, the faster the car seemed to roll. Often Sister Benson would start watching the speedometer and say, "I think we'd better stop singing."

Sister Benson enjoyed purchasing mementos for family members, especially items native to the country, though doing so was at times an inconvenience. On one trip to Italy she selected keepsakes for the family and wrapped them in soft articles from her suitcase. She didn't want them damaged.

At the airport she would not allow any of her treasures to be checked through, so she and Ezra carried them on board. The mission president's wife said, "There was President Benson, very dignified, in his black suit, his black Homburg on his head, but being the ever-dutiful, loving husband that he was, lugging these heavy bags loaded with marble and ceramic. As they hurried to the plane, Sister Benson was on a half run beside him, and part of her nightgown was hanging out of one of the bags, flying in the breeze. We wish we'd had a painting of them, but only Norman Rockwell could have done justice to that scene." [^32] Sister Benson also carried frozen turkeys and cranberry sauce in a suitcase back to Germany from Utah when she and Elder Benson came home for general conference. She wanted to have a traditional Thanksgiving dinner for the missionaries.

President Benson's lifelong interest in youth persisted in Europe. Because so many young people lived in small branches and were largely isolated from other Latter-day Saint youth, he encouraged youth conferences, and he and Flora attended dozens of them throughout the missions. But more was needed, he felt, to keep the youth active in the Church. First he implemented the Boy Scout program throughout Germany. Then he spearheaded Freud Echo (Echo of Happiness), the first conference for all German-speaking youth in Europe.

Beth took charge of the dance festival to be held at the youth conference and devoted months to planning the dances, teaching the routines, and designing costumes. She purchased the fabric, cut out patterns, wrote instructions in German, and sent packets to every MIA-age LDS girl in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland.

From July 29 to August 1, 1965, fifteen hundred youths gathered in Frankfurt for Freud Echo. Soccer matches, a huge dance festival, sports festivals, and a cruise down the Rhine made the conference an overwhelming success. A young girl from Czechoslovakia, who was allowed to attend the conference only after emigrating to France, where she received a short-term visa to visit Frankfurt, said, "These have been the happiest, most meaningful moments of my life." A missionary from Germany said, "I never thought I would be willing to stand in line for an hour just for the opportunity of bearing my testimony." The local press wrote glowing reviews of the event.

After attending Freud Echo, one newspaper editor in Darmstadt, Germany, subsequently agreed to print frequent articles on the Church in his paper. President Benson learned that the editor had "become convinced that the Church is . . . one of the best hopes the German people have for saving [themselves] from destruction through decadence. . . . He was astonished that a mere church . . . could be running programs for the youth which are designed to meet their real needs." [^33]

Elder Benson had the ability to quickly assess areas of weakness and move to strengthen them.

Missionary work had ceased in Italy in 1862, but Latter-day Saint servicemen stationed there since World War II had laid groundwork for the preaching of the gospel. On February 27, 1965, at President Benson's direction, John M. Russon, president of the Swiss Mission, accompanied twenty-two missionaries to northern Italy to begin proselyting. [^34] When President Benson returned to Salt Lake City seven months later, the Italian Zone of the Swiss Mission was leading the mission in baptisms. (Eventually Elder Benson would open the Italian Mission and rededicate Italy for the teaching of the gospel.)

President Benson found that proselyting techniques and printed materials in various languages were insufficient throughout Europe, and under his direction new brochures and seven new fellowshipping lessons for postbaptism use were developed. There was a great need for Church buildings throughout Europe, and by the time he left, he had dedicated sixteen chapels, with twenty-five more under construction.

President Benson was also very practical. In several German cities he sold mission homes and consolidated various offices into central locations, saving the Church sizeable sums of money. In one city alone, after selling a large mission home, the savings to the Church was $250,000. Before he left Germany, all Church agencies had been centralized into one location, increasing administrative efficiency and eliminating expense. [^35]

President Benson constantly taught fiscal responsibility. At the groundbreaking ceremony of the Dortmund Branch chapel on August 29, 1964, he challenged members to dedicate—and therefore pay for—their building in one year. The branch president responded, "If we complete it in a year's time, will you come and dedicate it?" Elder Benson agreed. He subsequently dedicated the chapel one year to the day later. As far as he knew, it was the first time a building had been completed and paid for so quickly. [^36]

The European members heard general conference from Salt Lake City for the first time in April 1965 after President Benson arranged for a station in Frankfurt to broadcast the meetings.

A difficult problem arose when, in early 1965, Elder Benson discovered that the newly released German translation of James E. Talmage's Jesus the Christ contained numerous errors with serious doctrinal implications. Two thousand copies were distributed before the inaccuracies were discovered. Before he left Europe, he arranged for a second translation of the book, which he supervised closely.

There was also the spiritual challenge of directing the work in twelve European missions. Beth remembered well those two years. On Thursdays—the day the Twelve met in the Salt Lake Temple—she saw how lonely her father was for his association with the Brethren. But she also saw him magnified in ways she had never imagined. One incident in Switzerland stands out: "Dad was speaking to the priesthood brethren. What I saw there is the closest thing to speaking in tongues I've seen. He didn't actually speak in German, but it was such a flowing experience that you didn't know where the English stopped and the translator began. I could tell the audience understood both languages. There were many experiences like that. Dad had to deal with challenges day after day. The First Presidency wasn't close by. He couldn't do anything but go to the Lord." [^37]

One evening a moving experience demonstrated just how close assistance was from the other side. President Benson related: "Soon after retiring I had this impressive dream: Karl G. Maeser stood before me. He was tall, dignified yet pleasing, dressed in a dark suit and white shirt, clean shaven with ruddy face and clear blue eyes. He said to me, 'Brother Benson, what are you doing to promote the sacred work in the temples for my people of Europe? They are a choice people who have played a major role in building up the Kingdom of God in these last days. The sacred ordinances must be performed for them in the temples in order to permit their progress in the spirit world. Will you please do all you can to help bring this about? They are a choice people of our Heavenly Father.' These were his words as nearly as I can recall them. He smiled kindly as he nodded goodbye without further words. The brief message impressed me deeply." [^38]

Though they were assigned to Europe, Ezra and Flora made frequent trips to the United States—to New York City for dedicatory services of the Mormon Pavilion at the World's Fair and for board meetings of Corn Products International, which association President McKay asked him to continue, and to Utah to attend general conference.

Elder Benson was surprised to learn the number of visitors to the World's Fair who signed the guest register at the Church's pavilion and said they had been attracted either to the Church or the pavilion because they admired Ezra Taft Benson. One fair-goer, for example, wrote, "Admire your church. Became interested because of Ezra Taft Benson, a wonderful patriot."

Though separated by an ocean, the Benson family stayed close. The children wrote to their parents frequently; and during their hurried trips to the United States, Ezra and Flora made time for short visits with Beverly and Jim, and Bonnie and Lowell, who were living in the East, and to other family members in Utah. They were ever conscious of the goings-on within the family. Ezra would later counsel his children in a family letter, "Stay close as a family. Write to us and each other as often as you can. Pray for each other and be specific in those prayers. We must be bound close together in this life. Be true to your good name and be true and loyal as a family." [^39] He often told his children that nothing would bring him more sorrow than if his family were disloyal to the Church or each other.

In the summer of 1965 President Benson learned he was being called back to Salt Lake City, and he returned in time for October general conference. He was encouraged about the Church's future in Europe. Translation work had increased, missionaries were proselyting in Italy for the first time, thousands of Europeans had viewed the film Man's Search for Happiness, administrative procedures in the missions had been consolidated, and the media were treating the Church more favorably. His twenty-one months in Europe had been fruitful. [^40]

This chapter relies heavily upon Ezra Taft Benson's personal journal and correspondence files, as well as extensive articles published in the press. See also European Mission History, 1964-65; interviews with Reed A. Benson, Beth Benson Burton, Bob Lee, and Scott Stanley; Jerreld L. Newquist, Prophets, Principles and National Survival (Salt Lake City: Publishers Press, 1964); Ezra Taft Benson, The Red Carpet (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1962); Ezra Taft Benson, A Nation Asleep (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963); Ezra Taft Benson, Title of Liberty (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1964).

Footnotes

"No nation which has kept the commandments of God has ever perished, but I say to you that once freedom is lost, only blood will win it back."

---
Notas:
[^1] See Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, October 21, 1965.
[^2] David O. McKay, Conference Report, October 1966, pp. 6-7.
[^3] As quoted in ETB to Joseph Fielding Smith, March 3, 1966.
[^4] Deseret News, January 15, 1966.
[^5] ETB personal journal, March 25, 1966.
[^6] ETB to Michael McGagin, February 10, 1966.
[^7] David O. McKay, Conference Report, April 1966, pp. 109-10.
[^8] As quoted in Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, June 24, 1966. See also journal entries of May 28, 1966, and June 17, 1966. This letter is referred to in "Benson's Influence Helps Keep Growing Church on Conservative Track," Wall Street Journal, August 8, 1966.
[^9] As quoted in "It Can Happen Here," An Enemy Hath Done This, pp. 90, 110, 112.
[^10] Ezra Taft Benson, "Stand Up for Freedom," first delivered February 11, 1966, at the Utah Forum for the American Idea, Salt Lake City, Utah. Reprinted in An Enemy Hath Done This, pp. 37-38.
[^11] Ezra Taft Benson, "Protecting Freedom—An Immediate Responsibility," Improvement Era 69 (December 1966): 1145.
[^12] Gordon B. Hinckley to ETB, June 21, 1966.
[^13] See ETB to David O. McKay, July 13, 1966.
[^14] Wanda Duns account of the event, as retold to author, April 30, 1986.
[^15] See "Benson's Influence Helps Keep Growing Church on Conservative Track," Wall Street Journal, August 8, 1966; "Presidential Draft for Elder Benson?," Deseret News, May 3, 1966.
[^16] See copy of statement in Ezra Taft Benson personal files; also ETB to Flora Parker, June 27, 1983.
[^17] See Ezra Taft Benson, Improvement Era, April 1969, pp. 24-26.
[^18] See General Priesthood Board Meeting Minutes, November 1, 1967, Church Archives.
[^19] Ezra Taft Benson, "Godless Forces Threaten Us," Improvement Era, December 1969, pp. 69-70.
[^20] See George C. Wallace to David O. McKay, February 12, 1968.
[^21] Congressional Record, March 14, 1967, pp. S3694-95. See also ETB to Strom Thurmond, March 2, 1967.
[^22] Ezra Taft Benson, "Americans Are Destroying America," Improvement Era 71 (June 1968): 68-71.
[^23] See Congressional Record, April 22, 1968.
[^24] Francis L. Sampson to ETB, April 9, 1968.
[^25] Rulon Joel Barlow to ETB, April 17, 1968.
[^26] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Proper Role of Government," Improvement Era 71 (December 1968): 51-53.
[^27] ETB to First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve, April 10, 1968.
[^28] See Beirut Daily Star, May 3, 1968.
[^29] Edwin H. White to ETB, May 30, 1969.
[^30] Church News, August 31, 1968.
[^31] "Family Joys," New Era, January 1973, pp. 4-6; also Church News, April 26, 1969.
[^32] Ezra Taft Benson, "Strengthening the American Home," Improvement Era 56 (December 1953): 970-72.
[^33] Ezra Taft Benson, "To the Humble Followers of Christ," Improvement Era 72 (June 1969): 43-44.
[^34] As recorded in Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, March 28, 1969.
[^35] See "Notes on Ezra Taft Benson's Visit to Vietnam," First Presidency Files, April 12-14, 1969; also "A High Degree of Spirituality," Church News, May 10, 1969.
[^36] LeGrand Richards to ETB, May 8, 1969. See also Ezra Taft Benson, "Vietnam—Victory or Surrender," Speeches of the Year, 1968-69 (Provo: BYU Press, 1969), pp. 1-13.
[^37] Ezra Taft Benson, "Vietnam—Why Not Victory?" in An Enemy Hath Done This, p. 188.
[^38] "Deficit Spending and Inflation," in An Enemy Hath Done This, pp. 210-11.
[^39] Ezra Taft Benson, "A World Message," Improvement Era 73 (June 1970): 95-97. See also Spencer J. Palmer to author, January 20, 1987; Ezra Taft Benson, "The Future of the Church in Asia," Improvement Era 73 (March 1970): 14-15.
[^40] See Church News, October 2, 1965; also "44,000 LDS Members Attest to Growth of Church in Europe," Church News, October 3, 1964.
