Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 19

Sounding a Warning

Elder and Sister Benson were delighted to be home again—closer to their children and grandchildren, and involved again in the day-to-day matters of the Church at headquarters. In some ways, things hadn't changed. Elder Benson was to supervise seven German missions and four stakes, so he would visit Europe frequently and maintain associations he had made in Germany; and he was as committed to the cause of freedom as ever. There was, however, at least one surprise coming.

It was in October 1965 that he first learned of an organization called the "1976 Committee"—a committee that was to organize in 1966 and function for ten years. Its purpose was to inspire, promote, and guide political action to help restore, maintain, and strengthen the Republic. Among other things, it would promote candidates for U.S. presidential nomination. [^1] A spokesman for the committee informed Elder Benson that after three months of research, the committee had determined there were two men best suited to provide the United States with the strong leadership it needed: Ezra Taft Benson and Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina. Elder Benson was asked if he would be willing to run for president of the United States, with the senator as his running mate.

Elder Benson declined to respond until he had spoken with President McKay. On October 21, he outlined the situation for the prophet. President McKay indicated that Elder Benson had his permission to allow the committee to proceed, but that he should do nothing to either promote or hinder the campaign.

For the first time since he left Washington, Elder Benson now faced the possibility of renewed political involvement. In addition, he continued to promote the principles of agency and freedom, and even encouraged a course of study on the subject for priesthood quorums—which President McKay approved but which ultimately did not come to fruition.

President McKay continued to speak on freedom. In the October 1966 general conference, answering the question "What shall we preach," he outlined topics of primary concern to Church leaders: "Preach the gospel plan of salvation. . . . It is a great imposition, if indeed not a crime, for any government . . . to deny a man the right to speak, to worship, and to work. . . . Declare the truth that man has the inherent power to do right or to do wrong. . . . Preach that the plan of salvation involves the belief that governments were instituted of God for the benefit of man. Man was not born for the benefit of the state. . . . Preach that honesty in government is essential. . . . Proclaim that God lives, and that his Beloved Son is the Redeemer and Savior of mankind." [^2]

Elder Benson explained his willingness to continue to speak out on a subject that was not always received with favor: "Brigham Young said it would never be good for the Church to become popular with the world, or all Hell would want to join it. I feel no compunction to make the Church popular. . . . I do feel responsible to tell the truth." [^3]

In fact, he felt responsible for all of the assignments he received. He was pleased to be assigned to the board of directors of Bonneville International, the Church's broadcast communications corporation. Always anxious to familiarize himself with his responsibilities, he immediately arranged for a tour of the broadcasting facilities. Corporation president Arch Madsen told him he was the first of the Twelve to make that request. [^4] Elder Benson also sat on the Church's Expenditures Committee, for which he felt more qualified after his experiences in Frank-furt.

Perhaps most of all, he thoroughly enjoyed stake conference assignments, though not all passed without some stress or difficulty. While in the San Luis Obispo Stake in California, his vehicle was involved in an accident. He protected himself from going through the windshield by thrusting out his hand, and later learned he had broken a bone. When he was returning from meetings in North Carolina, his plane was detained in Denver by dense fog in Salt Lake City. After a day in the airport he finally boarded a plane to Ogden, but on the forty-mile drive from Ogden to Salt Lake City the fog was so dense that at times he had to get out of the car to see where he was going.

Whether he was speaking to LDS congregations or secular audiences, there were apparently many individuals interested in what Elder Benson had to say. He spoke frequently across the country to standing-room-only crowds. The Assembly Hall on Temple Square, for example, was filled beyond its capacity of two thousand, and seats were brought in to accommodate the overflow, on February 11, 1966, when he addressed the Utah Forum for the American Idea on the topic "Stand Up for Freedom." President McKay had the address wired into his Hotel Utah apartment so he could hear it.

Elder Benson continued to meet frequently with President McKay. "If you feel at any time I am getting off the right track, please do as you promised and 'tap me on the shoulder,'" he told the prophet. [^5] On repeated occasions, he asked President McKay if he wished him to refrain from speaking on freedom, and in each case, Elder Benson was encouraged to continue. (On September 4, 1965, he was named to the American Patriots Hall of Fame.)

A significant number of individuals would continue to be attracted to the Church because of Elder Benson's strong patriotic stand. Nonmembers who wrote him about freedom-related issues got an introduction to the Church as well. To one inquirer he sent a typical response: "May I urge you to take time for fasting and prayer and meditation and reading in the Book of Mormon. . . . Mormonism is true. I know it as I know that I live." [^6]

Then, in the priesthood session of April 1966 general conference, President McKay made an unexpected statement. In part, he said: "We are continually being asked to give our opinion concerning various patriotic groups or individuals who are fighting Communism and speaking up for freedom. Our immediate concern, however, is not with parties, groups, or persons, but with principles. We therefore commend and encourage every person and every group who is sincerely seeking to study Constitutional principles and awaken a sleeping and apathetic people to the alarming conditions that are rapidly advancing about us. We wish all of our citizens throughout the land were participating in some type of organized self-education in order that they could better appreciate what is happening and know what they can do about it. Supporting the FBI, the police, the congressional committees investigating Communism, and various organizations that are attempting to awaken the people through educational means is a policy we warmly endorse for all our people." [^7]

President McKay's message pleased Elder Benson, as he, too, continued to feel strongly about anything that threatened freedom.

In early April 1966 Elder Benson enjoyed a lengthy session with President McKay, this one centering around the progress of the 1976 Committee. The prophet advised him to continue to do nothing to either promote or discourage his proposed candidacy, to be cautious and wise, and to keep him (President McKay) informed of developments and seek his counsel. Later on, President McKay provided the following written statement: "I have been informed of the interest of many prominent Americans in a movement to draft Ezra Taft Benson for the Presidency. It appears that this is gaining momentum and is definitely crystalizing into a formal draft movement. Elder Benson has discussed this with me and to whatever extent he may wish to become receptive to this movement, his doing so has my full approval." [^8]

As the efforts of the 1976 Committee gained strength, the response was positive enough that it frightened Ezra. With President McKay's consent, he continued to accept many speaking assignments around the nation. He was almost always enthusiastically received—often with capacity crowds, standing ovations, and thousands of subsequent requests for copies of his talks. At a convention in Oregon, for example, his address, "It Can Happen Here," received a prolonged standing ovation. Afterwards, during a question/answer session, he was asked if he would be willing to serve as president. He replied that every American has an obligation to serve his country, and he would do anything to help save the freedom of the United States. The crowd rose for a second ovation. At another convention in Oregon, this one for members of the National Credit Congress, his address, "Stand Up for Freedom," was greeted with a standing ovation that lasted "almost to the point of embarrassment," as he described it.

Elder Benson was the concluding speaker at a three-day "God, Family, and Country" rally in Boston on July 4, 1966, where the overflow audience in the Hilton Hotel's main ballroom responded energetically to his spirited message. And when he addressed the BYU devotional assembly in the Smith Fieldhouse on "Our Immediate Responsibility," overflow accommodations had to be provided in three additional buildings to accommodate the crowds. For weeks he received hundreds of requests for copies of his remarks, and many purchased tape recordings of the address.

Regardless of the setting, Elder Benson's message was consistent. He quoted Church leaders and drew examples from the Book of Mormon to establish scriptural and doctrinal precedents and guidelines on the subjects of freedom and agency. Then he delivered somber warnings about the threats to freedom in the United States.

In his address "It Can Happen Here," he cautioned: "Our complacency as a nation is shocking—yes, almost unbelievable! We are a prosperous nation. . . . We live in the soft present and feel the future is secure. . . . We are blind to the hard fact that nations usually sow the seeds of their own destruction while enjoying unprecedented prosperity. . . . Today as never before, America has need for men and women who possess the moral strength and courage of our forefathers—modern-day patriots, with pride in our country and faith in freedom. . . . This is a worldwide battle . . . between light and darkness; between freedom and slavery; between the spirit of Christianity and the spirit of anti-Christ for the souls and bodies of men." [^9]

In "Stand Up for Freedom," he outlined his motivation for addressing patriotic subjects: "From the time I was a small boy I was taught . . . that we should study the Constitution, preserve its principles, and defend it against any who would destroy it. To the best of my ability I have always tried to do this. . . . Some two years ago, however, a critic from Washington claimed that a person who serves in a church capacity should not comment on such matters. He charged that the separation of church and state requires that church officials restrict their attention to the affairs of the church. I, of course, also believe that the institutions of church and state should be separated, but I do not agree that spiritual leaders cannot comment on basic issues which involve the very foundation of American liberty. In fact, if this were true, we would have to throw away a substantial part of the Bible. Speaking out against immoral or unjust actions of political leaders has been the burden of prophets and disciples of God from time immemorial." [^10]

After his address at the October 1966 general conference, on "Protecting Freedom—An Immediate Responsibility," he had a difficult time getting out of the Tabernacle, so many crowded around him to comment. His message was direct and forthright. Some of the Brethren called it courageous. In it, he warned the Saints against being indifferent about and detached from the principle and issue of freedom. "Should we counsel people, 'Just live your religion. There's no need to get involved in the fight for freedom'?" he asked. "No, we should not, because our stand for freedom is a most basic part of our religion; . . . our reaction to freedom in this life will have eternal consequences. Man has many duties, but he has no excuse that can compensate for his loss of liberty." [^11]

While the principle of freedom was ever on his mind, Elder Benson was constantly alert to other dangers that threatened the Saints, and hence the Church. Often he raised a voice of warning. In the October 1964 general conference he had elaborated on "three threatening dangers" that President Joseph F. Smith had identified years earlier—the flattery of prominent men, false educational ideas, and sexual impurity. Elder Benson implored the Saints to anchor themselves to eternal verities rather than seek the praise and acclaim of men. He illustrated how far the philosophies of man had strayed from morality and correct economic, social, and educational principles. And he warned that promiscuity retarded growth, darkened spiritual power, and made an individual susceptible to additional sin.

Throughout the last half of 1966, frequent telephone calls and letters responding to the news that Elder Benson was a potential presidential candidate indicated that at least a segment of the population had warmed up to the pronouncements of this hard-hitting leader. "It almost fills me with fear when I hear people express their confidence in my humble abilities," he recorded in his journal on October 3. "I am following the counsel of President David O. McKay . . . regarding this draft effort—doing nothing to promote it or to stop it."

Meanwhile, his schedule of Church responsibilities was demanding. During the summer of 1966 he made a presentation at the seminar for new mission presidents on working with public officials. Elder Gordon B. Hinckley wrote him in a memo, "You can render a great service in suggesting to the Brethren how they may meet U.S. Ambassadors, consular officials, governors, mayors, and other public officials. . . . We feel that no one among the Brethren is as well equipped as you for this facet of our work." [^12]

The Church was beginning to see substantial growth outside the United States, particularly in Mexico and South America, and diplomatic contacts were increasingly important. For Elder Benson, trips south coupled with supervisory responsibility for six missions in Europe kept him extremely busy.

In late July 1966, he spent two weeks in Europe, where he attended the second Freud Echo youth conference. Young people came by bus, train, car, and plane. One young man rode 200 kilometers on his bicycle to attend.

In November 1966 he and Sister Benson returned to Europe. He had long championed the interests of Latter-day Saint servicemen, and, finding that many had not received patriarchal blessings, he arranged for the Patriarch to the Church to visit Europe and confer the blessings. [^13] On this trip, he and Elder Paul H. Dunn of the First Council of the Seventy conducted a servicemen's conference at Berchtesgaden, Germany. More than nine hundred servicemen and their families from Germany, France, Italy, and as far away as Lebanon and the Azores, gathered. A conference highlight was the baptism of several servicemen in an icy stream in a small Bavarian village.

Elder Benson had a continuing interest in the work in Italy, and on November 10 he and Sister Benson, with President and Sister John Duns, Jr., of the Italian Mission, and some thirty-five missionaries, drove to the small village of Torre Pellice to rededicate the land of Italy. This was where President Lorenzo Snow had first dedicated Italy 116 years earlier. Sister Duns remembered the events: "As we traveled [to Torre Pellice] President Benson sat with his lap full of papers, scanning the territory and reading from a historical description of the first dedication. He was anxious to rededicate in as close a proximity to where President Snow had stood as was possible to determine. Since the mountain peak where Lorenzo Snow's dedication took place was named Mt. Brigham [by the early Saints], we were scanning the roadside for a sign that would indicate such a mountain, but to no avail. Suddenly President Benson said, 'Stop here!' He got out of the car, pointed his finger up the mountain, and said, 'I think we'll climb right here.'

"About three-fourths of the distance to the top President Benson stopped and waited for the rest of us to catch up. Then he announced, 'This is it, this is the spot!' We all stood in silent, reverent gratitude to be sharing in this wonderful spiritual experience, as President Benson pronounced the dedicatory prayer." [^14]

Missionary work was taking hold. The Italian Mission had been created on August 2, 1966, and already two Italian branches and seven combined servicemen/Italian branches were operating.

Upon return to Salt Lake City, Elder Benson gave his recommendations to the First Presidency regarding missionary work in Italy, in Lebanon, and in other areas throughout Europe. As a Church leader, his responsibilities included temporal as well as spiritual concerns, administration as well as teaching. He often made immediate decisions on such concerns as buildings, land, government contacts, and personnel. His decisions had financial and diplomatic, as well as ecclesiastical, ramifications. He was adept at handling these assignments.

Ezra and Flora were always relieved to return home, though. Their children were growing older, and the Bensons were increasingly pleased with them, both in their church and their civic activities. Mark was serving as a counselor in the Texas Mission presidency; Reed had run for Congress, served in two bishoprics, and continued to be involved in the fight for freedom, which his father supported; Barbara, Bonnie, and Beverly and their husbands were active in the Church and busy with their families; sons-in-law were serving as bishops and would serve in stake presidencies; and there were by 1966 sixteen grandchildren being reared under the gospel umbrella.

On June 8, 1966, Elder Benson performed the marriage of his youngest daughter, Beth, to David A. Burton in the Salt Lake Temple. It was an occasion that brought great satisfaction and joy to Ezra and Flora. At that time he recorded in his journal, "We have now reached the one great goal we set for ourselves when the children were very small, that all six of them would be married to choice [companions] in the temple of our Lord. I think I have never seen so many tears of gratitude shed as we experienced in the sealing room."

And Elder Benson continued to be mentioned as a candidate for president of the United States. Following President McKay's advice, he had neither encouraged nor discouraged the 1976 Committee, nor had he discussed it with the Brethren. One journal entry explained the reason: "This, too, is in line with President McKay's counsel . . . that if I made an explanation to the General Authorities as a body, it might be interpreted that I was soliciting their support. . . . Only the good Lord knows what the future holds. I would be willing to do anything in my power to help to promote the work of the Lord or to help safeguard our great country." In the same journal entry, made the last day of 1966, Ezra revealed his overriding perspective: "It is my hope and prayer that the Lord will sustain us and direct us and magnify us in our work that I will be ready to meet any challenge which comes. . . . I am grateful beyond expression for the holy apostleship, for the Church and Kingdom of God restored, for my wonderful companion, and for our six children with their companions."

Momentum of the 1976 Committee picked up in January 1967. Thousands of packets, with information promoting Ezra Taft Benson for president and Strom Thurmond for vice-president, were mailed to households nationwide; bumper stickers appeared on cars; petitions for his nomination arrived at his home and office; and support from the grass roots came by way of financial donations, letters to the First Presidency and the 1976 Committee, and letters to newspaper editors.

In the early stages, however, the press didn't give the movement much publicity, even in Salt Lake City. And while there appeared to be substantial grass-roots approval, on a wider basis the campaign, such as it was with a candidate who did not promote himself, took off slowly.

Ezra's work load was increased by the publicity he received, however. In addition to heavy Church assignments, his volume of correspondence increased noticeably. Some Latter-day Saints were curious about his involvement and about the 1976 Committee itself. Finally the Deseret News quoted him as saying it was only a draft movement that he wasn't promoting, and that this was not an attempt to create a third-party movement. Rather, the 1976 Committee hoped to appeal to voters in both the Republican and Democratic parties. [^15]

Ezra put principle above political party. Historically, he had affiliated with the Republican Party. During his adult life its platform was typically closer to his own philosophy than that of the Democratic Party. However, he upheld each individual's right to choose for himself. Some years later, in 1974, he drafted a statement outlining his views: "I am in full accord with the official position of the Church of refraining from the endorsement of political parties or candidates. I recognize there are faithful members of the Church affiliated with both political parties. I have personal friends in these parties and they realize that I would not offend them by suggesting they were not faithful members of the Church."

As he explained in a letter to a granddaughter on another occasion, "I have close friends and people whom I greatly admire in both political parties. Many of them are great Americans with ideals closely related to my own." [^16]

In reality, Elder Benson lived by his own political and economic creed, which he outlined as follows:

"I am for freedom and against slavery.

"I am for social progress and against socialism.

"I am for a dynamic economy and against waste.

"I am for the private competitive market and against unnecessary government intervention.

"I am for national security and against appeasement and capitulation to an obvious enemy."

There wasn't much time for rest. At times Elder Benson got only four or five hours sleep a night as he shuttled in between conference and other assignments. He especially loved stake conferences in rural areas. In Soda Springs, Idaho, for example, he noted relishing time with the stake presidency, all three of whom were farmers and ranchers. "This is largely a rural stake," he wrote. "It was a real joy to be with these wonderful people."

Apparently it was the rural population who were particularly enthusiastic about a Benson/Thurmond ticket. He was speaking to standing-room-only crowds in large and small cities. For example, in Pasco, Washington, on April 16, 1967, a large delegation met him at the airport. That evening he addressed twelve hundred in the high school auditorium, where he received two standing ovations after a rousing address on freedom.

Eventually, as it became apparent Richard Nixon was the Republican Party's frontrunner, the 1976 Committee's promotion of Ezra Taft Benson and Strom Thurmond dwindled and finally ceased. Later in 1967 a second draft-Benson movement arose, this one by the American Independent Party. It was launched without Elder Benson's knowledge and was short-lived.

Amid his Church assignments and secular activities, Elder Benson made unusual effort to spend time with his children, who were by now scattered around the country. Bonnie and Beverly were both living in Denver, Mark in Dallas, Barbara in Calgary, Reed in Virginia, and Beth in New York City, where her husband was attending medical school. Many of Ezra's travels took him through or near these cities, and when possible he routed his schedule to include layovers for a few hours or perhaps overnight.

As the grandchildren grew older, he tried to make more time for them. After Bonnie and Lowell's family returned home from a visit with Ezra and Flora, Bonnie's son Mark, then age three, told her, "I am just going to dream about what I did at Grandpa and Grandma Benson's home." In May Ezra and Flora took their granddaughter Flora Walker, at their own expense, on an assignment to Europe and made sure she saw some of the famous zoos, castles, and other landmarks. They took her to the opera and loaded her up with posters and brochures to take home to classmates. But after a month in Europe, which had proved "fruitful in every respect," Ezra nevertheless had to admit, "I think I have never been more tired anytime during the last six years."

At least partly with their posterity in mind, Ezra and Flora purchased four acres in scenic Midway, Utah, and spent what hours they could spare improving the property. Ezra tore down fences, burned an old chicken coop, and arranged for major remodeling on the frame house. They hoped it would be a gathering place for their family and a convenient location for family reunions.

Elder Benson's love for his grandchildren was an obvious extension of deep feelings he had had since young manhood for youth. Youth were the hope for the future, he repeatedly taught, and he took every opportunity to visit youth conferences and to support the Boy Scout program. (In addition to his national BSA assignment, he served several years as chairman of the BSA's Region 12. When the national BSA wanted to raise funds to build a headquarters building in Salt Lake City, they asked him to chair the drive. Elder Benson had received the Silver Buffalo, Scouting's highest honor, in 1954, and the Silver Beaver in 1961.) Though 80 percent of eligible LDS youth were participating in Scouting, Elder Benson felt that wasn't good enough. "We need to have the other 20 percent of our boys in Scouting," he noted in his journal. He felt strongly about this and, in fact, all facets of the Church's program, which was seeing unprecedented growth throughout the world. At times he wondered if the Church was prepared to effectively administrate the burgeoning organization. He believed that while the broad organizational outline was divinely revealed, it was left to man with God's inspiration to work out the details. Good management meant delegating authority. [^17]

Late in 1967 Elder Benson presented a seminar to the General Authorities on delegation. The Brethren agreed that he was a master at administering a large organization. After his presentation, Harold B. Lee remarked, "I think I speak for all of us when I say to Brother Benson that he has given us a perfect model in his presentation." [^18] Elder Benson therefore enthusiastically supported the call that year of sixty-nine men to serve as Regional Representatives of the Twelve. He had the privilege of setting apart six of the first group, and in due time his son Mark and son-in-law Robert Walker would be called to this position.

An array of concerns demanded his attention, and he was alert to societal trends that could potentially threaten Latter-day Saints. He called the growing threat of drugs "frightening, weird [and] destructive," and was anxious that every high school and college-age young person be warned. Habit-forming, mind-altering drugs, in addition to being physically dangerous, had the grave potential of robbing people of their freedom. In a general conference address in 1969, he would warn the Saints about the onslaught of evils that threatened the moral fiber of the Church and America: "Today we face insidious, devastating evils that are widespread. Aimed especially at the destruction of America—the last great bastion of freedom—with emphasis on our youth, the evils are everywhere. . . . These evils are prominent in the promotion of drugs. . . . These devilish forces . . . seem to be everywhere. They are spreading into every segment of our social, economic, and religious life—all aimed at the destruction of one whole generation of our choice youth." [^19]

Some topics of discussion and activities involved more pleasant topics. In November 1967 the Council of the Twelve enjoyed a memorable meeting in the temple. The Church had recently acquired from the Metropolitan Museum in New York City papyrus fragments related to the Book of Abraham. "It was overwhelming to us as we viewed these writings," Elder Benson noted. "We couldn't help but feel that the Lord has His way of bringing about His purposes. He uses human beings to achieve those purposes. This work is directed by the God of heaven and not by man."

The last two weeks of December 1967 were peaceful. Flora returned home after spending two weeks with Beverly upon the birth of her second child. Ezra and Flora enjoyed several days of relaxation during the holidays at their renovated Midway cottage. Many visitors from the alpine farm community stopped in to pay their respects, and the Bensons appreciated the warm welcome.

Thereafter, Ezra and Flora would slip up to Midway on a rare weekend when he wasn't traveling, or even overnight when possible. It cleared his mind to drive through the beautiful Heber Valley and smell the oak smoke from fireplaces in nearby homes. He and Flora loved to dance to player-piano music. And he loved taking family there. When a granddaughter came to visit, they spent an evening in Midway just for her. Ezra arose early to take her on a snowmobile before the one-hour drive back to Salt Lake City in time to be at the office by eight o'clock.

During the first month of 1968 several groups interested in his running for political office continued to contact and encourage Elder Benson. He paid them scant attention. But in February, a situation arose that he could not ignore. Governor George Wallace of Alabama announced his candidacy for the presidency, and shortly thereafter he phoned Elder Benson to ask if he would be his running mate on the American Independent Party ticket. While he didn't agree with all of Wallace's positions, Elder Benson was impressed with the governor's aversion to big government and his strong emphasis on states' rights.

On February 12, 1968, with the permission of President McKay, Elder Benson and his son Reed met Governor Wallace at the governor's mansion in Montgomery, Alabama. For three hours they discussed dozens of questions in a closed-door session. Ezra found Wallace frank and open, and the governor indicated he was anxious to have Elder Benson join his ticket. He then sent President McKay a letter officially requesting the prophet's permission for Ezra to be his running mate. [^20] When he returned home, Elder Benson told the prophet about his visit to Montgomery and his impressions of Governor Wallace. That evening he recorded in his journal: "The President again emphasized that this was going to be a very lively and controversial campaign, and he felt that my being on the ticket would cause me to be criticized and possibly the Church also. He also said that he felt I had served for eight years with distinction. . . . I made it clear to him that . . . I wanted to do what the Lord wanted me to do. . . . Then President McKay said, 'I think the answer should be no. . . . Now is not the time.'"

At President McKay's direction, during the regular Thursday meeting of the Twelve, on February 15, 1968, Elder Benson outlined in detail the various movements and attempts to have him nominated to run for high office. He explained that President McKay had asked him not to discuss these matters earlier, and that he had not encouraged any of these overtures.

The matter did not end there, however. Wallace's popularity increased during 1968, and he invited Elder Benson to reconsider the invitation to run as his vice-presidential candidate. Eventually the question was taken to President McKay a second time. But again, the president felt that his original counsel was wise. On September 12, 1968, Ezra noted in his journal, "I only want to do what the Lord would want me to do, as revealed through His Mouthpiece."

Though from February 1968 on, Elder Benson felt certain he would not run for political office, he still worried about the dangers facing America, and often his remarks attracted national attention. In 1967 Senator Thurmond entered in the Congressional Record Elder Benson's address "Trade and Treason," first delivered on February 17, 1967, at the Portland Forum for Americanism. [^21]

In the April 1968 general conference, Elder Benson again delivered a strong address on the divine nature of the Constitution. Entitled "Americans Are Destroying America," his hard-hitting remarks, in which he decried the prevalence of such things as juvenile delinquency and moral disintegration, were stimulating: "I do not believe the greatest threat to our future is from bombs or guided missiles. I do not think our civilization will die that way. I think it will die when we no longer care—when the spiritual forces that make us wish to be right and noble die in the hearts of men. . . . If America is destroyed, it may be by Americans who salute the flag, sing the National Anthem, march in patriotic parades, cheer Fourth of July speakers—normally good Americans, but Americans who fail to comprehend what is required to keep our country strong and free. . . . Great nations are never conquered from outside unless they are rotten inside. Our greatest national problem today is erosion, not the erosion of the soil but erosion of the national morality." [^22]

Response to the address was overwhelming. Hundreds of letters from all over the country, from members and nonmembers alike, came to the apostle's office. Some respondents ordered thousands of copies of the address. The letters came from clergymen, executives, housewives, educators, diplomats—nearly every sector of U. S. society. Senator John McClellan had the conference address entered in the Congressional Record on April 22, 1968, giving it a laudatory introduction on the Senate floor: "Mr. Benson's speech . . . should be read by every American citizen, and I hope the central truth it conveys that Americans, by their lack of self-discipline, by their apathy and indifference, and by their lack of will and resolve, can succeed in destroying America." [^23]

A few letters are illustrative of many more. From the U.S. Army Chief of Chaplains: "Only on one other occasion have I felt it my duty to distribute a memorable, thought-provoking, challenging and uplifting address. That was General Douglas MacArthur's famous 'Duty, Honor, Country' speech he gave at West Point." [^24] And from the Central States Mission: "We have had many requests for a copy of your conference talk. Most of these requests are from nonmembers who were very much impressed with what was said. Several of them have also expressed a desire to learn more about the Church." [^25]

Response to the address was still pouring in several months later, prompting Elder Benson to note that he had never had such widespread and enthusiastic response to any talk given in or out of the cabinet.

In October of that year Elder Benson delivered another powerful discourse, "The Proper Role of Government," in which he defined the appropriate relationship between government and the governed: "Since God created man with certain unalienable rights, and man, in turn, created government to help secure and safeguard those rights, it follows that man is superior to the creature which he created." [^26]

Many respondents to these and other Ezra Taft Benson talks commented on how pleased they were to hear honest remarks. Elder Benson rarely toned down his message to entertain audiences. Often he began speeches with the comment, "I come with a solemn message. I am not here to tickle your ears."

Elder Benson remained concerned about the world situation, and he kept abreast of current events. His files, divided into hundreds of subject areas, contained information on everything from foreign policy to inflation—anything that potentially affected the quality of life. Periodically he distributed pertinent materials to the Brethren. In a detailed letter to the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve in April 1968, he outlined the dangers he foresaw the United States facing in coming years—increased racial unrest and violence, a prolonged recession or depression, a monetary and credit squeeze, and the possibility of another world war. He also recommended steps the Church might take to prepare its people: inform the priesthood; implore members to have a year's supply on hand and pay their debts; and encourage priesthood holders to attend to family prayers, hold home evenings, and teach the gospel in the home. [^27]

A week later Ezra and Flora left for a month of meetings in Europe. At one baptismal service there he had the pleasure of confirming a prominent attorney who indicated Elder Benson's testimony had led him to a confirming witness of the gospel's truthfulness.

As was his practice, Elder Benson went on these assignments with no preconceived message in mind, but in each stake or mission he determined what the people's needs were and suited his remarks accordingly. He fasted frequently with the missionaries and mission presidents. In Beirut, to the missionaries' delight, a newspaper interview resulted in three positive articles in the Beirut Daily Star. [^28]

Elder Benson enjoyed immensely having Flora travel with him. On one trip when she had stayed home he lamented in his journal, "I missed having her at the conference. She is always such an influence for good with me and her suggestions are invaluable. She has the unusual ability to win the confidence of audiences wherever she speaks." One man wrote after the Bensons had visited his area, "I don't think the authorities should travel without their wives. We will forever be grateful for having Sister Benson with us. My wife has not been so impressed with anyone." [^29]

After nearly a month's absence, the Bensons returned to the United States to find everything well at home. "Before we retired tonight," Ezra wrote, "we held each other in our arms and then knelt in prayer in thankfulness to God for His protection and His sustaining power during the almost one month that we have been away." It was to be their last trip to Europe for a while. In June 1968, supervision of the European area was transferred to Elder Thomas S. Monson, and Elder Benson was asked to supervise missionary work in the Orient, with Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the First Council of the Seventy as his assistant. Ezra took his first trip there two months later.

During his cabinet days, Elder Benson had been introduced to the hospitality of the people in the Far East. And as he arrived at the airport in Tokyo in August 1968 on his first trip to Asia as supervisor of that area, he was met by the Tokyo Mission president, a delegation of Saints, and a twenty-foot banner in what he called a "joyous reception." At the Japan-Okinawa youth conference he watched, among other things, twenty games of table tennis taking place at once and spoke to eight hundred youth. During testimony meeting, over one hundred young people stood in line at any one time to bear their testimonies. When the meeting ended, eighty-five were still standing in line.

He also rode the bullet train for the first time, and inspected the extensive area where the World's Fair, Expo '70, was to be erected. He was concerned to find that plans for the Church's exhibit had not been received, and he took care of the problem. He also arranged for an invitation to be sent to the Tabernacle Choir.

In the Philippines, when members of the press requested interviews, he replied that if they wanted to talk with him, they would have to come to church. "We called a meeting for 1 P.M. in midweek because that's the only time we had, and six reporters and photographers came to Church and we had a news conference afterward," he reported. [^30]

Elder Benson arrived back in Salt Lake City at 4:30 the morning of August 15 and left five hours later for Seattle for board meetings of Bonneville International. He could see that travel to and from the Orient was going to be more grueling than trips to Europe had been. But he felt an immediate affinity to the people and was delighted for this opportunity to work closely with them.

In November 1968 he and Flora, with Elder and Sister McConkie, traveled to the Far East for their first extended trip. In Tokyo, Elder Benson was told that it might not be wise for someone with his high profile to travel to Vietnam, as he had planned, so at the last minute he switched itineraries with Elder McConkie. Meanwhile he presented a copy of the Book of Mormon to the governor of Taiwan, visited Boy Scout headquarters there, and examined the feasibility of organizing a mission in Taiwan, where relations with government officials from Chiang Kai-shek on down were favorable. One night he awoke at 3:30 A.M. with thoughts and plans for future missionary work filling his head, and he put them on paper for reference.

In Korea he and Sister Benson slept on floor mats, as no beds were available. In Okinawa, he met with the newly elected governor, and in Thailand he spent forty-five minutes with the king, to whom he presented one of the first two copies of the Book of Mormon in the Thai language. (He presented the other copy to President McKay.) Though the king seldom granted an audience on Sunday, he agreed to meet personally the former U.S. Secretary of Agriculture. Elder Benson encouraged the mission president in Thailand to push forward the work and to investigate prospects in Indonesia.

The Bensons returned to the United States just in time to participate in groundbreaking services for the new temple to be built in Washington, D.C. It was an emotional occasion for Elder Benson—to participate in the beginnings of a temple in the area where he had served as the first stake president.

When the Bensons returned home, they caught up on news of their family. Their son-in-law, Robert Walker, had been one of four surgeons to perform the first heart transplant in the Midwest in September and was one of the early developers of the coronary bypass procedure at Cleveland Clinic. Mark was one of the top ten of three thousand salesmen in a national sales organization. Son-in-law David Burton would soon graduate at the top of his medical school class at Columbia. Most importantly, all were faithful to the gospel. This was perhaps the blessing the Bensons cherished most. One evening Ezra wrote in his journal, "I am so proud of our wonderful children. Everywhere I go people say good things about them and indicate the good they have done in the lives of others. I hope and pray that in all the days to come their influence for good will be felt increasingly among our Father's children."

Ezra had often said that there could be no genuine happiness apart from a good home. "Life cannot be fully successful," he wrote, "no matter what goals we attain in the material world, no matter what honors of men come to us in our lives, if we fail as fathers, mothers, and children."

When Ricks College honored Flora in March 1969 with its Distinguished Achievement Award in recognition of her "outstanding example of womanhood," she responded by saying that her husband, her children, and the gospel were the most precious things in her life. [^31]

In January 1969 Elder and Sister Benson attended Richard Nixon's inaugural. While in Washington, they renewed acquaintances with former cabinet officers and congressmen, and spent time with Bill and Alice Marriott. Bill was chairman of the inauguration, and the Bensons enjoyed everything from the inaugural ball in the Smithsonian to the parade, though the day was cold and windy.

It was also in 1969 that Elder Benson took on one of the hottest issues in the country: sex education in the schools. He was alarmed that some Americans and Latter-day Saints wanted to teach at school a subject that should be taught sensitively and plainly in the home. As early as 1953 he had foreseen this problem, when he declared: "I know there is a tendency for parents to shrink from this responsibility, the instructing of their own children in the problems of sex, the relationship with other young people, the problem of dating, and all of the many temptations that confront a growing boy and girl. These instructions should not be left to the school or to a class in sociology. The safest place, the best place, to give this vital counsel . . . in matters of moral purity should be in the home on a basis of confidence between parent and child." [^32]

In the April 1969 general conference, Elder Benson cautioned the Saints not to be influenced by the precepts of man. "There are some in our midst who are not so much concerned about taking the gospel into the world as they are about bringing worldliness into the gospel. . . . The world worships the learning of man. They trust in the arm of flesh." He then quoted President J. Reuben Clark to make his point on sex education: "Many influences . . . are seeking to break down chastity with its divinely declared sanctity. . . . In schoolrooms the children are taught what is popularly called the 'facts of life.' Instead of bringing about the alleged purpose of teaching, that is, strengthening of the morals of youth, this teaching seems to have had directly the opposite effect. The teaching seems really to have whetted curiosity. . . . A work on chastity can be given in one sentence, two words: Be chaste!" [^33]

From early 1969 on, he spoke firmly against the issue, and in private he encouraged the Church to offer specific direction. At stake conferences in Oregon and Utah that year, he found stakes divided on the issue, and at the request of local stake presidencies he devoted time to the subject from the pulpit, exposing sex education as an assault that could destroy the sexual morals and sensitivities of an entire generation of American youth.

Elder Benson left nothing to chance with his own grandchildren and furnished them with materials on this and other issues that he thought might be helpful. His grandchildren received letters and literature frequently. He sent information on everything from teachings of the prophets to foreign affairs. The education of his grandchildren outside of school was broadened due to their grandfather's influence. When granddaughter Flora Parker moved to Finland with her parents (who had been called to preside over the mission there), the volumes of information her grandfather sent her did more to help with her home school education than perhaps anything else. Ezra's efforts also exposed a new generation of Bensons to constitutional thought.

On March 28, 1969, Dwight D. Eisenhower died. Ezra had deep feelings for the former chief executive and issued the following statement: "In the passing of President Dwight D. Eisenhower—world figure—President—General—and friend of people everywhere—this nation has lost a great leader and I have lost a true friend and former associate. During eight years of close association as a member of his Cabinet, from 1953 to 1961, and through correspondence since, I have prized his loyalty, support and friendship. I knew him as a man of faith, deep spirituality, and courage. May God bless his memory and sustain Mrs. Eisenhower and other members of the family in the assurance that life is eternal." [^34]

Elder and Sister Benson traveled to Asia in the spring of 1969 to again tour the missions. Under the direction of the First Presidency, Elder Benson climbed a hill known as Mount Faber, where the view of Singapore and the city's famous harbor is breathtaking, and dedicated Singapore for the preaching of the gospel. He also presided at the groundbreaking for the Mormon pavilion at Expo '70 in Osaka. Six prominent Japanese officials, including the mayor of Osaka and the president of the fair, were present and spoke on the pavilion's theme, happiness.

Perhaps the highlight of this visit to the Orient was meetings with LDS servicemen. Elder Benson traveled to Vietnam, where, amid bursts of gunfire and the screaming of fighter planes, he conducted conferences with more than eight hundred soldiers in the South Central and Northern districts. Some of the gatherings were held just a few miles from the front lines, with guns stacked in the corners of makeshift Quonset-hut chapels.

Danger didn't particularly bother Ezra. He was confident that if he exercised reasonable care, the Lord would protect him. Even when artillery shells exploded nearby, he paused just long enough for the sound to dissipate and then began again. After shaking hands with hundreds of men, his hand ached and his heart was so filled with compassion that he couldn't always restrain the tears. At the Bien Hoa airbase twenty miles north of Saigon, he visited an LDS soldier who had been severely wounded in a Viet Cong attack. Though Elder Benson hadn't known it beforehand, the soldier had prayed fervently the apostle would come. [^35]

Vietnam was a sobering sight. After his tour there, Elder Benson was even more convinced that Vietnam, like Korea, was a tragic, no-win war. He thought the United States should never have become involved, but, once in, should fight to win quickly and decisively. Shortly after returning from Asia, he spoke sharply against U.S. policies of containment in South-east Asia in an address at BYU. He hoped to inform students about issues and to encourage them to not let others determine national policies that weren't in their best interest. As he sat down afterwards, BYU president Ernest Wilkinson leaned over and said, "Thanks very much for that courageous talk. I agree with it 100 percent." Afterwards Elder LeGrand Richards wrote Elder Benson, "I agree with you and MacArthur, that the only purpose for fighting wars is to win them." He then encouraged Ezra to send copies of the talk to the White House and Joint Chiefs of Staff. [^36]

In his book An Enemy Hath Done This, published in 1969, Elder Benson elaborated on his views about Vietnam: "The sharp point of our Vietnam dilemma is that the limited objectives of containment are not worth risking anyone's life for. . . . [As] that great American Douglas MacArthur once said, 'There can be no substitute for victory.' As Francis Cardinal Spellman states: 'Total victory means peace.'" [^37] While he was beginning to speak less frequently on civic matters, his latest book analyzed pertinent subjects that affected the lives of Latter-day Saints, many of them with national, even international, relevance—the United Nations, inflation, social security, civil rights, taxation, the Supreme Court, and others.

For example, on the subject of deficit spending and inflation, he warned, "By 1962, the United States . . . owed . . . more than the total indebtedness of all other nations on earth! . . . Yet every year or so, politicians in Washington who claim they are opposed to inflation, ritualistically vote in favor of raising the so-called 'permanent' national debt ceiling another twenty or thirty billion dollars. Deficit spending, and the inflation it produces, constitutes a hidden tax against all Americans. . . . Few policies are more capable of destroying the moral, political, social and economic basis of a free society than the debauching of its currency. And few tasks, if any, are more important for the preservation of freedom than the preservation of a sound monetary system." [^38] (As a young missionary he had had his first encounter with inflation when he paid 6.5 billion German marks—roughly equivalent to fifteen cents in U.S. currency—for breakfast in Cologne, Germany.)

Elder Benson's visits with President McKay were fewer now, for the prophet's health was steadily declining, and Elder Benson limited his infrequent stays to a few minutes. As he would express his deep love for the prophet, President McKay's eyes would inevitably fill with tears. A few moments in the presence of the prophet always rejuvenated Elder Benson.

Because of his deteriorating health, President McKay did not attend October 1969 general conference, where Elder Benson gave a talk entitled "Godless Forces Threaten Us." In less than a week Elder Benson's office filled requests for seven hundred copies of the address.

After conference Elder and Sister Benson, accompanied by the McConkies, left on another tour of the Asian missions. For some time Elders Benson and McConkie had monitored the situation in Indonesia. Church members there had built a small branch, and on this trip the two General Authorities visited Indonesia with the intention of determining when the Church might enter that country. They were greeted warmly by government officials and even whisked off to a royal wedding to meet the country's diplomatic corp.

Before leaving for Djakarta, Elder Benson had received permission from the First Presidency to dedicate the land for the preaching of the gospel, if he felt so inclined. In visits with government officials, local branch members, and mission presidents traveling with him, Elder Benson asked about the advisability of performing the dedication. The consensus was that the time was right. He said that he too felt that he should proceed.

On Sunday, October 26, 1969, on a mountainside in rural Indonesia, Elder Benson and his party climbed a hill covered with banana trees to a lookout point overseeing a valley of rice fields and terraced cornfields. There he dedicated the land. Among the small group was a powerful government leader whom Elder Benson had met previously when the man visited the United States on an agricultural fact-finding trip. The day of the dedication this man requested baptism. As Elder Benson spoke on the Indonesian hilltop, his voice cracked with emotion. This sacred occasion made his soul rejoice and his emotions tender.

Sacred events always touched him, and few things impressed him more deeply than opening new lands to missionary work. Before leaving Djakarta, he witnessed the baptism of the first Indonesian. And in Singapore, where there had been just a few members when that area was dedicated in April, now there were over two hundred at sacrament meeting.

On March 13, 1970, Elder Benson spoke at the dedicatory service of the Mormon pavilion at Expo '70. Snow fell, but the spirit was warm as six hundred crowded into the structure. The next day he attended the grand opening of the fair. The emperor of Japan was in attendance. Twenty thousand visitors toured the Mormon pavilion the first day. When Ezra and Flora encountered a television crew at the Canadian pavilion, the reporter requested an interview with them, resulting in publicity for the Church's pavilion.

Elder Benson was instrumental in having the film Man's Search for Happiness cast with prominent Japanese actors and refilmed for Oriental audiences. This film would prove immensely popular throughout the fair—so much so that Expo officials permitted the church to open its pavilion an hour before and after regular fair hours to accommodate the crowds. Some seven million persons toured the pavilion, and nearly 800,000, mostly from Japan and Korea, filled out referral cards.

After this tour of the Orient, Elder Benson observed that the Asian missions were attracting devoted, accomplished converts, including many lawyers, engineers, government officials, and educators. One branch of fifty members in Kwangju, Korea, had five college professors. The following year in general conference he reported, "In the timetable of the Lord, I think that the door is now open, and this is apparently the day for the work in Asia." [^39]

Elder Benson was thrilled to see the Church move forward. No effort was too great, no challenge too intimidating, if it related to building the kingdom.

Of particular importance in preparing this chapter were James B. Allen interview with Ezra Taft Benson, 1975, Church Archives; references to Elder Benson's personal journal; Jerreld L. Newquist, Prophets, Principles and National Survival; Ezra Taft Benson, An Enemy Hath Done This (Salt Lake City: Parliament Publishers, 1969); and Ezra Taft Benson, Title of Liberty.

Footnotes

"Today we face insidious, devastating evils that are widespread. . . . Never has evil been presented in such an array of appealing forms."

---
Notas:
[^1] "Ezra Taft Benson Tribute to Pres. David O. McKay," September 7, 1967, recorded by Bonneville International.
[^2] Prayer given by Ezra Taft Benson at David O. McKay funeral.
[^3] Idaho Falls Post Register article in Ezra Taft Benson personal file.
[^4] W. Stanford Wagstaff to ETB, January 27, 1970.
[^5] ETB to First Presidency, May 25, 1971.
[^6] Ezra Taft Benson, "Satan's Thrust—Youth," Ensign, December 1971, pp. 53-56.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Address to BYU ten-stake fireside, May 7, 1972.
[^9] As recorded in Ezra Taft Benson's personal journals, January 6, 1971.
[^10] Irene Staples memo to ETB, March 3, 1971.
[^11] LeGrand Richards to Mark A. Benson, October 28, 1971.
[^12] Baron Frary von Blumberg to ETB, November 15, 1971.
[^13] Notes on visit of Archbishop Iakovos, December 3, 1971.
[^14] See Boston Globe, July 5, 1972; also "God, Family, and Country," address delivered at the New England Rally for God, Family, and Country honor banquet, Boston, July 4, 1972, reprinted in God, Family, Country, pp. 401-7.
[^15] Harold B. Lee to ETB, February 22, 1972.
[^16] H. Burke Peterson to ETB, December 12, 1983.
[^17] Bonnie Benson Madsen to FAB, July 23, 1973.
[^18] See General Priesthood Board Meeting Minutes, November 1, 1967, Church Archives.
[^19] Ezra Taft Benson, "Godless Forces Threaten Us," Improvement Era, December 1969, pp. 69-70.
[^20] See George C. Wallace to David O. McKay, February 12, 1968.
[^21] Congressional Record, March 14, 1967, pp. S3694-95. See also ETB to Strom Thurmond, March 2, 1967.
[^22] Ezra Taft Benson, "Americans Are Destroying America," Improvement Era 71 (June 1968): 68-71.
[^23] See Congressional Record, April 22, 1968.
[^24] Francis L. Sampson to ETB, April 9, 1968.
[^25] Rulon Joel Barlow to ETB, April 17, 1968.
[^26] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Proper Role of Government," Improvement Era 71 (December 1968): 51-53.
[^27] ETB to First Presidency and the Council of the Twelve, April 10, 1968.
[^28] See Beirut Daily Star, May 3, 1968.
[^29] Edwin H. White to ETB, May 30, 1969.
[^30] Church News, August 31, 1968.
[^31] "Family Joys," New Era, January 1973, pp. 4-6; also Church News, April 26, 1969.
[^32] Ezra Taft Benson, "Strengthening the American Home," Improvement Era 56 (December 1953): 970-72.
[^33] Ezra Taft Benson, "To the Humble Followers of Christ," Improvement Era 72 (June 1969): 43-44.
[^34] As recorded in Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, March 28, 1969.
[^35] See "Notes on Ezra Taft Benson's Visit to Vietnam," First Presidency Files, April 12-14, 1969; also "A High Degree of Spirituality," Church News, May 10, 1969.
[^36] LeGrand Richards to ETB, May 8, 1969. See also Ezra Taft Benson, "Vietnam—Victory or Surrender," Speeches of the Year, 1968-69 (Provo: BYU Press, 1969), pp. 1-13.
[^37] Ezra Taft Benson, "Vietnam—Why Not Victory?" in An Enemy Hath Done This, p. 188.
[^38] "Deficit Spending and Inflation," in An Enemy Hath Done This, pp. 210-11.
[^39] Ezra Taft Benson, "A World Message," Improvement Era 73 (June 1970): 95-97. See also Spencer J. Palmer to author, January 20, 1987; Ezra Taft Benson, "The Future of the Church in Asia," Improvement Era 73 (March 1970): 14-15.
