Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 20

Challenges and Rewards

After a Canadian Christmas in 1969, Elder Benson returned to a desk piled high with work. As relaxing as a few days away had been, he found his heavy work load therapeutic. But with only three members of the Twelve more senior than himself, his responsibilities were manyfold.

On Sunday morning, January 18, 1970, Elder Benson was just completing a meeting with the Virginia Stake presidency when news arrived that President McKay had died. It wasn't really a surprise. President McKay's health had been poor for some time. But the news was sobering, and as he flew home, Ezra let himself reflect on the sweet association he had had with President McKay for almost fifty years. His thoughts went back to the 1920s, when David O. McKay had been his mission president and one of his first great spiritual leaders. Then there was the day Elder McKay had visited the Benson farmhouse in Whitney, Idaho, and eased the suffering of Ezra's family as they mourned the loss of their mother. Ezra replayed in his mind dozens of private meetings when he and the prophet had discussed freedom and various problems facing Americans. He thought of the times they had shed tears and prayed together. Elder Benson had once reflected on President McKay's influence on him during his mission. His feelings now were as he had described them then: "I shall never forget how he lifted us, how he inspired us, how we loved him. How we hung on every word of counsel he gave us. His wisdom was the wisdom of Solomon." [^1] For Ezra, this was a great loss.

For the Church, it was a great loss. David O. McKay had been president of the Church for nineteen years. Church membership had nearly tripled under his leadership, and two-thirds of the Saints knew no other prophet. The Church had 180 stakes when he became president. On the day of his death, the five hundredth stake was organized in Fallon, Nevada.

Early Monday morning, Elder Benson went immediately to the office of Joseph Fielding Smith, president of the Council of the Twelve, to assure the senior apostle of his support. He next stopped to see Spencer W. Kimball. The previous Thursday, the Twelve had held a special fast in behalf of Elder Kimball's health, and though Ezra had been out of town, he wanted his colleague to know of his faith and prayers.

President McKay's body lay in state in the Church Office Building. As Ezra left the office Wednesday evening at six o'clock, a line of people extended completely around the block. Perhaps there had never been such an outpouring of love and respect for a leader of the Church. Thursday morning, the day of the funeral, as Ezra arrived at the office at seven o'clock, people were already lined up for blocks in the rain to enter the Tabernacle, where the services would be held at noon. Ezra was honored to offer the benediction at the funeral services. In it he paid his final respects to a man who had influenced his life immensely: "We thank thee for President David O. McKay, as a great patriot and lover of freedom and liberty and a man of faith. Even more important . . . we are grateful for his testimony that Jesus is the Christ, the Savior of the world, the Redeemer of mankind." [^2]

Friday morning, January 23, 1970, the apostles met in the Salt Lake Temple. Joseph Fielding Smith was ordained president of the Church, and he named Harold B. Lee and N. Eldon Tanner as his counselors. Elder Lee was also named president of the Twelve, with Elder Spencer W. Kimball as acting president. "We had a wonderful spirit of unity in our meeting and great evidence of affection as the brethren threw their arms around each other as the new leadership was selected and set apart," Ezra wrote in his journal. The inspired procedure had been followed, and a prophet of God entered his ministry at the age of ninety-three.

That afternoon Elder and Sister Benson left for Idaho Falls, where he addressed an assembly of over twenty-five hundred on the subject "America at the Crossroads." Response to his patriotic sermon was electrifying. A letter to the Post-Register reflected the sentiments of many: "As I listened on the radio I felt like if ever there was a modern-day sermon on the mount, this is it. To me a giant of a man was telling it like it is. . . . I know he has a habit of making a lot of comfortable people uncomfortable, but he is one of the few eagles who can sense and see the danger." [^3]

In early March 1970, Elder and Sister Benson left again for Asia. How they had come to love these people! And as dozens of Saints met them at airport after airport with banners and flowers, their hearts swelled.

During this trip Ezra and Elder Gordon B. Hinckley organized the first Asian stake in Tokyo. Every priesthood holder they interviewed for leadership positions had been to the temple from one to three times, though the nearest temple was some seven thousand miles away. All but one were full tithe payers. "Great day for Japan!" Ezra recorded in his journal that night.

But there were also problems to handle. In Sapporo, Elder Benson talked with a missionary who said he had lost his testimony, the result of some literature penned by a Latter-day Saint critical of Church doctrine and leaders. The incident upset Elder Benson, who knew of other persons this same writer had influenced negatively. "Some may say [he] is sealing his own doom," Ezra noted, referring to the writer, "but are we going to sit by and let him destroy the lives of our youth?"

At the First Presidency's request, Ezra was named to the board of directors of the Church-owned Deseret Farms of Florida, Inc. In May 1970, he conducted a thorough inspection of the 170,000-acre ranch. He felt immediately at home, and quickly sized up problems keeping the farm from profitability. He made recommendations to President Lee, and a few days later he was asked to assume responsibility for the farms. This assignment carried a heavy load. Ezra traveled regularly to Florida to work out operational problems. A drouth had so affected the citrus groves that without irrigation, there would be little harvest; he arranged with the county agent for a feasibility study of the situation. He next concentrated on the livestock, forming a marketing committee to examine the most prudent avenues for selling the beef. Then he arranged for Harvey Dahl, a skilled Nevada rancher and associate from his USDA days, to make a detailed inspection of the ranch. Dahl was subsequently appointed ranch manager. Working closely together, they reorganized the breeding program so that calves came earlier; used clover to reduce the cost of fertilizer; reduced personnel; culled cows more heavily; and implemented other measures designed to increase revenues and/or cut operational expenses.

Elder Benson also saw missionary prospects in the huge ranch. On one of his first extended visits he supervised a reception at the ranchhouse for neighbors, bankers, mayors, county commissioners, and Farm Bureau representatives. The presidents of the local mission and stake also attended, and the Orlando Sentinel covered the event.

Ezra loved gatherings—and none so much as those with his family. In June 1970 the entire family—from Calgary, Dallas, Denver, Boston, and Virginia—gathered at the Midway cottage for a reunion. Ezra and Flora had organized the four-day event carefully, preparing a shuffleboard court, putting up a basketball backboard, and moving in a set of swings.

Many of the six children and their families stayed at the cottage, with overflow at a nearby lodge. The family played games, had talent shows and buffets, showed home movies, went on hayrides, and rode horses. Ezra and Flora gave many gifts. Each daughter received a necklace with a pendant made from the dime that George Albert Smith had given each of them when he visited the Benson home while Ezra was in Europe in 1946. But the most memorable and meaningful portions of the reunion were the sessions of testimony bearing. The bond between parents and children, and now grandchildren, was one of deep affection. This kind of reunion would be repeated every three years between calls as mission presidents that would come to Mark, Reed, and Beverly's husband, Jim Parker.

Though various family members had natural differences of opinion on certain subjects, they agreed on the essentials and believed strongly in loyalty and support of one another. Ezra and Flora fostered such feelings. For all his speaking around the Church and world, nowhere was his teaching more intense than within his own family. He and Flora wanted—they expected—their family members' lives to revolve around each other and the gospel. They were, by design, a tightly knit group. At one session of the reunion Ezra paid tribute to Flora, saying, "Aptly it has been said, 'Often a woman shapes the career of husband, or brother or son.' A man succeeds and reaps the honors of public applause, when in truth a quiet little woman has in large measure made it all possible—has by her tact and encouragement held him to his best, has had faith in him when his own faith has languished, has cheered him with the unfailing assurance, 'You can, you must, you will.' I need not tell you children," he emphasized, "how fittingly this tribute applies to your mother."

The children presented their parents with an American flag and flagpole to be mounted in front of the Midway cottage. On holidays thereafter the Bensons flew the colors.

Extended family was also very important to them. In August 1970 Elder Benson traveled to Santa Barbara, California, to baptize Thomas Eveleth, his sister Sally's husband. The next morning he traveled to Santa Ana to visit his brother Ross, who was recovering from a serious operation.

When his brother George lost his second wife, Ezra flew to Boise to speak at the funeral. He felt deeply for George, whose parents had both died while he was serving a mission, and now for the second time he had lost a wife to death. But in particular, Ezra's heart ached for George's youngest son, age ten, who had become very attached to his stepmother. He pulled the boy aside and comforted him.

At October 1970 general conference, Elder Benson talked about strengthening the family. Afterwards President Lee told Flora, "No one can treat that subject like your husband, and we will not hear a better talk at this conference." In some ways Elder Benson saw family as extending beyond bloodlines. Perhaps no one realized how frequently he slipped away, both at home and on stake conference visits, to visit the sick, perform blessings, and seek out those who were burdened in some way. Even when he visited the Midway cabin for a brief respite, he spent much of his time counseling with neighbors and local ward members.

Elder Benson's influence, both in one-on-one situations and on a larger scale, was demonstrable. By the early 1970s, for example, enough time had passed to assess more accurately the effect of his emphasis on freedom. A steady flow of letters arrived at Church headquarters telling of his influence on members and nonmembers alike. For example, the president of the Gulf States Mission wrote him: "I have become very aware lately of the tremendous missionary work you have done . . . here in the South. I have met many individuals who appeared to have unusual stature who were recent converts of the Church and when inquiring what attracted them to the Church, I found that you and your [family] were very frequently mentioned." [^4]

Though he turned seventy-one in 1970, Elder Benson was still vigorous and able to keep a fast pace. Staff members commented that they tired before he did. He made an extended trip to Europe in late 1970 but was in Salt Lake City to greet the Richard Nixons when they arrived for the July 24th celebration (Pat Nixon, spotting Flora as she entered the Church Office Building, leaned over the security rope and embraced her). While Spencer Kimball recuperated from serious illness, Elder Benson assumed additional leadership among the Twelve. He sat on the boards of various corporations (including Deseret Ranches of Florida, Corn Products International, Olson Brothers, KSLTV, Beneficial Life Insurance Company, Zions First National Bank, and Deseret Farms of California), and chaired three major committees of the Twelve (the committee on conference and regional meeting schedules, the committee on changes in wards and branches, and the budget committee). Life was busy but fulfilling.

On the evening of December 20, when Ezra returned home, his arms full of packages, he rang the bell and heard Flora call out weakly that she couldn't come to the door. Letting himself in, he found her on the couch with her left foot elevated. She had slipped on the front step and was in severe pain. They soon learned she had splintered the bone below the knee, and the following day she underwent surgery. Prior to her operation, President Lee administered to her, assisted by Ezra. The blessing was unlike anything Ezra had heard before. "He reviewed her life of service and devotion, reminded the Lord of her great example as a wife and mother, her devotion to the Church," Ezra wrote in his journal. "He made special mention of our wonderful children, the unity of our family, and our love of the Lord and His great Church and Kingdom. Flora and I were both in tears as the administration ended."

Flora spent several nights in the hospital. Early one morning Ezra jotted a quick note to her: "Returned last night from L.A. to a cold, empty house—it always seems empty and cold when you are not here." Beth flew in from Boston to care for her parents while Flora recuperated. Several months passed before Flora's leg healed completely.

Meeting all of his responsibilities took Elder Benson an enormous amount of time. One day, for example, he had six meetings, beginning at 7:30 A.M., including four budget reviews. That evening he flew to Los Angeles to speak on "America at the Crossroads" to an overflow crowd at the First Congregational Church, followed by a press conference.

When the First Presidency rotated supervision of various regions, Elder Benson was transferred from Asia to the Intermountain Area.

After a year of directing the Deseret Farms of Florida, Elder Benson saw substantial progress, though the property was still encumbered by debt. With the changes that had been made and if cattle prices held, he believed the ranches could be profitable within a year, and he was encouraged enough to recommend that the Church purchase nearly 1,000 acres bordering the ranches. (By 1977 the value of the Florida ranch had appreciated an estimated 500 percent.) He had also been asked to assume responsibility for the Deseret Farms of California, and under his direction, those properties were operating in the black for the first time, with the value nearly double the Church's initial investment. [^5]

In June 1971 the First Presidency asked Elder Benson to assume management of Temple View Farms, the Church's properties in Hamilton, New Zealand, which were running in the red. Two months later Ezra and Flora traveled to Australia and New Zealand, with assignments to divide the Melbourne Stake, attend conferences in Perth, and examine the farms. He spent hours reviewing farm operations and preparing recommendations for the First Presidency.

The managers of all the Church properties under his supervision found Elder Benson energetic, practical, and knowledgeable. He toured the ranches on horseback to get a firsthand look at conditions. In addition to helping hone ranch management, he encouraged innovative ways to bring about additional income.

Working with the farms and elsewhere, Elder Benson was an efficient manager. When presentations from his budget committee were made to the First Presidency, President Lee told him they were the finest budgets in memory. "This is very pleasing," Ezra noted that evening, "because I have devoted a lot of time to this and considerable worry to be sure we did that which the Lord would have us do."

Elder Benson continued also to be concerned about youth. He was incensed when he learned that a speaker in Star Valley, Wyoming, had criticized the Church and its leaders at a youth banquet, resulting in discontent among those present. He personally made a trip to the area to try to defuse the situation. There, and almost everywhere he spoke, he pleaded with young people to stay morally clean. He stressed also that the future of the youth depended upon the quality of their homes, and he warned parents, "Everywhere there seems to be a cheapening, weakening, downgrading of all that is fine, good, and uplifting—all aimed at our youth while many of their parents are lulled away into a false security as they enjoy their comfortable complacency." [^6]

Elder Benson didn't stop there. He seemed unusually alert, even forward-thinking, about social developments. In the late 1960s he became very concerned about the popularity and pervasiveness of rock music. At the October 1971 general conference, he warned that the adversary was after the Church's youth, and delivered a scathing denunciation of rock music in general and rock festivals in particular. He was the first of the Brethren to address this topic in general conference. "All is not well in Zion," he proclaimed. "If there are any doubts as to the insidious evils of rock music, you can judge by its fruits. The well-publicized perversions of its practitioners alone is enough to condemn its influence. . . . The famed Woodstock festival was a gigantic manifestation of a sick nation." Referring to "religious rock," such as the rock musical opera Jesus Christ Superstar, he labeled it "sacrilegious apostate deception." [^7] In May 1972 he told BYU students, "Rock [music], with its instant physical appeal, is an ideal doorcrasher, for the Devil knows that music has the power to ennoble or corrupt, to purify or pollute. He will not forget to use its subtle power against you. His sounds come from the dark world of drugs, immorality, obscenity, and anarchy." [^8]

Because he was so concerned about the Church's rising generation—that they be taught the gospel properly and have every spiritual and educational advantage the gospel could afford—Elder Benson was always intensely interested in Brigham Young University. He supported, for example, development of a law school there, telling BYU's board of trustees, "We are approaching the time when the Constitution of this great country will hang, as it were, by a thread, as the Prophet Joseph predicted. . . . We will need young men trained in the law and also trained in the philosophy of the Church and the inspired Constitution." [^9]

There were numerous events of significance in 1971. The wife of Israel's General Moshe Dyan visited Salt Lake City in March, and the first individuals she asked to see were Elder and Sister Benson, long-time acquaintances. As they parted, she said, "I hope I will see you real soon in Israel." [^10]

In April, Mark Benson was called to preside over the Indiana-Michigan Mission. The assignment was a thrill for Mark and Lela, who had converted at least one neighbor family each year during the five years they had lived in Dallas. In many ways, Mark's call was a natural sequence of events. He shared his father's enthusiasm for the gospel and had the same talent for organization. He seemed also to have picked up his mother's ability to encourage and be optimistic. Over time Ezra received glowing reports on his son's service as a mission president. After Ezra had shared with Elder LeGrand Richards a letter Mark had written to his missionaries, the master missionary himself wrote Mark: "Just reading your letter almost brings the tears to my eyes because I feel that depth of love that you have for your work and for the missionaries and they can't help but feel it. I like this paragraph in your letter. 'There is a surge of greatness running through the mission at this time—a surge of optimism, of faith, of dedication. . . .' You exemplify that spirit of greatness and the faith that they can accomplish the righteous desires of their hearts as indicated in your closing paragraph: 'I believe in you. I have faith in you. I love you so much as your mission president.' With such faith you and they cannot fail." [^11]

All of 1971's events didn't carry the weight or importance of converting souls, but others were memorable nevertheless.

In September the Bensons attended the Mamie Doud Eisenhower Diamond Jubilee and 75th Birthday Dinner. The impressive affair also marked a reunion of the Eisenhower cabinet.

In October, immediately after conference, Elder Benson left for Iran to represent the Church at the 2500th anniversary of Cyrus the Great and the founding of the Persian nation. In Teheran he attended a Sunday meeting of a small group of Saints and spoke for an hour. There were forty-six present, including six Iranians. Elder Benson also enjoyed lengthy conversation with Baron Frary von Blomberg, president of the World Fellowship of Religions, whom the Shah had charged with bringing representatives in for the celebration.

Teheran was adorned lavishly for the festive celebration, thirteen years in the planning. For miles and miles the main street was lined with closely planted trees of uniform size. Everywhere were beautiful electric lights, most of them red, green, and white, like the flag. In the evening the extensive lighting made driving along the highway seem the most artistic and beautiful fairyland Ezra had seen. The ceremony commemorating the anniversary was impressive. Elder Benson stood with representatives of numerous religions, many of them clothed in black garb. They were uniformly gracious and respectful of his position with the Church, and many seemed anxious to learn more about his unfamiliar religion.

During subsequent months, Ezra and Baron von Blomberg exchanged correspondence regarding the interest of leaders of major world religions in visiting Salt Lake City. Elder Benson sent von Blomberg copies of his talks and other Church literature. "It is my hope and prayer," the Baron wrote, "that eventually, thru you, world religious leaders may . . . get to know the Mormons, and love them—as I do." [^12]

It was impossible to measure the far-reaching effects of Elder Benson's travels on the prominence and visibility of the Church throughout the world. But an event in early December 1971 was one evidence of it. Archbishop Iakovos of the Greek Orthodox Church visited Salt Lake City and attended a luncheon hosted by the First Presidency. The Archbishop embraced Ezra when he entered, and later in his remarks he stated, "I would like to make a kind of confession. The man who has endeared me to all of you is Secretary Ezra Taft Benson. The last time I was with him was in October when we visited Iran for the 2,500th anniversary of that country. Dr. Benson's presence there was a comfort and inspiration for me." [^13]

The year 1972 brought a marvelous spiritual outpouring with the dedication of the Ogden and Provo temples, the first temples to be dedicated in Utah since 1893. Elder Spencer W. Kimball, acting president of the Council of the Twelve, was recuperating from surgery, and Elder Benson was asked to shoulder responsibility for the Ogden dedicatory services. And when President Kimball underwent open-heart surgery and was able to spend little time at the office in the spring of that year, again Elder Benson accepted responsibility for directing the quorum, though he felt it would be difficult to fill his colleague's shoes. After a visit to President Kimball at the hospital, Ezra wrote in his journal, "I will carry on supervising the work of the Twelve as best I can."

Though Elder Benson tried to stay closer to the office, he still handled his share of stake conference assignments. During this period, expansion of the number of Regional Representatives was approved. He also directed preparation for mission presidents and Regional Representatives seminars.

On Sunday, July 2, 1972, Joseph Fielding Smith passed away suddenly but peacefully at the home of Bruce R. and Amelia McConkie, his son-in-law and daughter. President Smith would have been ninety-six in two weeks. Elder Benson chaired the committee handling funeral arrangements. He also made a quick trip to Boston Monday afternoon, July 3, to attend the tenth annual New England Rally for God, Family and Country, where he was honored as Man of the Year. His energies had shifted somewhat in recent years, but he still spoke frequently in behalf of freedom. Nationally, even internationally, he was regarded as a patriot of enduring stature. On this occasion, the New England Rally recognized him for his vigilant defense of freedom. Many Benson family members traveled to Boston to share in this honor. Full-time missionaries manned an exhibit at the rally spotlighting the Book of Mormon as America's witness for Christ. Out of respect for Elder Benson, the toast of the evening was made with spring water. He was presented with an ornate saddle and bridle, which he insisted would be put to good use, as he still preferred riding a good horse to driving a car.

Elder Benson's message that night was bold. He stated no man could be counted among the fully faithful unless he was an active fighter for freedom. His address to the secular audience, which he titled "God, Family, and Country," emphasized Book of Mormon themes, and he bore testimony to his convictions: "I know, as I know that I live, that there is a God in Heaven. . . . I also know that life is a testing time in man's eternal existence. . . . [But] God has not left man alone. He sends prophets, gives scripture, whispers counsel, answers righteous prayers and in innumerable ways blesses his children. . . . Now the great consolation and hope of every patriot should be that God is in His heaven; that He is the same yesterday, today, and forever; that He is in charge." [^14]

Back in Salt Lake City, Elder Benson offered the invocation at President Smith's funeral. The following day the Council of the Twelve met to effect reorganization of the First Presidency. Harold B. Lee was ordained president, and he selected N. Eldon Tanner and Marion G. Romney as first and second counselors respectively. Spencer W. Kimball became president of the Council of the Twelve.

Ezra had unusual affection for President Lee, dating to boyhood. In February 1972 Ezra had presented him with a small statute of Thorvaldsen's Christus, with a personal note attached. Elder Lee replied, "I was profoundly moved by the feeling of sincerity conveyed in your message of brotherhood and fellowship. Your note took me back to our high school days when I remembered you as one of the outstanding examples of fine Latter-day Saint youth. . . . It has been a delight to have seen you grow in 'favor with men' as well as in the 'favor of God.'" [^15]

Under President Lee's direction, the Brethren conducted an area conference for the Saints in Mexico and Central America in August 1972. There Elder Benson spoke on a topic of which he had extensive personal knowledge—"Latter-day Saints and the World." With each trip abroad—and he had had many by now—his affection for the Saints of the world multiplied and intensified. Nearly seventeen thousand Saints crowded into the National Auditorium in Mexico City for the conference. As Elder Benson left at the conclusion, people swarmed around and clung to him until his host family feared he would be mobbed. He recorded in his journal, "These are wonderful, loving, warm-spirited people, proud of their Book of Mormon ancestry."

In other areas of Elder Benson's life, things were also moving forward, or at least changing. Having reached the mandatory retirement age, he was unable to be reelected to the Corn Products International board, on which he had served for eleven years. His trusted friend J. Edgar Hoover, former director of the FBI, passed away. And Ezra's eldest grandson, Stephen Reed, was called to serve in the Japan West Mission. This was a milestone of significant proportions, perpetuating a heritage of Benson missionaries that dated back to Ezra's great-grandfather, Ezra T. Benson. Thus far each of Elder Benson's grandsons, in turn, had earned his Eagle Scout award and graduated from seminary, and now they were beginning to serve missions.

Elder Benson's schedule during the first half of 1973 would have been grueling for a man half his age, let alone someone nearly seventy-four. The senior members of the Twelve were kept busy most weekends effecting reorganizations and divisions of existing stakes and creating new ones. As of February there were 601 stakes in the Church—an increase of 101 in just three years since President McKay's death. Weeks passed without Elder Benson writing in his journal. "We are so busy," he wrote in one brief entry. But not too busy, evidently, to leave a personal touch as he traveled. One stake president, later named a General Authority, related the impact Elder Benson had on him: "I am amazed at your attention to the needs of people. I first noticed it. . . when I was a stake president and you dedicated our new stake center. When you left I felt I was the most important person in your life." [^16]

Time was speeding by and there were so many activities—a priesthood blessing for his sister Lera; another family reunion to plan; the groundbreaking of BYU's J. Reuben Clark School of Law; and complicated budgets to oversee. There were also problems to work out, assignments that were mentally, emotionally, and spiritually draining. Elder Benson felt strongly that the Twelve needed to be relieved of detailed administrative matters so they could devote closer attention to overseeing the Church's rapid growth, the work in other countries, and building relations with government leaders.

And there were national concerns that demanded his attention. The dollar had dropped to new lows, and price-freezing was causing economic distress. "The real cause of inflation is deficit spending," Ezra noted, "unbalanced budgets and living beyond our income."

The accelerated pace wore on both Ezra and Flora. In May 1973 they spent eighteen days on Church assignment in Hawaii, Guam, and the Philippines. Though both had heavy colds, they traveled at night to maximize their time, and they arrived home exhausted. Even Ezra admitted they hadn't been wise in conserving their strength.

Only a few weeks later, Flora began to suffer serious health problems. Some days she appeared to function normally—vigorous and fully alert. Other times she was very weak and discouraged. These bouts, as she called them, usually came in the afternoon. Initially physicians were unable to determine the extent of the problem. Eventually they diagnosed that she had suffered a slight stroke. For a woman who had been so energetic, the change was traumatic. Wrote Ezra in his journal, "Flora is such a brick. She doesn't seem to understand that she is no longer forty. . . . I have tried to ease her load somewhat, but she is so ambitious it is not easy to do."

It was a challenging time for the whole family. Flora had always been at the center of things. She was independent, quick, vivacious in her own way. For years she had devoted her life to Ezra and the family. Suddenly the tables were turned.

At times Flora battled discouragement. She was alert enough to realize that she wasn't fully alert, and she couldn't always travel comfortably with her husband. Beth, who by now had moved to Salt Lake City, cared for her mother when Ezra had to travel without her. "I remember the first time Dad had to leave Mother with me. Tears just rolled down his face as he handed me Mother's little suitcase," Beth related. "It was as though they were being separated for months. Dad kissed her and helped her into my car. It was so hard on him."

The children fasted and prayed for their mother, as well as provided physical assistance. And, in a reversal of roles, the support came to Flora. After learning her mother had suffered a setback, Bonnie wrote: "It's not going to do any good to worry or get depressed but we just have to tackle the situation. If the doctors and the prophet himself have told you that you must slow down, then I figure you better slow down I mean really slow down! I know you've always taken pride in the fact that you were a real worker and pusher and could do more than any of us . . . but to be honest with you, mother, this isn't what's made you the special and saintly mother you've been to all of us. . . . What's made you one of the choicest spirits of our Heavenly Father is the love, wisdom, discernment and teachings that you give from within. This, mother, is what I don't want to be deprived of. . . . I'm having a real good cry right now, praying that you'll understand what I'm trying to say. Surely you know we won't love you any less because you have to slow down." [^17]

Through the end of the year, Flora's health fluctuated. At October 1973 general conference she attended the first four sessions on Friday and Saturday, but she didn't feel up to the last two on Sunday. Doctors still weren't in full agreement over treatment, and that concerned Ezra. In November their son-in-law, Dr. Robert Walker, performed additional tests, confirming the earlier diagnosis of a stroke. At that point Ezra and Flora decided it would be best for them to move into a condominium. There would be fewer maintenance problems and more privacy and protection. That December they spent their first Christmas in a new downtown Salt Lake City apartment. It was a beautiful holiday, and Ezra was grateful just to have Flora at his side.

The next day, late in the evening, a phone call came from Spencer W. Kimball and Marion G. Romney. President Lee had passed away suddenly at 8:58 P.M.

"It seemed impossible! He has been so well. I have felt that he would be the last President of the Church I would know in mortal life," Elder Benson wrote that evening, still stunned by the news. "Some relief came as I knelt in prayer alone in my study, but I found it impossible to sleep."

Just two months earlier, President Lee had closed general conference with stirring words. Never, Ezra felt, had a conference ended on such a high spiritual note. But now his boyhood friend, the prophet, was gone. What an enormous load this placed on Spencer Kimball! What a tremendous load he himself would now be called on to bear!

The day after the funeral services in the Tabernacle, the apostles convened for the third time in less than four years to reorganize the First Presidency. It was, as Ezra described it, the most glorious reorganization meeting he had ever attended. Spencer Woolley Kimball was sustained and set apart as president of the Church, and Elder Benson was named as president of the Council of the Twelve.

President Benson was now seventy-four years old. He had been an apostle for thirty years and from the moment his colleague who had sat next to him throughout that entire period was ordained the prophet, Ezra sustained him fully. Perhaps no one prayed more fervently for President Kimball's health and preservation of life than did Ezra and Flora Benson. "For thirty years I have had the honor of sitting at the side of Spencer W. Kimball," President Benson affirmed at the press conference announcing the reorganization. "I know this man. I love him. I honor him. I respect him."

As for his own assignment, which had come so unexpectedly, he confided in his journal: "It is almost overwhelming as I contemplate . . . being called to serve as the President of the Twelve. With all my heart I will seek the inspiration of heaven and the blessings of our Heavenly Father. I know the work is true. I know that God lives and that this Church carries the name of Jesus Christ. With His aid and the aid of my Heavenly Father, I am sure I will be blessed with success in my humble efforts."

This chapter relies heavily upon Ezra Taft Benson's personal journals. See also "Press Conference with President Spencer W. Kimball and the First Presidency, and Ezra Taft Benson," December 31, 1973, Church Archives; Ezra Taft Benson, God, Family, Country (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1975).

Footnotes

"It is my conviction that these living oracles are

not only authorized, but are obligated

to give counsel to this people on any subject

which is vital to the welfare of this people

and the upbuilding of the kingdom of God."

---
Notas:
[^1] Bonnie Benson Madsen to ETB and FAB, January 15, 1974.
[^2] Mark Amussen Benson to ETB, January 5, 1974.
[^3] A. Theodore Tuttle to ETB, February 14, 1975.
[^4] See, for example, Oscar W. McConkie to ETB, October 6, 1977.
[^5] Mark A. Benson to ETB, January 31, 1977.
[^6] Remarks at quarterly meeting of the Council of the Twelve, March 31, 1974, Church Archives.
[^7] William Grant Bangerter, "A Special Moment in Church History," Ensign, November 1977, pp. 26-27.
[^8] Ezra Taft Benson, "President Kimball's View of Missionary Work," concluding message at Mission President's Conference, April 3, 1985, Church Archives.
[^9] Ted E. Brewerton to ETB, June 19, 1979; also Ted E. Brewerton to ETB, May 28, 1979.
[^10] Carlos E. Asay to ETB, April 18, 1979; also memo from Kirt M. Olsen to Gene R. Cook, March 8, 1979.
[^11] Gene R. Cook to ETB, December 17, 1980.
[^12] See "Report on Trip to the Mideast," May 17, 1979.
[^13] See Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, March 11, 1969, and October 8, 1972.
[^14] David Horowitz to ETB, October 9, 1978. See also "Ezra Taft Benson Stresses Close Affinity Between the Mormons and the Jewish People," United Israel Bulletin, Winter 1978, pp. 1ff.
[^15] James M. Paramore to ETB, May 31, 1978.
[^16] ETB to Robert Welch, January 3, 1975.
[^17] Ezra Taft Benson, "Temple Blessings," address delivered at Washington D.C. Temple Dedication, November 20, 1974.
