Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 21

President of the Twelve

As the new president of the Council of the Twelve, President Benson quickly got situated. In a matter of days he had interviewed each of the Twelve and met with most of the remaining General Authorities. He felt the personal discussions were fruitful. "There is a wonderful spirit among the General Authorities," he noted afterwards. "I have felt this more deeply since interviewing [them]."

As they had always done when Ezra received a weighty assignment, the family rallied around their husband, father, and grandfather. The children called, wrote letters, prayed, and fasted. President Benson's eldest grandson, serving a mission in Japan, wrote that the missionaries had been praying fervently for President Kimball and "Grandpa." Regardless of Ezra Taft Benson's assignment or calling, it became a family affair. In early January 1974 he and Flora visited Bonnie's stake in Denver. Afterwards she wrote her parents, "After seeing both of you do the Lord's work . . . I know that the Lord needs you as a team. . . . At sacrament meeting Sunday night you were referred to so much in the prayers and talks and people just swarmed around us expressing appreciation for your presence. Yesterday our phone rang constantly! I think the comment mentioned most often is that they have never felt the Spirit of our Heavenly Father so great. . . . How uplifted they were and determined to do better."

Bonnie was also moved that, despite her parents' increased responsibilities, they were as solicitous of her family as ever. "After you left I went through the rooms and saw the baby quilt, the apples, and the potatoes, opened the freezer and saw that big turkey, the candy, the files and papers," she wrote. "You are so thoughtful of us." [^1]

Mark wrote his father, simply, "As children and grandchildren, in humble prayer and faith, we sustain you." [^2]

In a few weeks President Benson had implemented measures to streamline the operations of the Twelve. He moved ahead quickly, capitalizing on his administrative talents. It required long hours at the office, but he enjoyed it. Staff members decades younger than he found it difficult to keep up. He was demanding of them. When he wanted something, he wanted it now. But he expected the same performance of himself.

President Benson was anxious to relieve the Twelve of day-to-day operations so they would have more time for planning and policy-making. In an article he wrote for the Ensign entitled "A Habit of Integrity," Elder Mark E. Petersen warned that the standard against which Elder Benson measured all decisions or changes in policies or procedures was, What's best for the kingdom?

It was best for the kingdom, the First Presidency determined, that the president of the Council of the Twelve be relieved of all previous committee assignments so that he could chair the Missionary Executive Committee. In a matter of days the operation of that body had been simplified. Ezra Benson was a delegator par excellence, a leader unencumbered by inertia who quickly routed tasks that crossed his desk to the appropriate person or department. And he made prompt, precise decisions.

By mid-March 1974 new mission presidents to fill vacancies in July had been approved and called—the earliest that assignment had been completed in anyone's memory. Elder A. Theodore Tuttle of the First Quorum of the Seventy expressed his impression of President Benson's administrative talents in a letter to him: "When you became chairman of the Missionary Executive Committee, we felt a new direction and a new spirit. Somehow in your administrative sensitivity you instilled confidence in the First Council [of the Seventy], laid the work squarely on our shoulders [and] expected us to do it." [^3]

It didn't take long for members of the Twelve to understand in a way they had perhaps not appreciated fully before that their president was a man of unusual leadership ability. Elder Bruce R. McConkie often told family members he had never seen President Benson's administrative equal in the Church. [^4] President Benson was punctual in both beginning and ending meetings, and he made himself easily accessible to the members of his quorum. When a topic was discussed in the quorum, he encouraged, even expected, each of the Brethren to express his candid opinion on the matter. But if the comments began to wander, or if he felt that adequate discussion had taken place, he typically said, "I think we've got enough hay down now. Let's bale a little," bringing the issue to resolution.

The members of the Twelve found they could speak freely. Elder Boyd K. Packer explained: "You could disagree with President Benson without worrying that there was anything personal to it. We had full discussions on matters without worrying what his viewpoint might be." Elder Russell M. Nelson added, "In any consideration, even if it was not his opinion, President Benson measured a situation against only one standard—What's best for the kingdom? If it meant a wrinkle might have to be folded in a way he wouldn't have done it, so be it. He wanted only what was best for the kingdom. He listened to counsel."

After President Benson had served as president of the Twelve for three years, his son Mark, then a Regional Representative, related to his father an experience he had had while attending a stake conference with Elder Howard W. Hunter. Elder Hunter told Mark that his father was "most effective" and "an excellent administrator," and that he "knew how to get open and frank discussion from [the] Brethren and [was] able to direct and control it and arrive at a unanimous decision with everyone united." [^5]

Under President Benson's leadership, even the newest members of the Twelve were expected to speak their minds. Elder Russell M. Nelson was called to the council in 1984. He said: "President Benson was an apostle when I was in college, yet suddenly we were brothers, two of the Twelve together. But he couldn't have been more solicitous of my counsel in the council. I assumed there's nothing more appreciated than silence from a freshman. But he wouldn't have that. In fact, if I was silent on something he would draw it out. He accepted all of us as colleagues without gradation."

During one of his first meetings with the Twelve, Elder Dallin Oaks commented on a topic of discussion, then remarked that perhaps he shouldn't have said that from his end of the circle. President Benson immediately interrupted him, one of the rare times Elder Oaks remembered that happening, to say, "You are a member of this circle, and that's all that counts."

President Benson felt very humble and modest about leading the Twelve. Frequently he said he would be honored to reverse roles and serve under any of his colleagues. This was not an indication that he felt uncomfortable about leading out, but an expression of sincere respect for those whom he had been called to serve and to lead. In a quarterly meeting of the Twelve on March 31, 1974, he explained: "I have had a very anxious concern about this great responsibility—not a fearful feeling, because I know we cannot fail in this work . . . if we do our best. I know the Lord will sustain us, but it gives me great concern to be called to leadership over a body of men such as you—special witnesses of the Lord Jesus Christ. . . . I was looking through the Church Almanac yesterday evening. I went through the list of men who have presided over this council—real stalwarts! It is almost unbelievable that one as weak as I would be asked to serve in this capacity." [^6]

Perhaps no one had deeper respect and love for President Kimball than did Ezra Taft Benson. "Few saw President Benson on his knees, begging the Lord to preserve Spencer W. Kimball, as we did," said Elder Packer. "No one showed more deference and honor to President Kimball than did President Benson."

In April 1974 President Kimball outlined his vision of an expanded missionary program in a masterful address to Regional Representatives. Elder William Grant Bangerter of the First Quorum of the Seventy recalled that President Kimball had not spoken long when "a new awareness seemed suddenly to fall on the congregation. We became alert to an astonishing spiritual presence, and we realized that we were listening to something unusual. . . . It was as if, spiritually speaking, our hair began to stand on end." When President Kimball concluded, President Benson declared in a voice filled with emotion, "President Kimball, through all the years that these meetings have been held, we have never heard such an address as you have just given. Truly there is a prophet in Israel." [^7] That night Ezra recorded in his journal, "It is my prayer that Brother Kimball will live for many, many years. The Lord is magnifying him. The mantle of the President has fallen upon him. He . . . will be a great blessing to the entire Church."

Over a decade later, addressing a gathering of mission presidents, President Benson proclaimed, "Oh, that President Spencer W. Kimball could speak to us at this time, for no prophet in this dispensation, since the Prophet Joseph, has spoken on missionary work as much or as forcefully as has our beloved prophet, President Kimball." President Benson then explained that he had re-read every major address President Kimball had given on that topic during his administration. "Tears have welled up in my eyes," President Benson told the group, "as I have again caught [President Kimball's] marvelous vision of missionary work." [^8]

Indeed, under Spencer W. Kimball's admonition to the Church to lengthen its stride, missionary work moved ahead in an unprecedented fashion and the Church was challenged to keep pace administratively. As the actual supervision of missionary work fell under the direction of the Twelve, it was fortuitous that the president of that quorum was not only a skilled administrator but also a man whose deepest love through the years had been taking gospel truths to the people of the world. He was well suited to fully sustain and carry out President Kimball's inspired injunction. (By April 1974 up to three hundred missionaries were being assigned weekly.) And as Church growth accelerated, President Benson's understanding of world events and personal relationship with world leaders, as well as his overriding devotion to the kingdom, proved increasingly providential.

When, for example, the Church faced difficulty securing visas for missionaries to enter Brazil, President Benson's influence helped Elder Ted E. Brewerton arrange an audience with high officials of the Brazilian government. Though no non-Brazilian organization had been able to get visas for months, it was only a short time after meeting with the officials that Elder Brewerton received permission for nearly seventy visas. He explained, "[The government official] received us most graciously and we were able to . . . receive . . . this permission basically because of President Benson's name. . . . It appears we can have a regular flow of missionaries." [^9]

It was the same story in Colombia, where President Benson's "soft, congenial, sincere and experienced approach," as Elder Carlos E. Asay described it, convinced government leaders that the Church had fought the visa battle long enough, and the entrance permits were subsequently forthcoming. [^10]

After President Benson toured Peru and adjoining countries with Elder Gene R. Cook, then executive administrator of the Andes area, Elder Cook wrote him, "You have a great ability to expand yourself beyond just the member world, and to make many contacts with the non-member world. . . . Since your visits here, many doors were opened in ministries . . . , paving the way for better relations between the Church and the governments in this area." [^11]

In Egypt, President Benson was told it would take three weeks to secure the appointments he needed with key government officials. That night he knelt in his hotel room to ask the Lord for direction. He had consummate faith that the way would be opened. Those traveling with him were astonished when he was able to cut through mounds of red tape in a matter of hours and take care of his business. He subsequently met with four officials, including his old friend Sayed Marei, former Secretary of Agriculture and Speaker of the House, and now Anwar Sadat's first assistant. [^12]

Staff members who regularly accompanied President Benson came to realize that there was an abiding spiritual power about him. When he determined that something needed to be accomplished, he had complete confidence that the Lord would prepare the way.

It was President Benson to whom the letter came from Hesi Carmel, former Consul General of Israel, indicating that the mayor of Jerusalem, Teddy Kollek, had authorized the placement of a plaque on the Mount of Olives commemorating Orson Hyde's 1841 dedicatory prayer. President Benson later joined the First Presidency and Elders Mark E. Petersen and Gordon B. Hinckley in lengthy meetings with Carmel to work out details. They reached an agreement that the Church could develop five and a half acres on the Mount of Olives as the Orson Hyde Memorial Park. On several occasions over the years President Benson had talked with leaders in Israel about the Church's doctrine regarding the Jews. He had even suggested a commemorative garden. This project lifted his heart. He felt he had had a small hand in it.

From David Ben-Gurion on, President Benson enjoyed a cordial and mutually respectful relationship with key Jewish leaders. In a meeting with Ben-Gurion in March 1969, the Israeli leader told him, "There are no people in the world who understand Jews like the Mormons." To that President Benson responded, "Mr. Ben-Gurion, there are no people in this world who understand the world like the Mormons." Ben-Gurion replied, "Oh, I'm not sure I'd go that far, but what I said was true." He then asked President Benson to pray that his life would be extended ten years, as he hoped to complete a history of the Jewish people in that time. He also indicated he would like a copy of Orson Hyde's prayer for inclusion in the history. [^13]

President Benson often spoke on the divine destiny of the Jewish race. He addressed Jewish organizations and weaved the Church's doctrine regarding the House of Israel into his message. After delivering a major address in Calgary in 1978, entitled "A Message to Judah from Joseph," he received generous praise from the president of the United Israel World Union, who said, "What a great document! As a son of Judah who, for some 35 years has been proclaiming . . . the existence of Joseph-Ephraim, I rejoiced greatly in what you declared. . . . I have long felt a strong kinship for the Mormons." Highlights of the address were reprinted in the United Israel Bulletin. [^14] After President Benson delivered the same address in Seattle, two thousand copies were requested. He also gave this message to a large audience in San Diego and to another in Jerusalem. [^15]

The First Presidency recognized President Benson's stature in the non-Church world. In October 1975 President Kimball asked him to represent the Church at the White House Forum on Domestic Policy. In President Benson's remarks (later published as a pamphlet, A Plea for America) he stated that only the return of Americans to loving God and living morally would rid America of its political, economic, and social ills. He also used the forum to outline the Church's code of ethics and morality.

So much of what President Benson had to say—about staying out of debt, about loving God and neighbor, about holding on to freedom, and a host of other common-sense subjects—appealed to member and nonmember alike. In 1975 President Benson published his book God, Family, Country, incorporating messages on these three loyalties. When it was suggested that he might have rearranged the wording to "God, Country, Family," he replied he preferred the first way, as "the family is eternal. Countries may not be." [^16]

Indeed, the eternal family unit and hence temples were extremely important to President Benson. Attending the dedication of the temple in Washington, D.C., in November 1974 was a highlight for him and Flora that they described as "never to be forgotten." Reed and May, Mark, Beverly and Jim, and Bonnie joined their parents at the event, which held special meaning for the entire family. The beautiful, imposing structure situated prominently alongside the Capitol Beltway in Maryland was breathtaking—and particularly inspiring to a man who had spent over a dozen years of his life in Washington and who had presided over the first stake in that area. In his remarks at the dedication he admitted, "For me, this is a dream of more than thirty years come true. Not since the founding of this choice nation and the Restoration of the gospel has such an important event transpired in this great area." [^17]

Though he was getting older, President Benson liked to spend as much time in the field as possible, and most weekends he either attended stake conferences or toured missions. He created the first stakes in Ireland (1974), Denmark (1974), and Finland (1977), and attended the Stockholm area conference in August 1974. [^18] But amidst the press of administrative responsibilities, he still focused on individuals. Over the years those who had depicted him as driving and unrelenting had overlooked the more accurate, more important, softer, compassionate side seen by those who worked with him intimately.

When President Benson learned that a young man who had received authorization to have his church membership and other blessings restored had died suddenly of cancer, he acquired permission to have the blessings restored by proxy, contacted the family, and drove to Logan to take care of it himself.

While visiting Athens in 1979, he learned of a native-born Greek member of the Church who, despite intense pressure to do so, had refused to renounce his membership. As a result, the man's business had been boycotted, his children were not permitted to attend school, and he had subsequently become inactive. President Benson drove across Athens (though he had only four hours in the Greek capital) to visit the man, who was shocked when the General Authority knocked at his door. An assistant traveling with President Benson recalled the scene: "President Benson wanted to hear this man's story from his own lips. The President was very moved by what he heard. Before we left President Benson pulled this man to him and said, 'God bless you, my brother. I want you to know our prayers are with you.' The man had tears in his eyes. As we left, President Benson turned to me and told me to take down his name, his family's name, and the names of his children, and immediately when we returned, to put them on the temple prayer roll. Several months later the district president from Athens visited Salt Lake City and told us something miraculous had happened. The restrictions had been lifted, the children allowed to return to school, and the man was back at church. President Benson gave that brother who'd been discouraged and downtrodden the courage to come back." [^19]

While in Brazil to create the Brasilia Stake, President Benson learned that the stake president's daughter had a large growth on her neck, and doctors insisted on surgery. He asked to see the girl. Elder Ted E. Brewerton was there and described what took place: "President Benson placed his hands on her head and spoke with the Lord for a minute or two and then blessed her, saying she would not require an operation and the growth would disappear. It was a very touching scene full of emotion, the Spirit was obviously tangible, and many tears followed." Five days later the growth had disappeared. [^20]

President Benson recorded in his journal an experience one missionary in Argentina related to him. This missionary and his companion had been working for some time with a family who, though they accepted many gospel truths, lacked a testimony of modern-day prophets. On February 22, 1979, President Benson spoke at the Cine Opera in Buenos Aires, concluding his remarks with a powerful testimony of the Savior. This investigator family attended, and afterwards the father approached the missionary and said with emotion, "I do not want to wait for baptism any longer. I have just seen and heard a living prophet."

On another occasion after President Benson had concluded an address to youth and missionaries in Mexico, he felt impressed to ask the congregation to sing their national anthem. Elder Richard G. Scott later told President Benson how powerful that had proven to be: "You observed how deeply everyone was touched with the beauty and depth of spirit of the moment. I will ever recall your turning to me and saying, 'I don't want to leave,' nor did the youth. I received many comments that the morning testimony services were entirely dominated by youth bearing witness that they had been in the presence of one of the prophets of the Lord. . . . They will not forget your visit." [^21]

When a young man seeking a blessing came to President Benson's office, the apostle inquired why he didn't ask his father to confer the blessing and found that the father was an inactive elder. After talking at length with the young man, President Benson counseled him to return home and at an opportune time request the blessing of his father. Four days later the young man returned to President Benson's office and reported that his father had agreed, and it had created a bond of love in their home he had never known before. In a meeting of all General Authorities, President Benson instructed his colleagues. "May we be extremely careful not to deprive a priesthood father of that opportunity and privilege." [^22]

A mission president related the impact President Benson had in another case involving "a most delicate situation regarding a giant of a man in the Church. . . . This man . . . had been caught in a delicate and unfortunate circumstance regarding some doctrinal matters and was misunderstood by certain people. [President Benson] has turned the situation around totally and brought new light and hope to this person, and it has freed him. [He] has saved that person's soul." [^23]

President Benson had a gentle, down-to-earth way with people, perhaps best known by those who talked with him one on one. Young couples, returned missionaries, and those burdened with trouble or sin frequented his office, and he gave counsel, pronounced blessings as appropriate, and performed as many sealings as time allowed. He was much more approachable than some might have imagined. At a BYU basketball game he found himself sitting behind a woman whose son was whistled for his final foul. The woman, momentarily losing her composure, shouted several descriptive words—and instantly remembered who was sitting behind her. But before she could apologize, President Benson leaned forward and chuckled, "Sister, you took the words right out of my mouth." [^24]

While President Benson's energies were devoted fully to the Council of the Twelve, his interests in national affairs persisted. Government concerned him, the economy worried him, and what he perceived as apathy among national leaders frustrated him. President Kimball had made clear the urgency to take the gospel throughout the world and President Benson felt that certain forms of government threatened that growth. When events of national political significance occurred, he was typically the first LDS leader contacted for a response. Such was the case with Watergate and Nixon's resignation, at which President Benson issued a statement expressing his sorrow at the unfortunate incident.

After he became president of the Twelve, President Benson spoke frequently on such topics as prayer, the Savior, genealogy, and missionary work. At the October 1979 general conference he reemphasized the message he had delivered so often before by giving a firm warning on the subject of freedom: "I say with all the energy of my soul that unless we as citizens of this nation forsake our sins, political and otherwise, and return to the fundamental principles of Christianity and of constitutional government, we will lose our political liberties, our free institutions, and will stand in jeopardy before God. . . . Once freedom is lost, only blood . . . will win it back." [^25]

President Benson continued to be an astute observer of world affairs and did what he could behind the scenes to alert and persuade Americans to the encroaching danger. When a non-Mormon U.S. senator came to his office seeking a blessing at his hand, he gladly gave it. Congressmen and officials of influence heard from him regularly on issues that related to the advance of freedom and free enterprise. And he wrote to presidents of the United States recommending prayer in cabinet meetings. In 1977 his book This Nation Shall Endure was published—a collection of essays that pled with Americans to overcome their complacency regarding America's destiny. Two years later he forwarded a copy of another of his books, The Red Carpet—Socialism, the Royal Road to Communism, to each member of Congress.

President Benson felt that the Twelve should be astute about world affairs, and he led them in discussions on economics, social movements—anything that affected the Church as an institution or its members individually. He also distributed pertinent materials to the Brethren. In response, Elder Vaughn J. Featherstone wrote, "I know the Lord has blessed you with a special understanding of the needs of this country. You have helped breed in my heart a love for this great nation, a love for the founding fathers, and a love for the Constitution." [^26]

Ezra was pleased when the First Presidency issued an official statement in June 1979 reaffirming the Church's devotion to the Constitution and encouraging members to become actively involved in the political process.

By 1975 Mark and Lela had returned from their mission. Reed had accepted a position as area director of seminaries and institutes in northern Virginia and subsequently returned to BYU for graduate studies. And Beth and David were living in Salt Lake City. With some of their families close by, Ezra and Flora were the doting grandparents—listening to their grandchildren's book reports, leading in singing around the piano, showing home movies.

Despite the pleasant times with family, President Benson remained deeply concerned about Flora's health. At times she showed improvement and had some energy; at other times she seemed tired and discouraged. Through it all, he tried to deal with his own anxiety as well as see that she had every medical opportunity. She underwent dozens of tests, and he spent a lot of time on his knees. These concerns were complicated by a heavy travel schedule that kept him away from home a great deal. But he spent as much time with her as possible, though she didn't demand it. "She has always insisted that I do not do anything that would interfere with my duty as an Apostle and President of the Twelve," he wrote in his journal. But to him, caring for Flora was anything but an interference. It did affect his life-style, however. He found himself doing the shopping and performing other tasks she had always taken care of.

In September 1975 Brigham Young University honored President Benson by naming its new agricultural institute after him. The Ezra Taft Benson Agriculture and Food Institute was formed to help relieve world food problems and raise the quality of global life through improved nutrition and enlightened agricultural practices. At the ceremony inaugurating the institute, President Benson touched upon a principle that had guided his approach to agriculture as well as life: "Many of the nations of the world look to American agriculture for a pattern as they struggle to feed their teeming populations. Too often we, as benevolent Americans, have given them food instead of teaching them how to produce food." [^27]

During the ceremonies Ezra participated in a cow-milking contest with BYU president Dallin Oaks. Ezra not only won the contest but had a hearty laugh when a touchy Holstein kicked President Oaks head over heels when the college administrator lined up on the wrong side of the animal.

In many countries the influence of the Benson Institute spilled beyond agricultural boundaries and gave President Benson an additional calling card. For example, when Anwar Sadat determined to rebuild his childhood rural community, an Egyptian student attending school in the United States suggested that the institute might be able to help. President Benson made trips to Egypt, hoping this development would create goodwill for the Church.

The institute had potential impact in Central and South America as well. In Ecuador, for example, the institute contracted with the government to teach farmers how to support themselves on 2.5 acres or less. President Benson's agricultural accomplishments and connections continued to increase the visibility of the Church in many areas of the world.

In August 1975 President Benson traveled to the Orient for area conferences in Japan, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Korea, and the Philippines. In Tokyo scores of Saints laden with banners and flowers were at the airport. One girl approached President Benson with two dozen red roses for Sister Benson, and he was disappointed to tell her Flora had not made the trip. He wrote Flora that night, "How I miss you and find myself wishing you were here."

The first night in Japan, President Benson retired at 7:30 P.M., tired after working during much of the ten-hour flight. But during the next nine days in Asia, there was little time for rest, with general sessions, youth sessions, and meetings with missionaries, diplomatic calls, and press conferences. He and President Kimball called on the president of Taiwan and had breakfast with the Secretary of Natural Resources in the Philippines. President Benson suffered sleepless nights as he worried about major addresses he would give: to the Sino-American Fellowship Prayer Breakfast in Taipei; on the American Forces Network to Protestant servicemen of the U.S. Eighth Army in Korea; and at the Korea area conference. He was present when President Kimball announced to Japanese priesthood leaders plans to build a temple in Tokyo. Tears flowed freely—including his own.

After the exhausting but inspiring round of conferences, President Benson marveled at President Kimball's dynamic leadership. "It was nothing short of a miracle the way President Kimball came through all that was asked of him during the conferences," he noted in his journal.

Missionary work was moving forward at unprecedented speed. During one meeting of the missionary committee in January 1975, approval was given for the creation of three missions and three stakes. A day earlier two other missions had been approved, including one in the state of Utah, something President Benson had favored for some time. At the June 1975 seminar for new mission presidents, he announced that the Church missionary force had passed the 20,000 mark; twenty-two new missions had been organized in the previous twelve months; and proselyting was taking place in fifty-five countries and twenty-three languages. At the end of 1975 Church membership reached 3.5 million. Ezra felt that the religious world had never been weaker, and the Church couldn't afford to be backward or hesitant about carrying its message. "We have an opportunity the like of which we have never had, to get our message before our Father's children worldwide," he wrote in his journal.

Missionary work permeated the Benson family. Reed and May were two of those attending the 1975 mission presidents seminar, having been called to preside over the Kentucky Louisville Mission. And in July two of Ezra's sisters, Margaret and Lera, were called to serve in England. They immediately called him to tell him the news, expecting to have their brother say that he knew all about it. Instead he replied, "What mission calls? I didn't know you were going on missions." He would later delight in telling the story. "They expected the President of the Quorum of the Twelve to know everything. But it just ain't so!" (Only Ezra's sister Sally remained of his ten brothers and sisters to serve a mission, and eventually she and her husband would serve together.)

President Benson was conscientious about his personal missionary efforts. He constantly sent Church-related materials, particularly copies of the Book of Mormon with his testimony enclosed, and detailed letters containing his testimony to national and international dignitaries. Even within the Benson family there was need for fellowshipping. One of Ezra's brothers and his nonmember wife were frequently on Ezra's mind. After visiting them in California, he sent them a copy of A Marvelous Work and a Wonder with a letter that bore his testimony: "I do hope and pray that you will see your way clear to become actively associated with the greatest organization in all the world—The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. There is so much at stake. It is the truth. This I know as I know that I live."

Elder Benson often quoted the poem that reads in part:

We are all here,

Father, Mother, sister, brother,

All who hold each other dear.

Each chair is filled,

We are all at home.

With each year Ezra and Flora's feelings for their family grew increasingly tender. When President Benson officiated at the temple marriage of Flora Walker, his first grandchild to marry, a milestone was passed and a new generation initiated properly. As time passed he would perform the marriages of many of his grandchildren—most in the Salt Lake Temple. On trips to Provo he regularly stopped to visit grandchildren attending BYU. He was present when the first baby of his granddaughter Heather Walker Sandstrom was blessed. Heather wondered if her grandfather expected to pronounce the blessing, and she finally asked him about it. "Oh, no," he replied, "that honor is reserved for the father. I've just come to be here with you."

President Benson's grandchildren tended to embrace his philosophies, with his loyalties becoming theirs also. In time, several grandchildren would intern on Capitol Hill and work for political organizations based in Washington, D.C. When his grandson Stephen Benson evidenced talent as a political cartoonist, Ezra sent him materials on freedom, the Constitution, and related interests and encouraged him to be informed about the political and economic philosophies of the Founding Fathers. (Stephen would go on to become a nationally syndicated cartoonist in over one hundred papers and would win the National Headliner Award. Once one of his cartoons was carried in all three of the major weekly news magazines. Queen Elizabeth even requested the original of a cartoon to be displayed in Buckingham Palace.)

Flora's granddaughters also followed her example in staying home with their children, making home and family and the rearing of righteous children the highest priority. Flora had never viewed her role as wife and mother as one of duty. She loved children and felt that a mother's preeminent responsibility was to care for her children's spiritual and temporal welfare. Her positive outlook on motherhood and homemaking was firmly entrenched throughout her extended family. In 1950 she had written a chapter entitled "Your Children and You" for a Mutual Improvement Association course of study. There she placed the importance of parenting in perspective: "Yes, parents are responsible for the direction of their children. To Latter-day Saints, what is more important than effective parental guidance—the greatest need of the home, the community and the nation. With our knowledge of the gospel plan, can there be anything more important, more conducive to our exaltation than the bearing, rearing and proper training of an ideal Latter-day Saint family?" [^28]

That his family was on Ezra's mind is evidenced by the constant flow of things he sent to children and grandchildren. His letters were filled with encouragement. On a regular basis, his adult posterity received copies of talks, poems, and books he felt were inspirational. It was standard to share news through the family grapevine—awards, promotions, Church callings.

When President Kimball suggested that all LDS families display a picture of a temple in their homes, Ezra sent a full set of temple photographs to the family of each of his children. He and Flora added to each family's food storage and encouraged their children to get out of debt and to pay for their homes. (President Benson participated in the dedication of several of his children's homes.) They constantly encouraged and advised their children on a variety of matters.

Certainly Ezra had tremendous impact over his posterity, in word and in deed. After receiving a priesthood blessing from her grandfather, for example, a granddaughter wrote, "My heart is much too full to say this out loud so I'll write it. Half of the things you said were answers to my prayers that I had not ever thought would be answered in that way. The other half was an almost word for word quote from my patriarchal blessing. Grandpa and Grandma, I only hope I am worthy of you!" [^29]

Within his immediate family, Ezra enthusiastically supported Beth and David Burton's activities to conduct extensive genealogical research, and often helped raise funds to finance the projects. Discussing the four-generation program in general conference, he explained, "I have organized my family, as I'm sure scores of you have done—the Ezra Taft Benson Family Organization—as a grandparent family. Our children and married grandchildren are organizing as part of that organization." [^30]

Ezra served for a time as chairman of the George T. Benson Family Association, coordinating reunions and getting behind the four-generation program. A reunion of his brothers and sisters in 1976 in Idaho centered around genealogical research, temple work, and strengthening the family organization.

President Benson had no idea he was about to be honored with a surprise "Ezra Taft Benson Day" during Preston's Idaho Days, an event that coincided with the reunion. Hundreds of people, including Elder Mark E. Petersen and other General Authorities, as well as representatives from the Boy Scouts and U.S. Department of Agriculture, were there to honor him. Ezra rode a Palomino as grand marshal of what was later called the biggest parade ever held in Cache Valley. The generous tributes he received overwhelmed him. The event was beyond anything he had ever imagined.

Throughout 1976 President Benson was deluged with requests for speeches at patriotic meetings commemorating the Bicentennial of the United States. There was a brief attempt by a resurrected 1976 Committee to mention former Governor of Texas John Connally and Ezra Taft Benson as candidates for president and vice-president, respectively. "It is, of course, impractical and impossible," President Benson responded.

His love of America had made one assignment from President Kimball especially sweet. Ezra was to examine documents stored in the St. George Temple vault verifying that temple work had been performed for many of the Founding Fathers, including the fifty-six signers of the Declaration of Independence. He explained: "In so doing, I realized the fulfillment of a dream I had had ever since learning of the visit of the Founding Fathers to this sacred place. I saw with my own eyes the records of the work that was done for the Founding Fathers of this great nation, beginning with George Washington. I was deeply moved on that occasion to realize that these great men returned to this promised land by permission of the Lord and had their ordinance work done for them. If they had not been faithful men, if they had not been God-fearing men, would they have come to the elders of Israel to seek their temple blessings? I think not. The Lord raised them up, sanctioned their work, and proclaimed them 'wise men.'" [^31]

President Benson subsequently elaborated, stating that George Washington had been ordained a high priest at the time, adding, "According to Wilford Woodruff's journal, John Wesley, Benjamin Franklin, and Christopher Columbus were ordained high priests. . . . When one casts doubt about the character of these noble sons of God, I believe he or she will have to answer to the God of Heaven for it." [^32]

Several significant administrative changes were made in Church organization during President Benson's tenure as president of the Twelve. At the October 1975 general conference, President Kimball announced the organization of the First Quorum of the Seventy. Heretofore only the seven presidents, known as the First Council of the Seventy, had been serving. At this conference three additional men were called to serve as General Authority members of the quorum.

In April 1976 additional brethren were called to the Quorum of the Seventy, and in October 1976 a major reorganization was effected, with the Assistants to the Twelve called into the First Quorum of the Seventy and a new presidency of that quorum organized. President Benson was intimately involved in guiding the working relationship between the Twelve and the First Quorum of the Seventy. This history-making step pleased him greatly, and he felt sure it was in line with the scriptures and would facilitate efficient Church administration and enhance missionary work.

By early 1976 the Twelve had been relieved of conference assignments one Sunday a month. On that Sunday they met for five hours to review major policy matters. This allowed them to use their time in their weekly Thursday meetings more efficiently, and frequently President Benson noted in his journal his delight at their progress. "We broke all records with 28 items on the agenda," he wrote in his journal. "With good management and a little urging we were able to cover them all."

There was purpose in President Benson's managerial style. He, like others of the Brethren, was interested in simplifying the Church administrative structure worldwide so that the leaders could devote more attention to building faith among members and converting souls to the gospel. As he wrote in his journal, he told the Twelve in one meeting that he wanted fewer "dog and pony shows," where a succession of brief reports didn't always examine the heart of the matter. Elder Neal A. Maxwell explained: "By the time I came into the Twelve in 1981, President Benson had long since lost interest in what I call 'tinkering with the machinery,' and realized that wasn't where progress lay. While he was courteous, thoughtful and sweet, I'm sure there were times when some of the rest of us were trying to tinker with the machinery and he might have liked us to get back to whatever the real issue at the moment might have been."

By 1977 the Twelve were overseeing progress and development of major ecclesiastical areas, while the Seventy handled more of the day-to-day administration. President Benson expected the Brethren to come to quorum meetings well prepared. He encouraged more computerization to streamline procedures, and believed the Church should make better use of the media to get the gospel message to the world.

On many fronts the Church was moving forward. Certain General Authorities were invited to study other languages, especially Spanish; two recorded visions, by Presidents Joseph Smith and Joseph F. Smith, were added to the standard works (1976); an LDS edition of the King James Bible was published (1979); and in 1978 Church membership passed four million.

As concerned as he was about efficiency and productivity, few things were more important to President Benson than unity among the Twelve. Francis M. Gibbons, then secretary to the First Presidency, observed the distinctive unity that prevailed among the Brethren. He commented, "Each of the Twelve brings into office his background, political posture, and so forth. But once opinions have been frankly expressed and a decision made, it becomes a decision of the council. You will never hear one of the Brethren outside of those frank but confidential conversations say anything but in support of the decision reached by the presiding authority."

In February 1977 President Benson noted in his journal, "We have a great spirit in the Twelve. Never has there been greater unity and never have I felt the power of the Twelve as I feel it today." In the April 1984 general conference, President Hinckley concurred: "There is unity between the Presidency and the Twelve, perfect unity. There is unity among the members of the First Quorum of the Seventy and the Presiding Bishopric. I am somewhat familiar with the history of this Church, and I do not hesitate to say that there has never been greater unity in its leading councils and the relationships of those councils one to another, than there is today." [^33]

Perhaps that unity was fostered, at least in part, by a Quorum president who genuinely loved his brethren. He told the General Authorities in a meeting on January 19, 1977, "I express . . . love, loyalty, and affection for you. . . . Your reciprocating affection shown to me over the years is among the choicest blessings of my life." [^34]

President Benson concerned himself with the "fatherly" aspects of his calling. His concern for his brethren extended beyond the Church offices. As he traveled, he took time with them on the challenges they were facing personally. He was very concerned that they have enough time with their families and take care of their health. In one meeting of all General Authorities, he referred to instances when Brethren who were ill had filled conference assignments. "You don't have to go out when you're ill," he counseled. "We'll find a replacement. Please, Brethren, take care of yourselves." After this demonstration of concern, Elder LeGrand Richards cocked his head and said out loud, "You're a good daddy."

President Benson was typically the first to compliment and praise others—for presentations, talks, anything worthy of notice. As one example, when Elder Royden G. Derrick's work in the Genealogical Department was complimented in a meeting of the Twelve, President Benson made sure Elder Derrick heard of it. President Gordon B. Hinckley said that all who worked with President Benson knew the "gentle side of his nature. I know of no man more considerate of his associates or more concerned for their well-being. Graciousness becomes [him]. He has been blessed with a compassionate heart." [^35]

Immediately following the general conference session in which Waldo P. Call was sustained a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy, President Benson walked over to him, took him by both hands, and congratulated him. "He said he loved me," Elder Call remembered. "I am sure he was tired after two days of conference and other days of training meetings, but I will never forget his simple expression of love."

President Benson's deep affection for his associates in the Twelve was demonstrated on one memorable occasion. For some years Elder Richards had served as chairman of the important Boundary Change Committee, but as his age crept toward the century mark and his health and mobility declined, he felt his effectiveness was reduced. At one committee meeting he announced he was resigning as chairman. Almost on cue, President Benson unexpectedly entered the room. Elder Richards repeated his intention to resign, and President Benson responded, "As long as you live, LeGrand, you'll be the chairman of this committee." Then President Benson named Elder Marvin J. Ashton vice-chairman of the committee and told Elder Richards to delegate as much responsibility as he desired. Elder Richards boosted himself out of his chair, and he and President Benson took each other in their arms. Both were in tears. President Benson said simply, "LeGrand, I love you." Then he left.

With his astute observation of national and international affairs, President Benson became increasingly anxious in the late 1970s about the increasing frequency of natural disasters worldwide, the deteriorating U.S. economy, and particularly the willingness of some Latter-day Saints to turn to the government for support rather than becoming self-reliant. During general conference in October 1973 he had implored Church members to prepare themselves for eventualities by storing a year's supply of food, citing a graphic scriptural precedent: "The revelation to store food may be as essential to our temporal salvation today as boarding the ark was to the people in the days of Noah." At a later date, in the October 1980 general conference, again he would repeat his warning, again drawing parallels between the days of Noah and the latter days, and then adding: "Those families will be fortunate who, in the last days, have an adequate supply of food because of their foresight and ability to produce their own. . . . We urge you to do this prayerfully and do it now. I speak with a feeling of great urgency." [^36]

In February 1977 the General Welfare Services Committee, composed of the First Presidency, Council of the Twelve, and Presiding Bishopric, was formed to place increased emphasis on welfare work in the Church. President Benson frequently quoted Doctrine and Covenants 38:30: "If ye are prepared, ye shall not fear," hoping to prepare Saints who would react with stability rather than panic in times of crisis. And his influence went beyond the Church.

In May 1977 he addressed the board of the prestigious Foundation for Economic Education, of which he had previously served on the board of trustees (as had President J. Reuben Clark, Jr.). He warned that while America had become the world's richest nation because of free enterprise, today's citizen was learning to depend on the state, thus jeopardizing personal freedom.

The following day he was invited by the president of the foundation, Leonard E. Read, to attend a trustees meeting. "The first question [they asked me] was on the Church, and they never left that theme," President Benson wrote that night, "so I spent an hour answering questions, telling them about the Church, bearing my testimony to them and telling of Church policies and my experience in the Cabinet." One board member lingered afterwards and told him, "I want what you have. When we go home, I'm going to look up your church." Shortly thereafter President Kimball received a letter from Leonard Read, who wrote, "Last evening we had some 160 freedom friends to hear President Benson's lecture: 'The Productive Base of Society.' Imagine the audiences and lectures I have arranged during . . . more than 31 years as President of FEE. . . . Well, last evening was the best of all. Never have I witnessed such interest, approval, esteem. This forenoon, however, even topped last evening—this being an hour's discussion with 26 of our Trustees and that many guests. All were profoundly moved by Ezra's economic, intellectual, moral and spiritual insights. Among my acquaintances in this and 22 foreign nations, I have never come upon his equal." [^37]

President Benson sent an engraved copy of the book Meet the Mormons and a copy of the Joseph Smith story to each trustee of the foundation.

The year 1976, when the nation observed the bicentennial of its independence, marked a precious personal milestone for Ezra and Flora Benson. It had been fifty years since they knelt across an altar in the Salt Lake Temple and exchanged eternal promises. Much of the family gathered in Louisville, Kentucky, where Reed was serving as mission president, to celebrate the golden anniversary.

At the Louisville airport, Reed and May, Mark and Lela, Barbara, and Beverly and Jim, with some of their children (all wearing patriotic hats and sporting a huge Happy Anniversary sign) lined the concourse and sang "Love at Home" as Ezra and Flora (who were traveling with Bonnie and Lowell) deplaned. Passers-by stopped to catch a glimpse of them, and the commotion even caught the attention of the airport photographer.

On a major thoroughfare en route to the mission home, Ezra and Flora spotted a huge canvas sign hanging from an oversized billboard reading "Flora and Ezra T.—Happy Anniversary." Across the street from the mission home was a five-story hot-air balloon proclaiming anniversary wishes. Parked in front was a 1915 Model T Ford, similar to the one they drove to Ames, Iowa, with a sign, "Just Married—50 Years."

That evening, the family dinner and program celebrating the event was elaborate, with tributes penned by family and friends. The following are typical:

From Fred Babbel: "During those strenuous years in Europe . . . when the word 'Flora' was uttered, it always seemed to bring with it an outpouring of love and an inward strength that moved mountains."

From Ezra's brother Ross: "I think I appreciate most how, after the death of father and mother, you two took me under your wing and guided me as you would your own son."

From Beverly: "I'm thankful for the loyalty, the laughter and the love that have always been special to our family. . . . Home was always the safest, the happiest, the best place in all the world."

The six children presented their parents with a gold-framed mirror, on the back of which was written, "To Ezra Taft Benson and Flora Amussen Benson as they 'reflect' on 50 years of eternal marriage, from their grateful children." The following was inscribed on the frame of the mirror:

Look and see, out of ye, posterity

Rising up to call thee great

Like the Church and like the state.

Thou dost have a noble frame.

Eternal thanks who claim thy name.

The battle for passage of the Equal Rights Amendment heated up in 1976, and Latter-day Saints from Idaho, in particular, sought President Benson's support in fighting the amendment. He believed, as did his brethren, that the amendment was vague and broad and threatened to undermine the distinctive roles of men and women. After the bill was rescinded in Idaho, President Benson wrote the speaker of the Idaho House of Representatives, "I commend you and your associates for your courageous and wise action in voting down proposed legislation which strikes at the very foundation of the home and family. I know that some of you will be under fire. . . . The Founding Fathers were also under fire." [^38]

In 1977 President Benson participated in a successful effort to encourage Latter-day Saint women to attend the International Women's Year convention held in Utah, and to voice their opinions about issues affecting the role of women in society. Later the Twelve, in conjunction with the Seventies, drafted a strong statement in opposition to extending the period of ERA ratification. President Benson was involved in adding the words A Moral Issue to the title of a booklet, The Equal Rights Amendment—A Moral Issue, that was distributed to members of the Church. [^39]

Anything that threatened the home was anathema to President Benson. He told a crowd of 14,000 honoring National Family Week in Seattle that the home was America's strength and only hope for the future. His message was direct: "All is not well with this most basic institution, the American home. In fact, it is in grave danger, if not deadly peril. There is convincing evidence that a creeping rot of moral disintegration is eating into the very vitals of this temple of American civilization." To the audience, which was filled with non-Mormons, he taught that the family is meant to be eternal, quoting the lyrics to "I Am a Child of God." This talk was later entered in the Congressional Record. [^40]

In an address at the nondenominational "Strong Families/Strong America" program in Tulsa, Oklahoma, on March 24, 1978, President Benson unabashedly called for prayer in the home and for parental instruction on such crucial matters as sex education. Holding up a copy of the Church's current home evening manual, he admonished parents to forsake so much pleasure-seeking and to spend more time with their children. "The home is the rock foundation, the cornerstone of civilization," he said. "The church, the school, and even the nation stand helpless before a weak and degraded home. No nation will rise above its homes." [^41]

Also of concern to President Benson were materials being published by some LDS historians, who he feared were incorrectly placing their emphasis on writing Church history from a perspective that downplayed the divine authorship and doctrines. In a BYU fireside in March 1976, he criticized historians whose emphasis was "to underplay revelation and God's intervention in significant events, and to inordinately humanize the prophets of God so that their human frailties become more apparent than their spiritual qualities." No writer, he asserted, "can accurately portray a prophet of God if he or she does not believe in prophecy." [^42]

Later in 1976, in an address to instructors in the Church Educational System, he gave this caution: "When a teacher feels he must blend worldly sophistication and erudition to the simple principles of the gospel or to our Church history so that his message will have more appeal and respectability to the academically learned, he has compromised his message. We seldom impress people by this means and almost never convert them to the gospel. . . . Some teachers have felt that they have to expound some new slant on a doctrine, or reveal sensational or intimate and sacred personal experiences from their own lives, or allegedly from the lives of the Brethren in order to be popular with their students. You were not hired to entertain students."

He explained that to teach, for example, that "Joseph Smith received the vision on the three degrees of glory . . . as he grappled for answers that contemporary philosophers were grappling for, is to infer an interpretation contrary to the prophet's own. . . . Avoid expressions and terminology which offend the Brethren and Church members. I refer to such expressions as 'he alleged' when a president of the Church described a revelation or manifestation; or other expressions such as 'experimental systems' and 'communal life' as they describe sacred revelations dealing with the united order. . . . A revelation of God is not an experiment. The Lord has already done his research." [^43]

President Benson was worried that an interpretation of the Restoration that focused more on the societal environment of the time than a spiritual account of sacred events could destroy faith.

His concerns about professional historians reached beyond the Church. Frequently during 1976 he counseled those writing the nation's history. "The recurring theme in America's history is that God governs in the affairs of this nation," he declared. He believed that Columbus was inspired by the Holy Ghost, George Washington and Abraham Lincoln recognized the hand of God, Benjamin Franklin petitioned to have prayer in Congress, and the Lord established the Constitution through choice men raised up for this purpose. He decried the fact that one had to turn to eighteenth and nineteenth century literature to find this view, warning, "Those guilty of defamation of these men in writing or teaching will answer to a higher tribunal." [^44]

After five full years of service as president of the Twelve, and at an age when most men only read the news rather than make it, President Benson kept a relentless pace. In April 1978 his longtime friend Ernest Wilkinson passed away. They were the same age. But there was no sign that Ezra was letting up.

In May of that year he took an extensive trip to Asia. In Taiwan he met with Premier Chian Ching Kuo, the president-elect, and discussed missionary work in that island nation; and in Tokyo he dedicated the new seven-story Asia Administration Headquarters. The following month he spent eight days in Hawaii for rededication services of the Hawaii Temple.

With each year, it seemed, he was singled out for commendation. In January 1978, for example, he received the Distinguished and Meritorious Service Award from the American Farm Bureau Federation, considered the most prestigious of agriculture's recognitions. Just four months later he accepted another George Washington Medal Award from the Freedom Foundation at Valley Forge.

But all of the awards and recognitions in the world didn't rival the impact of a signal event in June 1978.

On June 1, following the monthly meeting of the General Authorities in a room on the fourth floor of the Salt Lake Temple, President Kimball invited his counselors and the Twelve to remain when the others were excused. The prophet then raised a subject they had discussed repeatedly in previous months—that of conferring the priesthood on worthy men of all races. President Benson knew the prophet had spent many hours alone in the temple, praying for an answer to this question. And he himself had done extensive research on the subject. This day President Kimball directed a lengthy discussion on the issue and then led in prayer.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie described what happened: "It was during the prayer that the revelation came. The Spirit of the Lord rested mightily upon us all; we felt something akin to what happened on the day of Pentecost and at the dedication of the Kirtland Temple. From the midst of eternity, the voice of God, conveyed by the power of the Spirit, spoke to his prophet. . . . And we all heard the same voice, received the same message, and became personal witnesses that the word received was the mind and will and voice of the Lord." [^45]

The experience was electrifying, one of the most glorious occasions in President Benson's nearly thirty-five years as a member of the Council of the Twelve. In his journal he wrote: "Following the prayer, we experienced the sweetest spirit of unity and conviction that I have ever experienced. . . . We took each other in our arms, we were so impressed with the sweet spirit that was in evidence. Our bosoms burned with the righteousness of the decision we had made. Thank God for the inspired leadership and the great and enduring principle of revelation. What a blessing it is to be associated with this, the greatest work in all the world. May God grant that I . . . may measure up to the great responsibility which is mine as one of the watchmen on the tower of Zion."

This chapter and subsequent chapters rely heavily on interviews with many of the General Authorities, including Ezra Taft Benson, Boyd K. Packer, Marvin J. Ashton, Neal A. Maxwell, Russell M. Nelson, Dallin H. Oaks, M. Russell Ballard, Hugh W. Pinnock, Robert L. Backman, Hartman Rector, Jr., Richard G. Scott, and Francis M. Gibbons. Other pertinent interviews include Gary Gillespie, William O. Nelson, Rulon G. Craven, John Hardy, and Betty McDonald. See also Melvin J. Leavitt, "Grandpa's Visit," New Era, April 1984, pp. 20-27.

Footnotes

"This work will go forward till every land and people have had opportunity to accept out message. Barriers will come down for us to accomplish this mission."

---
Notas:
[^1] See Church News, February 24, 1979.
[^2] See author interview with William O. Nelson and Rulon G. Craven, June 16, 1986. This conversation was confirmed through Flora Parker interview with Joseph Ginat, August 17, 1987. Nelson accompanied President Benson on that trip and recorded the events in his journal. See also "Pres. Benson Visits Leaders in Mideast," Church News, June 2, 1979, p. 5.
[^3] See author interview with William O. Nelson and Rulon G. Craven, April 30, 1987; also "Report on Trip to the Mideast," May 17, 1979; Church News, June 2, 1979.
[^4] "Report on Trip to the Mideast," May 17, 1979, copy of memo in Ezra Taft Benson personal files.
[^5] Ezra Taft Benson, "Remarks at Orson Hyde Memorial," Jerusalem, October 24, 1979. For additional information on the subject see "Garden to Blossom in Israel," Church News, October 29, 1977, p. 3; "The Orson Hyde Memorial Gardens," Ensign, January 1978, pp. 76-78; "Plans Move Forward for Park," Church News, January 14, 1978, p. 3; "Orson Hyde Garden Grows Outside Jerusalem," Ensign, March 1979, p. 78; "President Kimball Dedicates Orson Hyde Memorial Garden in Jerusalem," Ensign, December 1979, pp. 67-69.
[^6] See Ezra Taft Benson, "A Vision and a Hope for the Youth of Zion," April 12, 1977, BYU Speeches of the Year 1977, p. 76; Salt Lake Tribune, April 13, 1977.
[^7] See Ezra Taft Benson, "Fourteen Fundamentals in Following the Prophet," BYU Devotional Address, February 26, 1980, BYU Speeches of the Year 1981, pp. 26-30.
[^8] See "Benson Backs Prophets' Politics," Salt Lake Tribune, February 27, 1980; "U. Teacher Replies to Benson," Salt Lake Tribune, February 28, 1980; "No. 2 Mormon Says Leader's Word Is Law," Los Angeles Times, March 1, 1980.
[^9] Ezra Taft Benson, "Godless Forces Threaten Us," Improvement Era 72 (December 1969): 69-73.
[^10] ETB to Ronald Reagan, November 6, 1974.
[^11] ETB to Ronald Reagan, January 23, 1981.
[^12] As quoted in The Progress of Man (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1964), pp. 466-67.
[^13] See ETB to Ronald Reagan, May 29, 1984; Ronald Reagan to ETB, July 17, 1984.
[^14] See Fred Barnes, "Who's in Charge?," The Washingtonian, August 1983, pp. 124-33; also "The Bill the Farmers Want," Washington Post, January 24, 1985; and John R. Block to ETB, February 8, 1985.
[^15] Spencer W. Kimball, "The Blessings and Responsibilities of Motherhood," Ensign, March 1976, p. 70.
[^16] Ezra Taft Benson, "To the Elect Women of the Kingdom of God," dedicatory services of Nauvoo Women's Monuments, June 30, 1978, p. 2, in Ezra Taft Benson personal files.
[^17] See Ezra Taft Benson, "Fundamentals of Enduring Family Relationships," Ensign, November 1982; also William O. Nelson memo to ETB, October 5, 1982.
[^18] See Karl R. Anderson to ETB, January 17, 1983.
[^19] See "The Church Comes Alive in Kirtland, Ohio," Ensign, December 1979, pp. 69-70; "Kirtland Means Many Things to the Church," Church News, October 23, 1982.
[^20] Gordon B. Hinckley, Salute to Ezra Taft Benson, November 18, 1983, in Ezra Taft Benson files.
[^21] ETB to "Our Beloved Children," August 10, 1981.
[^22] Ezra Taft Benson, "Jesus Christ: Our Savior and Redeemer," Ensign, November 1983, pp. 6-8.
[^23] Douglas T. Snarr to Mark A. Benson, November 8, 1978.
[^24] See Roland T. Minson to ETB, October 31, 1983.
[^25] Ezra Taft Benson, "A Witness and a Warning," Ensign, November 1979, p. 33.
[^26] Vaughn J. Featherstone to ETB, April 12, 1979.
[^27] Ezra Taft Benson, Response upon Announcement of Ezra Taft Benson Agriculture Institute at BYU, September 23, 1975, Church Archives.
[^28] Your Marriage Partnership, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1950, pp. 15-20.
[^29] Flora Spackman to ETB and FAB, April 18, 1974.
[^30] Ezra Taft Benson, "Worthy of All Acceptation," Ensign, November 1978, pp. 30-32; also "4 Generations of Genealogy Needed, says Pres. Benson," Church News, September 30, 1978.
[^31] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Faith of Our Founding Fathers," in Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1983), pp. 21-22. See also Ezra Taft Benson, "Our Founding Fathers Stood in This Holy Place," St. George Temple Rededication, November 12, 1975, Church Archives.
[^32] Ezra Taft Benson, "God's Hand in Our Nation's History," BYU twelve-stake fireside, March 28, 1976.
[^33] Gordon B. Hinckley, "Special Witnesses for Christ," Ensign, May 1984, p. 51.
[^34] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Image of a General Authority," remarks to General Authorities Priesthood Board Meeting, January 19, 1977.
[^35] Gordon B. Hinckley, Salute to Ezra Taft Benson, November 18, 1983.
[^36] See Ezra Taft Benson, "Prepare Ye," Ensign, January 1974, p. 68; Ezra Taft Benson, "Prepare for the Days of Tribulation," Ensign, November 1980, pp. 32-34.
[^37] Leonard E. Read to Spencer W. Kimball, May 17, 1977, Ezra Taft Benson personal files; also Wendell J. Ashton memorandum to Ezra Taft Benson, May 20, 1977.
[^38] ETB to Allan F. Larsen, February 22, 1977.
[^39] Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, May 24, 1978.
[^40] See "America's Strength, the Family," Congressional Record, March 30, 1977, p. S5167; also "Importance of Family Told in Seattle," Church News, December 4, 1976, p. 7.
[^41] Ezra Taft Benson, "America's Strength—the Family," Strong Families/Strong America program, Tulsa, Oklahoma, March 24, 1978, p. 1.
[^42] Ezra Taft Benson, "God's Place in Our Nation's History," BYU twelve-stake fireside, March 28, 1976. See also "God Shaped Past," BYU Daily Universe, March 30, 1976.
[^43] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Gospel Teacher and His Message," address to Church Education System personnel, September 17, 1976, pp. 8-9, 11. For additional information on this issue see "Apostles vs. Historians," Newsweek, February 15, 1982.
[^44] See "God's Hand in Our Nation's History"; also Church News, April 3, 1976; BYU Daily Universe, March 30, 1976.
[^45] Bruce R. McConkie, "The New Revelation," in Priesthood (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981), p. 128.
