Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 22

The Expanding Church

Even as President Benson approached eighty years of age, he was a vigorous man. His face was unlined and his memory sharp. He looked, and felt, ten years younger.

Flora's health was somewhat unpredictable. She fainted during the funeral of LeGrand Richards's wife, Ina, in January 1978. And a few months later, during a theater performance, she suddenly slumped in her chair. Dr. Russell M. Nelson, who was providentially nearby, noticed and hurried over. Unable to find a pulse, he quickly put his arms around her from the back and pulled sharply against her chest several times until a pulse became evident. Dr. Nelson said he was relieved to hear her say suddenly, "Would you mind not doing that?" Subsequent tests showed no sign of irregularity, but apparently she had suffered a cardiac arrest.

Flora joined Ezra at a four-day family reunion in Nauvoo in July, held in conjunction with the dedication of the women's monument statues. The reunion was carefully planned, with testimony meetings, a special dinner honoring Flora's seventy-seventh birthday, and visits to local historical sites, as well as sports and music activities.

Reed and his family had just returned from their mission in Kentucky, and the Parkers were preparing to leave for Helsinki, where James Parker would preside over the Finland Helsinki Mission. So this reunion marked the last time the family would be assembled for at least three years.

The reunion was exhilarating but somewhat tiring. Upon returning home, the Bensons stole away to Midway for a few days' rest. On July 12, 1978, as President Benson prepared to go horseback riding with a neighbor, a horse he was steadying for his friend to mount suddenly reared, knocking him fifteen feet across the yard onto the hard ground. X rays at the hospital nearby in Heber revealed a multiple break in four places between the ball-and-socket joint of the hip and above the right knee. By that afternoon he was in surgery in Salt Lake City.

Word of the accident spread quickly among the General Authorities and family—even to Finland, where Beverly and Jim and their family had just arrived. The message they received from home had a special P.S.: "He wants you to know everything is okay, and he wants you to especially know that the horse did not throw him off." Flower arrangements, cards, and telephone calls poured in and visitors arrived at President Benson's hospital room in such numbers that the doctor finally restricted visitors to family and General Authorities. When they learned it would be three full months before he could put full weight on his leg, Ezra and Flora accepted Beth and David's offer to occupy a small apartment in their home. A hospital bed and other conveniences—walker, crutches, wheelchair—were moved into the house, which is situated on a semiprivate lane, a perfect location to recuperate.

Beth was a solicitous nurse, keeping constant care of her parents; and as long as her father stayed down, his pain was minimal. He could move very little at first, but despite his weakened condition, he asked staff members to visit him three times a week to review items of importance and keep the work moving back at the office.

David Burton was also recovering from back surgery, and as he and his father-in-law began to regain strength, they took walks down the lane, clad in pajamas and bathrobes, leaning heavily on walkers.

President Benson had been relatively unencumbered by health problems throughout his life, so he was frustrated at the long period of recuperation. The feeling that he wasn't carrying his load gnawed at him and he was an impatient patient. Nevertheless, he took a philosophical approach to the unexpected injury. "I have no doubt but what blessings will come from this experience," he wrote in his journal. "Certainly I have been given time to ponder, to count my blessings, to rest, to enjoy the blessings of home and family, and to be comforted and strengthened by the prayers and the unity and love of my noble family." The experience made him even more tolerant of those who had poor health.

A month after the accident President Benson attended his first meeting with the Twelve, but he stayed only briefly, as it was painful to sit. But it was a relief to be back at work—even for a short time. His strength gradually returned, and by early September he was attending several meetings a week, spending a few hours at the office, and getting around fairly well with the use of a walker. He had hoped to be mobile enough to travel to South America after general conference in October for five area conferences and dedication of the Sao Paolo Temple. But his doctor felt the risk for reinjury was too great and requested that he stay home. Ezra was extremely disappointed.

The doctor was not opposed, however, to President Benson's filling a speaking assignment in Idaho Falls on September 17. A battery-operated chair lifted him up the steps of the airliner, and he was carried up the steps to the platform in the Idaho Falls Civic Auditorium. He delivered his first address since the injury, and it felt wonderful. Two weeks later he spoke at general conference. Arrangements had been made for him to sit on a high stool to speak, but when the time came, he stood and leaned against the podium, placing most of the weight on his left leg. That same week he and Flora moved back to their apartment.

President Benson's condition improved substantially before year's end. By January 1979, he felt up to an extended trip to South America, where he created the first Bolivian stake; spoke in Ecuador to crowds that filled aisles and doorways; contended with a national strike in Peru that kept citizens off the street; and met hundreds of faithful Latter-day Saints whose lives were testaments to the power of the gospel. The press in Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru gave him generous and favorable coverage, and in Quito, over five hundred Ecuadorian members sang "I Am a Child of God" as he deplaned at the airport.

The Church was moving forward rapidly. Just two months later he returned to South America to organize the first stake in Paraguay. And on February 18, 1979, commenting that "the eyes of the Church are on us today," he organized the Church's 1,000th stake—in, appropriately, Nauvoo, Illinois. [^1]

In May 1979 he enjoyed one of his most satisfying trips as a member of the Twelve—this one to the Middle East, where he conferred with government officials in Egypt, Greece, and Israel. Prime Minister Menachem Begin of Israel adjusted his schedule to accommodate President Benson's and told the church leader, "We respect your people very much. Your people have suffered much, and you have stood by your faith."

In Israel President Benson also conferred in an hour-long meeting with Shimon Peres (then the opposition leader in the Knesset) and Abba Eban, whom he had met while serving as Secretary of Agriculture. Ezra was received warmly by these men as a former cabinet officer, but now they were to experience even more the impact of his role as an apostle of the Lord whose mission is to witness of the Savior. President Benson related to them his experience in the Baptist Church in Moscow and then bore strong testimony of the Savior. As President Benson prepared to leave, Shimon Peres said to Abba Eban in Hebrew, "Isn't he a great man?" Abba Eban replied, "One of the greatest I have met in my time." [^2]

In Greece, President Benson met with Mr. Kontogiorgis, acting minister of agriculture and minister of European Affairs, who effusively embraced him as he entered, commenting, "You don't remember me, do you?" When President Benson confessed that he didn't remember him, Mr. Kontogiorgis explained that he had visited the United States to learn about agriculture by working at the U.S. Department of Agriculture during Ezra's term there. He expressed the indebtedness he and the Greek nation owed Secretary Benson and the United States. "If there is anything I can ever do for you, let me know," he offered. President Benson explained there was an area where he could provide assistance—in helping the Church obtain recognition in Greece. In a matter of months, limited recognition was granted. An assistant traveling with President Benson observed, "I had the strong impression at that moment that there were many reasons Ezra Taft Benson had been placed in the Cabinet. It established his name throughout the world, and literally opened this door." [^3]

Reflecting on the trip, President Benson told the Twelve, "I hope much good came from this visit to three nations. . . . I trust that the legal recognition will soon come to the Church in Greece and later in Egypt. The Lord will bless us. I give you my assurance that He will prepare the way for us." [^4]

In a very short time President Benson resumed the kind of schedule he had kept prior to his accident. He was home from the Mideast scarcely a week before he left for South America again—his fourth major international trip in five months—to rededicate Venezuela for the preaching of the gospel and work out problems relating to restrictions on missionary visas. Before year's end he would travel to New Zealand and Australia for area conferences, to Mexico City for meetings with executive administrators on the rapid growth of the Church there and throughout Central America (in four years the number of stakes in Mexico had grown from fifteen to nearly sixty), to Kirtland, Ohio, for groundbreaking ceremonies of the Kirtland Ward chapel (CBS and NBC sent reporters), and to Israel for the dedication of the Orson Hyde Memorial Garden.

The ceremony on the Mount of Olives on October 24, 1979, was deeply moving and satisfying for President Benson, symbolizing fruition in years of friendship with Jewish leaders. As Jerusalem Mayor Teddy Kollek and President Spencer W. Kimball led a procession to a temporary platform at the garden, the crowd spontaneously began singing "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet." In his brief remarks, President Benson recalled the visit of Orson Hyde to Jerusalem in 1841, enumerated the prophecies of Elder Hyde that had been fulfilled, and then concluded: "Jerusalem, O Jerusalem—a designation signifying city of peace! Today the habitation of Jews, Moslems and Christians—all children of God, descendants of Father Abraham. My prayerful desire is that all who reside here and in surrounding nations will have the equanimity of soul to truly make this the city of peace, a symbol of the brotherhood of man." [^5]

Under the stress of near continuous travel, the Bensons were holding up fairly well. Flora traveled with her husband as often as possible. In August 1979 at a meeting in the Los Angeles Temple Visitor's Center, she gave her first talk since the stroke six years earlier, and Ezra was overjoyed. Others were similarly affected by her presence and presentation. Elder S. Dilworth Young, then director of the visitor's center, described the effect of her talk in a letter dated August 29, 1979: "Sister Benson, you were indeed eloquent! As you shared choice counsel and bits from your personal life, we felt the sacredness of that moment; and then when you moved into your delightful recital of 'It Takes a Heap o' Livin',' you had that entire audience in the very palm of your hand. It was a memorable occasion, and your beautiful example of womanhood will long be cherished by all."

As for President Benson, he had rarely felt better. On his eightieth birthday on August 4, 1979, he recorded that he felt like a young man. "It seems that I feel almost as strong and active as I did when I was sixty," he wrote in his journal. His only problem was that the injured hip bothered him some, especially if he remained seated too long. Otherwise he felt strong.

President Kimball's health, on the other hand, was not so predictable. In September 1979, President Benson pronounced a blessing upon the prophet's head prior to his undergoing eye surgery. There was s sweet spirit present, and Ezra felt all would go well. Two months later, however, the outlook was not as hopeful. After President Kimball had surgery to relieve pressure from an accumulation of blood on the brain—the second operation for this problem—President Benson was deeply concerned. At least twice a day alone, and usually twice with his wife, he prayed that President Kimball's life would be lengthened.

President Benson traveled with President Kimball to Japan in October 1980 for dedication of the Tokyo Temple and was thrilled that the prophet's voice and health grew stronger as the services went on. But by the end of 1980, the president's condition was not good, and it was beginning to look as though he might never completely recover. In May 1981, when President Kimball entered the hospital for implantation of a pacemaker, President Benson cancelled trips out of the country so he could stay close by. In March 1982 he was called to President Kimball's apartment when the prophet sank into a coma, and joined with Mark E. Petersen in administering to their leader. In tears, he offered comfort to Sister Kimball. His feelings were tender, his heart somber as he left. "I have been on my knees in the apartment since arriving home," he wrote in his journal. "I am praying that the Lord will do whatever is best for President Kimball. . . . We'd be very grateful if he could be blessed and recover to spend many more days, months, and years upon the earth in his inspiring leadership."

On several occasions President Benson was informed that the prophet's health was critical. Each time he visibly evidenced worry and even fear. He would immediately cancel his agenda for the day, go home, and, with Flora, begin to fast and pray that the Lord would preserve and sustain the prophet. The prospects of the weight of the Church wore heavy.

From 1981 on, President Kimball's health declined, and the imminent possibility of his passing was something the General Authorities lived with. As President Marion G. Romney's health also deteriorated, the weight of directing the affairs of the First Presidency fell principally upon President Gordon B. Hinckley. President Benson was eleven years older than President Hinckley and seventeen years his senior in the quorum. Said Francis M. Gibbons, secretary to the First Presidency, "I never once heard anything from President Benson other than complete subordination to President Gordon B. Hinckley. There was no attempt to supersede him in any way. President Benson's only apparent objective was to completely sustain the First Presidency of the Church." Elder Boyd K. Packer commented, "No one sustained President Hinckley more vocally and fully than did President Benson. When matters came to the Twelve from the First Presidency, he would say, 'Brethren, we must be about this now.'"

In the meantime, and despite a hip that caused him increasing pain, President Benson maintained a fast pace. He and Sister Benson traveled to Europe in the spring of 1980 to form the first stake in Austria, tour four missions in Italy, and visit Finland, where James Parker, Beverly's husband, was presiding over the Finland Helsinki Mission. The Bensons were proud of their family in Finland. Especially were they pleased with the way the Parker children spoke Finnish and were involved in missionary work.

But back in Salt Lake City, after two exhausting weeks of travel, President Benson nearly blacked out one morning while reading the Book of Mormon, and he had to be hospitalized for tests. He disliked the fuss, but he did admit to pushing himself "beyond the point of wisdom," though he made few adjustments in his routine.

Rarely, despite advanced age, did President Benson let a year pass without attending an encampment of Boy Scouts. In the summer of 1980 he visited some 2,800 LDS Scouts at the Florida ranch, donning his olive drab, 1920-vintage Scout uniform, which he refused to exchange for a modern one. Sacrament meeting on Sunday was held in the ranch's rodeo grounds, with one hundred young men administering the sacrament. President Benson noted that he had never seen so many young men so reverent for so long.

In each visit with the Scouts, he stood for hours while the boys filed by to shake his hand. Elder Robert L. Backman frequently accompanied him on those trips. "You can't imagine," he said, "what it does to the boys to have a man of President Benson's stature show such interest in them. I've seen four thousand Boy Scouts sit spellbound as President Benson tells them his Scouting experiences, praises them and tells them how he loves them. They can feel that he does." As always, President Benson was anxious that young people have every advantage the Church could provide.

President Benson was frequently among the first of the Brethren to speak out on timely issues and trends, especially as they related to youth. He was observant of the times, and alert to challenges posed by society's humanistic trends.

Into the 1980s President Benson was concerned about some of Brigham Young University's curricula, particularly in the social sciences and other departments where various economic and political philosophies were taught. In meetings of the university's board of trustees, he offered suggestions and aired concerns about instructors, courses of study, and guest lecturers invited to campus. For example, after the leader of Utah's Communist Party was invited to lecture in several political science classes, he publicly renounced any "BYU instructor [who] grants a forum to an avowed Communist for the purpose of teaching communism on this campus. It may be done on other campuses in the United States, but it will not be done here." [^6]

President Benson's interest in BYU was motivated solely by his abiding interest in youth and his desire that they receive the finest educational opportunities possible. Dallin Oaks described the kind of support President Benson gave him during his tenure as university president: "President Benson was willing to be very outspoken in the crunch, and always for the university. When we were in a budget crunch, he would speak for more money. When I wanted more administrative latitude, he supported me. It was not just because he loved BYU, but because he understood the issues. In my judgment, President Benson is one of the best executives we've had in the Church. As I went about clearing the appointment of deans, approving budgets, making policy on admissions, etc., it became obvious that President Benson was preeminent in his understanding of the management of a large organization.

"I remember specifically when I requested authority to carry over unexpended items at the end of the budget year. President Benson understood that quickly, but the proposition was sinking because it hadn't been done before. He took a position and argued for it all by himself and singlehandedly persuaded the board. He played the same kind of role many times. I've always felt that he was the greatest friend BYU had during that period."

There were also other ways that President Benson influenced the BYU studentbody. On Tuesday, February 26, 1980, he delivered what President Oaks called a "landmark address" and what others described as "a classic" at a BYU devotional assembly. In a message on "Fourteen Fundamentals in Following the Prophet," he talked about the calling of a living prophet. He prefaced his remarks by explaining, "To help you pass the crucial tests which lie ahead I am going to give you today several facets of a grand key which, if you will honor, will crown you with God's glory and bring you out victorious in spite of Satan's fury. Soon we will be honoring our Prophet on his eighty-fifth birthday. As a church we sing the song, 'We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet.' Here then is the grand key—Follow the Prophet."

President Benson taught that the prophet is the only man who speaks for the Lord, and that his words are more important than those of a deceased prophet. Further, he asserted, while it might not always be popular, a prophet is qualified to speak out on civic affairs. "The world prefers that prophets either be dead or mind their own business," he said. "Some so-called experts of political science want the prophet to be still on politics . . . [but] those who would remove prophets from politics would take God out of government." [^7] He also encouraged the students to enroll in the BYU religion class "Teachings of the Living Prophets."

Some of the local media took President Benson to task for his remarks, speculating that he was setting the stage for the day when he might become president of the Church and giving the impression that he had breached the sacrosanct barrier between church and state. [^8] But years earlier he had explained his view of the proper interface of religion and government: "I support the doctrine of separation of church and state as traditionally interpreted to prohibit the establishment of an official national religion. But this does not mean that we should divorce government from any formal recognition of God. To do so strike a potentially fatal blow at the concept of the divine origin of our rights and unlocks the door for an easy entry of future tyranny." [^9]

In just two weeks, over six hundred requests for copies of his BYU address came to President Benson's office, as well as hundreds of letters from Saints hailing his message as an inspiring tribute to the role of a prophet. While the talk generated a great deal of publicity, for his part President Benson had intended it to simply underscore President Kimball's prophetic call.

During the April 1980 monthly meeting of the General Authorities, President Benson explained that he had meant only to reaffirm the divine nature of the prophetic call. It was a faith-building, emotional experience. His family were aware of his concerns and had been praying for him. When he returned to his office that day, he found a phone message from Reed and a brief letter from Mark: "All will be well—we're praying for you and know all will be well. The Lord knows your heart." There was also a brief message from Elder Packer: "How I admire, respect and love you. How could anyone hesitate to follow a leader, an example such as you? What a privilege!"

President Benson watched the Ronald Reagan-Jimmy Carter presidential campaign with interest. As early as 1974 he had encouraged Reagan to step forward as a spokesman for the nation's conservatives. [^10] In fact, Ezra had corresponded with Reagan for several years. they had shared views on a variety of issues. Immediately after Reagan's election, President Benson wrote him that he rejoiced at the election results and added, "We sense that you are a man of deep spirituality and could wish there might be regular prayer in the White House." [^11] Reagan responded warmly.

Over time President Benson continued to share his views with President Reagan. In particular, he urged the president to reaffirm America's support of the Monroe Doctrine, insisting it should be central to any foreign policy on Central and South America. (In 1823 President James Monroe set forth this policy asserting that any attempt by a European power to create or maintain a colony in the Western Hemisphere would be opposed by the United States as "dangerous to our peace and safety." Joseph Fielding Smith called the Monroe Doctrine the greatest fortification in America and the "inspiration of the Almighty which rested upon . . . Thomas Jefferson and other statesmen, and which finally found authoritative expression in James Monroe." [^12])

On another occasion President Benson sent Ronald Reagan lengthy passages from the Book of Mormon about America's divine destiny and concluded with his testimony: "This nation is the Lord's base of operations in these latter days. Here the gospel of Jesus Christ was restored. Here God the Father and His Son, Jesus Christ, appeared to the young man Joseph Smith, which to me is the greatest event that has transpired in this world since the resurrection of the Master." Reagan agreed America was a "specially favored land," adding, that "as long as Americans have respected spiritual leaders such as yourself, our nation will . . . do wonders in the world." [^13]

President Benson continued to maintain contact with the USDA. When he was in Washington for Reagan's inaugural, he met with Reagan's Secretary of Agriculture, John R. Block. There was a fraternity, of sorts, among USDA veterans borne of shared experiences and frustrations, and Ezra Taft Benson was perhaps more highly regarded subsequent to his term as Secretary. The August 1983 issue of Washingtonian magazine featured him as the best Secretary of Agriculture ever. And in an article he wrote for the Washington Post, Secretary Block quoted from Ezra's book Farmers at the Crossroads and called the former Secretary's views on surpluses sound advice. "We didn't listen then, but we must listen and act now," he warned. [^14]

When Ezra and Flora came down with a violent case of twenty-four-hour flu, Reed, Mark, and Beth converged on their apartment bearing soup and an azalea plant. Unfortunately, however, the recurring and increasing pain Ezra was suffering with his hip was not as easily remedied. Almost more worrisome than the physical discomfort was his fear that he would have to stop traveling. In March 1981 Elder Mark E. Petersen administered to him. "I believe the Lord expects us to continue to do what we can on our own," Ezra wrote in a journal entry on March 29, 1981, "but I have faith that this administration will prove to be most strengthening."

In July he started a vigorous physical therapy program to strengthen his right hip and leg. But the pain persisted. It had become next to impossible for him to sit through meetings or walk distances. President Benson traveled, with pain, to Europe to organize the first stake in Italy in June 1981. At the cornerstonelaying of the Jordan River Temple on August 15, 1981, he toured the edifice by wheelchair but stood to deliver his remarks.

With a weak hip but strong convictions, he spoke forcefully on a topic of grave concern at the general women's meeting held September 26, 1981. His message contained a strong warning that mothers belonged in the home. Reaction to his message was mixed—favorable from women who applauded his defense of motherhood, and distress from others who felt his stay-at-home-mother remarks were unreasonable and out of touch with the times.

From his perspective, President Benson felt that he was only echoing the admonitions of President Kimball. At a general women's meeting on October 2, 1975, the prophet had stated, "We have often said, 'This divine service of motherhood can be rendered only by mothers.' It may not be passed to others. Nurses cannot do it; public nurseries cannot do it. Hired help cannot do it; kind relatives cannot do it. Only by mother, aided as much as may be by a loving father, brothers and sisters . . . can the full needed measure of watchful care be given." [^15]

President Benson had always been an outspoken advocate of mothers staying home, but as society at large, and Latter-day Saint families in particular, increasingly joined the influx of women in the marketplace, he became alarmed. He often said there had never been a finer "crop" of children than those coming to LDS homes today—children who need their mother's undivided attention.

Again, at the dedicatory services of the monuments to women in Nauvoo in June 1978, he warned: "We hear much talk—even among some of our own sisters—about so-called 'alternative life-styles' for women. . . . Some have even been so bold as to suggest that the Church move away from the 'Mormon woman stereotype' of homemaking and rearing children. God grant that that dangerous philosophy will never take root among our Latter-day Saint women! . . . The conventional wisdom of the day would have [women] be equal with men. We say, we should not have you descend to that level. . . . Equality should not be confused with equivalence." [^16]

This was a volatile topic that often attracted attention when President Benson broached it. At the October 1982 general conference, he again stated that many social ills could be traced to parents who abdicated their responsibilities at home. He did not want to alienate women, but simply to reinforce the critical message that the rearing of righteous children should be the principal aim of all parents and should take precedence over worldly desires and ambitions. [^17]

Immediately following October conference in 1981, President Benson announced that a second operation, this one to implant an artificial hip, was necessary. Again with Elder Mark E. Petersen acting as voice, the Twelve administered to him—"the most impressive blessing I have ever received under the hands of my Brethren," he noted in his journal. "There have been many times, in meetings of the Twelve, when the windows of heaven almost seemed to be open. This was one of those special occasions."

The three-hour hip athroplasty was successful, and once again Ezra began a long, painful recovery. When he left the hospital, he and Flora once again moved in with Beth and David, so Beth could give her father full-time care and David could keep a physician's eye on him. After six weeks he felt up to moving home, and he and Flora went back to their condominium. But soon thereafter he took a fall in his office, resulting in a hairline fracture to the pelvis that sent him back to the hospital for two weeks.

At that point Ezra and Flora accepted David and Beth's invitation to move in with their family indefinitely. Ezra and Flora had previously determined to divide their furniture and other belongings among the six children. Most of the furniture went to the girls, and Reed and Mark divided the voluminous library. Over the years Ezra had watched his children defer to each other as possessions were distributed. With most of their material possessions disposed of, and with Ezra and Flora requiring frequent assistance, Beth and David's offer was providential and practical. By February 1982 Ezra was almost entirely free of pain, and a few months later he resumed the schedule he had abandoned while recovering from surgery.

While President Benson's calling took him throughout the Church, there were certain areas that seemed to draw his special attention. Kirtland, Ohio, was one of them. In October 1982 he traveled there to dedicate the Kirtland Ward meeting-house. He also toured the Kirtland Temple, where the president of the Kirtland stake of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, Sebe Morgan, invited him to offer a prayer. President Benson turned to the man responsible for overseeing the temple to ask if that was his wish also. Finding that it was, he offered a prayer in which he prayed for good relations between the two churches, paid tribute to those who had sacrificed to build the temple, and thanked the Lord for his witness that the Savior of the world had appeared there. Later Sebe Morgan said he was "impressed by the sweetness, dignity, and appropriateness of what President Benson said," and also called attention to the fact that President Benson had been solicitous of the man who oversaw the temple. [^18]

The next day President Benson dedicated the Kirtland Ward meetinghouse. In October 1979 when he had presided at the groundbreaking of this building, he had referred to a prophecy in the Doctrine and Covenants (124:83) that stated Kirtland would be scourged after the Saints left, but would be rebuilt later. "I think that this prophecy is being fulfilled today," he had said then. "We have a great day ahead of us. I'm sure of it. . . . The Lord is looking in on the people of this community." [^19] (Since then, the Kirtland Stake has been created, a new mission has been formed in the area, nonmember descendants of early Latter-day Saints have been baptized, and new wards have been organized.)

In the spring of 1983 President and Sister Benson took a quick trip to Europe and the Middle East, stopping in Jerusalem long enough to confer with local government officials, who promised to alleviate bureaucratic delays with BYU's plans to build an educational center near the Mount of Olives. They also visited Reed and his family, who were spending six months in Israel while Reed was an instructor in BYU's study-abroad program.

That year President Benson enjoyed a diverse array of activities. He spoke in five sessions of the Atlanta Temple dedication and offered the dedicatory prayer in five others during June. On July 4, he served as grand marshal of the Freedom Festival in Provo and led the parade along a route lined with some 150,000 people. And in November, he was deeply moved when the Utah Farm Bureau and Salt Lake Area Chamber of Commerce honored him for "distinguished service to the people of the world through American agriculture." Representing the Church, President Gordon B. Hinckley saluted his colleague and summarized his contribution to the Church and the nation. "It is a long and interesting odyssey from Whitney, Idaho, to the Oval Room of the White House," he began. "His is a fascinating chronicle of a little boy on an Idaho farm who became Secretary of Agriculture. . . . His is a remarkable epic of faith and faithfulness. . . . Loyalty to leadership is of the very essence of his character. Loyalty to principle is of the very fiber of his being. . . . All of us who have worked with him have known the gentle side of his nature. . . . Unsparing in the use of his own strength, he has sought to lift burdens from the backs of others of us. I know of no man more considerate of his associates or more concerned for their well-being. He does not ask others to do that which he is unwilling to do himself, but rather sets an example of service for others of us to follow." President Benson was so overwhelmed by President Hinckley's tribute that he struggled to hold back the tears. [^20]

The centennial celebration of the Logan Temple in May 1984 produced more tender moments as he recalled childhood experiences. He still remembered his Grandfather Benson telling about the first load of rock that was hauled in for the temple. Ezra's heritage was priceless to him, as President Hinckley had noted in his tribute at the Utah Farm Bureau banquet: "President Benson's forebears were of the highest quality. His grandparents were among those who gave their hearts with deep conviction to an unpopular cause. . . . They were winnowed as grain on the threshing floor. . . . When others fell away, they remained true. . . . I see in President Benson the qualities of his remarkable pioneer forebears."

And there were other kinds of happy reflections. In July 1984 President Benson joined other former Secretaries of Agriculture at the White House to commemorate the thirtieth anniversary of the International Food for Peace program. President Reagan paid special tribute to him for having the foresight to launch the program. The trip to Washington also allowed Ezra and Flora time with Beverly and Jim and their children. They reminisced and sang songs around the grand piano in the elegant presidential suite provided for them in the J. W. Marriott Hotel—accommodations "too nice for a farm boy," Ezra told Bill Marriott on the phone that day.

August 4, 1984, marked President Benson's eighty-fifth birthday and a family reunion celebrated the occasion. In many ways, it didn't seem possible to Ezra that he had lived that long. His mobility wasn't quite what it had been ten years earlier, but he was still strong and alert. In fact, he and Flora had moved out of Beth's home a year earlier and were enjoying a condominium in Canyon Road Towers just a block from the Church Office Building.

Of course, there were also concerns and difficulties. President Benson continued to closely monitor world events, and what he saw worried him. Nevertheless, the time for speaking out on political and economic ideologies was not right. The expansive growth of the Church throughout the world, especially with so many various forms of government in operation, made it inappropriate at the time. But within his own family he minced no words. In one family letter he counseled, "Certain bloodlines seem to have the spirit of freedom in their veins. Mother and I are grateful that each of our children has that spirit of freedom . . . and have a love for this country and understand its divine destiny. Make your contribution where you will, but make it." [^21] Many family members followed suit in various ways. Some distributed campaign literature and worked at the polls on election day. Other took leadership roles in local party organizations, attended constitutional study groups, or participated in mass meetings and state party conventions.

When it came to challenging his family to serve, Ezra Taft Benson knew whereof he spoke. For nearly eight decades he had been making contributions within the Church, in the privacy of his own family, and throughout the world. With all that he had seen, accomplished, and experienced, nothing was more precious to him than his deep conviction and witness of the divinity of the Savior's mission. He bore testimony of this knowledge again and again, as he did in one general conference address: "With all my soul, I love Him. I humbly testify that he is the same loving, compassionate Lord today as when He walked the dusty roads of Palestine. He is close to His servants on this earth. He cares about and loves each of us today. Of that you can be assured. He lives today as our Lord, our Master, our Savior, our Redeemer, and our God. God bless us all to believe in Him, to accept Him, to worship Him, and to fully trust in Him, and to follow Him." [^22]

With each year, it seemed, President Benson was vividly reminded of his age and mortality as dear friends and lifelong associates passed away. On November 27, 1982, President N. Eldon Tanner, his "dear friend and colleague," as he wrote in his journal, died. President Benson represented the Twelve in delivering a tribute at the funeral.

Less than two months later, on January 11, 1983, Elder LeGrand Richards died, and a year to the day later, the man whom he had sat next to in the quorum for forty years, Mark E. Petersen, passed on. At the funeral service, as well as in his journal, President Benson revealed his deep emotion. "I feel close to each member of the Twelve," he said, "but there has been something special in the relationship I have had with Elder Mark E. Petersen. . . . I love this man as I have loved few men in this world."

Little more than a year later, Elder Bruce R. McConkie succumbed to cancer. Elder Russell M. Nelson was with President Benson in New England when they received word, and he observed how President Benson took the news. "It was as though he'd lost his own brother," Elder Nelson said. "For him it was a very deep personal loss. I calculated then that he had seen over twenty of his brothers in the Quorum of the Twelve pass on while he remained, and I thought that if he'd gone through that kind of mourning for each one, it was a heavy load for him to bear."

At Elder McConkie's funeral President Benson said, "I love Bruce R. McConkie with all my soul. I loved to hear him preach the gospel. We shall miss him. Oh, how he will be missed!"

Then in August 1985 President Benson lost another dear friend when J. Willard Marriott died. At the funeral, he joined Gordon B. Hinckley, Richard M. Nixon, Boyd K. Packer, and Billy Graham in eulogizing the founder of the Marriott empire. President Benson called him "a giant of a man." Then just three months later his brother Ross died. The graveside service in Whitney, Idaho, was a sobering experience.

With President Kimball's health now very tenuous and Marion G. Romney also afflicted with the disabilities of old age, President Benson often felt very alone. In June 1985, during a time when President Gordon B. Hinckley and Elder Thomas S. Monson were in Europe dedicating temples in Freiberg, the German Democratic Republic, and in Stockholm, and breaking ground for a new temple in Frankfurt, he revealed his feelings in his journal: "I feel very deeply how I miss President Hinckley and the Brethren who have scattered somewhat. . . . I hope they will have the protecting hand of the Lord over them. . . . I constantly pray for them."

He had hoped to travel to Ireland to dedicate that country for the preaching of the gospel, but cancelled plans when it was determined the trip might be too dangerous. "It appears that I am so well known," he wrote, "and would be one of the first to be attacked if there was any danger of a serious nature . . . . I am content to be close at home and will attend various functions in the United States and Canada as time permits."

Since 1983 President Kimball's health had been very unpredictable, and on more than one occasion President Benson had feared the prophet would not live through the night. But always he had rebounded, and had even attended meetings in the temple with the Twelve and some sessions of general conference.

President Benson also wondered if he wouldn't precede President Kimball in death. But this was not to be. On the evening of November 5, 1985, he received word. The prophet, beloved by Saints throughout the world, the man he had loved and respected through forty-two year of service, was gone.

Though this possibility had been imminent for so long, it seemed inconceivable even to consider the implications. He and Flora immediately dropped to their knees. The day they had dared not think about, the day they had even dreaded, had arrived.

Footnotes

"I bless you with increased understanding of the Book of Mormon. I promise you that . . . . if we will daily sup from its pages and abide by its precepts, God will pour out . . . . a blessing hither to unknown."

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," Ensign, January 1973, p. 33.
[^2] Neal A. Maxwell to ETB, December 18, 1985.
[^3] David B. Haight, "A Prophet Chosen of the Lord," Ensign, May 1986, p. 9.
[^4] Statement by President Benson at press conference announcing reorganization of the First Presidency, November 11, 1985. See also "President Ezra Taft Benson Ordained Thirteenth President of the Church," Ensign, December 1985, pp. 2-5.
[^5] See Joseph B. Wirthlin to ETB, November 14, 1985; David Horowitz to ETB, November 12, 1985; J. Willard Marriott, Jr., to ETB, November 14, 1985; Ronald Reagan to ETB, November 13, 1985.
[^6] Mark A. Benson to his children, November 14, 1985.
[^7] Dr. W. E. Hess to Gary Gillespie, November 13, 1986.
[^8] See "Stake Seventies Quorums Discontinued," Ensign, November 1986, p. 97; also Church News, September 12, 1986, p. 24.
[^9] Church News, December 22, 1985.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] See ETB to Ronald Reagan, January 6, 1986; Ensign, March 1986, p. 85.
[^12] Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, February 6, 1986.
[^13] See "L.D.S. Scripture Citation Index," comp. Donald H. Howard, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^14] See Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon Is the Word of God," Ensign, May 1975, pp. 63-65.
[^15] Mark L. McConkie to ETB, April 26, 1985.
[^16] See, for example, ETB to Bruce R. McConkie, January 23, 1985.
[^17] ETB to Stephen Reed Benson, April 21, 1981.
[^18] Ezra Taft Benson, "Cleansing the Inner Vessel," Ensign, May 1986, pp. 4-7.
[^19] Ezra Taft Benson, "A Sacred Responsibility," Ensign, May 1986, pp. 77-78.
[^20] See "Notes to Printing Advisory Committee," undated, Ezra Taft Benson personal files; also 1987 Church Almanac (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1986), p. 146.
[^21] See Church News, July 13, 1986, p. 3.
[^22] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon—Keystone of Our Religion," Ensign, November 1986, pp. 4-7.
