Sheri Dew, Ezra Taft Benson ( 1987)

Chapter 23

The Prophet of the Lord

Few would argue that, over the years, Ezra Taft Benson had been through a refining process—one unique in its intensity and scope to the select few who become president of the Church. His life had been a rigorous, intense schooling process. He had been in the Church's governing council for forty-two years. The difficulty and demands of some of his assignments had transcended the norm—particularly his eleven-month emergency mission to war-torn Europe in 1946 and his eight years as Eisenhower's Secretary of Agriculture. Perhaps no General Authority in the Church's history had achieved such depth and breadth of international prominence and respect.

Through it all, Ezra Taft Benson had become known as a man of integrity, a man who stood firm for principle—at all costs.

For several days prior to November 5, 1985, President Kimball's health had deteriorated substantially. Daily President Benson was apprised of the prophet's condition. He was emotional when he called one son to tell him it looked as though the prophet would not live long.

The evening of November 5, shortly after 10:00 P.M., the phone call announcing President Kimball's passing came. President Benson was overcome with emotion. He felt physically weak as the realization of the mantle, the burden that now fell on his shoulders, washed over him. In his journal he recorded, "I have never felt weaker and never before have I felt the influence of the Spirit in such great strength. . . . May the good Lord sustain me as I go forward humbly. I think it can be truthfully said, I will never acknowledge the Lord's hand as I have the last few hours."

How he loved Spencer W. Kimball! How often he and Flora had pleaded with the Lord to preserve the prophet's life! How he had marveled at the masterful spiritual leadership President Kimball had given, and at the Church's dramatic growth at his hand! And while it had been impossible to ignore the fact that he was next in the line of succession, in his heart President Benson had not expected the call to come.

But there was little time for reflection. Automatically the attention turned to him as responsibility for carrying the Church forward fell on his shoulders.

Shortly thereafter Mark talked with his father. The tone in President Benson's voice was different than Mark had ever heard—as though a tangible load had been placed on his shoulders.

Announcement of President Kimball's death made the late-evening news in the Salt Lake City area and within hours had traveled worldwide. That first night President Benson's telephone rang most of the night. "I got about two hours of sleep—[everyone] wanting to speak kind words on the matter. All of the children called and assured me they would be fasting and praying for me," he recorded.

The Brethren sought also to assure him of their support and love. And family members called and wrote letters filled with encouragement and love.

Newspapers around the world carried news of President Kimball's death and the imminent appointment of Ezra Taft Benson as the Church's new spiritual leader. The coverage wasn't necessarily more extensive for President Benson than his predecessors, but much of it was distinctive in tone and approach. Some journalists focused on his political career and ideologies, nearly ignoring his forty-two years of spiritual leadership as a member of the Twelve and reporting as though it were a political appointment, when the opposite was true.

There was no question but that the Lord, in calling President Kimball home, had spoken, and that if President Benson, as the senior apostle, was named president of the Church, it would be because the Lord had selected him as His mouthpiece.

Several years earlier President Kimball had explained: "It is reassuring to know that [a new president is] . . . not elected through committees and conventions with all their conflicts, criticisms, and by the vote of men, but [is] called of God and then sustained by the people. . . . The pattern divine allows for no errors, no conflicts, no ambitions, no ulterior motives. The Lord has reserved for himself the calling of his leaders over his Church." [^1]

On Saturday, November 9, President Benson conducted impressive and touching funeral services for President Kimball. He called President Kimball a "star of the first magnitude," and eulogized the late prophet as a "noble and great one," a "prophet of God to the nations of the world." President Benson then put his predecessor's service in perspective: "When the history of this dispensation is recorded, the administration of President Spencer Woolley Kimball will be seen as one of the most progressive in the history of the Church." He concluded, "May we all learn from the life of President Kimball what it means to fight the good fight, to finish one's course, and to keep the faith, that a crown of righteousness may be laid up for all of us."

Now it was time for the Kingdom to move on.

The next afternoon, Sunday, thirteen of the fourteen men sustained as prophets, seers, and revelators convened at 3:00 P.M. in an upper room in the Salt Lake Temple to effect reorganization of the First Presidency. (Elder Marion G. Romney's poor health prohibited him from attending.) President Benson went early to the temple to pray. His demeanor was solemn; he seemed preoccupied. As the meeting convened, he told the Brethren in a voice trembling with emotion that he had never anticipated this day—that he had felt Harold B. Lee would be the last prophet he would know and serve under on earth.

President Benson was subsequently set apart as president of the Church. He then indicated his desire that Elders Gordon B. Hinckley and Thomas S. Monson serve as his first and second counselors, respectively. Marion G. Romney was named president of the Twelve, with Howard W. Hunter acting president. President Hunter was the mouthpiece as members of the quorum laid their hands on President Benson's head and ordained him the thirteenth president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Seven of the Twelve were participating in their first reorganization. Elder M. Russell Ballard had been a member of the quorum for only one month. He later said, "The most impressive and spiritual confirmation that came to me is when I was invited to lay my hands on President Benson's head with the other members of the Twelve as President Hunter ordained him. That was a special, spiritual experience, one that confirmed to me without reservation or question that the Lord's will was being accomplished by President Benson being set apart as president of the Church." Later referring to the experience of sustaining a prophet, President Gordon B. Hinckley said, "It is miraculous in its simplicity. It is beautiful in its execution. It is divine in its method." And Elder Neal A. Maxwell relayed to President Benson his conviction that "the hands we placed upon you in the temple were simply a reenactment of other hands placed upon your head a long, long time ago." [^2]

Elder David B. Haight described the reorganization: "After much fasting and prayer, and the seeking of personal revelation to know the mind and will of God, it was confirmed to our souls who should be called—even Ezra Taft Benson. This I know!" [^3]

That evening, when President and Sister Benson attended the Churchwide Young Women Fireside and joined enthusiastically in singing "Carry On" with the audience, President Benson did so as president of the Church, though that announcement had not yet been made. The capacity audience in the Salt Lake Tabernacle, however, stood in respect for the senior apostle as he entered. He almost seemed surprised at the display, and quickly motioned everyone to be seated.

The Benson children attended the satellite broadcast of the fireside at their respective stake centers. Beth recalled, "As I watched the large video screen and saw Dad enter the meeting, I felt such a sweet and reassuring witness flow through my body that here was the prophet of the Lord. I knew he had the power of a true prophet of God in him. I could not stop the tears from flowing."

The following morning, members of the media gathered at the Church Administration Building to learn details of the reorganization at a press conference. Reading a prepared statement, and in a voice brimming with emotion, President Benson declared that this was a day he had not anticipated. "My wife, Flora, and I have prayed continually that President Kimball's days would be prolonged on this earth, and another miracle performed on his behalf." Then he added, "Now that the Lord has spoken, we will do our best, under his guiding direction, to move the work forward in the earth. We shall miss President Kimball so very much."

Indicating the direction their administration would take, President Benson said, "My heart has been filled with an overwhelming love and compassion for all members of the Church and our Heavenly Father's children everywhere. I love all of our Father's children of every color, creed, and political persuasion." He continued, "Some have expectantly inquired about the direction the Church will take in the future. May we suggest that the Lord, through President Kimball, has sharply focused on the threefold mission of the Church: to preach the gospel, to perfect the Saints, and to redeem the dead. We shall continue every effort to carry out this mission." He also said he would stress the importance of strong homes and family life, and then bore testimony of the Savior: "We should like to reaffirm to all the world that The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is led by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." [^4]

Response to the announcement that Ezra Taft Benson was now president of the Church was immediate—and global. Letters of praise and commendation flooded his office. They came from General Authorities, stake presidents recalling personal experiences with him, members who had met him as he traveled the Church, mothers and fathers, missionaries in the field, family members, children, politicians, and world and religious leaders he had associated with for decades. Friends from the National Boy Scouts of America, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Farm Bureau, Corn Products International, and many other organizations wrote to congratulate him.

The following responses are characteristic:

"Your total dedication to the Lord's work, your deep spirituality throughout your life and your great administrative ability will lead the Church to new heights of achievement."—Elder Joseph B. Wirthlin of the First Quorum of the Seventy.

"May this . . . mark the beginning of the fulfillment of Ezekiel's prophecy regarding the joining together of the 'two sticks.'"—David Horowitz, president, United Israel World Union.

"I know how disappointed [Dad] must be not to have lived to sustain you as our prophet."—J. Willard Marriott, Jr.

"This office is a fitting tribute to your unwavering devotion to your faith and your dedication to the word of God."—President Ronald Reagan. [^5]

As pouches of mail were delivered daily those first weeks, it became evident that the Saints viewed Ezra Taft Benson as a man of strength and conviction and welcomed him as their prophet. While Latter-day Saints had universally felt great love for Spencer W. Kimball, there was now a renewed spirit throughout the Church as a new First Presidency presided.

President Benson took the helm of an organization that had experienced rapid growth and prosperity during President Kimball's twelve-year administration. Membership had increased from 3,306,000 to nearly 6 million (5,910,496 as of December 31, 1985) in 1582 stakes and 188 missions. Twenty-one temples were dedicated during that period, with eleven more completed, planned, or under construction.

Over 40 percent of the Church's membership had joined the Church during President Kimball's administration; and while some members had followed Ezra Taft Benson's career closely for years, more had not. Converts were largely unfamiliar with his background. Suddenly throughout the Church many gospel teachers anxious to learn more about the prophet taught lessons on the lives of Ezra Taft and Flora Benson. And that spawned yet another avalanche of mail. Letters from children, in particular, pleased President Benson. One little girl from San Jose, California, even asked if her family couldn't have dinner with him when they visited Utah. Another girl wrote, "I love to sing Primary songs and one of my favorites is 'Latter-day Prophets.' . . . We don't sing it any more in Primary because no one knows how to fit you in. . . . Could you write to the Church publishers and ask them to fit you in?" And a boy asked, "Can a boy become a prophet when he grows up? I respect you very much because you talk with God."

At eighty-six, President Benson was the second oldest man to succeed to the Presidency (Joseph Fielding Smith was ninety-three when he was ordained president in 1970). In recent years, partly due to two hip operations, he had started to slow down. At times his memory had momentarily failed him. Just a month earlier, during October general conference, he had labored while delivering his address and had appeared almost fragile. Friends had asked his children if their father was well. And he had suffered momentary dizzy spells, during which he had struggled to speak for a time. At least twice as president of the Twelve he had been hospitalized briefly for these setbacks. On both occasions his physician had warned him that he was running faster than he had the strength.

But with his call as president, family members and others close to him noticed a change. Staff members were amazed at his physical and mental rejuvenation. Mark Benson told his children that their grandfather's body had literally been renewed. [^6] On Sunday afternoon, November 10, just before the Twelve convened in the Salt Lake Temple to reorganize the First Presidency, Beverly telephoned her parents from Virginia. When the voice of a young man answered the phone, she assumed her call had been routed to a Church security officer. "Is this President Benson's apartment?" she asked. "Who is this?" the man responded. "This is his daughter, Beverly. May I speak to my father?" "This is your father," President Benson answered. Beverly was taken aback. Her father sounded like a much younger man. "It was a witness to me that the Lord was blessing Dad and giving him the vigor and strength to carry on," she said.

The orthopedic surgeon who had operated on President Benson's hip was summoned to the president's office a few months later. The surgeon related, "I hurried down and as I walked into his office . . . he came out to greet me with a spry step and a big smile. I was absolutely astonished by the change in his appearance—his quick and steady gait." [^7]

The Church moved on as members of the new First Presidency familiarized themselves with the weighty matters confronting them on a daily basis. President Thomas S. Monson described the administrative pattern their presidency followed: "President Benson grasps quickly matters which come to his attention. He doesn't need to consider an item at great length before he finds the inspiration of the Lord directing him in a decision. With the expansive nature of the Church today, throughout the world, and with the multitude of matters that come before the First Presidency, this ability to cut through detail and get to the heart of the issue is vital to carrying out the administrative work of the Church."

The matters that came to their attention were varied. Temples were dedicated in Korea, Peru, and Argentina; and ground was broken for temples in Las Vegas and Portland. The missionary force surpassed 30,005 (March 1986); and while he was grateful for those who were serving, President Benson said there weren't nearly enough. President Monson organized the 1600th stake of the Church on June 22, 1986, in Toronto. The translation of the Book of Mormon into the seventieth language was completed. The First Presidency issued a statement opposing gambling, including the legalization and/or government sponsorship of lotteries. And they also announced a policy change authorizing the issuing of temple recommends to worthy members married to an unendowed spouse.

Many Saints from around the world wrote emotional letters thanking President Benson for opening the temple to them. As one woman explained, "I express the gratitude that only those who have been denied something for a long time can understand. . . . I will always remember you as the Prophet who opened the temple doors for me."

At general conference in October 1986, the First Presidency announced that all stake seventies quorums were to be discontinued, and that now all priesthood holders, not just seventies, were responsible for teaching the gospel. This change was prompted by the desire that Church members take a more active role in missionary work. [^8]

During the first few weeks of his administration President Benson stayed close to home. He was delighted when a Salt Lake City family presented Flora with a 14-karat gold watch crafted by her father, Carl C. Amussen. On December 1, 1985, he spoke at the annual First Presidency Christmas devotional, and later that month the First Presidency hosted an open house for Salt Lake City area religious leaders. It was the first such reception held.

Almost immediately President Benson and his counselors began to address themes that would become important in their Presidency. In their 1985 Christmas message they proclaimed that peace could be found only in the Savior, and then stretched out a welcoming hand: "To those who are lonely, we extend the hand of friendship and fellowship. We invite you to become one with us in worship and in the service of the Master." [^9] And then, just before Christmas, they issued a special statement, which they called an invitation to come back: "We encourage Church members to forgive those who may have wronged them. To those who have ceased activity and to those who have become critical, we say, 'Come back. Come back and feast at the table of the Lord.'" [^10]

Repeatedly in his addresses as prophet, President Benson issued challenges or opportunities, and then added, "You can do it, I know you can." He believed in the Saints, and he wanted them to know so.

On January 4, 1986, President and Sister Benson traveled to Washington, D. C., to install a new temple presidency and divide the Annandale Virginia Stake (the twenty-seventh stake in the same geographic area he had presided over as president of the first stake in Washington). Though he was, in many ways, returning home, the outpouring of love that met him and Sister Benson took them by surprise. Many Saints came hours early to get a seat in the Annandale Stake Center. Some had driven from as far away as New York to attend. Chairs were set up in every available room, but hundreds had to be turned away.

As President Benson entered the stake center Sunday morning, many of the Saints wept openly. He had a commanding physical presence. He looked like a prophet. When he stood to address the congregation, he said, "My wife just said to me, 'I'll be praying for you.' So under those circumstances I don't know how I can fail." Then he delivered a message that would become a recurring theme of his presidency as he bore testimony of the power of the Book of Mormon to change lives and lead people to Christ. The congregation was visibly moved by his spirited challenge that they study this book of scripture. (A few months later President Benson received a booklet with some five hundred names of members of the stake who had pledged to complete the Book of Mormon by a certain date. And over time he would receive hundreds of similar commitments from wards, stakes, and missions.) Of this stake conference President Benson wrote in his journal, "The spirit of the meeting was electric. The Saints were warm and my feelings tender as I shook hands with the many families and children."

It was President Benson's first experience among people as prophet, and the Saints' eagerness to see him, shake hands with him, hear from him, and be near him humbled him to tears. It was also the first time he was sustained by members in his presence, and that was a tender moment. As the congregation sang "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," tears welled in his eyes. (Often he would say when that song was sung that it made him think of Joseph Smith and all of the prophets.) The overwhelming expression of support and love was unlike anything he had ever experienced.

His own family noticed the difference. Members of Jim and Beverly Parker's family, whose stake was being divided, were perhaps taken aback as their father and grandfather arrived in Washington. Even during his cabinet days, he had not been accompanied by such an entourage. Surrounded by the press, he moved in a small caravan. TV cameras whirred every time he entered or exited a building. And even as President and Sister Benson enjoyed a family dinner at the Parkers' home afterwards, members of the press requested time with them.

While in Washington, President Benson met with Chief Justice Warren Burger, chairman of the committee to celebrate the bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution; hand-delivered a letter to President Reagan outlining the Church's contribution of some $10 million in 1985 to aid world hunger and presented him with a personalized edition of the new Church hymnbook; and paid courtesy calls on Vice-President George Bush, FBI director William Webster, and Richard Schubert of the American Red Cross. This first trip out among the Saints was exhilarating for President and Sister Benson. [^11]

On Saturday following their return from Washington, President Benson fainted. Paramedics rushed him to LDS Hospital, where, after two hours of examination, he was moved to the coronary-care unit. Tests revealed no cardiovascular difficulties, and by that evening he was asking that his glasses and scriptures be brought to him. On Monday he was released.

It proved only a minor interruption in what was building into a crusade—President Benson's advocacy of the Book of Mormon. Everywhere he went, he talked about the power of that book: at a regional conference in El Paso, to 8,000; in San Antonio, to 6,000; in Salt Lake City, to 6,000; in Laie, Hawaii, to 6,000; on the slopes of the Hill Cumorah in upstate New York, to 8,000; in Provo, to 16,000; in San Bernardino, California, to 12,000. During his first year as president, he delivered some twenty major addresses on the Book of Mormon. In a temple meeting of the General Authorities in early February 1986, President Hinckley told the Brethren that President Benson would become the Church's greatest proponent of the Book of Mormon. [^12]

President Benson's emphasis on the Book of Mormon was nothing new. For years he had quoted the scripture teaching that the Church was under condemnation for taking that book of scripture lightly. (See Doctrine and Covenants 84:54-57.) In 1979 the history and religion librarian at BYU's Harold B. Lee Library conducted a study of the scriptures that had been quoted in general conferences from April 1950 to April 1978. The research revealed that of the fifty scriptures quoted most often, only three were from the Book of Mormon. President Benson had quoted the Book of Mormon more frequently than the Bible. [^13]

In the 1975 April general conference he had delivered what some religious scholars called the finest address ever given on the Book of Mormon. Titled "The Book of Mormon Is the Word of God," the address was considered so powerful by the BYU Department of Religious Instruction that tens of thousands of copies have been distributed to Book of Mormon classes on campus. [^14] And it was this theme, in the main, that President Benson repeated from one regional conference to the next. Often, as he did at the conference of the Butler and Sandy East regions held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in November 1986, he made no apology for the repetition—"because the Saints need it." Repeatedly he counseled the Saints to "make the study of the Book of Mormon a lifetime pursuit."

While perhaps many Latter-day Saints didn't realize how frequent President Benson's admonitions on this subject had been, others did. After the funeral of Elder Bruce R. McConkie, a son of Elder McConkie's wrote President Benson to thank him for the eulogy he had delivered, adding, "From one soldier out in the field who thrills every time I hear you testify of the Book of Mormon, an honest and enduring thank you." [^15]

Within the councils of the Church, President Benson had been a persistent advocate of making the Book of Mormon the focal point of proselyting. [^16] The Book of Mormon, he taught, was compiled by those who foresaw the latter days and who abridged centuries of records, selecting events, stories, and speeches that would be most helpful to Saints of the latter days. It would bring men to Christ; it would expose the enemies of Christ; it would testify that Joseph Smith was a prophet. And in a troubled world filled with uncertainty, it bore another witness of the Savior and His mission.

President Benson had been equally emphatic with members of his own family. He often wrote exhorting them to study the Book of Mormon daily in their homes. One letter to a grandson was typical: "Be sure you read the Book of Mormon each day, if you can. Grandma and I have just started reading it together again. We just finished First Nephi this morning. It is a great book for our time. The Prophets saw our day and they gave us the counsel which they felt we would need." [^17] He and Flora set the standard by following their own counsel; in addition, each month they sent dozens of copies of the Book of Mormon, with their photograph and personal testimony, to be used in missionary work.

In a meeting of the General Authorities in March 1986, President Benson explained that he felt moved upon, in the same way President Lorenzo Snow had felt moved upon about tithing, to preach the Book of Mormon. He asked the Brethren to reread the book before April conference.

It was at that April 1986 general conference that President Benson took his Book of Mormon challenge to the entire Church. In his first address to the general membership as president of the Church, he admonished the Saints to cleanse the inner vessel by being morally clean, by conquering pride, and by reading the Book of Mormon. "Watchmen—what of the night? We must respond by saying that all is not well in Zion. As Moroni counseled, we must cleanse the inner vessel, beginning first with ourselves, then with our families, and finally with the Church," he counseled. And he proclaimed that the Book of Mormon is a key in doing so. "We can do it," he reiterated. "I know we can." [^18]

In his second address to the general membership, this one during the Solemn Assembly in which he was sustained the thirteenth president of the Church, he emotionally thanked those who had sustained him and then spoke from the heart, declaring, "I have been aware of those who preceded me in this office as president of the Church. I have felt very keenly my own dependence upon the Lord and the absolute necessity of relying upon Him for His direction in the conduct of the affairs of the Church." He then made a personal plea: "If there be any division among us, let us set aside anything of this kind and join ranks in the great responsibility to move forward the work of the Lord. If there be those who have become disaffected, we reach out to you . . . and stand ready to assist and welcome you back in full fellowship and activity in the Church."

Then he put in context his pleadings about the Book of Mormon: "The Lord inspired His servant Lorenzo Snow to reemphasize the principle of tithing to redeem the Church from financial bondage. . . . Now, in our day, the Lord has revealed the need to reemphasize the Book of Mormon."

And he bore powerful testimony and left an unmistakable blessing on the people: "I want you to know that I know that Christ is at the helm. This is His world. This is His Church. His purposes will be fulfilled. . . . I invoke my blessing upon the Latter-day Saints and upon good people everywhere. I bless you with increased discernment to judge between Christ and anti-Christ. I bless you with increased power to do good and to resist evil. I bless you with increased understanding of the Book of Mormon. I promise you that from this moment forward, if we will daily sup from its pages and abide by its precepts, God will pour out upon each child of Zion and the Church a blessing hitherto unknown—and we will plead to the Lord that He will begin to lift the condemnation—the scourge and judgment." [^19]

Saints around the world took President Benson's admonition about the Book of Mormon to heart. Seminary and institute classes made reading the Book of Mormon a project; stake organizations emphasized it in training seminars; bishops inaugurated reading programs in their wards. And, judging from hundreds of letters he received from children and adults alike, many families began reading it regularly at home.

Everywhere he went, President Benson talked about the Book of Mormon—at missionary and stake conferences, at regional conferences, in meetings with the Brethren. Imagine the good that would come, he said, if the entire church turned its attention to the Book of Mormon. His message was taken seriously. In the calendar year 1986 over 3 million copies of the Book of Mormon were sold. More copies of the English version (1,693,000) were sold that year than during the years 1982, 1983, and 1984 combined (1,467,000). Nearly 700,000 more English copies of the book were sold in 1986 than the year previous. [^20]

A Spanish ward in the Glendale California Stake placed advertisements offering complimentary copies of the Book of Mormon to those who requested them. Of those who responded to the ad, over 80 percent were baptized. Missionaries in the Florida Tallahassee Mission placed more copies of the book than ever before, and in May 1986 the mission had its best baptizing month in two years. In November 1986 missionaries in the Puerto Rico San Juan Mission placed more copies of the Book of Mormon than were placed before and had more convert baptisms than in any previous November. [^21]

Seminaries and institutes throughout southern California launched a "We Have Met the Challenge" program, referring to President Benson's challenge to read the Book of Mormon daily. All who met the challenge—some 5,000 young people—were invited to a special fireside with the prophet on February 8, 1987, in the Anaheim Convention Center.

In October 1986 general conference, President Benson again urged members to launch a lifelong study of the Book of Mormon. He promised, "It is not just that the Book of Mormon teaches us truth, though it indeed does that. It is not just that it bears testimony of Christ, though it indeed does that, too. . . . There is a power in the book which will begin to flow into your lives the moment you begin a serious study of the book." [^22]

The Brethren also began to reflect the prophet's counsel in their sermons. In April 1987 general conference, one after another of the General Authorities used the Book of Mormon as their text. When Elder L. Tom Perry stood to speak he began, "President, I'm starting to receive the distinct impression that we've been listening to you. I, too, will take my text from the Book of Mormon." [^23]

As he traveled throughout the United States, President Benson visited as many Church historic sites as he could manage.

In March 1986 he and Sister Benson participated in the groundbreaking of the Hiram Branch meetinghouse in Ohio at the site of the historic John Johnson home. While there they visited the Kirtland Temple, where they were hosted by members of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints. During brief services in the temple, President Benson was invited to offer a prayer, which he did in a manner that visibly affected the group.

Then they went to the Whitney Store, where President Benson addressed some seventy individuals, many of them seated in the room where the School of the Prophets was held. This meeting commemorated the final steps in the organization of the first First Presidency on March 18, 1833. Here President Benson's extemporaneous remarks centered on missionary work. Stating that only one-third of the young men of missionary age were serving missions, he said, "This is not enough. Here in this sacred room, I know the Lord expects more of us." [^24]

Only weeks after his visit, a fire destroyed the Kirtland Stake Center. The mayor of Kirtland wrote President Benson, "While one type of flame consumed your dwelling, please be assured that another flame, one of renewal, burns even brighter in Kirtland." Immediately offers came from members and nonmembers in the community to help rebuild the church. [^25]

In August 1986, President Benson visited three sites central to the Restoration. Accompanied by Sister Benson, he toured the Sacred Grove, the Hill Cumorah, and the Peter Whitmer farm.

Two hundred missionaries from the New York Rochester Mission waited quietly in the Sacred Grove for the Bensons to arrive and stood as they walked into the clearing. President Benson's words took on additional meaning as he spoke from that place. "You're here among the trees where, except for the resurrection of the Master, the greatest demonstration of the power of God took place," he said with emotion. As he spoke, others visiting the grove recognized his voice echoing through the trees and were thrilled to find the prophet there. By the time he finished, a large group had gathered, and they sang "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet" as he and Sister Benson left. Parents hoisted their young children on their shoulders for a better view of the prophet.

That evening visitors to the Hill Cumorah Pageant were surprised when the Bensons arrived, and tens of thousands stood, breaking into thunderous applause as they walked past. The next morning, Sunday, he addressed several thousand Saints gathered on the slopes of the Hill Cumorah. People sat on benches, lawn chairs, and blankets to hear him. Standing a short distance from the hill where Joseph Smith received the gold plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated, President Benson concluded his remarks, "I bear my witness that the Book of Mormon is verily true. I know this as I know I live."

As with previous prophets, one of President Benson's primary areas of focus was missionary work. Few subjects affected him more emotionally. For years he had gone to great lengths to attend the farewells and homecomings of family members serving as missionaries or mission presidents. And as president of the Church, he singled out missionaries wherever he went.

President Benson not only preached missionary work and the Book of Mormon to others, but he led the way with his individual effort. On a flight to Honolulu, for example, he asked five flight attendants if they would care to receive a copy of the Book of Mormon. All agreed. This was a frequent practice of his. In fact, he sent dozens of copies of the Book of Mormon monthly—to people he met while traveling, to national and world leaders, to literally anyone who came to mind. When a former president of the national Farm Bureau, a nonmember, spoke at a Church fireside in Illinois about his "good friend" Ezra Taft Benson, he admitted having three copies of the Book of Mormon—each a gift from Ezra Taft Benson.

On one occasion a son-in-law introduced President Benson to two prominent men, one of them a former president of Blue Cross who was now attending divinity school. President Benson recorded afterwards, "I had great opportunity to teach these men the gospel and speak frankly to them. I felt it was time well spent and they left in good spirits with copies of the Book of Mormon and my testimony ringing in their ears." Later the same day he met with other nonmembers, and he concluded his journal entry, "It has been a great missionary day for the Church. The Lord be praised."

After meeting with President Benson two journalists, both nonmembers, remarked that it had been one of the greatest experiences of their lives. One of the men had met President Benson previously, but he remarked that something was different about him. An LDS friend explained that the mantle of the prophet had fallen on President Benson, that he was the Lord's prophet to the entire world, not just the Latter-day Saints. The nonmember replied, "You don't have to convince me of that." [^26]

At the seminar for new mission presidents in June 1986, President Benson delivered a powerful address that subdued yet filled the congregation of leaders with the knowledge they were hearing from a prophet of God. He deviated from his prepared text and in a voice full of emotion said, "How I wish I were going with you!" Then he pled with the presidents to let the Spirit guide them, to love their missionaries, and to put the Book of Mormon at the center of missionary work. He promised there would be more and better converts in every mission if missionaries would use the Book of Mormon as the great converter. [^27]

President Benson also had a stirring effect on missionaries. While at the Missionary Training Center in Provo for the mission presidents' seminar, he and President Hinckley held an impromptu devotional with the missionaries. One young man wrote his parents about the experience: "President Benson . . . is a glorious man. He spoke to us and everyone was crying. He said it was the most inspiring sight he had seen, 1200 missionaries preparing for the most important work we can do. Three times he said he wished he could go with us. I love him and know that he is truly chosen of God." [^28]

One missionary wrote to tell President Benson that he had met a nonmember who had responded warmly when the missionaries told him the name of the Church they were representing. "I'm not a member of your church," the man said, "but I will always have the greatest amount of respect and admiration for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and its people." Questioned further, the man explained that he had escorted Ezra Taft Benson when, as Secretary of Agriculture, he and Flora visited Hawaii. The missionary told the man that former-Secretary Benson had been an apostle then, but was now president of the Church. The man replied, "I knew there was something special about Mr. Benson the moment I met him." Upon hearing the story, President Benson sent this missionary a personally inscribed Book of Mormon to give the investigator. [^29]

After attending a sacrament meeting in Salt Lake City, President Benson paused on his way out to shake hands with the local missionaries. Stopping and holding the hands of one elder (who, unbeknownst to President Benson, had joined the Church and entered the mission field amid persecution from his family), he looked into his eyes and said softly, "Remember, elder, this is the greatest work in all the world. I love this work. If you have the Spirit, you can teach. When you teach, you convert. The Lord will bless you. My wife went on a mission. And see her smiling." Tears streamed down the missionary's face as the prophet blessed him with his personal testimony. The missionary later explained, "As President Benson approached us, my heart burned. His glowing, happy face filled our hearts with peace and love. He was so happy to see us! He took our hands in his and held them tight. . . . Never have I felt such penetrating power from a man. Not since my conversion have I felt so drained by the Spirit. I will never forget it." [^30]

Wherever he went, President Benson was overwhelmed by the outpouring of love from the Saints. During Christmas 1986, as thousands of cards streamed in, he took armfuls home each night to share with Flora. Often his eyes filled with tears as the stacks were brought in to him. "What can we do for these wonderful people?" he would ask.

Many of the President's remarks were directed to youth. He loved children, and he would often look out on congregations where there were many children and say, "Zion is growing!" In regional conferences he delighted congregations by singing, a capella, "I Am a Mormon Boy." With all the power he could muster, he proclaimed that this was the rising generation, and while the Lord expected much, He had given much. He promised BYU graduates in April 1986 that they need never feel embarrassed among "people who count, real men and women, because you live according to the . . . ideals of the Church." [^31]

On another occasion he summarized his deep feelings about the role of the youth of the Church: "God has saved for the final inning some of His strongest and most valiant children, who will help bear off the kingdom triumphantly. That is where you come in, for you are the generation that must be prepared to meet your God. . . . Make no mistake about it—you are a marked generation. There has never been more expected of the faithful in such a short period of time than there is of us." [^32]

At the general priesthood session in April 1986, President Benson directed his remarks to young men and closed with his blessing: "My young men of the Aaronic Priesthood, how I love you, how I respect you, how I pray for you. Remember the counsel I have given you tonight. It is what the Lord would have you hear now—today."

Six months later, at the general women's meeting, held September 27, he spoke to young women and again revealed his deep love for youth: "How I love and respect you! How I pray for you! How my hope abounds in you! . . . Remember who you are and the divine heritage that is yours—you are literally the royal daughters of our Father in Heaven. O 'youth of the noble birthright,' with all my heart I say, 'Carry on, carry on, carry on!'" Both addresses were reprinted in pamphlet form for distribution throughout the Church. [^33]

President Benson's health remained fairly good. The pace was strenuous for a man in his late eighties, but some concerns became evident as he occasionally suffered from dizzy spells. One day in his office he lost his balance and fell on the carpet. He was unhurt, but after checking his blood pressure, doctors suggested he go home and rest.

In the weeks following conference in October 1986, he inaugurated a new president at Ricks College; spoke and offered the dedicatory prayer at the first session of the Denver Temple dedication; and addressed a regional conference in Michigan. A storm forced him to miss a connecting flight home from Michigan, so he sat in an uncomfortable airport chair for two hours, his right leg propped on his briefcase, waiting for the next flight to Salt Lake City. He was very disappointed, though, when weakness prevented his attending a regional conference in Boise, Idaho. Elder Marvin J. Ashton presided at the conference and explained that "anxious exhaustion" had prohibited the prophet's attending. Just four days later President Benson entered LDS Hospital for implantation of a pacemaker.

When he finally emerged from the recovery room and was wheeled back to his room, Sister Benson walked over to him and asked if she could kiss him. When the doctor said yes, she leaned over and gave her husband a gentle kiss. "T," she said, "I was so worried about you. I've been praying for you." It was as though they had been separated for weeks.

The Sunday after surgery, President Benson insisted on attending church, though his physician advised against it. It took calls from his children to persuade him otherwise. Only five days after the operation he returned to work, but the first day back he left after a few hours. He was very tired and finally admitted he had better be more prudent in his activities. It was just ten days after surgery, however, that he addressed two regional conferences in the Salt Lake Tabernacle.

That President Benson would speak out on topics related to the family perhaps came as no surprise to those who had followed his addresses over the years. This was the president of a church that was built around the family unit, a church whose previous presidents had preached and popularized such phrases as "no other success in life can compensate for failure in the home." And this was a man whose wife had devoted herself exclusively to creating a gospel-centered home and rearing faithful children. Having a family united for eternity had become the central peg around which the Benson family culture revolved.

It was perhaps fitting that President and Sister Benson celebrated their sixtieth wedding anniversary, on September 10, 1986, during his first year as president of the Church. The event drew churchwide attention to their relationship. The month before, at a family gathering in Washington honoring his eighty-seventh birthday, a representative from Church Public Communications had asked him the secret to his long, happy life. Before he could answer, Sister Benson said, teasingly but with meaning, "He has a good wife." President Benson referred to their wedding day—September 10, 1926—as "the day life began." For thirty years she had worn daily a golden pendant her husband gave her that was inscribed, "To Flora, For constant help, devotion and inspiration. Lovingly, T, 1926-56 Christmas."

Commentator Paul Harvey, on his nationally syndicated radio program, noted the Benson's anniversary and said, "I never see them together that they're not holding hands." [^34]

President Benson was so grateful for Flora and so proud of her. He wanted her to travel with him whenever possible, and he was delighted when she could participate. Her very presence provided him with strength and comfort. And she was proud of him. She once turned to him and said, "When I was a little girl, I used to wonder if I would ever meet the prophet." He immediately replied, "Did you ever imagine you would have to live with him?"

Occasionally, Sister Benson spoke extemporaneously in meetings and bore her testimony. More often she recited a favorite Edgar A. Guest poem, "Home," which begins,

It takes a heap o'livin' in a house t'make it home,

A heap o'sun an' shadder, an'ye sometimes have t' roam

Afore ye really 'preciate the things ye lef' behind,

An' hunger fer 'em somehow, with 'em allus on yer mind. . . .

Ye've got t'sing an'dance fer years, ye've got t' romp an' play,

An' learn t'love the things ye have by usin' 'em each day.

Then she would blow the audience a kiss. After she had delivered a particularly moving rendition in one regional conference, President Benson began his remarks, "What can a mere man do after that?" Even in advanced age, Sister Benson was still spunky and ever ready with an encouraging word and sometimes a quip. One of her favorite phrases was, "The Lord bless you and the devil miss you."

Those who studied Sister Benson's life found there was much to admire. The University of Utah chapter of Lambda Delta Sigma named her their Woman of the Year in 1986.

President and Sister Benson still took time for family—missionary farewells and homecomings, lunch with family members between sessions at conference time, and family gatherings afterwards. When they were in town, they regularly had Sunday dinner at Mark and Lela's home. He spoke at the missionary homecomings of his grandchildren; attended his grandsons' Eagle Scout Courts of Honor; while in California to install a new presidency of the Los Angeles Temple, visited the California Anaheim Mission where his grandson, David Madsen, was serving; and made a surprise appearance at the August 1986 BYU commencement to honor his graduating grandson, Robert Walker. BYU President Jeffrey Holland abbreviated his own address to give President Benson time to speak, saying, "I feel justified in this shift of speakers because it comes under the heading in your program of President's Greeting—we just didn't tell you which president." The audience was delighted. [^35]

One granddaughter lived with her grandparents during much of his first eighteen months as president, and at their request often traveled with them to assist them and attend to their personal needs. And she observed firsthand her grandparents at home—their dates to an ice cream parlor; sitting on the couch and holding hands as they reminisced, sang, and laughed together; the warm visits they had with the home teachers and others who came calling.

President Benson took on almost heroic proportions to his grandchildren, who saw in him the embodiment of everything they had been taught. A grandson, then working in the Canadian Parliament, wrote, "Every day I am faced with having to make decisions on various social programs that have become overrun by fraud. . . . I am fortunate to be able to turn to your books . . . and discover the correct ideology that should be implemented." A granddaughter wrote her thanks after President Benson had counseled her and her husband regarding a difficult decision. "We asked you what you thought and you said, 'Pray about it. I have faith that you will make the right decision.' Your faith in us gave us extra confidence." [^36]

It was the family ties, the penetrating links with his heritage, that made the restoration of a four-story gristmill near Tooele, Utah, built by his great-grandfather Ezra T. Benson, all the more meaningful. [^37]

President Benson continued to feel strongly that children and youth needed full-time mothers. During an address in July 1986 at the Provo Freedom Festival in which he discussed the Founding Fathers and the Constitution, he commented upon a mother's responsibility to her children. That portion of his address was omitted from press reports. Afterwards he noted in his journal, "I don't know whether it was . . . not wanting to stir up controversy that the statement which I made that mothers should be full-time mothers in the home was not mentioned. I feel very deeply regarding this question, and expect to speak on it later."

That time came on February 22, 1987, when during a churchwide fireside for parents, broadcast via satellite, he delivered a clear message on the role of mothers. Quoting three of his predecessors—Brigham Young, David O. McKay, and Spencer W. Kimball—his statements left little doubt. In a forthright manner, President Benson counseled couples to not postpone having children and to not limit their families for selfish reasons. While acknowledging that some women find themselves in unusual circumstances wherein they are required to work, these "instances are the exception, not the rule." And he placed the responsibility squarely upon fathers to provide adequately for their families so mothers weren't forced to work. "The Lord clearly defined the roles of mothers and fathers in providing for and rearing a righteous posterity," he said. "In the beginning, Adam—not Eve—was instructed to earn the bread by the sweat of his brow. Contrary to conventional wisdom, a mother's calling is in the home, not the marketplace."

Quoting President Kimball, he added: "'Too many mothers work away from home to furnish sweaters and music lessons and trips and fun for their children. Too many women spend their time in socializing, in politicking, in public services when they should be home to teach and train and receive and love their children into security.' . . . President Kimball spoke the truth. His words are prophetic. Mothers in Zion, your God-given roles are so vital to your own exaltation and to the salvation and exaltation of your family. A child needs a mother more than all the things money can buy. . . . Among the greatest concerns in our society are the millions of latchkey children who come home daily to empty houses unsupervised by working parents." Then he added: "Mothers, this kind of heavenly, motherly teaching takes time—lots of time. It cannot be done effectively part time. It must be done all the time in order to save and exalt your children."

President Benson's final comments were a tribute to his wife, who was a prime example of what he admonished: "I would be remiss if I did not express my love and eternal gratitude for my sweetheart and companion and the mother of our six children. Her devotion to motherhood has blessed me and our family beyond words of expression. She has been a marvelous mother, completely and happily devoting her life and her mission to her family. How grateful I am for Flora!" [^38]

The response to the address was as varied as it was volatile. Thousands of women, grateful for the assurance that their role as mothers and homemakers needn't relegate them to a lower social status, were relieved to have the prophet teach that motherhood is the most critical, yet ennobling role a woman can fill. President Benson received hundreds of letters from women expressing their feelings that having mother at home leads to strong, gospel-centered families. One woman wrote, in what was a typical response, "It has seemed to me that there has been some hesitancy among some of our leaders to fervently declare this role, particularly as it relates to the responsibility of women. . . . I am pleased that now we all know that the mission and message of the Church will not be changed." Another mother said she felt as extinct as a dinosaur in today's society, but that the prophet's message had filled her with "love, hope and courage to continue on." She added, "It's so important to know that you're aware of our needs." [^39]

There were also those who felt that President Benson was out of touch with their needs—and with the times. Telephone calls came into the Church Office Building from women seeking clarification and from others expressing concern about his message.

But this message was nothing new—from President Benson or his predecessors. He had preached the virtue of full-time motherhood for decades. [^40] His motivation was simple. He was convinced that, in the main, children whose parents did not make them their priority were at a great disadvantage in their chance for spiritual and emotional survival. There was no way to say it any clearer, no way to cushion his remarks. His message was not a statement of new policy, but rather a restatement of his predecessors' views. He felt so strongly about the message that it was reprinted in pamphlet form for distribution churchwide through the home teaching program.

President Benson's address received national attention, including mention on Paul Harvey's radio broadcast on April 2, 1987. Mr. Harvey reported the events in his distinctive way: "The President of the Mormon Church, Ezra Taft Benson, says mothers should stay home and care for their children. This administrative guideline from the head of the Church is being resisted because 40 percent of the Church's female members are already in the work force. . . . One of them says it will be easier to deal with the guilt than to live without the income. Nothing they can do about this. President Benson's three predecessors have all said the same thing: that mothers should stay home and care for their children. Benson is just reiterating long-held Church doctrine—long held and increasingly ignored. There's no known connection, but the Great Salt Lake is creeping up higher and higher . . . record high and going higher."

It was providential, and certainly fitting, that President Benson's presidency coincided with the celebration to commemorate the bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution. Certainly a love of country had been a primary focus of his life. He was, in fact, still recognized as a patriot of international stature, and among many of the nation's leaders he was regarded as a patriotic hero, and one of the greatest defenders of the U.S. Constitution. Many of those in U.S. political circles had been schooled on his books and philosophies and considered him one of their formative tutors. A special consultant to President Reagan explained, "I know of no American, or citizen of the world for that matter, who has been more forceful in defense of the Constitution than has President Benson. His record on this, both as a public servant and as a religious leader, is widely known and respected. He has devoted his life to this grand document and its principles." A senior policy adviser to President Reagan declared, "Ezra Taft Benson has always been a great hero of mine. He speaks the truth more purely and courageously than any man I have ever known." Senator Steve Symms of Idaho remarked, "When I first met Ezra Taft Benson, I felt I was talking to one of the Founding Fathers. He has that timbre. It's just too bad he wasn't president of this country. That's what this country needed—a tough guy who understands the Constitution. He gave people who believe in the constitution some credibility when he served in the Cabinet." [^41]

President Benson's reputation as a champion of freedom was reemphasized on June 19, 1986, when the Freedoms Foundation at Valley Forge named him the recipient of their Service-to-Freedom Award, the highest honor the foundation bestows. President Benson was only the third person to receive the award (with the other recipients being President Ronald Reagan and Senator Strom Thurmond). [^42] (Less than a year earlier he had another high honor as an outgrowth of his distinguished agricultural service. On July 28, 1986, he became only the second recipient of the Service to American Agriculture Award, given by the National Association of County Agricultural Agents in Colorado Springs.)

On September 16, 1986, the largest devotional audience in BYU's history heard President Benson deliver an address highlighting the bicentennial celebration of the U.S. Constitution. In a stirring address entitled "The Constitution: A Heavenly Banner," he outlined his feelings about government, beginning at the beginning—with the war in heaven and the principle of agency: "The central issue in that council, then, was: Shall the children of God have untrammeled agency to choose the course they should follow, whether good or evil, or shall they be coerced and forced to be obedient? . . . The war that began in heaven is not yet over. The conflict continues on the battlefield of mortality. And one of Lucifer's primary strategies has been to restrict our agency through the power of earthly governments."

The Constitution of the United States, President Benson continued, quoting Wilford Woodruff, was raised up by the best spirits the Lord could find on the face of the earth. "What the framers did, under the inspiration of God, was to draft a document that merited the approval of God Himself." But a liberal interpretation of the Constitution, he explained, had led to an erosion of freedom. Then he quoted Brigham Young: "We are fast approaching that moment prophesied by Joseph Smith when he said: 'Even this nation will be on the very verge of crumbling to pieces and tumbling to the ground, and when the Constitution is upon the brink of ruin, this people will be the staff upon which the nation shall lean, and they shall bear the Constitution away from the very verge of destruction.'"

President Benson outlined four steps of preparation to meet the challenge. First, the Saints must be righteous; second, they must understand the principles of the Constitution and abide by them; third, they should participate in civic affairs; and fourth, they must exercise influence by voting. He then declared: "I have faith that the Constitution will be saved as prophesied by Joseph Smith. . . . It will be saved by the citizens of this nation who love and cherish freedom. It will be saved by enlightened . . . men and women who will subscribe to and abide by the principles of the Constitution. . . . It may cost us our blood before we are through. It is my conviction, however, that when the Lord comes, the Stars and Stripes will be floating on the breeze over this people." [^43]

On September 26, 1986, Senator Steve Symms placed the address in the Congressional Record, and Senator Orrin Hatch sent a copy to each member of Congress. Deseret Book reprinted the message in pamphlet form, and within just a few days the first printing had sold out. The feedback from many who heard or read the talk was very favorable. For example, Senator Jesse Helms wrote: "Senator Hatch has favored me with a copy of your remarkable book, The Constitution: A Heavenly Banner. It is an extraordinary assessment by an extraordinary American. . . . As you know, you are at the top of the list of our nation's leaders whom I have long admired and respected." [^44]

In addition, as President Benson spoke on the Book of Mormon throughout the Church, he typically tied its message to the preservation of freedom: "And our nation will continue to degenerate unless we read and heed the words of the God of this land, Jesus Christ, and quit building up and upholding the secret combinations which the Book of Mormon tells us proved the downfall of both previous American civilizations." [^45]

In January 1987 the First Presidency restated the Church's view that the Constitution is an inspired document, and encouraged Americans to take advantage of the bicentennial celebration: "We encourage Latter-day Saints throughout the nation to familiarize themselves with the Constitution. They should focus attention on it by reading and studying it. They should ponder the blessings that come through it. They should recommit themselves to its principles and be prepared to defend it and the freedom it provides." [^46]

From the time he received the mantle of the prophet, President Benson repeatedly emphasized his intention to carry forth the threefold mission of the Church that the Lord, through President Kimball, had outlined. He did so by making missionary work a high priority and by being alert to his personal missionary opportunities; by pleading with members to read and study the Book of Mormon; and by carrying forth the Church's program of building temples. When they weren't traveling, he and Sister Benson went to the temple nearly every Friday morning. Temple workers related that the effect of having the prophet and his wife participate in a session was electrifying to the patrons and did more to emphasize the importance of temple work than a hundred sermons on the subject.

In his concluding testimony in the April 1987 general conference, President Benson again centered his remarks on the Book of Mormon, this time calling the Doctrine and Covenants the "binding link" between that book and the Restoration. He said that the Book of Mormon was "the keystone of our religion" and the Doctrine and Covenants "the capstone with continuing revelation." He concluded this discourse, which some believed would be hailed as a doctrinal masterpiece, by leaving another powerful blessing upon the Latter-day Saints and by focusing on all three of the Church's objectives: "I bless you with added power to endure in righteousness amidst the growing onslaught of wickedness. I bless you that as you more diligently study modern revelation on gospel subjects, your power to teach and preach will be magnified, and you will so move the cause of Zion that added numbers will enter into the house of the Lord as well as the mission field. I bless you with increased desire to flood the earth with the Book of Mormon, to gather out from the world the elect of God who are yearning for the truth. . . . I promise you that, with increased attendance in the temples of our God, you shall receive increased personal revelation to bless your life." [^47]

Like prophets from time immemorial, President Benson frequently bore his personal witness of the Savior, as in the December 1986 First Presidency Christmas fireside: "Men and women who turn their lives over to God will discover that He can make a lot more out of their lives than they can. He can deepen their joys, expand their vision, quicken their minds, strengthen their muscles, lift their spirits, multiply their blessings, increase their opportunities, comfort their souls, raise up friends and pour out peace. Whoever will lose his life in the service of God will find eternal peace." [^48]

He spoke as a prophet. But he also spoke as a man who had adhered to that counsel throughout his life.

When Ezra Taft Benson was inducted into the Agricultural Hall of Fame, the man who made the introduction paraphrased a statement by Winston Churchill during a serious stage of World War II—that there were some who must work, and some who must fight, and some who must pray. It was said of President Benson, "We have in him a unique man who does all three."

President Gordon B. Hinckley, in the first general conference held after President Benson's ordination as president of the Church, said of the new prophet: "I give you my testimony that it is the Lord who selected Ezra Taft Benson to become a member of the Council of the Twelve almost forty-three years ago. It is the Lord who over these years has tested and disciplined him, schooled and prepared him. . . . As one who knows him and who stands at his side, I bear witness that he is a man of faith, of tested leadership, of profound love for the Lord and His work, of love for the sons and daughters of God everywhere. He is a man of proven capacity, who has been tempered in the Refiner's fire." [^49]

President Thomas S. Monson summarized the singleness of Ezra Taft Benson's heart and the contribution he would make to the kingdom of God: "President Benson has the capacity to bring men and women back to the straight and narrow pathway. He would have made a great wagonmaster in bringing Saints across the plains. He wouldn't have let them wander to the gold fields of California, and he wouldn't have let them stop and plant for two or three seasons in the lush, rich soil of Iowa. He knows how to say, 'Move on, wagon train.' He would have brought them to the valleys of the mountains successfully.

"Spirituality will be the main contribution and theme of his administration. That spirituality will lead to a greater study of the Book of Mormon. It will lead to more missionary and temple work. It will lead to greater Christian service. And it will lead to an holier people."

It has been said that there is nothing as motivating as to know that yours is a worthy cause. Throughout his life, Ezra Taft Benson has indeed been motivated by worthy causes. His loyalties to God, to his family, and to his country have become legendary. His life has been an exercise in patience and endurance; an example of integrity, conviction, and principle; a model of faith and implicit trust in the Lord. Like those prophets who have preceded him, under his direction the work of the Lord moves forward. And through him, for a season, the Lord communicates with and guides His church.

Ezra Taft Benson's motivations have been, throughout his life, directed by purpose, by a higher power. At the basis of his loyalties and beliefs is devotion to the most worthy of causes—the gospel of Jesus Christ, and all that it contains. Such is the life of a remarkable man—a prophet, patriarch, and patriot. Such is the life of Ezra Taft Benson.

This chapter relies heavily upon interviews with members of the General Authorities, including Ezra Taft Benson, Gordon B. Hinckley, Thomas S. Monson, Boyd K. Packer, Marvin J. Ashton, Neal A. Maxwell, Russell M. Nelson, Dallin H. Oaks, M. Russell Ballard, Robert L. Backman, Hugh W. Pinnock, Hartman Rector, Jr., and Francis M. Gibbons. Interviews with Gary Gillespie were particularly helpful, as well as numerous interviews with members of the Benson family and with Senator Steve Symms, Senator Orrin Hatch, Stephen Studdert, and Ronald Mann.

See also "President Ezra Taft Benson: Ordained Thirteenth President of the Church," Ensign, December 1985, pp. 2-7, and "Pres. Benson Called to Lead Church," Church News, November 17, 1985, p. 3.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Spencer W. Kimball, "We Thank Thee, O God, for a Prophet," Ensign, January 1973, p. 33.
[^2] Neal A. Maxwell to ETB, December 18, 1985.
[^3] David B. Haight, "A Prophet Chosen of the Lord," Ensign, May 1986, p. 9.
[^4] Statement by President Benson at press conference announcing reorganization of the First Presidency, November 11, 1985. See also "President Ezra Taft Benson Ordained Thirteenth President of the Church," Ensign, December 1985, pp. 2-5.
[^5] See Joseph B. Wirthlin to ETB, November 14, 1985; David Horowitz to ETB, November 12, 1985; J. Willard Marriott, Jr., to ETB, November 14, 1985; Ronald Reagan to ETB, November 13, 1985.
[^6] Mark A. Benson to his children, November 14, 1985.
[^7] Dr. W. E. Hess to Gary Gillespie, November 13, 1986.
[^8] See "Stake Seventies Quorums Discontinued," Ensign, November 1986, p. 97; also Church News, September 12, 1986, p. 24.
[^9] Church News, December 22, 1985.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] See ETB to Ronald Reagan, January 6, 1986; Ensign, March 1986, p. 85.
[^12] Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, February 6, 1986.
[^13] See "L.D.S. Scripture Citation Index," comp. Donald H. Howard, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.
[^14] See Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon Is the Word of God," Ensign, May 1975, pp. 63-65.
[^15] Mark L. McConkie to ETB, April 26, 1985.
[^16] See, for example, ETB to Bruce R. McConkie, January 23, 1985.
[^17] ETB to Stephen Reed Benson, April 21, 1981.
[^18] Ezra Taft Benson, "Cleansing the Inner Vessel," Ensign, May 1986, pp. 4-7.
[^19] Ezra Taft Benson, "A Sacred Responsibility," Ensign, May 1986, pp. 77-78.
[^20] See "Notes to Printing Advisory Committee," undated, Ezra Taft Benson personal files; also 1987 Church Almanac (Salt Lake City: Deseret News, 1986), p. 146.
[^21] See Church News, July 13, 1986, p. 3.
[^22] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon—Keystone of Our Religion," Ensign, November 1986, pp. 4-7.
[^23] L. Tom Perry, "United in Building the Kingdom of God," Ensign, May 1987, p. 33.
[^24] See "Prophet Walks Historic Paths During Ohio Visit," Church News, March 30, 1986, pp. 3-4; also Deseret News, March 23, 1986.
[^25] Ezra Taft Benson personal journal, May 21, 1986.
[^26] Gary Handy to ETB, May 8, 1986.
[^27] See Ezra Taft Benson, "My Challenges to Mission Presidents," Mission Presidents' Conference, June 25, 1986; also Church News, July 6, 1986.
[^28] Charlene Holmstrom to ETB, June 30, 1986.
[^29] Darin A. Stubbs to ETB, November 15, 1985.
[^30] Aaron C. Wilhelm to Lloyd V. Owen, February 23, 1987. Copy in Ezra Taft Benson's files.
[^31] Church News, April 27, 1986.
[^32] Ezra Taft Benson, "In His Steps," February 8, 1987, address delivered in Anaheim, California.
[^33] See "To the Youth of the Noble Birthright," Ensign, May 1986; also "To the Young Women of the Church," Ensign, November 1986, pp. 81-85.
[^34] As reported in the Church News, September 28, 1986.
[^35] Church News, August 24, 1986, pp. 3-4.
[^36] Robert Benson Walker to ETB, February 10, 1986; Stephanie and David Young to ETB, August 4, 1986.
[^37] See Church News, July 20, 1986.
[^38] Ezra Taft Benson, "To the Mothers in Zion," address delivered at Churchwide Parents Fireside, February 22, 1987, published in pamphlet form by the Church.
[^39] Nadine D. Nelson to ETB, February 23, 1987; Christine M. Jeppesen to ETB, February 25, 1987.
[^40] See, for example, Ezra Taft Benson, "Our Homes Are Divinely Ordained," Improvement Era 52 (May 1949): 278.
[^41] Flora Parker interview with Senator Steve Symms, September 19, 1986; Stephen Studdert memo, June 8, 1987; also David Cannon to Flora Parker, May 4, 1987.
[^42] "Foundation Commends President Benson," Church News, June 22, 1986, p. 6; Freedoms Foundation press release, June 13, 1986; Salt Lake Tribune, June 20, 1986, p. 10A.
[^43] This and subsequent quotations from this address are published in pamphlet form in Ezra Taft Benson, The Constitution: A Heavenly Banner (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1986).
[^44] Jesse Helms to ETB, September 29, 1986.
[^45] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon Is the Word of God."
[^46] See First Presidency Statement, January 15, 1987; see also Church News, January 31, 1987, p. 11.
[^47] Ezra Taft Benson, "The Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants," Ensign, May 1987, p. 85.
[^48] Church News, December 14, 1986.
[^49] 49. Des Moines Register, exact date unknown.
