B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

CHAPTER CLIII

THE CANNON-CAMPBELL CONTEST FOR THE UTAH DELEGATESHIP

FEELING doubtless that in Governor Murray they had one who would go to any limits in political opposition to the people of Utah and the party through which they fought for the right of the majority of the people to control the local government—the People's party—the Liberal party, which for some years had languished in desuetude, suddenly revived in 1880, and determined once more to place a candidate in the field for the office of delegate to congress. The nominating convention was held in the Liberal Institute Building, Salt Lake City, on the 22nd of September. The gathering was large and enthusiastic, also bitter in its denunciations of the Latter-day Saints, their church, and their political organization. Governor Murray was in attendance and delivered what at the time was called a "ringing speech," also a "declaration of war" was made between "the American Republic and Mormon Polygamic Theocracy." [^1] This was the keynote of the convention and of the campaign which followed it.

ALLEN G. CAMPBELL NOMINEE FOR CONGRESS

The convention nominated as its candidate for delegate to congress Mr. Allen G. Campbell, a large mine owner in Beaver county, and quite generally identified with the business interests of the territory. [^2] His anti-"Mormonism" was sufficiently intense to make him quite dependable in carrying out any scheme the Liberal party might consider necessary in pursuance of its policy to destroy in Utah what its leaders called "polygamic theocracy"; and his wealth sufficient to meet the necessary expenses of the contest for the seat at Washington, which, before Mr. Campbell's nomination, was determined upon—for there was no hope that he could be successful in obtaining a majority of the votes in the election. Mr. Campbell was absent in New York at the time of his nomination, and when informed of it at Chicago en route for the west, he was disposed to treat the matter as a joke; but was persuaded by his mining partner, Mr. Cullen—who met him in Chicago, and gave him the information of his nomination—to take the matter seriously and wire from Chicago his acceptance of the nomination. [^3]

3GOVERNOR MURRAY'S ANTI-"MORMON" REPORT

3During the progress of the campaign Governor Murray sent a report of conditions in Utah to the secretary of the interior, the chief purpose of which was to influence public opinion against the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and to add to the pressure brought upon congress by public opinion to pass some one or other of the stringent, anti-"Mormon" measures then pending before that body. The governor's principal plea was that the anti-polygamy laws should be enforced or repealed. In the latter event "the officers of the United States should be recalled, non-Mormons be removed and the country be given over to the Latter-day Saints." Presenting the matter in this alternative form was intended, of course, merely to emphasize the need for the enactment of some measure that would make it easier to prosecute polygamy cases and doubtless also to aid in placing the control of the territory completely in the hands of the political "ringities," headed by the federal officers in Utah; for the recommendations of the anti-"Mormon" crusaders of this period almost invariably included within them such congressional legislation as would take from the people of Utah even the remnant of local self-government left to them by the territorial system under which they lived. Recommendations which, before the close of the year, as already seen, were voiced in the message of the president of the United States to congress.

3The New York Times, reviewing this Murray report on the 11th of October, 1880, said: "Governor Murray only follows in the footsteps of his predecessors when he makes a forcible and formal plea against the enactment of laws against polygamy without enforcing them. * * * The Governor of Utah reiterates the old complaint—he does not suggest any new remedy." The Deseret News' editorial comment on this point was pertinent:

"Governor Murray * * * indulges in some nonsense about the removal of federal officials and non-'Mormons' from Utah, as a necessary sequence of the repeal of the anti-polygamy laws; but every one knows that there were federal officials and non-'Mormons' in Utah before there was any anti-polygamy law, and therefore its repeal would not necessitate their removal nor affect the nature or emoluments of the offices here under the control of the government; they would remain as if no such law had been enacted. We think the repeal of the act of 1862 would be a very wise measure. The passage of that law was a step outside of the constitutional powers of congress, and has been the cause of trouble, vexation and perplexity to the government ever since it was enacted. But if it is to remain on the statute book, no reasonable citizen or official will claim that it should be enforced in any other manner than the usual method of executing the laws of the country. First prove an offense against it, and let the punishment imposed follow conviction. But do not raise a hue and cry against the government for not proceeding in a lawless manner to enforce one of its laws, simply to please a few rampant bigots who want to put down a religious system to which they are opposed."

4One other comment on the report is also worthy of recording here, since it deals with a point urged by the press throughout the country as well as in Governor Murray's report. Referring to "Mormon polygamy" the Governor said that it was a "practice which is punished as criminal in every part of the republic, but flourishes unchecked in Utah."

4"With all the frequent repetitions of this statement," says the News, "it is not true. Our marriage system does not exist in any other part of the United States, therefore it cannot be punished there as criminal. Common bigamy and 'Mormon' plural marriage, as has been repeatedly demonstrated have nothing in common. They are dissimilar and opposite. Bigamy is of the very essence of fraud, is a betrayal of the women who are deceived, and usually involves the desertion of the wife for a union with another, who is not a wife but is deceived into believing that she is. It is not regulated by anything except the passion or other base desire of the criminal who perpetrates the act. The law against it is designed to protect the wife and prevent the fraud. 'Mormon' plural marriage is a contract of a religious nature, entered into with the knowledge of all parties, neither of whom is deceived as to the facts; it involves no desertion and makes no deception. It is governed and controlled by ecclesiastical rules, and is entered into as a matter of conscience. The law against it was framed specially to prohibit and punish a religious ordinance, and was aimed directly and solely against the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as is well known, and not denied by any one but sophists and quibblers." [^4]

ATTEMPT TO DISFRANCHISE THE WOMEN OF UTAH

During the political campaign for the election of delegate to congress an attempt was made by the managers of the Liberal party to disfranchise the women of Utah, who, as detailed in a previous chapter, had been given the elective franchise by act of the governor and territorial legislature. The matter was brought before the supreme court of the territory on a writ of mandamus to compel the registrar of Salt Lake county, R. T. Burton, "to erase and strike off from the list of voters of Salt Lake county made by him, the names of the following persons, viz: Emmeline B. Wells, Maria M. Blythe, and Mrs. A. G. Paddock, * * * and of all women whose names appear on the aforesaid list." The case was heard on demurrer, the defendant alleging that (1) the court had no jurisdiction of the subject of the action; and (2) that neither the petition nor writ of complaint state facts sufficient to constitute cause of action. In argument it was held by counsel for the plaintiff (General Maxwell), respecting the second statement of the demurrer, that the act conferring suffrage upon women, and the registration act, so far as it related to women, were void, and if persons' names were put upon the registration lists without authority of law, it was just as much the duty of the registrars to strike them off as it was to refrain from putting them on; and a writ of mandamus was the proper instrument to compel him to erase them.

The heart of the question was, had the women the right to register and to vote in Utah. The right was attacked on two grounds; the territorial law of 1859 only provided for males and taxpayers to be voters; the law of 1870 had extended the privilege of suffrage to women without requiring them to be taxpayers, hence discrimination; and it was also held in argument that the act did not require a woman to be a "citizen" within the ordinary meaning of that term, since it was sufficient for her to be a voter—so far as citizenship was concerned—if she was the wife, widow, or daughter of a native-born or naturalized citizen—hence discrimination again; and hence the law making these discriminations must be void. The court held that the supreme court of the territory held jurisdiction in the case, but held also that "the validity of the law" which imposed the duty upon the registrar to enter the names of the persons named in the register "cannot be brought into question in a proceeding of this kind." "We find," said the court, "that there is a law on our statute books in reference to registration, compelling the respondent to do what we are asked to compel him to undo. We cannot, for the purpose of this proceeding inquire into its validity. Having satisfied ourselves that the duty required by the statute to be performed has been performed, nothing is left for us to do." [^5]

6The court therefore refused to mandamus the registrar to remove the names of women from the registration lists, and the women voted.

PROMINENT WOMEN OF THE UNITED STATES SUSTAIN THE WOMEN OF UTAH ON SUFFRAGE

It should be noted that in this Utah issue prominent suffrage women in the United States stood by their sisters in Utah who already had what they were contending for in other parts of the Union. The following dispatch was received by Emmeline B. Wells, under date of Sept. 28th, 1880, from Washington.

6"Stand by your guns. Allow no encroachment upon your liberties. No mandamus here.

6[Signed] "BELVA A. LOCKWOOD."

6The Woman's Journal of Oct. 9, 1880, published at Boston, and edited by Lucy Stone, in its editorial on the case said:

7"It is hardly possible that so bold an attempt to disfranchise citizens who have exercised the right to vote for ten years can be accomplished. It would certainly never have been attempted if these citizens had not been Mormons. But the right to suffrage is independent of any such accident or fact, and this [attempt to disfranchise the women of Utah] should be everywhere rebuked as it deserves to be."

THE ELECTION OF GEORGE Q. CANNON

The result of the election was that George Q. Cannon, the People's party nominee, received 18,568 votes, and the Liberal candidate but 1,357 votes. The smallness of this vote was rather humiliating both to Mr. Campbell and the Liberal party, since the party when it had contested the election for delegate to congress several years before, gave the candidate, Mr. Baskin, over 4,500 votes. The small vote in the present election was attributed to the fact that for several years the Liberal party had been practically dead. [^6] The smallness of the vote, however, did not prevent institution of a contest for the seat at Washington; that had been determined upon previous to the election. Mr. Campbell, it appears, had some objections at first to making a contest for the seat at Washington, owing to the very unsatisfactory results at the polls; [^7] but his objections were soon overcome by his party leaders and managers and in due time, namely, December 12th, a protest against the issuance of the certificate to George Q. Cannon was filed with the governor of the territory. The protest recited a number of reasons why the certificate should not be given to the delegate so overwhelmingly victorious at the polls, chief of which was:—that the votes cast for George Q. Cannon were declared to be illegal—votes "legally blank," said the protest; George Q. Cannon, the protest charged, was an unnaturalized alien, "being such" he was not eligible to the office, and therefore "all the votes given for him" were void. Not only was it charged that Mr. Cannon was not naturalized, but it was also held that he was not qualified to be naturalized, since his polygamous relations and his public defense and advocacy of polygamy would disqualify him for making the oath required by law, to the effect that he was "attached to the Constitution of the United States, and well disposed to the good order and happiness of the same." It was assumed that the territorial law granting the elective franchise to women was void; there were more women claiming and exercising the right to vote than the entire vote cast at the late election; "females have voted in large numbers," said the protest, "they are partisans of said Cannon, and it must be taken for granted that they voted for him at the last election." As these votes were illegal, according to the protest, they had vitiated the election by making it possible that "the pretended majority reported for Mr. Cannon" consisted of such illegal votes.

All these questions Governor Murray was urged to pass upon in canvassing the returns of the election; arguments and citations of authorities for such procedure formed part of the protest, thus assuming in advance to defend the executive jurisdiction in the case. [^8] Over against this, however, was the plain and simple fact which overthrew all the sophistry of the special pleading of Judge McBride, and later of Governor Murray et al, namely, that the duties of the governor and the secretary of the territory in canvassing the votes, declaring the result, and issuing the certificate, as prescribed by law, was a simple administrative act, not at all judicial in character. The law was—"Every territory shall have the right to send a delegate to the house of representatives of the United States. * * * The persons receiving the greatest number of votes shall be declared by the governor duly elected, and a certificate shall be given accordingly." [^9] The territorial statute provided that when the certified returns from the respective counties had all been received at the territorial secretary's office, "the secretary in the presence of the governor, shall unseal and examine them, and furnish to each person having the highest number of votes for any territorial office a certificate of election." [^10] Furthermore, each house of congress, by constitutional provision had reserved to it, as a right, to be the judge of the elections, returns, and qualifications of its own members. [^11]

AN ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER EXERCISES JUDICIAL FUNCTIONS

A very careful and elaborate answer to the Campbell protest was made and filed with the governor in which all matters of ineligibility raised were answered and the above principles and laws bearing upon the case were ably set forth. [^12] Both parties to the contest appeared by counsel before the governor and presented oral arguments and cited authorities in support of their respective contentions. [^13] Governor Murray needed no persuasion to induce him to issue the certificate of election to Mr. Campbell instead of to Mr. Cannon. It was in harmony with his own inclinations to do so, and doubtless part of the conspiracy entered into before the election by Utah anti-"Mormon" "ringities" and certain anti-"Mormon" plotters at Washington, and other eastern localities, to so proceed, let the election returns be what they might. [^14] Governor Murray proceeded along the lines suggested by the Campbell protest. He sat in judgment upon Mr. Cannon's citizenship, declaring not only that he was not a citizen, but that he was on account of his relations to polygamy, "incapable of becoming a citizen," and decided that "Mr. Campbell, having received the greatest number of votes cast for any citizen, was therefore duly elected and must receive the certificate accordingly." [^15]

11The press comments throughout the United States on the action of Governor Murray in giving the certificate of election to Campbell was very generally and severely condemned. A collection of these comments amounting to more than two score of columns will be found in the Deseret News, weekly, for 19th and 26th of January, 1881; and also in the four numbers of the same journal for February of the same year. About the only leading journal that did not emphatically condemn the action of the governor was the Louisville Courier Journal, published in Murray's home town. It was thought in some quarters that a mistaken sense of loyalty to a fellow townsman was the cause of the support of Murray in this paper. The Chicago Inter-Ocean, a stalwart Republican paper, published a Washington dispatch suggesting as an explanation of the support given by Mr. Watterson, editor of the Courier Journal—to Governor Murray and Mr. Campbell, that the brilliant editor had become interested through Governor Murray in the celebrated Moulton Mine of Montana, and that this interest influenced his editorial utterances on a really great public question. [^16] This, however, is not in keeping with the character of Mr. Watterson; and it is more likely that the great editor allowed his bitter anti-"Mormon" prejudices, created by the misrepresentations of Murray, Campbell, et al, to sway his judgment from that splendid poise in which it generally stood so well balanced.

On the 20th of January, 1881, Mr. Cannon served formal notice upon Mr. Campbell that he would contest his right to hold a seat in the house of representatives of the 47th congress, also his right "either to be sworn or enrolled, or to hold a certificate of election as such delegate." [^17] In addition to this step, on learning of the departure of Governor Murray from Utah for the east, early in January, a petition for a writ of mandate was made to the United States district court at Salt Lake City, commanding the secretary of the territory, Mr. Arthur L. Thomas—who in the absence of the governor from the territory was the acting governor—to declare the petitioner, Mr. Cannon, elected to the office of delegate to the house of representatives of the 47th congress, and to issue his certificate of election to that effect, in harmony with the returns of the late election. The case was argued at length before Judge Stephen P. Twiss by counsel for the opposing parties on demurrer proceedings entered by the acting governor. Judge Twiss decided that the demurrer must be sustained on the main issue. He held that granting a certificate of election by the governor was not "merely ministerial;" it was "at least an executive duty of a political character, which may at times require the best and soundest discretion; and that directing him by a peremptory writ of mandate to do an act within the scope of his official power, which he had on demand, in the exercise of his discretion refused to perform, would be assuming a grave responsibility unsupported by authority of law, which might result in irreparable mischief." [^18]

12THE CANNON-CAMPBELL CASE AT WASHINGTON

The next step was taken at Washington. Mr. Cannon's notice of contest declared his intention not only to contest Mr. Campbell's right to hold a seat in the house of representatives, as delegate from Utah, but also to contest his "right either to be sworn or enrolled," or to hold a certificate of election as such delegate. Unwittingly Governor Murray had really given a certificate of election to Mr. Cannon in the second paragraph of his "Declaration of Results of the Election," which accompanied the certificate given to Mr. Campbell, where he states, and of course over his own signature, and under the seal of the state—"the returns show that George Q. Cannon received 18,568 votes and Allen G. Campbell, 1,357 votes." [^19] Thus there were in effect two certificates placed before the clerk of the house when the governor's certificate with accompanying declaration of results was filed with that officer; one declaring that Mr. Cannon was the person receiving the greatest number of votes at the election, and the Murray certificate declaring that Mr. Campbell "was the person, being a citizen of the United States, having the greatest number of votes," and therefore duly elected. Mr. Cannon in pursuance of his notice to Mr. Campbell that he would contest his right to enrollment and to be sworn in as a member, as well as his right to the seat, appeared before Mr. Adams, the chief clerk of congress whose duty it was to make up the roll of membership in the congress elect, placing "thereon the names of those persons, and of such persons only, whose credentials show that they were regularly elected in accordance with the laws of their states respectively, or the laws of the United States." [^20] Mr. Cannon submitted a copy of this certificate which stated that he had received the greatest number of votes. It is said that Mr. Adams refused to hear arguments at that time "as the other party had not seen proper to appear." [^21] and Mr. Cannon's name was enrolled as the delegate from Utah. This completely turned the tables on the Utah "ring" conspirators, installed Mr. Cannon as the delegate instead of the "contestant," which granted him his per diem and mileage, and relieved him of much of the trouble and cost of a contestant for the rights to which he was plainly entitled; also the disadvantage of waiting around the committee rooms and lobby until the case could be brought to a hearing, which doubtless—had Campbell been enrolled—the conspirators would have postponed as long as possible.

PRESS COMMENT ON THE COURSE OF MR. ADAMS

Chief Clerk Adams was very generally censured by the Republican press of the country for ignoring the certificate given to Campbell by Governor Murray, and enrolling Cannon's name. It was characterized as "a great stretch of power." Still the voice of the press was by no means all onesided: "The Republican press severely criticises Clerk Adams of the house of representatives," said the Detroit Free Press, "for putting the name of Delegate Cannon on the roll of the house instead of the name of Campbell." But it is worth noticing, that with all their bitterness none of them accuse Clerk Adams of doing any wrong to Campbell. No Republican journal that lays any claim to a reputation for decency pretends that Campbell is elected or has any shadow of title to the seat, save that which the governor of Utah invented when he gave him a certificate. Even the New York Times, while censuring the clerk for ignoring the certificate to Campbell, admits that it "really belongs to Cannon."

The Louisville Post said: "Clerk Adams placed Cannon's name on the roll of the house of representatives because Cannon was duly elected. No rational person, acquainted with the law and the facts, could decide otherwise. Cannon is entitled to the seat and no member of congress doubts that he will get it."

This from the Cincinnati Times: "The indications are that Governor Murray, of Utah, does not run the United States congress."

15The Omaha Herald: "Utah is likely to get her chosen delegate in congress. The fraud of Governor Murray has been repudiated by the clerk of the house."

15The Cincinnati Gazette: "It is undoubtedly true that the majority both of Republicans and Democrats sustain the position taken by Clerk Adams in regard to the Cannon-Campbell case, notwithstanding the claims of the latter and his friends that he is entitled to the seat. The committee on elections was strongly of the opinion, and this without regard to party, that Governor Murray has taken an authority on himself which he has no legal right to exercise."

15The Sacramento Record-Union: "The clerk of the house, Adams, has put Cannon on the roll of members, despite the bogus certificate of Governor Murray, and Mr. Campbell thinks it very hard that he should not be allowed to secure the seat to which he was not elected, after his friends had gone to so much trouble to issue a certificate which was fraudulent on its face." There were many other papers that voiced similar sentiments.

Naturally the Utah "ringites" were enraged at the course of Clerk Adams in enrolling the name of Mr. Cannon instead of Mr. Campbell's, and on the 8th of June brought suit, in the name of the United States, "in the nature of a bill of equity," in the third district court of Utah, asking first, that George Q. Cannon be adjudged not a citizen of the United States; second, that the certificate of citizenship he held be adjudged fraudulent and void; third, that he be enjoined from drawing the salary and compensation pertaining to the office of delegate to congress. To this proceeding the defendant, Mr. Cannon, demurred, and on hearing the arguments Judge Hunter dismissed the case on the ground that "the attorney-general of the United States should file complaint in behalf of the government in such cases"—in other words, the plaintiff had no right to prosecute the case and the court had no jurisdiction to hear it.

P. T. Van Zile, United States district attorney for Utah, was joined with the attorneys of Mr. Campbell, Messrs. Sutherland and McBride, in an effort no doubt to give color to the idea that the United States government was really prosecuting the case. Judge Hunter permitted a very astonishing thing to be written into his order dismissing the case, namely, that from the facts stated in the complaint, which are admitted by the defendant's demurrer, "there is no record of defendant's naturalization, and that no proceeding for that purpose ever took place in court, and that the certificate held by defendant as a certificate of naturalization was obtained by fraud and has been fraudulently used, and is void on its face in not professing to be the copy of a record, and not certifying a regular naturalization, and therefore that there is no sufficient cause shown for annulling it." An examination of the demurrer—printed in full and with the whole proceedings had in the case in Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 9th, 1881—discloses no such admissions. "This probably," says the author of The Delegate From Utah, "is the first case in the history of jurisprudence where a court at once determines that he has no power to proceed to determine the case, and at the same time renders a decree in favor of the plaintiff." Still, had the admission been made in the demurrer, it would have been but an admission for the sake of the argument. Yet, in the following excerpts from The Delegate From Utah, see what use is made of this falsely claimed admission: "Among lawyers there would be need of little to be said of the ridiculous features of this order; nor does it in itself have any effect; but immediately upon the filing of the order the agents of the conspiracy telegraphed to all the newspapers of the country that Judge Hunter had decided the naturalization of Cannon fraudulent; and solemn essays and articles appeared on the merit and effects of such decision, as if the decision had been rendered on final decree, after a hearing of the facts. That a demurrer admits nothing except for the purpose of the argument of the demurrer, and cannot be used in any collateral or other proceeding, is abundantly proven by the following extracts from prominent authority." He then cites several law cases in point. Mr. Cannon's attorney sought later, (Dec. 16th, 1881) to have the record corrected, but this Judge Hunter refused to do, since what he had stated in the court order, he explained, was from the "effect" of the demurrer. "Of course," he added, "there could be no finding of facts, as none were presented." [^22]

17Relative to this matter of Mr. Cannon's citizenship it will be sufficient to say the question of his citizenship grew out of an alleged defect in the court record of his naturalization, for which he, of course, was in no way responsible. The whole question, however, had been investigated and settled in the 44th congress, when Mr. Baskin was the contestant. The committee on election at that time, by unanimouse vote, overruled the objection to Mr. Cannon's eligibility on the ground of defective naturalization, holding that the judgment of the first district court of Utah on the point was conclusive, and under that ruling Mr. Cannon had retained his seat in that congress; and as Mr. Cannon forcefully said on this point of his naturalization, in his speech on the floor of the house during the contest in the 47th congress—his last speech in the house—"there ought to be some time in a man's life when the statute of repose should intervene to prevent his being annoyed upon a question of that kind, especially after it had been so thoroughly investigated." [^23]

The case next came up before the house of representatives on December the 7th. The speaker of the house, Mr. J. Warren Keifer, allowed the delegates from the other territories to be called and sworn, but refused to have the name of Mr. Cannon called, thus ignoring the enrollment by Clerk Adams. Mr. Haskel, representative from Kansas, introduced a resolution declaring that Mr. Campbell, delegate-elect from Utah, "had a right to be sworn in as a delegate, on a prima facie case." Against this Mr. Cox of New York raised a point of order, viz., that Mr. Cannon's name was on the roll of members and the speaker was bound to recognize that fact. A spirited debate followed, and the matter finally went over to the 10th of January. [^24]

18When the question came up on the 10th, Mr. Haskel's resolution to swear in Mr. Campbell as delegate "on a prima facie case" was defeated, and a substitute motion by Mr. Thomas B. Reed, of Maine, directing—

18"That the papers in relation to the right to a seat as a delegate from the territory of Utah be referred to the committee on elections, with instructions to report at as early a day as practicable, as to the prima facie right, or the final right of claimants to the seat, as the committee shall deem proper."

18The amendment was carried by a vote of 189 to 24; and thus, without allowing either Mr. Cannon or Mr. Campbell to be sworn in, though with Mr. Cannon's name remaining on the roll, the whole question of prima facie and final right of the claimants was referred to the house committee on elections.

The day following this action Mr. Haskel brought before the house a resolution the purpose of which was to declare "as the fixed and final determination of the house of representatives of the 47th congress," that "no person living in polygamous marital relations, or guilty of teaching, or inciting others so to do, is entitled to be admitted as a delegate from any territory." The resolution was introduced under a plea of "personal privilege," "to maintain the dignity of the house." After some debate it was decided by the house not to be a matter of personal privilege at all, and was thrown out by a vote of 139 against it, to 109 in its favor. It was of course, pretense all aside, a direct attempt to disqualify George Q. Cannon for the office of delegate to which he had been elected, and whose contest for his seat was then being considered by the house committee on elections. The manifest unfairness of the resolution was very apparent; and becomes more so when it is known, as the fact was, that Mr. Haskel took advantage of a written admission made by Mr. Cannon on the subject of polygamy before the committee on elections in order to expedite the contest before that body.

19Following is the written statement of Mr. Cannon referred to above:

19"I, George Q. Cannon, protesting that the matter in this paper contained is not relevant to the issue, do admit that I am a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, commonly called 'Mormons;' that in accordance with the tenets of said church, I have taken plural wives, who now live with me, and have so lived with me for a number of years and borne me children. I also admit that in my public addresses, as a teacher of my religion in Utah territory, I have defended said tenet of said church as being in my belief a revelation of God."

19[Signed] "GEORGE Q. CANNON." [^25]

19This paper was given by Mr. Cannon to the committee on elections to obviate the necessity of the contestee, Mr. Campbell, calling witnesses and going into the proof of the matter, as he proposed to do. No sooner was it given than Mr. Haskel made it the basis of his resolution to disqualify Mr. Cannon for taking his seat.

This admission of Mr. Cannon in the house debate that followed later was made conspicuous by being placed in contrast with a statement of his made in the contest with Maxwell in the 43rd congress, wherein he denied that he was "living with four wives or that he was then living with or cohabiting with any wives, or had ever lived in violation of the laws of God, man, his country, decency, or civilization or any law of the United States." This in 1874. The anti-bigamy law of 1862 made the act of marrying another woman while the legal wife was living and undivorced, the crime, not the subsequent polygamous cohabitation. And as Mr. Cannon had married all his wives previous to 1862—and the law could not be retroactive, and as there had been no law on the subject of cohabiting with polygamous wives until the passage of the Edmunds act of 1882, Mr. Cannon was plainly within the truth when he said in 1874 that such relations as he had contracted and maintained in Utah were not illegal—not in defiance of, or in violation of, the laws of congress. [^26]

20It may be claimed that this was dealing with "refinements" in the use of language, to stand within the law—technicalities merely. Be it so; but they are technicalities that the law permits; and certainly there was no intention at deception in the case, and none was possible, as Mr. Cannon's marriage status was notorious, being even nationally known.

20The final action of the house of representatives in this case belongs to a later chapter.

Footnotes

No remedy is adequate or effective in respect to office for short terms which does not administer the corrective during the canvass, for before any other remedy can be sought and applied the motive to pursue it ceases by the expiration of the term; the wrong prospers and the authors are thereby encouraged to repeat it, and generally do." (House Miscellaneous Documents, 47th Congress, 1st Session, No. 25. Nearly all the documents of this case of contest will be found in the foregoing; also in Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine for Oct., 1883, pp. 49-60; and in his History of Salt Lake City, ch. lxxxix). All this sophistry, however, is swept aside by the statement of the text respecting the law governing the case.

---
Notas:
[^1] For these two messages see Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. vii, pp. 559-60; and 605-6.
[^2] Republican Platform, 1876, Cooper's American Politics, bk. ii, p. 56.
[^3] For an incisive analysis of this proposition, and its utter abolishment in argument by one of the most noted jurists of the United States—second only, perhaps, to Chief Justice John Marshal,—see a speech by Judge Jeremiah S. Black,—attorney-general, and, in the closing months, secretary of state in Buchanan's administration, and formerly chief justice of the state of Pennsylvania—delivered before the judiciary committee of the house of representatives, Feb. 1st, 1883, in behalf of Utah on the subject of "Federal Jurisdiction in the Territories," and published in a pamphlet of 28 pages. Excerpts of which will be found in a Note, end of this chapter.
[^4] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. viii, p. 11. Among other things he said: "In my judgment it is the duty of congress, while respecting to the uttermost the conscientious convictions, and religious scruples of every citizen, to prohibit within its jurisdiction all criminal practices, especially of that class which destroy the family relations and endanger social order."
[^5] See this History, chapter cxlviii.
[^6] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. viii, p. 57.
[^7] Page 59 of the proceedings (pamphlet); also reproduced in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 15th, 1881, p. 308.
[^8] Ibid, p. 308.
[^9] Ibid, p. 308.
[^10] Hand-Book on Mormonism, Coyner, pp. 1-4.
[^11] See Mr. Leonard's Report at the Buffalo Meeting, reproduced in Deseret News, weekly, June 15, 1881.
[^12] Ibid. Vigorous editorial treatment of the action of these several sectarian conferences and conventions will be found in the Deseret News, weekly, impressions of 15th and 22nd of June, 1881.
[^13] The full name of the assassin was Charles J. Guiteau, and the reliable work of the popular History of the United States by Wm. Cullen Bryant, Sydney Howard Gay, and Noah Brooks, published by Scribner, 1896, makes this statement: "Guiteau was arrested at once and he defiantly exclaimed 'allright; I did it and will go to jail for it, I am a stalward and Arthur (vice president) will be president.' A thrill of horror ran through the country when it was known that Garfield had been mortally wounded by a disappointed office seeker, and that the unseemly career of leading politicians was by remote implication connected with this cruel crime." And this was the only cause that ever developed concerning the motive of the madman who shot down President Garfield. (See Scribner's History of the United States, Bryant-Gay-Brooks, p. 523).
[^14] Press dispatches of October 4th, 1881, in Salt Lake Tribune of October 5th, 1881.
[^15] See Congressional Record of Jan. 10th, 1882, p. 326.
[^16] The Dayton (Ohio) Daily Herald of Oct. 3rd, 1881; copied into Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 26, 1881.
[^17] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 3rd, 1881.
[^18] Ibid.
[^19] Deseret News, weekly, Oct. 5th, 1881.
[^20] See chapter cxxiv this History.
[^21] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 3rd, 1881.
[^22] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 3rd, 1881.
[^23] Deseret News, weekly, of July 6th, 1881.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] The governor's reply declining the tender of the tabernacle, for the reasons given in the text, was equally courteous. Both letters will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 12th, 1881, p. 583.
[^26] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 5th, 1881.
