B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

21CHAPTER CLIV

21THE ANTI-"MORMON" CRUSADE, 1879-1884—POLITICAL—SECTARIAN

21RUNNING parallel with the later incidents of this contest over the seat for delegate from Utah, was another incident of even greater importance, and one designed to, and which did effect the contest over the delegateship. This was the passage of the celebrated Edmunds bill during the first session of the 47th congress.

A NATION-WIDE ANTI-"MORMON" AGITATION

While the press of the United States, as already noted, almost universally condemned the action of Governor Murray, for giving the certificate of election to Mr. Campbell, to whom, clearly, it did not belong; and while a number of influential papers sustained Clerk Adams in placing the name of Mr. Cannon upon the house roll, still there was a wave of anti-"Mormon" sentiment sweeping over the country during the years 1880-1882 that was quite appalling. At no previous time, perhaps, had anti-"Mormon" prejudices been more violent, or unreasoning; and public opinion loudly demanded some settlement of what was quite generally called the "vexed Mormon question." The question had been treated in four official communications from three presidents of the United States. First, President Hayes in two annual messages to congress on December 1st, 1879, and December 6th, 1880, respectively.

"If necessary to secure obedience to the law," President Hayes wrote in his first message, "the enjoyment and exercise of the rights and privileges of citizenship in the territories of the United States may be withheld or withdrawn from those who violate or oppose the enforcement of the law on this subject [i. e. polygamy]." In the second message he recommended the practical abolishment of the territorial government and the establishment of a government by a governor and legislative commission. He said: "Polygamy will not be abolished if the enforcement of the law depends on those who practice and uphold the crime. It can only be suppressed by takink away the political power of the sect which encourages and sustains it. * * * I recommend that congress provide for the government of Utah by a governor and judges or commissioners, appointed by the president and confirmed by the senate—a government analogous to the provisional government established for the territory northwest of the Ohio by the ordinance of 1787. If, however, it is deemed best to continue the existing form of local government I recommend that the right to vote, hold office, and sit on juries in the territory of Utah be confined to those who neither practice nor uphold polygamy." [^1]

22The severity of these measures,—un-American in spirit and beyond question unconstitutional—indicate the temper that had been developed by the anti-"Mormon" crusade, made the title of this chapter. Such recommendations as these grew out of that political heresy of the times that "the Constitution confers upon congress sovereign [absolute] power over the territories of the United States." [^2]

22The recommendations of President James A. Garfield were scarcely less drastic on the point of asserting absolute legislative authority over the territories.

It scarcely requires an argument with the citation of authorities to convince one that such a course here recommended by President Garfield, supported though it was by a vitiated public sentiment against the Latter-day Saints, and I say it with all due respect to the revered memory in which President Garfield is held by the American people—was a plain apostasy from American principles of government and the adoption of that odious colonial policy practiced by Great Britain upon her American colonies, and which those colonies overthrew and forever destroyed by the Revolution of 1776, in the adoption of the doctrines of the Declaration of Independence. [^3] President Garfield referred to the "Mormon question" in his inaugural address on March 4th, 1881; [^4] and doubtless, had his life been spared to the time of the meeting of congress, he would have made very definite recommendations to congress on the subject of legislation for Utah. But on the 2nd of July, he was shot down by the assassin, Charles Guiteau. Chester A. Arthur, the vice president, succeeding to the presidency, in his message to congress, December 6th, 1881, urged vigorous measures against the plural marriage system of the Latter-day Saints. Among other things he called attention to the then recent decision of the supreme court in the Miles case, in which the judgment of the lower court in the conviction of Miles for bigamy was reversed. [^5] The court in rendering this decision called attention to the difficulty of proving polygamous marriages, and suggested the propriety "of modifying the law of evidence which makes a wife incompetent to testify against her husband." [^6] This suggestion of the supreme court President Arthur changed to a recommendation to congress; and also recommended that stringent laws be passed, with heavy penalties, requiring the filing of marriage certificates with the supreme court of the territory, by the officiating person.

"CHRISTIAN" SECTARIAN BITTERNESS

In addition to these recommendations to congress by the chief executives of the nation here named, the chief of the sectarian churches of the country once more took up the "Mormon question" and made urgent demands for drastic legislative measures against the Latter-day Saints of Utah.

24Among the more prominent religious bodies acting upon this matter was the Protestant Episcopal church which met in a general convention in the city of New York from the 6th to the 27th of October, 1880. This body was the most moderate of the churches in its recommendations. One of its resolutions said:

24"Resolved, the house of bishops concurring, that while there are peculiar difficulties in the execution of this law, owing to the religious fanaticism (doubtless oftentimes sincere) by which the institution of polygamy is upheld, and especially to the fact that the interests of many innocent persons are unhappily involved, it is still the duty of every Christian citizen of this republic to use his influence to aid the United States government in bringing about, as speedily as possible, a merciful but firm enforcement of the law in regard to polygamy or bigamy in the territories of the United States." [^7]

24An Episcopal convention held in New York City, 11th of April, 1881, passed a series of resolutions much harsher in tone than the above. This convention approved the reference to "Mormonism" in President Garfield's inaugural address and said: "The filth of its abominations is overflowing into other territories, and in conjunction with communism threatens, in effect, the nation. The people's neglect in this matter has already become a national wrong, if not a crime." This convention said that if the severe legislation prayed for failed, "We commend the use of the strong force of the military arm." [^8]

The Methodist Episcopal church assembled in the northern New York conference, at Oswego, April 16th, 1881, passed a series of denunciatory resolutions against the "Mormon" church, one of which said: "We most respectfully but earnestly demand of our national legislature enactments that shall relieve our country from the oppressive, un-American and criminal features of this national disgrace and curse." The convention also joined with the brethren of the Newark conference of the same denomination, in asking "the religious and secular press and all ecclesiastical assemblages to urge upon the public mind this important subject and to vigorously sustain the executive and legislative branches of our government in all needed action in relation thereto." [^9]

25The Central Pennsylvania conference of this demonination joined in the movement. At the Presbyterian Mission Board meeting, held at Buffalo, N. Y., on May 27th, 1881, many bitter anti-"Mormon" speeches were delivered, and congress was denounced for "allowing Mormonism to grow." It was at this meeting that Mrs. Horace Eaton read her somewhat celebrated paper on the Rise of Mormonism. [^10]

25The Baptist Home Mission Society meeting held at Indianapolis, May 26th, 1881, authorized the executive board to address a Memorial to the president and congress of the United States calling for early measures to prohibit the practice of polygamy. The Reformed Episcopal church of New York, on the same date, took similar action. On June 8th, the Home Missionary Society at the anniversary meeting—1881—adopted a Memorial to congress and the president of the United States praying for the adoption of speedy measures for overthrowing the evil of Mormonism. At this meeting Mr. Haskel, member of congress from Kansas, was present and spoke most bitterly, saying that "Mormonism" "at its best was but a beastial relic of barbarism."

RADICALISM OF UTAH'S SECTARIAN MINISTERS

At several of these conventions and missionary board meetings, local sectarian ministers, missionaries in Utah, were present, reported "conditions in Utah," and urged the passage of extreme legislative measures against the Latter-day Saints. It is but the truth to say—however much regret one may feel in saying it—that strict regard for truth was not always on element of many of these reports, and certainly but little of the Christian spirit was manifested in the utterances of these reverend gentlemen.

26Among those from Utah who were particularly active in this kind of work were Rev. C. P. Lyford, of the Methodist Episcopal church; Rev. J. M. Coyner of the Presbyterian church; Rev. W. M. Barrows, of the Congregational church; Rev. D. L. Leonard, superintendent of "Home Missions for Utah." As specimens of exaggeration and bitterness it is pointed out here that Mr. Leonard in pleading the financial and other needs of his mission district, declared that "there were 620,486 young persons in the Mormon district, and that it was the youthful element that the missionaries were working on." [^11] As a matter of fact there were not one-half that number in the entire membership of the "Mormon" church at that time, much less, of course, that number of "young persons." On the same occasion Professor J. M. Coyner said that he had analyzed "Mormonism" and "found it included diabolism, animalism, Mohammedanism, the bigotry, cunning and treachery of Judaism, and Thugism, which made a dose for Columbia, and he wondered how long she could stand it." [^12]

UNWARRANTED INSINUATIONS IN THE ASSASSINATION OF PRESIDENT GARFIELD

Individual utterances of a number of the clergy in the United States were even more reckless and vicious than the resolutions of religious conferences and missionary conventions. The Rev. T. DeWitt Talmage, on Sunday, the 2nd of October, 1881, in a public discourse at the Brooklyn New York tabernacle very broadly implied that Guiteau, the assassin of President Garfield, was a "Mormon;" [^13] and further said that he "should not wonder if in the great day, when all such things are revealed, it should be found that he was a paid agent of that old hag of hell [i. e. the 'Mormon' church] who sits making mouths to heaven between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada." [^14] The reverend gentleman also said that "while all the good people throughout the world were praying for the president's recovery, the Mormons were praying for his death." "If the death of Garfield," he added, "shall arouse the nation to more hatred of that institution of Mormonism which was Garfield's special disgust, he will not have died in vain."

27The sermon in full will be found in the New York Express of October, 1881. A synopsis of it as a press dispatch was sent to the papers of the country on the 4th. "I will not say Guiteau was a Mormon; nor would I dare to say he was not," the press dispatch represented the Brooklyn divine as saying, "but Guiteau says he shot Garfield in the name of the Lord. If he was not a Mormon he was one of the Oneida community," whose chief doctrine was right to a profusion of wives. In the full text of his speech he declared Guiteau had "the Mormon ugliness." "He had the spirit of Mormon licentiousness; of Mormon cruelty; of Mormon murder." Then follows the insinuation quoted above that Guiteau was the paid agent of the "Mormon" church. [^15]

Mr. Haskel, representative from Kansas, in a speech on the Cannon-Campbell contest in congress, thought enough of this vulgar, brutal phrase of the Brooklyn divine—"that old hag of hell who sits making mouths to heaven between the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra Nevada"—to plagarize into the closing sentence of said speech. [^16]

28At Dayton, Ohio, on the same day of the DeWitt Talmage ebullition in the Brooklyn tabernacle, the Rev. J. H. Parks, a Baptist divine, told his congregation that the "Mormons" rejoiced over the death of President Garfield, because in his inaugural address he favored the adoption of some means of abolishing this "infamous practice of polygamy." "I would," said the reverend gentleman, "that the guns of Fort Douglas were turned upon them, and they made loyal by this means if by no other means." [^17]

28The story that the news of the assault upon President Garfield was received in Salt Lake City "with joy and satisfaction;" and that "prayer circles" of the church were constantly imploring the destruction of the president, found its way into a number of eastern papers in the latter part of July and early in August. There was coupled with this statement also another, not less infamous, to the effect that "when President Lincoln was murdered the saints gathered and had a time of joy and gladness, singing praises and giving glory to God for the assassination." [^18]

In editorial comment of the Latter-day Saint organ—the Deseret News—the story was indignantly denied. The Providence (Rhode Island) Star published the story, but proclaims its disbelief in it: "We do not believe the 'prayer circle story that is now going the rounds of the press," it said. "There are bad Gentiles as well as Mormons in Salt Lake City, and lying about the saints is one of their chief accomplishments. The account of a prayer for the death of President Garfield has about it all the earmarks of a Gentile roorback, and we believe we could put our fingers upon its source in the Mormon capital." [^19] The Boston Watchman, the organ of "New England Orthodoxy" was very specific in its charge. "It is an interesting fact," it said, "that on the day set apart for prayer for the president, * * * the Deseret News, organ of the Mormons, declared that the 'praying circle' of the Mormon church was engaged in continual supplication for the death of President Garfield." "If the Watchman can produce anything of the kind as an assertion of the Deseret News," commented the editor of that journal, "either on the day named or at any other time, we will agree to regard the Boston religious paper with some degree of respect." [^20]

DEMONSTRATIONS OF SYMPATHY FOR PRESIDENT GARFIELD BY THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS

Relative to the manner in which the news of the assassination of Lincoln was received in Utah, and the course of both the Latter-day Saints and the Gentiles with reference to memorial services, and the genuine sorrow of the whole community without respect to political or religious differences—all this has already been treated in these pages. [^21] As to the murderous assault upon Garfield, every evidence that a community could give of its sorrow over so shocking an event was manifested. Elaborate preparations were under way for the public celebration of the Fourth of July that year in Salt Lake City. There had been an expenditure of considerable sums of money and much labor employed for the purpose of making this year's celebration of the anniversary of the nation's birth memorable; but when the news of the assault upon the president reached Utah—he was shot down on the 2nd of July—all thoughts of a celebration were at once abandoned, and the sad news sent to the remotest parts of the territory, that all arrangements for rejoicing and merriment should be suspended. [^22]

The 24th of July is Utah's "Pioneer Day;" a day of general rejoicing, public amusements, and festivities; but as President Garfield's life was still hanging in the balance, it was considered no time for public rejoicing while he was lying in a critical condition, so no preparations were made for celebration of the day that year—"although the facilities reserved from the Fourth [of July]," said the Deseret News, "are at hand waiting to be utilized." "This is a small thing," the editorial continued, "but it shows the feelings of the people on the subject under consideration"—the charge that the people were praying for the death of the national executive. "We repudiate with all our soul's energies, the malicious charges made in the fiendish paragraph referred to." [^23]

30When word that the president had been dangerously wounded was received in Salt Lake City, and the matter of abandoning the Fourth of July celebration was presented to John Taylor, president of the church, he said in a public statement:

30"In relation to the startling news that we have heard concerning the attempted assassination of President Garfield, whether it arises from private animosity and personal feelings of revenge, or whether it originates from a political clique, it is one of those things that all right-feeling people will lament. * * * We ought not only in appearance, but in reality, in our hearts, have feelings of sympathy towards those who have suffered with the honorable president of the United States in this dire calamity which has overtaken him; and to feel to execrate the wretch who has perpetrated so foul a deed. * * * I propose to send word to all our prominent men throughout the territory to cease from any exhibition of jubilation on the Fourth of July; and to act in sympathy with our injured president as becomes good and faithful citizens, and to not only act in that way, but to feel so in our hearts, that we may truly sympathize with the chief executive and with his family, and with the nation of which we form an integral part." [^24]

30In pursuance of this declared intention relative to the celebration of the Fourth of July, the following telegram was sent to all stake presidents of the church:—

TO THE PRESIDENTS OF STAKES

"The lamentable news having reached this city this morning, that an attempt has been made upon the life of President Garfield by an assassin, and that he is now lying dangerously wounded; execrating as we do the horrible crime of assassination, we suggest to the Latter-day Saints that out of respect to the nation's chief magistrate, and in accordance with our heartfelt sympathy in behalf of all, preparations by them for celebrating the national birthday, July 4th, throughout the territory of Utah, be suspended, and the demonstrations usually had on that day be dispensed with.

31"JOHN TAYLOR,

31[Signed] GEORGE Q. CANNON,

31JOSEPH F. SMITH,

31First Presidency." [^25]

31Finally when the end came,—19th of September—President Taylor in a very courteous note to Governor Eli H. Murray, under date of September 23rd, tendered to him the use of the great tabernacle for union services by the people of Salt Lake City without regard to religious affiliation.

31The body of President Taylor's letter to the governor—from which the spirit of the tender may be judged—was as follows:

31"Dear Sir: Fully appreciating the motives which have suggested the issuance of proclamations of President Arthur, as the chief magistrate of the United States, and yourself as governor of the territory, to the effect that Monday next be observed as a day of humiliation and mourning, and that the usual business of the day be suspended, and the people gather to their respective places of public worship, to pay their tribute of sorrowful respect to the memory of the late President Garfield, I take the liberty of tendering to you, and through you to the various religious denominations, and to those citizens who do not belong to any religious denomination, the use of the large tabernacle in this city, for the services on that occasion, as a building in which all the citizens can meet without distinction of sect and party, and unite in ceremonies appropriate to the solemn occasion.

31If it should be agreeable to yourself and the various congregations, and the citizens generally, to accept the tender of this building, you will be at perfect liberty to make such arrangements as to the speakers who will occupy the time, and also the singing and of the ceremonies connected therewith, as you may deem proper.

31Yours very respectfully,

31JOHN TAYLOR." [^26]

The tender, however, was respectfully declined on the ground that previous arrangements had been made by several of Salt Lake City's churches for union services, and in other cases for services in their respective churches, in one of which the governor had promised to join.

THE LATTER-DAY SAINT MEMORIAL SERVICES FOR PRESIDENT GARFIELD

As President Taylor's tender of the Salt Lake tabernacle for union service was not accepted by Governor Murray for a union service, the Latter-day Saints assembled there in large numbers, and solemn and impressive services were held amid the emblems of sorrow with which the interior of the building was draped. A full report was made of these services, including verbatim reports of the speeches and prayers, in the official organ of the church.

32The services were held as per the appointment of President Arthur, on Monday, the 26th of September. George Q. Cannon who was on terms of intimate, personal friendship with President Garfield (who was acquainted with a number of the early elders of the "Mormon" church, among them Sidney Rigdon and Parley P. Pratt), said at the services in referring to the supposed hostility of President Garfield to "Mormonism":—

32"He may have been willing to talk against us; he did in his inaugural message; but I always thought that if President Garfield could be brought face to face with any question affecting us, and matters could be laid fairly before him, he was a man of too high and too just a conception of right, to do even a humble and obscure people like we are—a people who have been maligned and who are unpopular as we are—an injustice knowingly. That is my estimate of his character." [^27]

NOTE

JUDGE JEREMIAH S. BLACK ON FEDERAL JURISDICTION IN THE TERRITORIES

It having been asserted, and indeed the then proposed legislation for Utah (for the proposed vicious legislation of the Hayes' administration in 1879 persisted to and beyond the speech of Judge Black in 1883)—being based upon the assumption, that congress had exclusive jurisdiction over the territories—the old British claim that she could legislate for her American colonies "in all cases whatsoever"—Judge Black proceeds to inquire:

33"Has congress this exclusive power of legislation for a territory? or does it belong to the people of the territory and to the representatives whom they have chosen to intrust with it? I maintain that the right of local self-government is founded on acknowledged principles of public law; it existed before this government was framed, and the Constitution reserves it to the people of the territories as distinctly as to the states. * * * I do not assert that they can govern themselves in a way forbidden by the federal Constitution, or by an act of congress passed in pursuance thereof. The people of a state cannot do that. What I do assert is, that congress cannot legislate for a territory on any subject-matter on which it cannot legislate for a state. This furnishes an easy and infallible test of constitutionality. If congress may regulate marriage and divorce in a state, it may do so in a territory; if not, not.

33It is true, also, that the general government may give the colonists a charter, and call it an act of incorporation or an organic law. This was what the imperial government of England did for the several colonies that settled on its lands in America. But the charter must be a free one. If it abridges the liberty of the people to do as they please about matters which concern nobody else, it is void. Even if the colonists would consent, for a consideration, to accept an organic law imposing a restraint upon the right of self-government, they could throw it off as a nullity; for the birthright of a freeman is inalienable. I need not say that foreigners naturalized are on a level with native citizens.

As congress cannot give, so it cannot withhold the blessing of popular government in a territory. But the legislation now proposed, in addition to that already passed, would blacken the character of the federal government with an act of cruel perfidy. The charter you gave to Utah was in full accordance with the broad principles of American liberty. You organized for them a free territorial government, put into their hands all the machinery that was needed to carry it on; the ballot to be used under regulations of their own; officers chosen by themselves to administer their local affairs, collect the taxes and take charge of their money, and a legislature representing them, responsible to them, clothed with exclusive power to make their laws and to alter them from time to time, as experience might show to be just and expedient. Gilding your invitation with this offer of free government, you attracted people from every state and from all parts of the civilized world, whose industry scattered plenty over that barren region and made the desert bloom like a garden. Now you are urged to break treacherously in upon their security—supersede the laws which they approve by others which are odious to them; make their legislation a mockery by declaring that yours is exclusive; drive out the officers in whom they confide, and fill their places with raging and rapacious enemies; take away their right of suffrage, and with it all chance of peaceable redress; break down the whole structure of territorial government, under which you promised to give them a permanent shelter. Would not this be a case of Punic faith? * * * The relations of the colonies to Great Britain were precisely the same as those which exist between what we call the territories and the general government of the United States. By the public law of the world, the colonies had the right of local self-government. The imperial parliament, omnipotent at home, was utterly without power to legislate on the domestic affairs of any community settled upon crown lands sold or given to them on this side of the Atlantic. This freedom was not only asserted by the colonists, but for more than a century they were allowed to enjoy it without disturbance. The exclusiveness of their right to legislate for themselves, the extent to which it was exercised, and the range of subjects it embraced are known to all who have read their history."

34Previous to this Judge Black had in the same speech said:

34"It is perfectly clear that if your claim to exclusive jurisdiction be established, so as to comprehend the power to punish men and women for making family arrangements which you disapprove, you have authority to define all offenses; anything is a crime which you choose to call so, and everything is innocent which you think proper to tolerate. You may therefore make an entire criminal code for them, and you may make it as pernicious as you choose. It need not be 'a terror to evildoers, or a praise unto them that do well,' if you wish to have it otherwise. The virtues may be visited with penalties; justice, chastity, temperance and truth may be sent to the penitentiary; swindling and perjury may be legalized. Taking the exceptional jurisprudence of Sparta as a model, larceny may become a merit, or following a more recent precedent in the congressional government of the south, you can maintain the worst men in the highest offices, throw the reins loose on the neck of rapacity, make leprous fraud adored,

34Place thieves,

34And give them title, knee and approbation

34With senators on the bench.

34If you have not only the right, but the exclusive right, to do this, it must be acknowledged that there is no use for a local government; it is merely in your way, and accordingly you have already begun to abolish it. Agents appointed under your laws have gone down with instructions to take possession of all the polling places and registration offices, and the people were expressly forbidden to vote except by their permission and under their supervision. They construed your law as a bill of pains and penalties, which attainted the whole population, and they ordered every voter to be disfranchised who would not take an expurgatory oath that covered his whole life. Another set of agents assert that they have your direction to seize all the territorial offices, and distribute them as booty among the enemies of the people. One more step, an easy and a short one, you are much urged to take, and that is to send a commission upon them, with power, not only to supervise them when they vote, and deprive whom they please of the ballot, but to make and execute all laws on every subject, and to govern them generally as an overseer might govern a plantation of slaves.

35Of course it is possible that the territory might be controlled justly, wisely, and moderately by the hirelings of the federal government. But the chances are a thousand to one that they would act as persons in that situation have always acted—oppress and plunder their subjects, steal their money, and tax their industry to death. This might provoke the resistance of the most patient people, and the first symptom of disorder would furnish a legal excuse for cutting them up root and branch. Arbitrary rulers pardon nothing to the spirit of liberty." [^28]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Letter of Matthias F. Cowley to the St. Louis Globe Democrat, Feb. 5th, 1882; and Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iii, p. 173.
[^2] See biographical sketch of Goodwin in Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iv, Biographies, p. 341.
[^3] See number for Oct. 1881, p. 758.
[^4] Hand-Book on Mormonism, p. 46.
[^5] See Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 11th, 1882, p. 790.
[^6] Ibid, signed statement by Wm. S. Seely, Wm. F. Reynolds, Niels P. Madsen, John Waldemar, (non-"Mormon") C. J. Anderson, Jens C. Nielsen, Niels Johansen, Charles Hampshire.
[^7] See Deseret News, weekly, 11th of Jan., 1882; also Ibid of Sept. 21st, 1881. Lyford was the author of several anti-"Mormon" tracts and books, the principal of which is The Mormon Problem, 1886.
[^8] The Denver Republican, May 1st, 1882, quoted by Deseret News, weekly, of May 24th, 1882, p. 276.
[^9] Both articles are quoted in the Deseret News, weekly, of June 1st, 1881.
[^10] Both The Methodist and Herald plans are quoted in the Deseret News, weekly, of June 29, 1881.
[^11] Edmunds was a Republican senator from Vermont, 1866-1891. He was also a member of the electoral commission that settled the Hayes-Tilden presidential contest of 1877; and was acting vice president of the United States, 1883-5.
[^12] See Congressional Record for those dates.
[^13] Pamphlet, 1883, pp. 21-22. The speech is in Church Collection of Pamphlets, vol. lxvi.
[^14] Congressional Record of 19th April, 1882, p. 3045, et seq.
[^15] Letter of John R. Irvine, under date of April 21st, 1882, published is Millennial Star, vol. xliv, pp. 330-334.
[^16] The Dayton (Ohio) Daily Herald of Oct. 3rd, 1881; copied into Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 26, 1881.
[^17] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 3rd, 1881.
[^18] Ibid.
[^19] Deseret News, weekly, Oct. 5th, 1881.
[^20] See chapter cxxiv this History.
[^21] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 3rd, 1881.
[^22] Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 3rd, 1881.
[^23] Deseret News, weekly, of July 6th, 1881.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] The governor's reply declining the tender of the tabernacle, for the reasons given in the text, was equally courteous. Both letters will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 12th, 1881, p. 583.
[^26] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 5th, 1881.
[^27] 27. From speech of Judge Black before house committee on territories, 1st Feb., 1883, pamphlet, Federal Jurisdiction in the Territories, pp. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
