B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

36CHAPTER CLV

36UNFAIRNESS OF THE AMERICAN PRESS ON THE "UTAH QUESTION"—PASSAGE OF THE EDMUNDS BILL—SEAT OF UTAH'S DELEGATE IN CONGRESS DECLARED VACANT

36THE press of the country was very reluctant to give a hearing to the "Mormon" side of the controversy religious and political then literally raging—1879-1884. It was only here and there that a voice was heard to say a word on the "Mormon" side, and when this was done it was usually attended by such modifications and apologies as to rob it of its force. Harper's Monthly for October, 1881, admitted an article by Judge Charles C. Goodwin, who had recently become the editor of the Salt Lake Tribune, then a very bitter anti-"Mormon" sheet; but refused to receive an article in reply from the editor of the Deseret News, Charles W. Penrose. [^1] Judge Goodwin's article, to say the least of it, was reckless in statement, and extreme in its conclusions in respect of Utah affairs. One can but think that the writer of it—then newly arrived in the territory, [^2] and from a veritable hotbed of rank apostates and of anti-"Mormonism"—western Nevada—accepted without serious investigation the street talk, the current apostate reports, and anti-"Mormon" gossip at full face value, instead of at their necessarily large discount value.

THE REV. DUNCAN J. MCMILLAN CASE

He incorporated in his narrative, for example, the untruthful story of a young Presbyterian minister, Rev. Duncan J. McMillan, who came to Utah a few years before to regain his health, and whom, it is charged, Brigham Young in a public meeting "ordered killed," and whose life was several times attempted under that order, and for no other reason than that said Rev. McMillan "opened a school to teach the illiterate young Mormons of San Pete county!" "He went to San Pete valley," runs the judge's narrative, "where there were no schools, where there were boys and girls nearly grown to manhood and womanhood who were totally ignorant of the rudiments of an education, and opened a school."

37I follow strictly the text of Harper's Monthly here, [^3] and call attention to the fact, because when excerpts of this article were made by the compiler of The Hand-Book on Mormonism, the Rev. J. M. Coyner, he wrote it—"there were no American Schools," [^4] which represents the quibble by which the "divine" would help out the judge, whose statement in either case was a gross untruth as will appear in a note that immediately follows.

37The statement that there were no schools in San Pete county until McMillan went there and founded them, brought forth indignant denials from the leading citizens of San Pete county. Wm. T. Reid, who was superintendent of schools in said county from November, 1867, until August, 1877, made affidavit that in the year 1867 (fourteen years before the Goodwin article) there were 1,130 pupils enrolled in said schools, with an average daily attendance of 794; while in 1877 the number of pupils enrolled was 1,860, with an average attendance of 1,312; that these schools were in session eight months during each year.

In relation to Brigham Young "in a public meeting"—where two thousand people were assembled—ordering the young minister "to be killed" for establishing schools—one would think the story would break down by the mere statement of it, on the ground of its absurdity. But not so. Judge Goodwin seriously undertook to establish the truth of it in one of a series of nine editorials in the Salt Lake Tribune, written in defense of his Harper's Magazine article, wherein he gives a more circumstantial narrative of the meeting at which the "order to kill" was given, and of the several attempts to make the order effective.

38These editorials numbered from I to IX appear in the Salt Lake Tribune from Oct. 1st to 9th, 1881. In the March number of the North American Review Judge Goodwin had an article on "The Political Attitude of the Mormons" which had attracted considerable attention, and doubtless opened the way for his article in Harper's Magazine in October. An able review is made of the North American article in the editorial columns of the Deseret News, weekly, of March 2nd, 1881; and George Q. Cannon was permitted to answer the Goodwin article in the May number of the Review. Among many corrective statements that he made was one in respect of the Utah schools, as follows: "The average duration of school days in all the states and territories per year is 126>.8; while in Utah it is 146>; it stands eleventh in this respect in the list. Of a school population, nearly two years ago, of 34,929, there were 66 per cent enrolled. At that time there were 373 public schools, and an average daily attendance of 47 per cent. The text books are principally those used in the other parts of the republic. Schools there [i. e. Utah] have received no aid from the parent government."

38Relative to the attempts upon the life of McMillan a large number of affidavits from those in attendance at the meeting were collected and published. [^5] "Affidavits declare that no such orders were given in the meeting referred to, neither has there, to the best of our knowledge, ever been made any attempts upon the life of said D. J. McMillan while here, and the statement of C. C. Goodwin, in relation to these things is utterly false and without foundation in truth."

Affiants further declare, that at a public meeting held at Mount Pleasant, Rev. Duncan J. McMillan voluntarily made the statement that certain articles published in the Rocky Mountain Christian Advocate, and copied into other eastern journals, where among other things it was stated that he had to preach in this country "with pistol in one hand and Bible in the other," and also that several attempts had been made upon his life, were published without his knowledge or sanction, and were untrue. And he there and then promised to publish said statement in the journals of this territory, which promise, however, he never kept. [^6]

39It is in the Tribune impression of Oct. 6th that Mr. Goodwin deals with President Young's "order to kill McMillan," and the alleged attempts upon his life. After detailing the narrative he says: "The foregoing is a simple statement of facts, gathered from the notebook of the man who was assailed [i. e. Rev. McMillan], who sat by and heard Young's denunciation and George Q. Cannon's endorsement of all his chief had said." This throws the responsibility for the story of the "order to kill" upon McMillan. It is in this editorial that the judge alleges that 2,000 people constituted the congregation and fixes the date of the meeting on the 22nd and 23rd of July, 1875. The attempts upon McMillan's life are thus stated: "The next night [i. e. following the meeting at which the 'order to kill' was given], McMillan's house was stoned; and the next night a murderer seeking entrance into the house was driven away with a pistol. Later an ambuscade was laid for the minister, which he escaped by taking another road."

EFFECTIVE DENIAL OF THE MCMILLAN FICTION

Against the statement of Judge Goodwin, based—as may be seen by the above quotations-upon the representations of McMillan, eight reputable citizens of Mt. Pleasant, among them John Waldemar, a non-"Mormon," made affidavit to the following effect: That they were present at the meeting held in Mt. Pleasant, at which Brigham Young is said to have instructed his hearers to kill the young Presbyterian minister, Duncan J. McMillan; that no such instruction was given, that no attempts to the best of their knowledge were ever made upon the minister's life, and that he, Duncan J. McMillan, publicly declared such statements respecting attempts upon his life—to be untrue.

40This man, McMillan, be it remembered, had been represented as the minister who in "barbarous Utah" had been compelled "to preach with pistol in one hand and Bible in the other!" The story was made to do service in the east, primarily to exhibit the personal heroism of the sectarian ministry in Utah, and incidentally, no doubt, to increase the missionary funds for the redemption of "poor Utah." It had its origin with one Rev. C. P. Lyford, for a short time a minister of the Methodist Episcopal church at Provo, Utah: who first reported it as being his own experience. So that the "pistol story" is in reality but a plagarism of a Methodist Episcopal fiction, made to do common service in an anti-"Mormon" crusade. [^7]

40The exposure of McMillan through the affidavits of leading citizens of San Pete county did not deter the gentleman from continuing his mendacity, for on the 31st of April, of the same year of his exposure, in the city of Denver, Colorado, he delivered himself practically of the same story. Indeed he was introduced by the local minister in Denver, Rev. Mr. Hayes, as "the man who carried the Cross into the camp of the Danites in the face of death, and preached the gospel of Christ with his hand on his pistol." McMillan on the occasion repeated the story of Brigham Young ordering his death, and of the assaults upon his house, when he "forgot he was a minister and thought only of his pistol!" [^8]

VARIOUS SUGGESTIONS FOR THE SOLUTION OF "MORMONISM"

Various plans, regarded as more or less concrete, were suggested through this period for the solution of the "Mormon question." Here is one from the Chicago Interior, an organ of Presbyterianism:

41"Let the lands and tenements of the Mormons be thrown open to original entry by civilized settlers. * * * Let it be understood that the army will keep out of the way in Utah for four years, and that the use and occupation of Mormon property for one year is to give a preemption title. There are enough young men in the west and south who are seeking homes to finish up the pest, fumigate the territory, and to establish themselves in ninety days after the word 'go' is given."

41The Congregationalist of Boston, made the following comment on the Interior's plan: "For a Christian journal to advocate wholesale robbery, which inevitably would be accompanied with more or less bloodshed, and the possibility of which would attract all the ruffians in the west and stimulate them to their worst deeds, is as amazing as it is wrong." [^9]

41The Methodist, another religious organ, suggested the following as a solution:

41"We could, if we had the courage and the purpose, check Mormonism, at its central seat, by the use of the simple and perfectly natural system of colonization. In that way, in point of fact, Kansas and Nebraska were made free states. The Christian church has the means and can lay its hands on the necessary agents. The work requires no high order of talent, no great statesmanship. The thing to do is to put Christian (or Gentile) voters into Utah, and the threatened adjacent territories, in such numbers as to just simply outvote the Mormons. We do not need to go abroad for the bulk of these voters; they can be found at home. Ten millions of dollars, wisely expended, would probably settle the Mormon question."

41The New York Herald sometime before had suggested a plan very like this, so that it was not original with The Methodist. [^10]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE EDMUNDS BILL

Conflict over PolygamyHCIn view of all the public agitation here described, and expressing itself in demands upon congress for action, and for action that meant at bottom effective, physical force, and never once appealing to the moral forces of persuasion and reason, much less to the spiritual power supposed to be resident in religion, it is not a matter of astonishment that congress listened to the clamor and sought to satisfy it by the enactment of special legislation. This was done by the Edmunds bill, introduced into the senate as a report from the judiciary committee, by senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont, [^11] on the 24th of January, 1882. The measure passed the senate on the 16th of February. Its opponents were senators chiefly from the southern states where the evils of carpetbag rule—which the Edmunds bill proposed within certain limitations to inflict upon Utah—had been felt during the reconstruction period following the war between the states. But their arguments, able and even brilliant as some of them were, availed nothing; the bill passed by a substantial majority.

Conflict over PolygamyHCOPPOSITION IN THE SENATE

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe only northern senator who took part in the debate against the Edmunds bill was George H. Pendleton (Democrat) from Ohio, afterwards United States Minister to Germany under Cleveland's first administration—1885-1888. The other senators who took part in the debate against the bill were Senators George G. Vest, of Missouri; John T. Morgan, of Alabama; Wilkinson Call, of Florida; Joseph E. Brown, of Georgia; Lucius Q. C. Lamar, of Mississippi; Senator Lamar, who afterwards became secretary of the interior in Cleveland's first administration, 1885-1888, and associate justice of the supreme court of the United States after that—was ill at the time of the senate debate, but rose from his sick bed and went to the senate chamber to register his protest against the proposed legislation, which he did in the following passage:

Conflict over PolygamyHC43"Mr. President, I am not only opposed to the provisions which have already been discussed so ably by gentlemen, but to the policy of the legislation which the committee propose. In my opinion, sir, it is a cruel measure, and will inflict unspeakable sufferings upon large masses, many of whom are the innocent victims of a system. I do not think that the bill has been sufficiently considered in view of the importance of its provisions. With this simple declaration I shall not detain the senate longer."

Conflict over PolygamyHC43The debate occurred on the 15th and 16th of February, 1882. [^12]

Conflict over PolygamyHC43The senate Edmunds bill came up for consideration in the house on the 13th of March. The member in charge of it—Mr. Haskel, of Kansas, and his supporters, refused to have it referred to the house committee of the whole, and railroaded it through the regular sessions of the 13th and 14th of March, without allowing any amendments, or discussion of it worthy of the name. It was passed on the 14th by a vote of 199 yeas, 42 nays, 51 not voting.

Conflict over PolygamyHCANALYSIS OF THE EDMUNDS LAW

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe Edmunds law was an amendment to the anti-bigamy law of 1862. It defined polygamy as a crime—every person who has a husband or wife living—who hereafter marries another, whether married or single, and any man who simultaneously, or on the same day, marries more than one woman * * * is guilty of polygamy. The penalty was the same as the law of 1862, $500 fine or five years imprisonment, or both in the discretion of the court.

Conflict over PolygamyHC43It defined polygamous living as "unlawful cohabitation," making it a misdemeanor, and punishable by a fine not to exceed $300, and by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. The offense might be joined with prosecutions for both polygamy and unlawful cohabitation.

Conflict over PolygamyHC44It excluded from jury service those who had been living in the practice of bigamy or polygamy or unlawful cohabitation, and made it sufficient cause of challenge to any juror who believed it right for any man to have more than one living and undivorced wife at the same time, or to live in the practice of cohabiting with more than one woman.

Conflict over PolygamyHC44Section nine declared all registration and election offices vacant, and until other provisions should be made by the legislative assembly, the duties of said registration and election officers were to be performed by a board of five commissioners appointed by the president with the advice and consent of the senate, not more than three of whom were to be of one political party.

Conflict over PolygamyHC44The issue of polygamous marriages—if said marriages had been solemnized according to the ceremonies of the "Mormon" church—born before the 1st of January, 1883, were legitimated; and the president of the United States was authorized to grant amnesty to those guilty before the passage of this act on such conditions and under such limitation as he might think proper; but said amnesty would not be effective unless said conditions were complied with.

EFFECT ON RIGHT OF TRIAL BY JURY—JUDGE BLACK

That the law violated the right of trial by jury as commonly understood; and the American principle of local self-government, the latter by setting aside the territorial registration and election officers and giving power to a returning board to appoint such officers, and to otherwise conduct the territorial elections—admits of no question, nor reasonable defense.

44Judge Jeremiah S. Black, commenting on this "trial by jury" feature of the Edmunds law in his speech on "Federal Jurisdiction in the Territories," said:

"Trial by jury means by a jury of the country, the peers of the party, selected impartially from the general population, so as to represent a fair average of the public understanding and moral sense. That is the kind of jury that every man is entitled to have who pleads not guilty, and puts himself on God and the country for trial. That is the meaning of the word 'jury' as used in the decrees of Alfred, the statutes of Edward the Confessor, Magna Charta, the Petition of Rights, the Bill of Rights, and the American Constitution. In that sense it is used by all English-speaking peoples, and with that sense attached to it the institution has been adopted by other nations. The right of trial by jury is withheld by the Edmunds law, or given in a mutilated form, which makes it hardly better than a military commission, 'organized to convict.' * * * A juror may be questioned on his oath whether 'he believes it right for a man to have more than one living and undivorced wife at the same time or to live in the practice of cohabiting with more than one woman.' If he refuses to answer, or answers in the affirmative, he is conclusively presumed to be one of the people, and must be rejected; but if he replies 'No,' he has spoken the watchword of the inimical faction, and he is admitted, because his ascertained hostility to the party accused and all his class may be relied upon as an element of his verdict." [^13]

45EFFECT OF THE EDMUNDS LAW UPON THE CANNON-CAMPBELL CASE

45Undoubtedly the unseemly haste with which this measure was rushed through the senate and the house, and especially in the house, was to make its section eight—making it unlawful for a polygamist or any person cohabiting with more than one woman to hold any office or place of public trust in any territory or under the United States—applicable to the case of Hon. George Q. Cannon, then pending in the house; for at the time of its passage on the 14th of March, and when signed by President Arthur on the 22nd of the same month, the Cannon-Campbell contest had not yet been settled, nor was it decided until after the Edmunds bill became a law. When the contest case came up for a consideration a number of the representatives confessed that the passage of the Edmunds law had materially affected their attitude in respect of the Utah delegate's contest. That whereas before the enactment of the Edmunds law they had favored the seating of Mr. Cannon, they now could not consent to vote for him.

THE HOUSE DECISION IN THE CANNON-CAMPBELL CASE

The final act in the Utah contest case came up on the report of the house committee on elections on the 18th and 19th of April, 1882. The committee submitted three resolutions to the house as follows:

46"Resolved—That Allen G. Campbell is not entitled to a seat in this congress as delegate from the territory of Utah.

46Resolved—That George Q. Cannon is not entitled to a seat in this congress as delegate from the territory of Utah.

46Resolved—That the seat of delegate from that territory be and is hereby declared vacant."

46To these resolutions an amendment was offered by Mr. Moulton, of Illinois, as follows:

46"Resolved—That George Q. Cannon was duly elected and returned as delegate from the territory of Utah, and is entitled to a seat as delegate in the 47th congress."

46The debate during the two days, 18th and 19th of April, covered a wide range respecting the powers of the general government and right of the people of the territories; much of it was bitter and personal. In the midst of it all, however, the delegate from Utah had a number of strong friends who ably defended his rights.

46Among these were Mr. Davis, of Missouri; Mr. House, of Tennessee, who made an exceptionally able speech; Mr. Jones of Texas; Mr. Bragg of Wisconsin; and Mr. Moulton of Illinois. In the course of his speech Mr. House at one point put the whole case for Mr. Cannon in the following terse manner, that exhibits the brutally arbitrary spirit in which the house was acting:

"Their right [i. e. of the people of Utah] to elect is fixed by law by which the seat of their delegate when elected is assured to him, yet after the people exercising this lawful right, and in strict compliance with the statute, have gone to the trouble and expense of electing a man possessing all the qualifications which the Constitution prescribes for a member of the house of representatives, yet, when he arrives in Washington, presents his credentials, and asks to be allowed to take his seat, he is told, 'We know the law gives your territory the right to be represented by a delegate; we know you were duly and legally elected to that position; we admit that you possess all the qualifications that the Constitution requires a member of the lower house of congress to possess, yet you do not suit our taste, or caprice, or the standard which we have erected outside the law, and therefore we have concluded not to admit you. We claim the right to arbitrarily exclude you. We have, therefore, Mr. Delegate, proposed for the adoption of this house the following resolutions:

47Resolved, That George Q. Cannon is not entitled to a seat in this congress as a delegate from the territory of Utah.

47Resolved, That the seat of delegate from the territory of Utah be, and the same hereby is, declared to be vacant.

47Go tell your people that the 47th congress is capable of taking that position, and—

47If any fool should ask thee,

47Why we wear the crown;

47Tell him we wear the crown

47Because—it fits our head'."

47The leaders of the debate for the majority report of the committee were Mr. Calkins of Indiana, who had charge of the resolutions and the debate for the majority; Mr. Hazelton, of Wisconsin; Mr. Jacobs of New York; Mr. Pettibone, of Tennessee, Mr. Hoar of Michigan, Mr. Miller of Pennsylvania. Mr. Thompson, of Iowa, was the one member who spoke in favor of Mr. Campbell's claims—his was a "lonely position."

47Toward the close of the debate Mr. Cannon, by unanimous consent was given the opportunity to address the house for one hour.

It was a remarkable privilege that was granted to Mr. Cannon. It should be remembered that he had not been allowed to be sworn in as the delegate from Utah, nor in any sense to take his seat. He won the unusual privilege, doubtless because he sprung his request at the last moment of the debate, when the previous question was about to be moved, after which Mr. Calkins in charge of the election committee's report, was by previous arrangement, to be granted an hour in which to close the debate. The request came in the way of a surprise. It speaks well for the sense of fair play on the part of the house that it was granted. It is a remarkable evidence also of the esteem in which Mr. Cannon was held in the house that such a privilege should be accorded to him.

48When Mr. Cannon arose, every member was in his seat, and the galleries were crowded. There was substituted for the noisy confusion of the previous debate a silence that was painful. He is described by an eye witness as being very pale when he began to speak, nor is it matter of wonder that he was. For many months he and his people had been the object of fierce attacks from the press and the pulpit of the entire country, and for two days in the house of representatives a bitter assault had been made upon him and his constitutional rights by men of trained minds, and of keen, forensic skill, zealous to meet the demands of their respective constituencies and the requirements, it must be admitted, of public opinion throughout the United States. And now there was one voice to be heard against the tumult of millions. And the pathos of it all lay in the fact that it would avail nothing beyond being a protest against injustice. Mr. Cannon stood as some noble stag of the forest whom horns and hounds had pursued and brought to bay. The fight, as a spectator would think, would be a noble one, worthy of the monarch of his race, but the end is known—the stag will succumb to the dogs and the huntsmen. And so with the gallant gentleman from Utah, he would be overwhelmed by weight of numbers, no matter how excellent his defense, or howsoever righteous his cause.

"As I have not prepared any written remarks," said Mr. Cannon in the opening sentence of his speech, "I will feel greatly obliged to members if they will allow me to proceed with what I have to say without interruption." "I would feel ashamed, Mr. Speaker," he said a moment later, "if I could get the opportunity that has been afforded me now, to go back—should the house vote that this seat is vacant—to my constituents without saying something in reply to the many charges which have been made against them by various speakers during this debate."

49The next word placed him on magnificent fighting ground:

49"I am comforted Mr. Speaker, by one reflection: That Christianity which has been so much vaunted upon this floor, and which has been held up in contradistinction to that system which many of my constituents believe in, was itself a persecuted sect, and its founder was crucified between two thieves. And from that day until the present every man who has ever stood among his fellow men to declare principles which came in conflict with popular ideas has, in almost every instance, had to lay down his life as a proof of the sincerity of his convictions concerning that which he has taught. There has been no end of false statements made on this floor concerning the people with which I am connected. But while this flood of false statements has been pouring over the country, concerning the people of Utah, scarcely a voice has been heard in their defense. Those who attempted to say something favorable concerning them in the first discussion which took place upon the Utah case were sneered at and were derided and laughed almost out of the arena, to prevent them from saying a word respecting the morality, industry, the good order, or other good qualities the people of Utah possess."

49Then followed an able review of Utah's history in congress, with a discussion of the contests that had taken place from first to last, including a refutation of many false charges made against the unloved people of Utah, and with which the reader of these pages is already acquainted. He also made a brief but able defense of the institution which constituted the head and front of "Mormon" offending, their marriage system; which, when the temper of the house of representatives and of the country at large is taken into account, was a bold thing to do, and one that required high, moral courage. At one point he referred very feelingly to the undesirable position he had himself occupied in coming to congress:

"You know gentlemen, the position I have occupied here now for nine years, is one which no one capable of filling the place would desire to occupy. It is not pleasant to be made a target for every man who wishes to gain credit for his morality to aim his arrows at. In coming here, however, I have been sustained by the consciousness that I was at a post of duty where it was necessary for some one to represent the people, and that I had the solid support of my constituents."

50In conclusion he said:

50"I am a resident of Utah territory and one of those people who are everywhere, spoken against, and against whom many vile charges are made, as were made against their predecessors, the church of Christ in the early days, and as Jesus predicted would be the case; yet I do respect my oath, and I pity any gentleman, who, with nothing to sustain him but popular sentiment, is willing to trample upon the Constitution and the law and to strike down a people against whom popular sentiment is strong." [^14]

50The speech occupied a little more than an hour. "Taken as a whole," wrote one who listened to it from the galleries, "the speech was delivered with great power, and several members, as they listened to the eloquent and pathetic appeals of the honorable gentleman, were moved to tears." [^15]

50After the speech of Mr. Cannon one hour remained for closing the debate by members supporting the majority report of the house committee on elections. It was occupied chiefly by Mr. Cassidy of Nevada, and Mr. Calkins, chairman of said committee. The vote was then taken on the resolution offered by Mr. Moulton, of Illinois, to seat Mr. Cannon, which was lost by a vote of 79 yeas, to 123 nays, 89 not voting. The vote was then taken on the resolutions declaring that neither Mr. Cannon nor Mr. Campbell was entitled to a seat in congress as delegate from Utah, and declaring the seat vacant. The resolutions were agreed to without the yeas and nays being taken; and the curtain was rung down on one of the most spectacular contest cases in the history of the American congress.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Honorable John T. Caine was a native of the Isle of Man, where in the parish of Kirk Patrick, he was born, January 8th, 1829.
[^2] See first day of the convention proceedings Deseret News, weekly, Oct. 11th, 1882.
[^3] Wonderland of the Wild West, p. 51.
[^4] Wonderland of the Wild West, 1891, p. 54.
[^5] An account of the Liberal party rally at Ogden, October 18, 1882, will be found in Deseret News, daily, of that date—et passim. Also of Oct. 31st, account of meeting at Tooele. An elaborate history of this notable campaign with the platforms of both parties in full, and a number of the speeches of leading participants in it will be found in Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, for Jan., 1883, pp. 426-454.
[^6] See proceedings at length before the Commissioners and the Board of Canvassers, Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 22nd, 1882, p. 696; and in Tullidge's Quarterly Magazine, Jan., 1883.
[^7] Congressional Record, Dec. 4th, 1882, p. 14.
[^8] Congressional Record, of 17th of Jan., 1883, pp. 1298-9.
[^9] Judge Jeremiah S. Black assured the "Mormons" of Utah, as their counsel, that five gentlemen of higher character could hardly be found in the Union. "I assured my clients," he said, "that they might be relied upon to do the simple duty assigned them, of holding the elections honestly, fairly to all parties, and faithfully according ot the laws of the territory." (Judge Black's communication to the secretary of the interior, 29th September, 1882, published in full in Deseret News, weekly of Oct. 25th). Concerning their official actions, however, the judge had occasion later to speak with some severity.
[^10] Millennial Star, vol. xliv. Utah News, p. 639. "This is a specimen of American justice," adds the English chronicler.
[^11] Judge A. B. Carlton. "As a result of the enforcement of provisions of the (Edmunds) law, between 12>,000 and 14,000 polygamous Mormons were disfranchised. This includes men and women." (Interview with Carlton at City of Washington. Dec. 10th, 1882, Washington Republican, copied into Millennial Star, vol. xlv, p. 71).
[^12] "Congress . . . held the opinion that fine and imprisonment were altogether too merciful, and therefore they super-added the penalty of entire and perpetual disfranchisement, perfect deprivation of all political rights, total disability to vote or hold any office whatever either in Utah or elsewhere, under the United States or under any territory, which was civil death and infamy besides. It is vain for the Utah people to complain of this as cruel and impolitic." (Judge Black's communication to the secretary of the interior. See Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 25th, 1882).
[^13] The order of the commission on this point will be found in Commissioner Carlton's Wonderland of the Wild West, pp. 103-4.
[^14] See Rules of the Commission with test oath accompanying them, Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 30th, 1882; p. 500; and Ibid of Oct. 25th in Judge Black's address, p. 638.
[^15] The Supreme Court decision was rendered at the October Term, 1884, Jesse J. Murphy vs. Alexander Ramsey et al. U. S. Supreme Court Reports, vol. xiv, pp. 47-58.
