B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

51CHAPTER CLVI

51AMERICAN PRINCIPLE OF HOME RULE ASSAILED—PEOPLE'S PARTY—LIBERAL PARTY—CHURCH AND ANTI-CHURCH POLITICS

51JOHN T. CAINE was elected to succeed Mr. Cannon as delegate to congress from Utah, as well for the unexpired term in the 47th congress, as for the full term in the 48th; and so through successive terms up to and including the 52nd, which closed in March, 1893. [^1]

THE PEOPLE'S PARTY CONVENTION

Mr. Caine was nominated at a territorial convention of the People's party—the political organization through which the Latter-day Saints waged their contest for their civil and political rights against their persistent and relentless assailants. This convention met on the 11th of October and continued until the 13th, 1882. Judge R. K. Williams, of Ogden, was made temporary chairman, and in the speech he delivered stated that the present convention was different in character from other conventions that had preceded it, in that they "had been more of a theological than of a political character." [^2] This idea was corrected by Mr. Charles W. Penrose on the second day of the convention. Mr. Penrose had been a member of several People's party convention previous to this one, and by reading was familiar with the character of the conventions since the first ever held in Utah; "and," said the speaker, "there was nothing of a theological nature in their organization, business, or objects. They were political conventions for political purposes. They were precisely of the same character as the present convention." "The chairman," he explained, "had not long resided in the territory, and may have been misled on this subject by incorrect reports."

52No exceptions were taken by the convention to the statements of Mr. Penrose, and he undoubtedly voiced the sentiments of all the delegates.

52Since the convention was desirous of nominating a candidate for the unexpired term of Mr. Cannon, a committee was appointed from the convention to ask Governor Murray to call a special election for that purpose. But the governor declined on the ground that there was no law authorizing him to call such an election. The convention, however, nominated Mr. Caine to fill the unexpired term of the 47th, as well as for delegate to the 48th congress.

RECOGNITION OF MR. CANNON'S CONGRESSIONAL SERVICES

The convention did not forget the faithful labors of Mr. Cannon, the former delegate; a resolution expressing appreciation of his services in congress, of his high character, and condemning the action of congress in excluding him from his seat was introduced by Mr. Penrose, and unanimously adopted.

52Several things had occurred in the recent agitation of Utah affairs throughout the United States, that called for some word of protest and rebuke from the representatives of the people—the congressional legislation, the administration of the Edmunds Commission,—which arrived in Utah on the 18th of August, 1882, and immediately began preparations for conducting the November elections—and in the administrative acts of Governor Murray, hence this resolution. Hence also this convention afforded the official opportunity for making that protest and administering that rebuke through its platform declarations. Those declarations, therefore, are an authoritative utterance upon many of the subjects pertaining to Utah and her people—chiefly consisting of the Latter-day Saints—that had been agitated before the country for the past several years, and for that reason said platform is of unusual importance.

53The platform represented that the People's party was struggling for constitutional law and "the sacred privilege"—I wish they had said right, I am sure they meant it—"of local self-government."

53On the subject of government itself the platform declared—"that the protection of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness is the object of free government; * * * that free government can only exist where the people governed participate in the administration thereof."

THE "GENTILE" OR "LIBERAL" PARTY

Relative to the party in the territory opposed to the People's party, the "Gentile" or "Liberal party"—which really stood for the subversion of administration of the government by the people—the platform said: "Any party, or faction of a political community, that seeks to subvert the institutions of local self-government, aims a deadly thrust at the Constitution, and such party or faction is unworthy the suffrages of a free people." In reference to the action of Governor Murray in seeking to annul the expressed will of the people, in the delegate certificate matter, the platform said: "Any official who attempts to stifle the popular voice as expressed at the ballot box is guilty of treason against the sovereign people."

53Relative to the proposition—much discussed at the time through the American press, and especially advocated by political and other adventures in Utah—that a legislative commission be appointed to enact laws, and with the governor and federal appointed judiciary administer them, the platform said:

"The right to frame laws suited to the requirements of the territory having been vested by congress in the legislature elected by its citizens; to deprive them of that right by substituting a commission, arbitrarily appointed, and thus to disfranchise a hundred and fifty thousand people and reduce them to a condition of serfdom, would be unprecedented in the history of the nation—an act that could not be justified by any actual necessity, and that the attempt by a pretended political party to create such a revolution in the government of this territory is worthy only of conspirators and political adventurers."

54The complaints made against the Latter-day Saints for contesting the constitutionality of recent congressional legislation, and especially for refusing to accept the administrative dictum of Governor Eli H. Murray in the matter of interpreting and administering the recently passed Edmunds law—in the matter of appointing local officers, to be more fully considered later—was dealt with in this paragraph:

54"We believe in the right of the people of a territory as well as of a state to test in the courts, established by the government, the constitutionality or construction of any enactment, local or congressional, and express our astonishment at the public declaration of a high federal official of this territory and the enunciation by a so-called political party that the people have no rights except such as congress may grant to them, and that to differ with the territorial executive about the construction of a statute, is nullification.

ATTACK UPON WOMAN SUFFRAGE IN UTAH

There had been an effort under the administration of the Edmunds law commission to have the territorial statute conferring the suffrage upon women declared illegal. This on the initiative of "certain non-'Mormon' citizens of high character;" first before the Utah Commission, and second before the courts. The commission heard the arguments patiently, and then unanimously decided against the motion to refuse registration to the women entitled to vote in Utah. "The courts of Utah were then appealed to," says A. B. Carlton, member of the commission. "They decided the law to be valid and the judges were abused and criticized." [^3] With reference to this assault upon the statute of the territory conferring the right of suffrage upon women the People's party platform said:

"For twelve years the women citizens of Utah have enjoyed the right to vote at all elections in this territory and have exercised it with credit to themselves and to the benefit of the community, and the people's party hereby denounces the attempts which have been made to deprive women voters of the right of suffrage, as an illiberal and unmanly assault upon vested rights and upon justice, equality and the principle of popular sovereignty."

55In order to give recognition to the right of women to participate in political activities, Mrs. Emmeline B. Wells and Mrs. M. I. Horne were elected members of the territorial committee of the People's party.

FOR ECONOMICAL ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT

Other striking items of the platform were the pronouncement in favor of "honest and economized administration in government." The platform "pointed with pride" to the record of economy and honesty in the public administration of affairs "by officers elected from the ranks of the People's party;" and also to the fact that the taxes in Utah were "lighter than (in) any other territory." "The territory is out of debt." the platform could boast, "the counties with one or two exceptions are in the same satisfactory condition."

OF LAWLESSNESS

The platform repudiated the charges of lawlessness which had been made against the people of Utah (and therefore against the Latter-day Saints), and as proof that those slanders were without foundation an appeal was made to the records of the courts, and the "chief courts were not in any way in the control of the people," "And which," continued the plank on this subject, demonstrate the startling fact that the so-called "'Liberal' class, constituting less than twenty percent of the population of the territory, furnishes over eighty percent of the criminals!" To this statement of the platform is added one even stronger, to the same effect, by one of the members of the Utah Commission created by the Edmunds law, A. B. Carlton, who in the text of his book says: "I was not long in discovering that one was as safe in Salt Lake City by day or night as in any other city of the United States;" to which he adds this footnote in comment. "Later I ascertained that if a man should be sand-bagged, robbed, or have his house burglarized, the chances were ten to one that the perpetrator would be an 'outsider' and not a 'Mormon.' It is a fact, shown by statistics, that while only about one-fifth of the population of Utah are Gentiles they contribute at least four-fifths of the crimes of a heinous character. The same proportion will hold good as to misdemeanors—excepting, of course, polygamy and unlawful cohabitation." [^4]

DENIAL OF SUNDRY CHARGES: STATEHOOD

It was denied that the church (i. e. the Church of the Latter-day Saints) dominated the state; that priestly control infringed upon the freedom of the individual; that perjury or falsehood was justified; that intolerance was exhibited either for the discouragement of immigration, or the settlement on the public domain, or that there was invasion of the rights of any individual; that unequal taxation was encouraged or permitted; that public accountings are not given of the expenditure of public money; that the tenets of a church are taught in the district schools; that the people are influenced to disloyalty or antagonism to the government Per contra the platform affirmed it to be "the duty of every American citizen to render obedience to the Constitution of the United States, and every law enacted in pursuance thereof." The concluding planks affirmed the "preparedness of the territory for self-government, by admission into the Union as a sovereign state," and pledged the party to maintain and defend constitutional principles.

THE LIBERAL PARTY CANDIDATE

Philip T. Van Zile was nominated by the Liberal party and ran on a platform which charged everything against the people of Utah which the People's party platform denied. It declared that there could be no fair and impartial! government in Utah "while the Mormon church is permitted to control the law-making power," and therefore favored the adoption of a commission form of government. Mr. Van Zile, in fact, sought to impress the audiences he addressed during the campaign with the idea that his election "meant statehood for Utah, while his defeat meant a legislative commission." [^5]

THE CAMPAIGN OF 1882

After a very extended and earnest campaign, the election took place on the 7th of November, with the result that Mr. Caine received 23,639 votes; Van Zile, 4,884. Notwithstanding his overwhelming defeat at the polls, the defeated Liberal candidate protested before the commission against any votes being counted for Mr. Caine, because he had been voted for to fill the unexpired term of delegate from Utah in the 47th congress, as well as for the full term of the 48th congress; because the two ballots in the one envelope in such voting revealed for whom the ballot was cast, and thus violated the secret ballot law of the territory; and that said Caine was ineligible because within the meaning of the Edmunds law he was a polygamist—that is, a believer in the rightfulness of polygamy. All these objections were overruled by the commission. Next was presented to the board of canvassers appointed by the commission, a protest against their issuing a certificate of election to the successful candidate on the ground that the right to issue said certificate under the laws of Utah belonged to the governor, and that the Edmunds law had not annulled that right. This protest was unanimously overruled by the canvassing board, and the certificate of election given to Mr. Caine. [^6]

On the convening of the second session of the 47th congress, Mr. Caine presented in a petition for admission to his seat the facts of his election to fill the unexpired term of the delegate from Utah in the 47th congress (to which he was elected by 15,490 votes); [^7] and soon afterwards, viz., on the 17th of January, 1883, he was admitted to his seat, by the house voting to approve the unanimous report of the committee on elections that Mr. Caine was entitled to the same. [^8]

PERSONNEL OF THE UTAH COMMISSION

The Utah Commission created by the Edmunds law of 1882, the members of which were appointed by President Arthur, on the 16th of June, 1882, was made up of men of fairly high character. [^9] All of them were, or had been, practicing lawyers, and two of them had been United States senators. The personnel of the commission was as follows: ex-Senator Alexander Ramsey, of Minnesota; ex-Senator Paddock, of Nebraska; George L. Godfrey, of Iowa; James R. Pettegrew, of Arkansas; and Ambrose B. Carlton, of Indiana.

On their arrival in Utah in August the commission found "a strong disposition with some non-Mormon citizens against preparing for the election of delegate to congress," but finding that by United States statutes the territory was entitled to representation in congress by a delegate, they proceeded with the election with the results above stated. Relative to the decisions of the commission in the matter of the women registering and voting; as also with their ruling with reference to the Van Zile protest against the votes cast for Hon. John T. Caine being counted, for the reasons already stated—in all these matters the commission seemed to have acted fairly, though by their procedure they drew upon themselves the abuse of the anti-"Mormons" of the local community. In other respects, however, their actions indicated an unfairness towards the majority of the people of Utah—the Latter-day Saint population. In the matter of appointing registrars, for example, to enroll voters for the November election, eight were "Mormons," seven Gentiles, nine Apostates. Yet according to the United States census of two years before, 1880, the "caste" population was as follows: "Mormons," 120,283; "Gentiles," 14,156; "Apostates," 6,988; "Josephites," (members of the "Reorganized Church") 820; doubtful, 1,716. The allotment of the population by the commission for registration purposes was as follows: "To 'Mormon' registrars, 12,308; 'Gentile,' 63,543; 'Apostate,' 68,112." [^10]

THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE COMMISSION

More serious, however, was their administration of the Edmunds act with reference to the disfranchisement of a large number of people—between 12>,000 and 14,000, according to one of the commissioners [^11]—by means of an expurgatory test oath which covered practically the period of their whole past lives. There is nothing in the Edmunds law itself which justified such procedure as this. Granting, for the sake of the argument, the jurisdiction of congress to pass the law inflicting the added punishment—noting in passing, however, that to add disfranchisement to the penalties already provided of fine and imprisonment for polygamous offenses, seems somewhat harsh and unusual, [^12]—the question remains, "had they the right to inflict it for past offenses as for future offenses without legal conviction?" "If I had the voice of a thousand trumpets, I would answer No as loudly as I could," said Judge Black in his communication to the secretary of the interior.

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE EXPURGATORY OATH

Conflict over PolygamyHCThis in the first issue of their rules and later by circular, the commission expressly directed the registrars to go as far back as 1862, [^13] "and put the penalty of disfranchisement upon all who cannot stand the test, or will not subject themselves to it"—"catching them with a test oath which reached back like the terrible right hand of a gorilla."

Conflict over PolygamyHC60The part of the oath referred to ran as follows:

Conflict over PolygamyHC60"And I do further solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am not a bigamist nor a polygamist; that I am not a violator of the laws of the United States prohibiting bigamy or polygamy; that I do not live or cohabit with more than one woman in the marriage relation, nor does any relation exist between me and any women which has been entered into or continued in violation of the said laws of the United States, prohibiting bigamy or polygamy, and, (if a woman) that I am not the wife of a polygamist, nor have I entered into any relation with any man in violation of the laws of the United States concerning polygamy or bigamy.

60Subscribed and sworn before me this——day of ——, 1882.

60 ——— ——— ———,

60 Registration Officer,

60 ———Precinct." [^14]

Conflict over PolygamyHCCases involving this rule, however, were taken to the courts of Utah where the action of the commission was sustained, both in the district courts, and in the supreme court of the territory. The question was then appealed by the people to the supreme court of the United States where the Utah courts, respecting the power of the commission to prescribe such a test oath as contained in Rule II, here discussed, or "to prescribe any condition of registration or of voting,"—were reversed; and the acts of the commission in these respects were declared to be "null and void." [^15]

THE SEIZURE OF TERRITORIAL OFFICES

In addition to the injustice above noted another abuse and injustice arose under what is known as the Hoar amendment to the Edmunds law. This was an attempt to seize all the territorial and county offices from territorial auditor and treasurer, to precinct justices of the peace and constables, hitherto elected by the people, of which attempt the following is a brief statement:

The territorial law provided for the election of all territorial and county, and precinct officers—including members of the territorial legislature—on the 8th day of August, biennially. The time of the election, interrupted by the Edmunds law, was the 8th of August, 1882. All the registration and election officers of every description were vacated by the ninth section of the Edmunds law; the commission provided for by the same section were not nominated by President Arthur until the 16th of June; [^16] they did not receive their commission until early in July; they held their first meeting in Chicago, on the 17th of that month, and did not arrive in Salt Lake City until the 19th of August, and of course no election for territorial and county officers could be provided for that year. The law required that the registration should take place in May, and be revised in the first week in June; and none but registered voters, of course, could vote. [^17] Under this state of facts it was impossible that an election could be held in August of that year, since it could not be held by officers whom the people had previously chosen, but whom the Edmunds law had displaced, and the commission provided by the congressional act were not appointed in time to conduct the registration.

62Under these circumstances the three federal judges in Utah, Messrs. Hunter, Emerson, and Twiss, joined in a letter to Senator Lapham of New York, calling the senate's attention to the fact that the August election for territorial and county officers, for reasons above given, would default; "that this failure to elect" was likely "to cause general disturbance and trouble. * * * We therefore ask that congress shall take such measures as will provide for legal successors to all the present incumbents of office whose successors would have been chosen at the August election, and thereby secure the continuance of good order, and the regular and undisputed support of organized government, which otherwise would be seriously jeopardized."

Upon this recommendation Senator Hoar, chairman of the senate judiciary committee, in the last days of the first session of the 47th congress, brought in an amendment to the sundry civil service bill authorizing the governor of Utah "to appoint officers in the said territory to fill vacancies which may be caused by failure to elect on the first Monday in August, 1882," in consequence of the provisions of the Edmunds law that displaced the registration and election officers. The appointed officers were to hold their offices until their successors were elected and qualified under the provisions of the Edmunds law. [^18] Senator Joseph E. Brown of Georgia forced upon the measures the following amendment. "Provided that the term of said officers shall in no case exceed eight months." [^19]

63When this senate amendment came up in the house, on the 4th of August, it was sent to the conference committee which reported it back on the 5th and announced that it had been withdrawn from disagreement; and Mr. Blackburn, of Kentucky, urged its passage. Mr. Converse of Ohio sought to have the measure so amended that it would not apply to any officers who had not been guilty of polygamy, where, under the laws of the territory of Utah, they can hold their respective offices until their successors are elected and qualified." [^20]

63The conference report, however, was not subject to amendment; but Mr. Converse managed to so introduce an amendment as to have it go into the Congressional Record.

Mr. Converse in the hearing he secured for his proposed amendment for entrance upon the Congressional Record insisted that the granting of this appointing power to the governor of Utah, placed "the treasury of that territory in the hands of a returning board." "By this provision," he further urged, "you have bound that territory hand and foot, and given it over to carpetbag governors and returning boards to rob, as the southern states have been robbed by the same class of officers within the last few years." When Mr. Blackburn spoke eulogistically of Governor Murray, as a Kentuckian known to him and highly esteemed, Mr. Converse answered, that if the gentleman from Kentucky (Mr. Blackburn) would "examine the files and papers in the office of the Bureau of Justice in this city (Washington), he will find an examination made by the last administration of Mr. Murray's proceedings as marshal of Kentucky, which I think would induce him to modify his opinion. He also said that Mr. Murray's recent action in the Campbell certificate matter, is not calculated to inspire confidence in either his judgment or his property. But without regard to him," concluded Mr. Converse, "such power ought never to be taken from the people and placed in the hands of any one man. Neither ought he to be subjected to any such temptation."

The matter referred to by Mr. Converse respecting an examination "made by the last administration" regarding Utah's governor, has reference to an examination before the committee on expenditures in the department of justice, of which Mr. W. M. Springer, of Illinois, was chairman. The charges against Murray were made by John D. White, representative in congress from the state of Kentucky, Henry Diven, an ex-deputy marshal of that state, and G. K. Chase. These charges were in substance "that Governor Murray, while United States marshal of the district of Kentucky, collected illegal fees and made illegal charges for guards and for the transportation of prisoners." The hearing had was not a very searching one. When it had reached a certain point of development it was "quashed," the committee refusing to proceed further, since it was claimed that after Justice Harlan of the supreme court of the United States, and Mr. John G Carlisle, speaker of the house of representatives had testified to the general good character of Governor Murray, his vindication was evident. On the other hand it was held that the investigation was merely a "white-washing affair," and that the committee had refused to call quite a long list of witnesses submitted to the committee by Mr. White, both in his oral testimony and in a written communication. After the "investigation" was closed, Representative White, in order to show the inadequacy of it, introduced the subject in a speech on the floor of the house on the 18th of April, which the renomination and reappointment of Murray as governor of Utah was under consideration in the senate. The speech appears in the Congressional Record, of April 25th, 1884 and in the Appendix of the record of that congress. Mr. White published as an appendix to his speech, the testimony taken before the Springer committee. If the Springer committee's "investigation" was a "white-washing affair" it was effective, since Murray was reappointed to the governorship of Utah, and on his return to Salt Lake City was given a hearty public welcome and banquet by the Utah "ringites." [^21]

"OFFICE GRAB" PROCEDURE IN UTAH

It is very clear from these facts developed in the debate upon the Hoar amendment to the Edmunds bill, that it was not the intention of the legislators to vacate the territorial and county offices in Utah where the territorial law provided that present incumbents should hold over until their successors were elected and qualified, [^22] and as this was a general provision of the territorial law there were clearly no vacancies to fill—except in cases of death or resignation, or established—not assumed—cases of polygamy. "It is clear beyond possible doubt," said Judge Black, in his address to the secretary of the interior, "that the Hoar amendment did not bring the much coveted power within the grasp of the governor." [^23] Yet in the face of all this, Governor Murray assumed that the Hoar amendment vacated all the territorial and county offices that would have been filled by the votes of the people had the August election been held, [^24] and proceeded by proclamation to fill the same by his own appointees. By his first proclamation, 16th of September, he appointed one hundred and six such officers, including the territorial auditor of public accounts; in a second proclamation, 27th September, he appointed forty; [^25] and in a third proclamation, Oct. 20th, he appointed twenty-eight, [^26] making a total of one hundred and seventy-four. These appointments were nearly all made from the "Gentile" or from the "apostate Mormon" classes of the community. Only in rare cases, and these only when there was none from the other classes to be found at all suitable, was there variation from the rule.

66A syndicate of law firms was formed to conduct the necessary litigation in the cases, to prepare the bond and oath of office for the appointees, and instruct them as to what steps would be necessary to take to be installed and who would also attend to the prosecution of such suits as might be deemed necessary to test the right of the appointees to the several offices. Each of the appointees was to send to this self-constituted committee of Salt Lake county appointees, who took this business in hand, $15.00 to meet the expense thus incurred. [^27]

66That the Utah "ring" stood in with the governor in this attempt at seizing the local government of the people through this wholesale and indiscriminate "grab" at the territorial and county offices, admits of no doubt. [^28]

The "office grab" of Governor Murray, et al, however did not succeed. The officers elected by the people refused to vacate in favor of the governor's appointees. Test cases were taken into the courts upon which various decisions were rendered, chiefly in respect of procedure, and in the one case where a writ of mandate issued—the Richards-Kimball case involving the office of probate judge of Weber county—an appeal was taken to the supreme court of the territory. This court's decision, rendered in February, 1883, was favorable to the governor's appointee, Mr. Kimball, but an appeal was taken to the supreme court of the United States. It was evident, however, that before the matter could be adjudicated by the tribunal, the eight months which marked the limit for which the governor's appointment would hold, would be passed, and therefore the case never reached the court of last resort; and the "office grab" passed into history as an abortive effort against the existence of local self-government in Utah. "The attempt," however, without the consummation of the deed, is sufficient in atrocity to "confound" the Utah conspirators against the American principle of home rule in Utah. The following August a regular election for territorial and county officers took place under the direction of the Utah Commission, and the local officers in question were elected by the people. [^29]

I shall offer no apology for dealing with the political matters of this chapter at such length and even though a number of the issues that arose in connection with them were settled adversely by decisions of the supreme court of the United States against those who launched attempts against the home rule principle of the American system; and which ordinarily when so settled would be regarded as ended without further discussion; but here we are setting down the record of those crimes against the principle of "local self-government" which are the best concrete examples of the crime against those principles in American history. Also an example of the most unremitting attempts by one thing after another against the people, all having the one end in view, the breaking down of, and destroying the power and influence of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, by striking down their rights as citizens of the territory and of the United States. These attempts that fail of realization, as well as those which may be said to achieve success for the enemy, make up the story of the annoyances, and trials, and petty tyrannies and injustices to which the members of the church have been subjected, and hence proper subject matter for consideration in a comprehensive history of that church.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Memorial complete signed by Francis Marion Lyman, speaker of the house, and Joseph F. Smith, president of the council, will be found in Deseret News weekly, of Feb. 22nd, 1882.
[^2] Ibid, of March 8th, 1882.
[^3] Deseret News, weekly, issue of March 8th, 1882.
[^4] Deseret News, weekly, of June 14th, 1882. The returns of the voting on the Constitution are certified by the president of the council and the speaker of the house of the legislative assembly, whose action authorized the convention. (Ibid).
[^5] The Cannon-Campbell vote, 1880, for delegate to congress, had been but 18,567, and 1,357; and in 1882 the vote for delegate to congress was but 23,039 for Caine, and 4,884 for Van Zile; so that the interest of the people of Utah in the question of statehood, even under discouraging circumstances, was greater than in an election for delegate to congress.
[^6] The personnel of the committee was as follows: Wm. H. Hooper, John T. Caine, James Sharp, Wm. W. Riter, F. S. Richards, D. H. Peery, H. D. Johnston. (Deseret News, weekly, of June 14th, 1882). Of this committee but four—Caine, Richards, Peery and Johnston, appeared at Washington to present the Memorial and Constitution. (See Congressional Record, 47th Congress, 2nd Session, p. 3149).
[^7] See Congressional Record of 11th of December, 1883.
[^8] Address to the Members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. The pamphlet is now rare; a copy of the epistle will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 6th, 1882.
[^9] See current press dispatches, in the latter part of August—the epistle bears date of Aug. 29th—and in the first several days of September.
[^10] The Deseret News, weekly, Sept. 6th, 1882.
[^11] See both the governor's communication and the answer of the legislature in extenso extenso in Deseret News, weekly, of March 15th, 1882.
[^12] Whitney's History of Utah, vol. iii, p. 200.
[^13] The chancellor and board of regents declared it to be "The finest public square in the city." (Annual Report, 1884-5, p. 12). Now the site of one of Salt Lake's High Schools. The University is removed to the east "bench," a commanding site, and "Deseret University" has become "Utah University."
[^14] See item in general appropriation bill passed by the legislature of 1880, and approved by the governor on 20th of February. (Deseret News of March 10th, 1880).
[^15] Deseret News, weekly, of March 22nd, 1882, p. 134. The Utah Commission took the same view of this subject as the governor did, and therefore did not include these territorial officers in the election of August 6th, 1883. (See signed communication by a committee, Carlton and Godfrey, of the Utah Commission, in Deseret News, weekly, of June 20th, 1883).
[^16] See editorial review of these subjects in Deseret News, weekly, of March 22nd, 1882.
[^17] Deseret News, weekly, of April 9th, 1884.
[^18] See answer of legislature of Governor Murray, Deseret News of March 15th, 1882, p. 125.
[^19] See Memorial of the Territorial Legislature (the 26th) of 1884, published in Millennial Star, vol. xlvi, Nos. 20, 21, p. 305, et seq.
[^20] Ibid.
[^21] Utah Reports, vol. iv, pp. 421-438.
[^22] Jan. 6th, 1890, Supreme Court Reports, vol. x, pp. 190-194.
[^23] Millennial Star, vol. xlvi, p. 311.
[^24] Ibid, p. 321.
[^25] Ibid. Oct. 4th, p. 591.
[^26] Ibid of Nov. 8th, p. 661.
[^27] The self-constituted committee were U. J. Wenner, probate judge; William Nelson, county clerk; Edmund Wilkes, surveyor; Arthur Pratt, sheriff. The law firms syndicated were Marshal and Royle; Sutherland and McBride; Dickson and Varian; Williams and Young; and to these was added P. T. Van Zile, the United States district attorney. (See Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 4th, 1882, p. 583. In same impression will be found the instructions of these lawyers as to procedure for the appointees to follow in filing bonds and applying for their offices).
[^28] 28. Address of Judge Black to the secretary of the interior, copied into Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 25th, 1882.
[^29] 29. The official returns by counties will be found tabulated in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 10th, 1883, p. 606. The total vote cast was 21,969; of which the People's party cast 20,508; and the Liberal party 1,453. The vote in the previous November had been People's party 23,039 and the Liberal party 4,884, a falling off in the Liberal party's vote of 3,431; and of the People's party, a decrease of 2,531. The Utah Commission in their report to the secretary of the interior deplored the decrease in the Gentile vote, for the reason that it was believed that by proper effort and good management, one or more non-Mormons could have been elected to the legislature. (Commission Report, Oct. 30th, Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 7th, 1883).
