B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

69CHAPTER CLVII

69LEGAL RESISTANCE BY THE PEOPLE TO ENCROACHMENTS UPON THEIR POLITICAL RIGHTS—AN EFFORT FOR STATEHOOD

69IT must not be thought that the Latter-day Saints—then the very large majority of the people of Utah, and the people especially against whom all this federal legislation noted in the preceding chapter was leveled—were indifferent to their liberties or inactive in maintaining them. They made a brave resistance to the encroachment of the central power into the domain of local government. This, as we have already seen, through the efforts of their delegate to congress, Mr. Cannon, to maintain his place in the house of representatives; second by selecting a man from the same political party and of the same religious faith rather than an "alien" to the local community, a federal officeholder who sought the place under the plea—or more nearly the threat—that his election would mean statehood for Utah, while his defeat meant "a commission form of government." Also by the Utah legislature memorializing congress in relation to Utah affairs, while the Edmunds bill was pending in the senate, and other drastic measures were before congress. "We do most earnestly memorialize congress," said the legislative assembly, in their conjoint Memorial, "not to act hastily upon extreme measures, radical in intent, and which would be hurtful in the application; but to appoint a commission of honorable gentlemen to come to Utah, empowered to send for persons and papers, and otherwise authorized to fully investigate the affairs of the territory, the citizens thereof, and every matter bearing upon the question at issue." [^1]

This was supplemented later by a more formal and pretentious Memorial, making the same request, and drafted by a special, conjoint committee of the house and council, setting forth in detail the reasons why an investigating commission should be sent to Utah to inquire into the territory's affairs before radical measures should be enacted. The Memorial is an able state paper, giving a resume of the whole ground of controversy as to the "Mormon question" in Utah, from the pro-"Mormon" standpoint.

70The conjoint committee which drafted the Memorial was made up of the following members: of the council, Erastus Snow, Daniel H. Wells, John T. Caine; of the house, Charles W. Penrose, Lorin Farr, John Jaques, Edward Partridge, Edward Dalton. Among the anti-"Mormon" charges refuted was one that the affairs of the territory were under the control of foreign-born citizens." "The present legislative assembly contains twenty-seven American-born, and but nine naturalized citizens," said the Memorial. Again, in respect to education:

70"We are accused of being opposed to education. Statistics demonstrate the contrary. Territorial tax, equal to that from which the entire revenue of the territory is derived, is annually assessed, collected, and disbursed exclusively for payment of school teachers in district schools, open to the children of all citizens, irrespective of creed, color, or party, while in addition, a local option law permits a tax not 'exceeding two per cent for general school purposes, to be annually assessed in the district where the people so elect by popular vote.'" [^2]

70One thousand of the Memorials were ordered printed in pamphlet form, that copies might be sent to the president of the United States, to members of the cabinet, and to each member of congress, in both house and senate. No heed was paid to these Memorials by congress.

A counter Memorial was sent from a meeting of "prominent Gentiles" representing that the "Memorial" by the Utah legislature asking for the appointment of an "investigation commission" was merely a trick to gain time, and that should the petition be granted it would be claimed that it was a "divine interposition in favor of polygamy," and used "to incite the masses of the Mormon people against the just authority of the national government." This Memorial bears date of 17th of February. It was published in the New York Herald of Feb. 18th, 1882. The Deseret News questioned its being sent out from a "meeting of prominent Gentiles." Evidently the meeting was not a public one. [^3]

ANOTHER APPEAL FOR STATEHOOD

Political and Legal AffairsHCIt was decided also by the legislature of 1882 to make another effort to obtain statehood for Utah as a means of escape from the repeated assaults upon the rights of the people to local self-government. "It is the right and the duty of the people of Utah," said the legislature, "to plead for and demand a republican form of government, so that they and their posterity may enjoy the blessings and liberties, to secure which the founders of this great nation lived, labored, and struggled, and died." Accordingly a resolution was passed authorizing the assembling of a convention on the 10th of April, 1882, consisting of double the number of the total representation of the respective counties to the territorial legislature—which would amount to seventy-two members for the convention.

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe convention met at the time appointed, framed and unanimously adopted a Constitution, and submitted it to a vote of the people. The vote was taken on the 22nd of May. The Constitution was adopted by 27,814 votes, as against 498 in the negative. [^4] This in the face of the unlikelihood of obtaining a favorable consideration by congress was a remarkable vote. [^5] On the 6th of June the constitutional convention reconvened, drew up a Memorial to congress and elected a committee to present the Constitution to that body. [^6] The matter of Utah's statehood, however, was not presented in congress until 23rd of February, 1883. On that day United States Senator Wilkinson Call, of Florida, presented in the senate the Memorial of the territorial convention, praying for the consideration of Utah's petition for statehood, asking also for the repeal of some sections of the Edmunds bill, and protesting against the injustice of other legislation then pending in congress. The Memorial was referred to the committee on territories and ordered printed in the record; but beyond this no favorable action was taken on the Petitions and Memorials of the people of Utah.

Political and Legal AffairsHC72On the 11th of December, 1883, in the 48th congress. Mr. Caine, the delegate from Utah, presented a bill for the admission of Utah as a state, somewhat in pursuance of the action of the convention of 1882; but this measure received no consideration beyond reference to the committee on territories. [^7]

Conflict over PolygamyHCPOLITICAL CONFUSION—A WORD FROM THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

Conflict over PolygamyHCNone of these efforts on the part of the people, as we already have seen, availed anything in preventing the passage of the Edmunds bill—it became law; and the only thing left for the Latter-day Saints to do was to adjust themselves to the changed conditions as best they could. To aid them in this the first presidency of the church addressed to the an epistle of instructions shortly after the arrival of the Utah Commission and the issuance by them of rules and instructions to the registrars and judges of election they had appointed. The justification for sending forth this epistle rested upon the fact that the first presidency learned "from many quarters" that some of the church members were not clear in their minds as to the course they ought to take in respect of registering and voting. Some were reported to view the requirements of the law as the commission proposed to administer it as iniquitous; others had scruples about taking an oath which embodied all the odium of a religious test; and still others felt so indignant that they would "rather suffer the loss of citizenship [i. e. the elective franchise] than to seek to maintain it" by such methods as were proposed by the commission. Referring to this condition it was pointed out in the epistle that it was as religious community that the Latter-day Saints were assailed, and it was the duty of those who under the law could do so, to defend the community by exercising the few political privileges left to them in the interest of the community. [^8]

Conflict over PolygamyHC"IN THE MARRIAGE RELATION"

Conflict over PolygamyHCThis counsel was heralded throughout the press of the United States as "Mormon opposition to the Edmunds law." [^9] The epistle also called attention to what the first presidency regarded as extra administrative action on the part of the commission in putting the law into operation. The law itself provided "that no polygamist, bigamist or any person cohabiting with more than one woman, and no woman cohabiting with any of the persons described as aforesaid in this section, * * * shall be entitled to vote at any election," etc. The commission in Rule II required the applicant for registration to swear—"I am not a violator of the laws of the United States prohibiting bigamy or polygamy; I do not live or cohabit with more than one woman, in the marriage relation!" This phraseology, of course, confined the operation of the law strictly, as no doubt was the intention of congress, to those cohabiting in the polygamous relations sanctioned by the plural marriage system of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. "If proof were needed," said the epistle, "respecting the truth of our protestations and testimonies, that this is a part of our religion, and that the object of this law is not the eradication of immoral practices, but that it is intended as a direct below at our religious faith and practice, we have it furnished in this oath prescribed by the commissioners. * * * It is with unmixed satisfaction we perceive that the oath draws the line so sharply and distinctly between marriage and licentiousness. By the attempt in the construction of this oath to shield from injury those who, by their illicit connections with the other sex might, under the provisions of the Edmunds law, be disfranchised, the Latter-day Saints, who, in all sincerity and honor have obeyed a revelation from God, are not reduced to their degraded level." [^10]

CONTROVERSY OVER APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS WITH GOVERNOR MURRAY

Among other unpleasant things of this period was the controversy between Governor Murray and the legislature during its session of 1882, on the appointment of certain territorial officers. The point at issue was as to whether the aforesaid officers were to be nominated by the governor and by and with the advice and consent of the legislative council, appointed by him; or whether they were to be appointed or elected as the legislature had by previous enactments provided. Governor Murray took the first view, the legislature the second. The offices in question were two commissioners to locate university lands, territorial auditor, treasurer, superintendent of public schools, librarian, sealer of weights and measures, recorder of marks and brands, surveyor general, chancellor of Deseret University, a board of twelve regents and a treasurer for the board. The governor submitted to the legislative council the nominations to fill all these offices, with a communication explaining on what grounds he claimed the right to make the nominations, and with the council's advise and consent, make the appointments. He cited the 7th section of the organic act of the territory which provided that "all township, district, and county offices, not herein otherwise provided for, shall be appointed or elected, as the case may be, in such manner as shall be provided by the governor and legislative assembly of the territory of Utah. The governor shall nominate, and, by and with the advice and consent of the legislative council, appoint all officers not herein otherwise provided for;" of which, the governor held, was the list of territorial officers above given. In answer to his contention the council by formal resolution replied that by former enactments of the legislature, the date of the enactments ranging from 1850 to 1878, these territorial officers had been made elective either by the legislative assembly or by the people, and under such election had continuously held office. That these laws had been submitted to congress and had never been disapproved by that body, and therefore were in full force and effect. That the several executives of the territory who had approved said acts, had by their approval waived and relinquished any right which they previously possessed to nominate these officers, and therefore resolved that "the complaint of his excellency"—viz., that to elect or appoint the aforesaid officers in any other manner than that provided by the act of congress—the organic act—under an act of the legislative power was nullification—was groundless, and his nominations unnecessary. [^11]

Education HCTHE UNIVERSITY CONTROVERSY—GOVERNOR MURRAY vs. THE LEGISLATURE

Education HCThis controversy led to another which threatened for a time to affect the development of higher education in Utah by preventing the completion of the University Building of the territory; and so far as Governor Murray was concerned that would have been the result of this controversy, but happily he was overruled by the patriotism of enterprising "Mormon" citizens. The account of the matter referred to follows. For some time the Deseret University—the institution of higher education referred to—had been very much retarded in its development by inadequate quarters for such an institution. It had occupied for several years the Old Council House on the corner of Main and South Temple streets, described in a previous chapter in this History; and later had been inadequately housed in a "weather-beaten structure formerly known as the 'Union Academy'." [^12] The previous legislature—1880—had taken the needs of this institution into account. Salt Lake City generously granted "Union Square," a block of ten acres in the northern part of the city—1st North and 2nd West streets bounding its south and east sides—for a site, [^13] and the legislature had appropriated $20,000 that was available towards the erection of buildings. [^14] Under these circumstances the foundation and basement story of a building was constructed on the site provided by the city—and the legislature of 1882 to complete the work, appropriated $40,000 more, together with the sum of $15,000 to provide for the tuition of eighty normal students to be prepared in the normal department of the University as teachers for the district schools. These appropriations Governor Murray vetoed, chiefly for the reason, as he claimed, that the University was not legally organized, the regents and chancellor not being named and appointed according to his interpretation of the provisions of section 7 of the organic law of the territory—that is, they were not nominated by him, and appointed by him with the advice and consent of the council of the legislature, and the council had refused to concede his right to make these and other nominations and appointments—hence his veto to these appropriations, hence this blocking of the development of higher education in Utah. "The unfinished building," said the Deseret News editorial, "stopped in this untimely and captious manner, does not speak very loudly for the desire of the executive to promote the cause of education." [^15]

Education HC77The other objections urged by the governor for vetoing these appropriations of the University were, first, that with the other appropriations this for the University went beyond the territorial revenue provided by the existing laws; and second, that appropriations for this purpose should contain a proviso that no doctrinal sectarian tenets should be taught in the University. Both these objections were captious, in that, first, the increasing revenue within the two years to follow promised to exceed all the appropriations of the legislature; and second, that the University was already recognized as a secular institution of the territory, supported out of public funds, and was not and could not be a denominational school, and hence what the governor contended for under this head was unnecessary. [^16] There is no doubt but that these objections would have been waived had the governor been permitted to have appointed the chancellor and board of regents together with the other territorial officers he claimed the right to nominate and appoint.

Education HC78While Governor Murray was giving this evidence that his determination to have his way in the matter of appointing territorial officers was dearer to him than the cause of higher education in Utah, certain prominent Latter-day Saint citizens, and the church of which they were members, stepped forward and removed the obstacle to the cause of education erected by the stubborn, self-willed policy of Governor Murray. At a meeting of the chancellor and the board of regents of the University, held on the 11th of May, 1883, a resolution was passed opening subscriptions for loans and voluntary contributions by which the officers of the University might be able to proceed with the University structure, until it was made ready to house the institution.

Education HC78"In view of the facts," said the report that the school was suffering through the want of sufficient room to accommodate its students and to carry on its work of instruction, and that the unfinished building was in danger of waste and destruction through exposure and want of care, and that the entire grounds donated conditionally by the city, together with the work already done upon the building, were liable to forfeit, they (i. e. the aforesaid patriotic citizens and the church) determined to make an effort to raise means to relieve these unfortunate conditions. In this effort they were successful. By loans and voluntary contributions from citizens a sufficient amount was raised to erect the entire walls and roof the building in, and even to prepare two rooms in it to accommodate a large class of students during the winter just passed. [^17]

Education HCIt was hoped that the legislature of 1884 would make appropriations that would reimburse these citizens and be sufficient to complete the building. So indeed the legislature did, appropriating $50,000 for that purpose; but again the governor, not being permitted to appoint the chancellor and board of regents (which from February 28th, 1850, to the time of this controversy had been chosen by joint vote of both houses of the general assembly—a period of over thirty years), [^18] again interposed his veto, and thus again prevented the representatives of the people from appropriating the money of the people for housing an educational institution of the people—the only "high school" of the territory, at the time, in which normal students could be educated at public expense to serve as teachers in the public schools. [^19] What to Governor Murray did it matter if the cause of education in the territory languished; if the $20,000 expended for foundation and basement story should be wasted, by not completing the structure; or, if the valuable bequest of "Union Square," by Salt Lake City should be lost to the University through failure to fulfill the conditions specified in the bequest by the erection of suitable buildings for the institution within the time limits fixed in the bequest? What did all this impending waste of the people's money, and the disappointment of their educational ambitions for the territory amount to in comparison with the importance of an autocratic governor appointed from Washington—an adventurer who had no interest in common with the people—having his way in the matter of appointing a score of territorial officers hitherto elected directly or indirectly by the people! Especially could the governor have patriotically waived the question of his right to appoint the chancellor and board of regents of the University until the question then pending in cases before the United States supreme court could be determined. [^20]

ACTION OF THE SUPREME COURT

The question of the right of the governor to make the appointment of territorial officers other than those of "township, district, and county officers" finally went to the courts. The case was tried in the third district court (Salt Lake City) the People vs. Nephi W. Clayton, territorial auditor, and the People vs. James Jack, territorial treasurer. The court sustained the right of the governor to appoint these officers by and with the advice and consent of the legislative council. The case was appealed to the supreme court of the territory which affirmed the rightfulness of the district court's decision, June, 1886. [^21] An appeal was taken to the supreme court of the United States which affirmed the rightfulness of the decision of the territorial supreme court. [^22]

EXERCISE OF THE ARBITRARY VETO POWER OF THE GOVERNOR

Undoubtedly it was the intent of congress that the Edmunds law commission should be but a temporary returning board. It was provided in the law itself that the commission should only continue in office "until the legislative assembly of said territory shall make provisions for filling said offices"—i. e. "all the registration and election offices of every description in the territory;" whereupon these officers provided for by the law enacted by the said legislature, and elected or appointed as the law prescribed, should take charge of the registration and election affairs of the territory instead of the Edmunds law commission. This the Utah legislature of 1884 sought to bring to pass by the enactment of a general election law making the necessary provisions. But this act of the legislature was vetoed by the governor, and the Utah Commission, in consequence, was continued in office and the evident intention of congress with respect to the dispensing with that returning board was thwarted.

An effort to reapportion the legislative representation of the territory, met with even more contemptuous treatment at the hands of the autocratic governor. This measure was one recommended in the governor's message. The legislature promptly passed a bill conforming to his suggestions as they supposed; but the bill was returned without his approval, with the statement that "the census of 1880 entitles every 12,000 of population to one representative in the council; and every 6,000 of population, to one representative in the house of representatives," and the governor added: "If the legislature will pass an act apportioning the territory into twelve council districts and twenty-four representative districts, as near as may be upon the foregoing basis, where each councilor and representative is to be voted for separately, I will be pleased to approve the same." [^23]

81In conformity with this suggestion another bill was drawn and sent to the governor for his signature according to his promise. "But, he forfeited his pledged agreement, and treated the bill with the contempt of utter silence, neither approving or rejecting it." The following scathing comment on conditions prevailing in Utah—supposedly under the rule of republican institutions:

81"Such is the dependent condition of the territory of Utah, that it does not need the absolute veto of the governor to render void an act passed by the people's elected representatives, but his neglect to sign it is more mighty than the combined labors of thirty-six legislators chosen by ballot to express the popular will. The object of this insulting treatment of the legislature was, without doubt, to leave the way open for the passage of a measure now before your honorable body, giving the governor alone the right to make the appointment of the representation." [^24]

81The closing appeal of the Memorial was eloquent, though a bit too humble for outraged Americans—rightful heirs to the liberties of their patriotic fathers.

"We appeal to you not to condemn us unheard: not to take from us the few political privileges that distinguish us from conquered slaves; not to deliver our fair and flourishing territory into the hands of men responsible to the people; not to reverse for us the established rules of civilized jurisprudence; not to disfranchise the innocent for the alleged offenses of the presumably guilty; not to encroach upon our rights of property; not to apply to us a religious test for political purposes, nor to pass any such rash and revolutionary measures as have been proposed, but to postpone any further action towards Utah until a committee of your own number, or other disinterested persons appointed specially for the purpose, shall have impartially investigated the whole subject of the situation in Utah, and have reported to your honorable body, so that you may act with a fair understanding of all sides of these important questions and your memorialists will ever pray."

82The request for a congressional investigating committee was once more an appeal made in vain—none was appointed.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It is as vile a concoction of misrepresentation, denunciation and crediting of false motives and purposes to the objects of its assault—the Church of the Latter-day Saints—as was ever crowded into one hundred pages of printed matter. "I call it a production of diabolism," said Elder John Nicholson, associate editor of the Deseret News, in his lecture on the Tennessee Massacre, (pp. 15-16), "for it is filled with lies and misrepresentations against the Mormon people and their religion from beginning to end." (See also the context).
[^2] Lyford was also the author of brochures on "Tithing," "The Priesthood," "Brigham Young's Record of Blood," etc., etc.
[^3] Mr. Robinson did not know, as the "Mormon" leaders and people did know, how extremely difficult it was for them or their friends to obtain a hearing through the press of the country. Mr. Robinson's letters to the New York World were finally put into book form under the title Sinners and Saints, Roberts Brothers, Boston, 1883.
[^4] The editors in their caption of Mr. Thatcher's article refer to it as "A clever plea for the Saint-hood," and "an able and ingenious defense." It will be found complete in the Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 6th, 1882. Both Van Zile's letter and the Thatcher answer will be found in L. D. S. Pamphlets, Historian's Office, vol. iv, p. 749, et seq.
[^5] The editorial comments of the Inter-Ocean appear in the impression of the 17th of January. Elder Thatcher's reply was dated at Washington, D. C., 28th of January, and appeared in the Inter-Ocean on the 13th of February. (See Deseret News, weekly, of March 26th, 1884).
[^6] Both articles will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of April 2nd, 1884.
[^7] New York World impression of June 14th, weekly, 1882, p. 328. The Chicago Times, early in January, 1884, stood out strongly against hostile legislation for Utah; the same is true of the Chicago Herald of the same period.
[^8] See this History, chapter clv.
[^9] Salt Lake Tribune of March 16th, 1884.
[^10] Teasdale's letter is published in Deseret News, weekly, of March 26th, 1884, p. 152.
[^11] Salt Lake Tribune, daily, of March 20th, 1884.
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] History of Utah, Bancroft, p. 637.
[^14] See Jones' account of the massacre, Millennial Star, vol. xlvi, p. 625, et seq.
[^15] See Jones' account of the massacre, Millennial Star, vol. xlvi, p. 625.
[^16] Letter of Wm. H. Jones, quoted by Elder John Nicholson in a lecture on "The Tennessee Massacre and Its Causes," Salt Lake Theatre, Sept. 22nd, 1884. Excerpt from Jones' letter is given in the footnote of the published lecture, p. 21. The Nicholson lecture delivered in the Salt Lake Theater by request of the mayor of the city and other prominent citizens was the sensation of those exciting times.
[^17] Mrs. Condor died at her home in Hohenwald, the shire town of Lewis county, Tennessee. Her husband, James Condor, died October, 1911. (See Improvement Era. Oct., 1911, p. 1107).
[^18] It is published in the Improvement Era of November, 1898.
[^19] Millennial Star, vol. xlvi, pp. 582-3.
[^20] For above details see communication of Judge George W. Bean in Deseret News, weekly, Aug. 27th, 1884, p. 499; Bishop Henry Lunt, Ibid, p. 504 and interview with John W. Berry, Ibid, p. 508.
[^21] See Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 10th and 17th, 1884; also History of Southern States Mission, Southern Star, of July 1st, 1899, pp. 241-2.
[^22] Copied into Millennial Star, vol. xlvi, p. 805.
[^23] Ibid, pp. 805-6.
[^24] Ibid.
