B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

83CHAPTER CLVIII

83SPECIAL PERIOD OF ANTI-"MORMON" MISREPRESENTATION—THE TENNESSEE MASSACRE

83THE period 1880-1884, beyond all others preceding it, was the period of misrepresentation of the Latter-day Saints and conditions in Utah. This misrepresentation was persistent and systematic. It was the period when sectarian churches in Utah were being sustained by contributions from the eastern states. It naturally followed that the more awful conditions could be made to appear in Utah the more generous were the contributions. The sectarian ministers of the period did not fail to see their opportunity, nor did they hesitate to use it. It was a time when politicians appointed from Washington to fill federal offices in Utah—chiefly as a reward for political services to party—were making a mighty effort to get complete political control of the territory, and of the treasury of the people by securing either the adoption of a legislative commission form of government for the territory, or the extension of the appointing power of the governor. Under these general conditions, and with the knowledge of human nature assumed, it requires no effort of mind to understand how great the temptation to misrepresent the Latter-day Saints would be; especially when the universal prejudice existing against them and their religious faith made it so easy an achievement; and so far was it from meeting with rebuke, that it was quite generally rewarded with applause.

LITERATURE OF THE PERIOD Pro et Con

It was this period—1882-1884—that produced a great mass of pro et con "Mormon" literature—chiefly periodical, but some books. It produced the Hand-Book on Mormonism, a compilation by J. M. Coyner, of anti-"Mormon" utterances dealing with many phases of the alleged faith, motives, and objects of the "Mormon" church, including a so-called expose' of their sacred "temple mysteries." [^1] Later—1886—but growing out of this period now considered—came The Mormon Problem, by Rev. C. P. Lyford; [^2] and Mormon Portraits, by Dr. W. Wyl, of the Berliner Tageblatt, the awfullest book published on "Mormonism" since John C. Bennett's alleged expose', in his History of the Saints, 1842. It was in this period—1882-3—that Phil Robinson, war correspondent of the London Daily Telegraph in the first African Boer War, but in his visit to Utah special correspondent of the New York World—called the attention of the country to the fact of the "utter unreliability of anti-Mormon literature," and to the fact that practically there was no other source of information; since, from his viewpoint, "the Mormons themselves" were "most foolishly negligent of the power of the press, and of the immense value of informing public opinion by a free use of type." [^3]

There was, however, occasional opportunity afforded for contradiction of the misrepresentations made of Utah affairs. Mr. George Q. Cannon, Utah's ex-delegate to congress, for instance, in the North American Review of May, 1881, was given space for a reply to Mr. C. C. Goodwin, editor of the Salt Lake Tribune, who had written in the March number of the same magazine, on the "Political Attitude of the Mormons." Elder Moses Thatcher, of the council of the twelve apostles, was given space in the Chicago Inter-Ocean, of November 23rd, 1882, for an effective answer to United States district attorney Van Zile, of Utah, who had written a violent attack upon the "Mormons" in the Inter-Ocean of the 19th of October. [^4] A like courtesy was extended to Elder Thatcher a little more than a year later.

GOVERNOR MURRAY'S MESSAGE TO THE UTAH LEGISLATURE OF 1884

The message of Governor Eli H. Murray had been delivered to the Utah legislature on the 14th of January, 1884, and had caused very widespread and usually unfriendly comment on the status of affairs in Utah. To effect this result was doubtless the aim of the message. Among leading journals making such unfriendly comments, and referring to the message as an "important state paper," was the Chicago Inter-Ocean, and to this journal Elder Thatcher directed his "Review of the Governor's Message." [^5] To this article Judge J R. McBride replied in the Inter-Ocean of 16th of February, championing the cause of Utah's governor, by a defense of his message and a defense of the whole anti-"Mormon" attitude toward Latter-day Saint affairs, to which Mr. Thatcher made rejoinder in the Inter-Ocean of the 16th of March [^6] as aforesaid.

In addition to these opportunities, President John Taylor was given equal space with Governor Murray in the January, 1884, number of the North American Review, on the subject of "Ecclesiastical Control in Utah." Also, be it said to the credit of the press of the United States, a few of the great, and the near great, daily papers of the country, of themselves made protest against the severe and un-American measures proposed to congress for the destruction of what was vaguely called "Mormonism."

86Among these was the New York World, which stead fastly opposed the passage even of the Edmunds bill, of 1882; and more strongly opposed subsequent bills more flagrantly violative of the constitutional principles of American government. [^7]

86In congress Utah was not without friends, either, as witness the opposition to the Edmunds bill of 1882 in both senate and house, already noted; [^8] and in the discussion of the Cullom and Hoar bills in the senate—1883-4—proposing a legislative commission for Utah.

86This misrepresentation of the Church of the Latter-day Saints during this period—misrepresentation of its motives and its purposes—culminated in what is known in the annals of the times as the "Tennessee Massacre," directly traceable to an alleged address by a "Mormon" bishop by the name of "West," in Juab, Juab county, about ninety miles south of Salt Lake City. The canard, for so it proved to be, was published in the Salt Lake Tribune, of Sunday, March 16th, 1884. It was headed:

"A RED HOT ADDRESS"

"Bishop West of Juab, on the God-forsaken Gentile Government."

Juab was a small, obscure railroad town, and consisted of a hotel, a frame boarding house, a store or two, supported by a few scattered ranchmen, and section hands of the railroad. The "address" purported to be a stenographic report of an harangue by one "Bishop West" on Sunday, March the 9th. It is too long for reproduction in this text, and excerpts would scarcely give an idea of the vileness of the gross brutality, and untruthfulness of the fanfaronade, of treasonable diatribe against the United States, its murderous blasphemy, its smug hypocrisy, and its threats of assassination against Governor Eli H. Murray.

87The opening sentence and a few excerpts may help a little to exhibit the senseless harangue put forth as a "sermon."

87"It is time my brothers and sisters, that we ceased this cowardly silence and humble submission to the rulings and machinations of the devil and his fiery imps at the capitol of this God-for-saken Gentile government; and it is time for us to fling their defiance and scurrilous domination back in their faces. * * * If I had my way not a house would be left standing which sheltered a knavish Gentile. They are eye-sores in the sight of the Lord and his vengeance is sure to come. They have persecuted his saints, and he has commanded them to destroy their persecutors. He has commanded the saints to rid the earth of the sin-besmudged heretic. * * * Hell is filled with the scurrilous Gentiles and the floors of hell are paved with the skulls of apostates. He who kills a Gentile rids the earth of a serpent and adds a star to his own crown. The saints are gathering together from sea to sea and they will rise in their awful might and fall upon the enemies of Zion. * * * The minions of the devil are let loose in our midst by the crime soaked politicians who rule our land. The shades of the sainted martyr Smith calls aloud for vengeance at the hands of his followers. The blood of the Gentile persecutors shall be spilled on their own threshold to appease the anger of our prophet. Tune the lyre and beat the cymbals, for our revenge is now at hand! * * * Our strength is greater than the world believes and our will is powerful and undaunted by heretic menaces. The Lord is our shepherd and we cannot fail. The red man is our firm ally and he thirsts for the blood of the enemy of Zion. * * * Our young men are drilling for the conflict, and our wives and daughters are making themselves ready to minister to our wants, and the day is close at hand. Let the Gentile leeches and poltroons beware and win our forbearance if yet they may." [^9]

87So on to the end, ad nauseam.

87In editorial comment the Tribune referred to it as having been forwarded to the paper by "a friend," and in the heading to the address it was declared to have been reported "by Tobias Tobey, for the Salt Lake Tribune."

"It reads like the old-day tabernacle harangues, and the devout brethren and sisters of the former time would have warmly enjoyed and commended it, as being 'full of the sperret;' indeed, we are not sure but that away down deep in their hearts they will approve it now. It is a very violent harangue, full of bitter malice and the usual untruths of the fanatics when they undertake to deal with subjects wherein they are opposed. The common dreary twaddle of exclusive holiness and a monopoly of honesty is disgustingly paraded by this dishonest parasite in behalf of a set of rogues whose crimes, peculations, public and private, robberies and unblushing piracies are the amazement of every one who has had to do with the fact."

88Throughout the editorial treats the "address" as if it were a truthful report. Two days later came the exposure of the hoax. Elder George Teasdale, of Nephi, on seeing the "address" in the Tribune, wrote to the Deseret News and declared that there was no "Bishop West," in that section of the country or in the church; that only a branch organization existed at Juab; that it was presided over by Elder James Wilson; that on Sunday the 9th of March, the time of the alleged harangue, in consequence of a washout on the railroad, no services were held in Juab, and who "Tobias Tobey" was nobody knew, and that the "address" was "a base fabrication." [^10] The Salt Lake Tribune itself claims also to have conducted an investigation of the matter, "the authenticity of it [the 'address'] having been questioned." This exposure led to the editorial announcement on the 20th of March, that the reported "sermon" was "a forgery." "No such 'address' was delivered, as far as this investigation is concerned," continues the Tribune's editorial, "and no 'West' is known in Juab." Had the editorial stopped with this declaration, with subsequent statement of how it had been imposed upon by "a friend," it might have come out of the affair with some credit; but unfortunately after its denial of the genuineness of the "address" it practically reinstated the forgery in all its strength of falsehood, and of its treasonable and its murderous threatening, by saying:

88"We regret that we have been made the vehicle of this imposture, but it is so like what is going on all the time and the ordinary talk and feeling of the majority here, only in more concentrated form, that it might have deceived even a saint." [^11]

89The Tribune claims that the "explanation" of its correspondent was that the "address" was "a collection in one connected whole" of what he had "heard at different times in Mormon sermons and otherwise during a brief sojourn in Utah." This even the Tribune itself denounced as reprehensible, saying: "It was a totally reprehensible proceeding to write these disjointed fragments up in this way and attribute them to one man on any special occasion." [^12] Yet the Tribune throughout the controversy maintained that the chief matter of the bogus "West address" was only what had been said in the discourses of "Mormon" leaders, but in more "concentrated form," and even published some excerpts from discourses, in "proof" of the position, and followed these with the statement:

89"In view of all the facts, and of the record, we submit that the 'Bishop West Address' was no libel at all, though it was non-genuine. But the genuine is worse than the spurious, as fact is stronger than fiction." [^13]

THE MISCHIEF OF FALSEHOOD SET ON FOOT

The alleged "West address" was circulated in various parts of the east. It found its way into Lewis county, Middle Tennessee; and while the tragedy which occurred at Cane Creek in that county, on the 10th of August, 1884, may not be charged solely to that "address," it was beyond any question a potent factor in producing the tragedy, the last thing needful to create the sense of justification in the minds of the people in that vicinity for the ferocious act of mobocracy that ended in the killing of two "Mormon" missionaries from Utah; two other young men not members of the church, but friends of the elders, and natives of Tennessee; also the serious wounding of an aged lady—mother of the two young men referred to—rendering her a cripple for life, and the killing of one of the mob party.

90For more than twenty years elders of the Church of the Latter-day Saints had occasionally passed through Hickman county, Tennessee,—the county adjoining Lewis on the north where there had been members of the church from Nauvoo times. About six years previous to the tragedy here to be described, the elders had extended their labors on to the headwaters of Cane Creek, in Lewis county, where a branch of the church had been organized. The converts in this branch had lived in peace with their neighbors, interfering with no one, and uninterfered with except that they had brought upon themselves the sneers of some of their neighbors by becoming identified with so unpopular a religion as "Mormonism." Elders had preached quite regularly through the summer of 1884 in this branch of the church, and considerable success had attended their labors, eighteen baptisms resulting from the labors of Elder John H. Gibbs and Wm. H. Jones from April to July. [^14] During all this summer opposition and bitterness was increasing. One Parson Vandevere, of Hohenwald, the shire town of Lewis county, circulated the "Red Hot Address" alleged to have been preached by "Bishop West;" "and by his pretended credence to the falsehood," wrote Elder Wm. H. Jones, [^15] who was at the Cane Creek tragedy, and narrowly escaped with his life, "causing great excitement. Elder Gibbs and I sent by mail to Vandevere an exposure of the address in question, but he [Vandevere] did not show it to anybody that we know of." [^16]

THE MOB TRAGEDY ON CANE CREEK

Elder Wm. S. Berry and Henry Thompson, traveling elders from Utah in the district, had made an appointment for religious services to be held at the home of a Brother James Condor, on Cane Creek, on Sunday, August 10th. A day or two previous to the time of the appointment they were joined by Elders John H. Gibbs and Wm. H. Jones, who had been absent from this field of labor through six or eight weeks on a tour through surrounding counties in Tennessee and northern Mississippi. They had been absent on a special mission to which they had been called by the president of the Southern States Mission, to stem, if possible, the tide of misrepresentation that was creating popular prejudice, the pressure of which was being every where felt throughout the south. They were instructed to call upon the leading citizens of the various counties and give them correct information respecting the doctrine, history, and the progress of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, as well as to represent the true condition of affairs in Utah—politically, socially, and morally.

91By ten o'clock a number of people had gathered at the Condor residence where three of the elders had arrived earlier in the morning, Gibbs, Berry, and Thompson; Elder Jones who had lingered at the home of Mr. Thomas Garrett to read Utah papers, as he drew near the Condor residence was seized by a mob of twelve or fourteen masked men who held him prisoner, and made inquiry as to the whereabouts of the other elders.

A number of the gathering congregation were loitering about the gate and doorway of the house, and some were in the orchards at the rear of the house, when the mob from ambush rushed upon the Condor home. At the gate the mob seized the older Condor and held him fast, but not before he had shouted to James R. Hudson, his wife's son by a former husband, and his own son, Martin, to get their guns and resist the attack. The two young men made a dash for the house. Young Hudson had to go to the attic of the house for his gun, which he, that morning, had loaded at the request of his mother in anticipation of trouble. Martin's gun was suspended in deer horns over the back door of the living room, where the morning's religious services were to be held. As Martin entered the door the leader of the mob was taking down this gun, and a short, fierce struggle ensued for possession of it, during which young Martin Condor was shot down by others, and the mobber, turning the gun upon Elder Gibbs, who was in the act—Bible in hand—of seeking a text for the pending morning service—shot him, and the elder sank to the floor a dead man.

92Meantime other bloody work had been going on. Many guns had been fired. One aimed at Elder Thompson, Elder Berry seized and pushed aside, enabling Thompson to escape from the back door through the orchard and to the woods, but at the instant he had saved Thompson's life Berry him self fell riddled with bullets. The mobber who had shot down Elder Gibbs had just stepped from the front door of the house when young Hudson came from the attic, gun in hand. Two men seized him at the foot of the rude stairway, but flinging them off, he rushed to the door and shot the murderer of Elder Gibbs, killing him instantly. The man so killed proved to be Dave Hinson, the leader of the mob, and the arch enemy of the elders in that region. Then pandemonium reigned. Young Hudson was fired upon and fatally wounded—he died within an hour; the mob yelling for vengeance for the killing of their leader, rushed to the open windows and fired promiscuously into the house, savagely wounding Mrs. Condor in the hip, from which to the time of her death she remained a cripple; but most of the shots thus fired riddled the bodies of the dead elders upon the floor. This done the mob took their dead leader and departed. [^17]

ESCAPE OF ELDER WM. H. JONES

The single guard left in the adjacent woods with Elder Jones, hearing the firing, mingled with the screaming of the women and children, and thinking that a general massacre was going on, evidently became alarmed and permitted his prisoner to escape, accompanying him through a cross country run to a trial leading into the adjoining county of Hickman.

93The coroner's inquest over the bodies of the two elders and the two Condor brothers, determined that they came to their death "by gun shot wounds inflicted by unknown parties." The Condor brothers were interred in the orchard surrounding their home, where they had so valiantly sought to defend their friends, the two slain elders. The latter by the coroner's orders were buried in rough coffins on a knoll overlooking Cane Creek, by the roadside, and a little below the Condor residence. Six days later the assistant mission president of the southern states—then in personal charge of the field—went with three others to the place of burial, disinterred the bodies of the elders and sent them to their families in Utah, in charge of Elder Willis E. Robison, who was released from his mission for that purpose.

Of the three men who accompanied the presiding elder of the mission to recover the bodies, two were members of the church from Shady Grove, Hickman county, about thirty miles from the scene of the tragedy. Their names were Henry Harlow and William Church. The third was a young man, not a member, by the name of Rufus Coleman. Unfortunately in the early accounts of this incident, the part of Rufus Coleman was accredited to Robert Coleman, a younger brother, but it was Rufus who joined in this expedition, attended with more or less risk. Two brothers, Emmons and Robbins Church, members of the church from Nauvoo times, furnished the two teams and wagons for the expedition; and a Mr. Bernard Moses, a merchant tailor of Chattanooga, with whom the mission had done some business, kindly guaranteed payment to the Chattanooga house of undertaker's supplies for the two caskets, and advanced money for the undertaking, pending the arrival of means telegraphed for to Salt Lake City. It is a pleasure to note that Mr. Moses, whose aid at that time was so valuable, is still living (1930) now in Baltimore, Md. He has visited Utah in later years and formed pleasant acquaintance with President Grant.

THE HEROISM OF ELDER WILLIS E. ROBISON

As an evidence of the brotherly love existing among these missionary elders of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, it should be stated that Elder Robison, who was laboring in Humphrey's and Dickson county, forty miles from Cane Creek, on hearing the many conflicting reports of the attack upon the elders, the alleged escape of some of them, "who were doubtless in the woods and wounded," immediately set out through a hostile country—wild with excitement, the people invariably in their comments justifying the killing of the "Mormons"—to ascertain just what had happened, and who needed help. He decided to make this trip alone, as being less likely to attract attention, and if disaster came of it only one would fall instead of more. After narrow escapes from guards watching the roads leading into Cane Creek settlement, he finally reached the Condor home at midnight of Thursday, the 14th, ascertained what had happened at first hand—learned that the surviving elders had reached places of safety and were with friends; and the same hour, or on Friday morning, between the hours of one and two, departed from the neighborhood and returned to his companion in Dickson county, where a message awaited him to meet the assistant president of the mission in Nashville, the state's capital, to which point the elders in the nearby counties had been called as being safer than in the smaller towns and the rural districts in this time of stress. After his arrival in Nashville on Monday, the 18th, Elder Robison was selected to convey the bodies to Utah. Robison wrote a detailed account of his adventures on this trip to Cane Creek, and of his journey home with the bodies of his murdered brethren, that in the simple and modest style in which the story is told, makes a thrilling narrative of adventure. [^18]

THE TENNESSEE MARTYRS

JOHN H. GIBBS

John H. Gibbs was the son of George D. Gibbs and Ellen Phillips, and was born on the 28th of July, 1853, at Haverford, West Pembrokeshire, Wales. He immigrated to Utah with his parents in 1866. By profession he was a teacher in the public schools and had long been recognized as a moral force among the young men of northern Utah. He left Utah on his mission to the south in February, 1883. He was married to Louisa Obray, daughter of Thomas L. Obray of Paradise, Utah, on the second of November, 1874, and left a family of several children. [^19] The present writer having knowledge of him through long association, can testify of his character personally as being without reproach. He possessed those qualities of mind and heart which naturally endeared him to all who had the pleasure of his acquaintance. Every labor required of him was intelligently executed. He was untiring in his labors in the ministry. Yet his zeal was tempered by an excellent judgment, pleasantness and charity. His mind was well stored with information and he was naturally gifted, being fluent in speech, easy and pleasant in conversation, and an excellent correspondent. But to crown it all, he was an honorable man, ever prayerful and humble in spirit—a truly Christian man.

WILLIAM S. BERRY

William Shanks Berry was born in Dresden, Weekly county, Tennessee, on the 3rd of February, 1838; and was the son of Colonel Jesse and Amelia Berry. He was of Revolutionary ancestry. His father served in the war of 1812-14 against Great Britain, and rose to the rank of colonel. Both of William S. Berry's grandfathers, and his great-grandfather, on the paternal side, were soldiers of the Revolution,—and fought to establish the American Republic. Colonel Jesse Berry, father of William, received the faith of the Latter-day Saints in the state of Tennessee, in 1842 and moved with his family to Nauvoo in the spring of 1844, where, on the 6th of August of the same year, he died. The family migrated to Salt Lake valley in 1848; and subsequently moved into the south part of the territory, and settled at Kanarra. The martyrdom of William was all the more a severe blow to the family for the reason that in the Indian War of 1866, in southern Utah, two of his brothers, Robert and Joseph, and the wife of the former, were barbarously murdered by Indians; and John W. Berry, the sole surviving son of Colonel Jesse Berry, who came to Salt Lake City to meet and accompany the remains of his martyred brother to Kanarra, to his mother,—then in her eighty-first year—had performed a similar service for his brothers who were the victims of Indian savagery. Elder Wm. S. Berry was of a fine personal appearance, being fully six feet in height and powerfully built. He was somewhat slow of speech, but endowed to a remarkable degree with good, sound sense, and was of a mild and genial disposition. [^20]

THE CONDOR BROTHERS: JAMES R. HUDSON, MARTIN CONDOR

A word should be said respecting the fellow martyrs of the elders and their defenders—James R. Hudson and young Martin Condor. They were the sons of Sister Condor, who was wounded in the brutal assault on the lives of the elders. J. R. Hudson was her son by a former husband, and Martin Condor by her present husband, James Condor. Unfortunately we can say nothing of the date or place of their birth. Martin Condor was a mere boy, only nineteen years of age, J. R. Hudson must have been twenty-four or twenty-five. They were children of nature, accustomed to the hardships of backwoods life, the gun, and the chase. Their education was limited, having been reared in a neighborhood remote from the centers of education, and the circulation of books and periodicals. They knew but little of the great world, but little of its polish and refinement—terms too often used to cover its hypocrisy and deceit—to all this they were strangers; but by their action on the tenth of August, in defending the elders, they proved to the world that beneath a rough exterior, they possessed qualities of heart and mind which proclaim them Nature's Noblemen.

97The remains of the martyred elders were sent to their respective homes, Elder Gibbs to Paradise, in Cache county, Utah; Elder Berry to Kanarra, in Iron county; and on Sunday the 24th of August, fourteen days after the martyrdom, services were held over their remains in their respective home villages, and memorial services in many of the wards throughout the stakes of Zion. Subscriptions were taken up all over the church in aid of the families of the martyred elders, of the Condor family, and also for the removal of the saints on Cane Creek, who might wish to avail themselves of the opportunity, and felt themselves in danger, to the settlements of the saints in San Luis valley, Colorado. [^21] Most of the saints of the Cane Creek branch of the church accepted this opportunity and removed to the Colorado settlements in San Luis valley.

OFFER OF A REWARD FOR THE APPREHENSION OF THE MURDERERS

The governor of Tennessee, William B. Bate, was waited upon and formally petitioned by a number of the elders, who had gathered into Nashville for safety, to offer a reward for the apprehension of any or all the parties engaged in the mobbing on Cane Creek, Lewis county. The governor was very indifferent to the matter, and manifested some impatience at the request, but finally offered a reward of $1,000 to be divided pro rata according to the number convicted, the offer holding good as well for the apprehension of the parties who shot and killed David Hinson—the mob leader, masked and with a gun in his hand, and whose death revealed his identity—as well as the innocent victims of the assault led by him!

98At the fall term of the circuit court in which Lewis county was included, Judge T. P. Bateman delivered a rather pompous charge to the grand jury, that might mean much or little according as to which passages were emphasized, those that depicted the helplessness of grand juries and the courts in such cases, or those which described the majesty of the law.

98For example the judge said, with respect to the helplessness of the courts and the law:

98"And this thing of murdering one another for differing in religious belief has been going on as far back as we have any history, and it looks as if it would continue as long as there remain two different religions and they can get hold of each other's missionaries; and no civil tribunal to this day has ever been able to suppress it. * * * This practice of killing men for attempting to introduce a new religion in a country that does not want it, can never be suppressed by the civil tribunals, and he who expects it will certainly be disappointed. * * * I have said this much that the public may see how futile it is for a court to attempt to do anything in a case like the one before us, and it is obliged to remain this way so long as there is such a diseased sentiment among a part of the clergy, a portion of the press, and many of the people." [^22]

98On the side of the majesty of the law, he said:

98"The law is: that any person going about the country masked or disguised is guilty of a misdemeanor. If they make an assault upon any one with a deadly weapon, it is a felony, and if they kill any one it is murder, and in such cases it is the duty of the grand jury to send for witnesses if they think they know who can make out the case, and examine the witnesses touching the offense of going masked or disguised, and any offense growing out of it, and find bills or not, as the proof may justify." [^23]

98And these two views the judge linked together with this discouraging, nerveless observation:

98"But gentlemen of the jury, it makes no difference how powerless the courts are in such cases, they must act, and in cases like this must generally fail to do anything and must bear the consequences of one party for trying to do, and the censures of the other party for not doing what they cannot do." [^24]

99This "straddle" of the case—this confession of the inability of the court to do anything, effectually put an end to any earnest effort to bring the guilty to punishment. Nothing came of the charge—no indictments were found.

ACTION OF GOVERNOR MURRAY RESPECTING THE TENNESSEE MASSACRE

As soon as it was learned in Utah from press dispatches that Governor Bate would offer a reward for the detection and arrest of those engaged in the mob violence on Cane Creek, Governor Murray took a hand in the procedure in a most unwarranted manner. Without any justifiable reason that any circumstance connected with the case can give, he sent the following dispatch to Governor Bate:

99"SALT LAKE, Aug. 22nd.

99Gov. W. B. Bate, Nashville, Tenn.,

99Dispatches state that you are exerting yourself to vindicate the laws in the matter of the murder of Mormon missionaries in Tennessee. I thank you for this action. The charges of preaching polygamy do not excuse murder. I trust that you may bring the guilty to punishment, thereby preventing such lawlessness in Tennessee or elsewhere. Lawlessness in Tennessee and Utah are alike reprehensible, but the murdered Mormon agents in Tennessee were sent from here, as they have been for years, by the representatives of organized crime, and I submit that as long as Tennessee representatives in congress are, to say the least, indifferent to the punishment of offenders against the national law in Utah, such cowardly outrages by their constituents as the killing of emigration agents sent there from here will continue.

99ELI H. MURRAY,

99Governor." [^25]

This dispatch served two purposes for Governor Murray; first, it enabled him to falsely represent the elders of the Church of the Latter-day Saints as agents of "organized crime in Utah," thus suggesting the ground plan of an excuse for those who murdered them—leaving his expressed wish that "the guilty might be brought to punishment," and his characterization of the Cane Creek deed as a "cowardly outrage," just so much insincere mockery; and second, it enabled him to rap the representatives in congress from Tennessee for what he regarded as their indifference to the "Mormon question," and their unwillingness to favor the anti-"Mormon" legislation pending in congress.

OTHER ACTS OF VIOLENCE TOWARDS THE L. D. S. ELDERS IN THE SOUTH

In addition to the massacre on Cane Creek, the eventful summer of 1884 in the Southern States Mission was enlivened by a mob at Rye station in Mississippi seizing Elder Charles Flake at night, while waiting for the arrival of a companion on an incoming train, and pouring over him a half tub of pitch and tar, and compelling him to leave before the arrival of his companion. This in May. [^26]

100A Latter-day Saint meeting house was burned to the ground by a mob in St. Clair county, Alabama. [^27]

100On the 24th of July, in Meshaba county, Mississippi, Elders John W. Gailey and Joseph Morrell were taken our into the woods in the middle of the night, ropes placed about their necks, by which they were led, while an angry dispute arose among their score of captors as to whether they should be hung or whipped. The whipping was finally decided upon. The elders were stripped and tied to trees, after which one of the mob selected for the task, because of his great strength, was detailed to give them fifteen lashes each with a heavy leather halter strap doubled, which he did with all the brute force he could put into his blows. [^28] They were then ordered to leave the county.

101On August 8th, in Lee's valley, Hawkins county, Elder James Roskelley was shot through the arm while seated upon the porch of the house of a Mr. Green, a prominent citizen of the place, whose son had been healed through the faith and administration of the elders. The assault was committed by a negro who had been hired to perform the act. The attempt was most murderous as the ball had sped obliquely across Roskelley's breast and entered the fleshy part of his arm. [^29]

101On the night of the 17th of August, in Lauderdale county, Alabama, Elders J. J. Fuller and George J. Woodbury were assaulted, and taken to the woods where Elder Fuller, a man well advanced in years, was given about forty lashes and ordered to leave the county. Woodbury had made his escape from the mob while being ordered from the house to the woods. [^30]

101There were many threats made in various parts of the south. Mr. Garrett of Cane Creek settlement, though not a "Mormon," but who had extended the hospitality of his home to the elders, and had rendered valuable assistance in taking the bodies of Elders Gibbs and Berry from their graves that they might be sent to their sorrowing families in Utah, was compelled by repeated threats to leave his home, and despairing of ever being able to live in security in that settlement, sold his home and farm at a great sacrifice, and moved into Bond county, Illinois.

So numerous were the threats of mob violence that it was thought prudent to suspend missionary activity for a time, and allow the excitement to subside; but there was no intention of abandoning the field. Later in the fall the presidency of the mission submitted their report of conditions in the south to the first presidency of the church, who advised that the work continue to be conservatively carried on, avoiding difficulties as far as posible, "and when they persecute you in one city, flee ye to another," was the signed instruction of the presidency of the church. [^31] Letters were accordingly written to the conference presidents to this effect, and the south has continued a prosperous and fruitful mission to this day, (April 6th, 1930).

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Desreet News, weekly, of Feb. 22nd, 1882, where note of her death and her life's work will be found and testimonies of her virtues.
[^2] Juvenile Instructor, vol. xix, pp. 24-5. In this same number under "topics of the times and editorial thoughts," a very fine character sketch of the general will be found. See also ante this History, chapter cxlvi, note 2.
[^3] Elder Francis Marion Lyman was the son of Amasa M. Lyman, formerly one of the twelve apostles, and prominently identified with the affairs of the church as already detailed in these pages. The new apostle was born Jan. 12th, 1840, in the town of Goodhope, McDonough county, Illinois. His mother's name was Louisa Maria Tanner. The Utah Lymans run back into the great American Lyman family of the New England states.
[^4] John Henry Smith was the son of George Albert Smith and Sarah Ann Libby. His father was a member of the apostles' quorum and counselor to President Brigham Young. He was born near Council Bluffs, Iowa, Sept. 18th, 1848.
[^5] George Teasdale was the son of William Russell Teasdale and Harriet Henrietta Tidey. He was born in London, England, Dec. 8th, 1831. He received the faith of the Latter-day Saints in 1852, came to Utah in 1861, and had been active in church service for many years.
[^6] Heber J. Grant was the son of Jedediah M. Grant, Salt Lake's first mayor, and counselor to President Brigham Young in the first presidency of the church. He was born in Salt Lake City, Nov. 22nd, 1856. He has the distinction of being the first native son of Utah to be chosen one of the twelve apostles of the church.
[^7] The revelation complete was published, and will be found in L. D. S. Pamphlets, vol. lxv, collection in Historian's Office. See also letter of President John Taylor to Albert Carrington, Millennial Star, vol. xliv, pp. 732-3. According to President Taylor the revelation was submitted to the twelve apostles and accepted by them; after-wards it was submitted to the presidents of stakes, the first council of the seventy and others. (Ibid).
[^8] President Taylor's letter to Carrington, Millennial Star, vol. xliv, pp. 732-3.
[^9] Bishop Preston was born in Franklin county, Virginia, Nov. 24th, 1830. His father was Christopher Preston, a cousin of W. B. Preston of Virginia, and W. C. Preston, of North Carolina, both members of congress from their respective states. His mother's name was Martha M. Claytor. He received the gospel of the New Dispensation in California, to which state he had removed from Virginia in 1852. He came to Utah in 1858, and participated in all the activities of developing a new and but sparsely settled country. (See Biography in L. D. S. Biographical Encyclopedia, Jenson, vol. i, p. 233).
[^10] See Seventy's Course in Theology, First Year Book, where the instructions and the revelation in full are given, pp. 9, 10.
[^11] Above condensed from Jenson's Church Chronology, under date of Aug. 26th, 1883, p. 113.
[^12] Ibid.
[^13] See Church Chronology, date of March 8, 1898.
[^14] Ibid. Date of Oct. 9th, 1913.
[^15] Report from Presiding Bishop's Office, Dec. 31st, 1929.
[^16] From report in Millennial Star, vol. lxxv, pp. 372-3.
[^17] Church Chronology, date of June 18th and 25th, 1888, pp. 162-3.
[^18] Elder Joseph H. Dean was the first president of the Samoan Mission. He was succeeded on August 16th, 1890, by Wm. O. Lee; Lee by Geo. E. Browning, Feb. 4th, 1892; Browning by Ranson M. Stevens, Nov. 8th, 1893; Stevens by Thomas H. Hilton, May 17th, 1894; Hilton by John W. Beck, March 27th, 1895; Beck, by Orlando Barnes, April 22nd, 1896; Barnes by Edward J. Wood, 25th December, 1896; Wood by Wm. L. Worsencroft (in temporary charge), Jan. 24th, 1899; Worsencroft by Wm. G. Sears, May 3rd, 1899. During his presidency the Book of Mormon was translated into the Samoan language, Elder Sears being assisted in the work by Elders Frank E. Morris, Edwin Smart and G. C. Spillsbury. The edition was 5,000. The presidents in succession since then have been: Martin F. Sanders 1903; Thomas F. Court, 1905; William A. Moody, 1908; Christian Jensen, 1912; John A. Nelson, Jr., 1913; Ernest Wright, 1916; Willard A. Keith, 1918; John Q. Adams, 1920; Ernest LeRoy Butler, 1924; Willard L. Smith, 1930.
[^19] Report from Presiding Bishop's Office, Dec. 31st, 1914.
[^20] For above details see communication of Judge George W. Bean in Deseret News, weekly, Aug. 27th, 1884, p. 499; Bishop Henry Lunt, Ibid, p. 504 and interview with John W. Berry, Ibid, p. 508.
[^21] See Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 10th and 17th, 1884; also History of Southern States Mission, Southern Star, of July 1st, 1899, pp. 241-2.
[^22] Copied into Millennial Star, vol. xlvi, p. 805.
[^23] Ibid, pp. 805-6.
[^24] Ibid.
[^25] San Francisco Bulletin, to which paper the message was sent as a special dispatch. It is copied into Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 3rd, 1884.
[^26] See History of the Southern States Mission, Southern Star, vol. i, p. 169.
[^27] Ibid, p. 178.
[^28] Ibid, p. 186.
[^29] See Millennial Star, vol. xlvi, pp. 580-1.
[^30] 30. Ibid, p. 653.
[^31] 31. History of the Southern States Mission in Southern Star, vol. i, p. 242.
