B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

111CHAPTER CLX

111THE ANTI-POLYGAMY JUDICIAL CRUSADE 1883-1886

111IN THE year 1883, began that series of prosecutions for polygamy and polygamous living, under the Edmunds law, which made the relationship begun by the polygamous marriage a continuous offense—defined in the statute as "unlawful cohabitation." The prosecutions finally rose to a veritable crusade.

IMPRISONMENT OF WOMEN FOR REFUSING TO TESTIFY IN THE COURTS

The prosecutions as stated began in 1883, [^1] but no convictions were had until late in November, 1884. Several women in the early prosecutions were sent to prison for contempt of court for refusing to answer questions relative to their marital status in cases before the grand juries, and the United States commissioners' courts.

111In a very few instances of overzeal, and doubtless at the time when it was thought that established sexual relations would be necessary to constitute guilt of unlawful cohabitation, women declared that they did not know who the fathers of their children were. [^2] Such mistaken zeal, though practiced to thwart what was generally felt to be unjust prosecutions, was not approved by Latter-day Saint public sentiment.

Conflict over PolygamyHCUTAH COMMISSION REPORT OF 1885

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe Utah Commission appointed under the Edmunds law reported to the secretary of the interior, Hon. L. Q. C. Lamar, date of October 28th, 1885, that there had been eighty-three indictments up to that time, twenty-three convictions, seventeen cases of unlawful cohabitation had escaped punishment by promising the court not thereafter to offend against the law themselves, "nor advise, counsel, aid, nor abet in any way its violations by others; forty-three cases were awaiting trial. [^3] The commission in its. 1885 Report ventured to estimate-it could be no other than a mere guessing at the matter-the increase of plural marriages in the church, for the year 1884, at four hundred and fifty-nine males and females; but for the year 1885, they expressed the belief that there had been but very few such marriages. [^4]

Conflict over PolygamyHCBITTERNESS OF THE COURTS

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe prosecution of these cases from 1884 to 1887 became very vigorous. With the power when impaneling both grand and petit juries, to exclude not only all who had ever practiced polygamy but all who expressed a belief in its rightfulness; with frequent resort to calling juries on open venire, because the regular panel would be exhausted by challenges for belief, the administration of the law threw men on trial for these offenses entirely into the hands of non-"Mormons," not infrequently their avowed enemies, and before federal judges who often manifested their bitterness in the sentences pronounced from the bench. For the temper manifested by the courts the case of John Nicholson sentenced in the third district court, will afford an illustration; also the cases of Andrew Smith and Emil Olsen. To Mr. Nicholson associate editor of the Deseret News, the court said with great manifestation of feeling, at times during his remarks striking the desk with his hand: "If you do not submit, [i.e. to the alleged expressed will of the American people] of course you must take the consequences; but the will of the American people is expressed [severely] and this law will go on and grind you and your institution to powder!" [^5] Procedure was more or less similar in other districts.

SEGREGATION OF ONE OFFENSE

Conflict over PolygamyHCNew and novel ways of interpreting the possibilities of the law, so as to increase its penalties, were resorted to. The statute provided that the misdemeanor of unlawful cohabitation should be punished by a maximum term of imprisonment of six months, or a maximum fine of $300, or both fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the court. The Utah Commission in its report of the 28th October, 1885, recommended that the term of imprisonment be extended to two years for the first offense and three for the second offense. [^6] But the district courts had surpassed the commission's method of increasing the punishment of a simple misdemeanor, by a process of segregation of the time of the continuance of the offense so that imprisonment might practically be for life, and a fortune, however, princely, would not suffice for the payment of fines that might be assessed—to such an extent had anti-"Mormon" madness carried away the federal judiciary of the territory. This method of procedure was sanctioned by Judge Zane of the third judicial district (Salt Lake City), on the occasion of the grand jury coming into court and asking for instructions upon a question of finding an indictment under certain conditions, that had been suggested by the United States district attorney. This on the 16th of September, 1885. The judge instructed the jury that an indictment might be found for any portion of the time, within the three years past—that being the period the Edmunds law had been in effect—in which the offense was proven to have been committed, whether it be a year, a month, or a week. [^7] As it was held by the courts that it was not necessary to prove sexual association in order to establish the misdemeanor of unlawful cohabitation, but that the offense was complete "when a man to all outward appearances is living or associating with more than one woman as his wife," [^8] it was possible to prove any number of "cases" even out of ordinary acts of association and courtesy; and especially out of actions that had for their purpose the maintenance of the homes and looking after the material comforts of plural wives and their children. Nothing but absolute abandonment could meet the requirements of the law as interpreted by the federal courts. This interpretation made it possible for one victim when brought before the court and asked to plead to the charge of unlawful cohabitation, to plead guilty in this form—"If it is a crime to support my family, I am guilty of unlawful cohabitation." This case was that of William J. Hooper before the third judicial district court, who pleaded on the 14th of Feb.; six days later he was sentenced to the full extent of the law. [^9]

A JUDICIAL REIGN OF TERROR

Conflict over PolygamyHCWith the law so interpreted by the federal judges charged with its administration, and its possibilities of punishment so immense, it is small wonder that for the next few years a judicial reign of terror obtained in Utah and the surrounding territories wherever the Latter-day Saints had settled. Funds were supplied through the federal department of justice for the vigorous enforcement of the law by increasing the number of special deputy marshals, and United States commissioners, with power to make preliminary examinations and bind over to appear before grand juries both those accused of polygamy and unlawful cohabitation, and also the witnesses in such cases. Fired with a zeal that gave every evidence of being born of hate, both for a system and of a people, officers of the law in many cases acted with a harshness that was not warranted when the nature of the offense and the character of the offenders are taken into account. The victims of this crusade were not criminals, brutalized by vices that are the ordinary concomitants of law-breaking. The men who had accepted plural marriage as a part of their religious obligations were among the most honorable men of the Latter-day Saint community, and confessedly, by the non-"Mormon" portion of the community, apart from the one circumstance of their acceptance of plural marriage as part of their religion, were regarded as men of honorable lives and probity of character. The women involved in this marriage system were not women of a low class, or of brutal natures, but were chaste in thought and speech, refined in their manners, mothers of children, and were, even more than in monogamous marriage—since they had larger domestic responsibilities and duties—queens of their own homes.

Conflict over PolygamyHC115To assail such elements of a community as if they were criminals to be hunted down by brutal deputy marshals, was an outrage justified by no necessity arising out of the circumstances attendant upon the suppression of polygamous marriages or polygamous living; but that such harsh brutality was resorted to by the federal administrators of the anti-polygamy law, the current periodicals of the times and the mass meetings held to protest these proceedings abundantly witness.

MASS MEETING OF LATTER-DAY SAINT WOMEN

Conflict over PolygamyHCA mass meeting of over two thousand Latter-day Saint women assembled in the Salt Lake Theater, "representing the wives, mothers, sisters and daughters" of the whole territory of Utah, on March the 6th, 1886, and protested against the course being pursued in the administration of the anti-polygamy laws. An intelligent committee of prominent women, representing all parts of the territory, [^10] was appointed to draft a "Memorial and Protest" to the president of the United States and both houses of congress, setting forth their grievances and voicing their protests. This Memorial was presented in the senate of the United States by Senator Blair, of Missouri, on the 6th of April, 1886. The Memorial recited instances of extra judicial procedure on the part of the courts, the imprisonment of women witnesses for refusing to answer indelicate questions respecting sexual associations with their supposed husbands, when at the same time the courts were holding that evidence of such relations was not necessary to the proof of unlawful cohabitation. [^11]

THE DALTON CASE

Conflict over PolygamyHCBefore the close of the year 1886, viz., on the 16th of December, to a long list of preceding outrages there was added one other still more atrocious than the others—the killing of a very worthy man, by an overzealous deputy marshal; and because this incident exhibits the bitterness of the spirit in which the "crusade" against the plural marriage system of the Church of Latter-day Saints was waged, it is set forth here in some detail.

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe victim was Edward M. Dalton, the deputy marshal one William Thompson, Jun. The place Parowan, Iron county, southern Utah. Dalton had been indicted on the charge of unlawful cohabitation early in the spring of 1885, but under the severely harsh manner in which the law was then being executed, and the illegal segregation policy then being in vogue, he felt justified in evading trial. He escaped from the officer who arrested him and made his way to Arizona, where he spent a number of months among friends in the "Mormon" settlements of that territory. He had returned but a short time to his home in Parowan when two deputy marshals, Wm. Thompson, Jun., and W. O. Orton, rode over in the night from Beaver to arrest him. Arriving at Parowan before daylight on the morning of the 16th of December, they went to the house of Mr. Page, an apostate "Mormon," and made inquiry of Mr. Page as to the whereabouts of Dalton; and though they were armed with revolvers, requested Page to borrow a rifle for their use, which he did, a winchester. They discussed the proposed arrest with Page and the probable whereabouts of Dalton in the village. The son of Mr. Page came in at this junction and reported that Dalton was then coming down the street on horseback, driving stock. The evidence at the subsequent trial of Thompson disclosed the fact that Dalton was in his shirt sleeves, unarmed. The deputies watched Dalton from a north window of the Page house as he was moving by the house westward. Seeing that he turned the corner—on which the house stood—southward, they rushed from a rear door to the southwest corner where they shouted "halt"! "halt"! and an instant later, and some said "simultaneously with the shout," Thompson fired with the borrowed winchester rifle and Dalton fell forward on his horse and to the ground mortally wounded; Thompson was arrested and held by Sheriff Adams of Iron county. Three-quarters of an hour later his victim died. [^12]

Conflict over PolygamyHCGreat excitement prevailed among the people of the town, almost exclusively a Latter-day Saint community. Naturally, the thing to expect in an American western town of the period would be the lynching of the officer. In any other western town that doubtless would have followed. Especially since Thompson had but a short time before shot at a man of the name of Jensen, an inoffensive Scandinavian accused of unlawful cohabitation, because he had skipped out of a back door in order to avoid arrest. [^13]

Conflict over PolygamyHC118Elder Heber J. Grant of the council of the twelve apostles was in Cedar, eighteen to twenty miles southward, at the time of the killing of Dalton and he telegraphed the church authorities at Parowan to keep order, and not allow Dalton's friends to take the law into their own hands, "as one wrong does not justify another."

Conflict over PolygamyHC118Meantime at Beaver where the court of the second judicial district was in session—Judge Jacob S. Boreman presiding—a writ of habeas corpus was issued by the judge, and placed in the hands of Oscar Thompson, son of Deputy Marshal Thompson, who did the killing.

Conflict over PolygamyHC118The next day the case was heard on habeas corpus proceedings before Judge Boreman, when the prisoner was released from the custody of the sheriff, but bound over to appear before the grand jury then in session, which Deputy Thompson himself had selected in the spring, and which the night before had of their own volition gone out to meet him and conduct him into Beaver. The jury brought in an indictment for "man slaughter." The community feeling was that it should have been for murder. The case went to trial on the 6th of January, 1887. The trial jury was selected on open venire, chiefly from the mining camps surrounding Beaver, only three being chosen from the latter place. All were non-"Mormons."

Conflict over PolygamyHC118After two days trial the jury returned a verdict of "not guilty." The trial was a farce.

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe largest question of law that entered into the case was, did the officer have the right, if necessary to effect the arrest, to kill the person for whom he held the warrant. It was practically conceded at the trial that for cases amounting only to misdemeanors, no such right to kill existed in cases of flight from, or avoidance of arrest. The great question in the trial then, was one of law. Was Edward M. Dalton charged only with a misdemeanor? and was the warrant Thompson held to be served on him for misdemeanor? The statute which made unlawful cohabitation an offense, specifically designates it as a "misdemeanor." [^14] It was unlawful cohabitation that Dalton was charged with in the warrant for his arrest held by the deputy marshal who killed him. Yet the United States prosecuting attorney in this case, Mr. Charles S. Varian, assistant United States district attorney made an exhaustive argument to prove in the very face of the United States statute that Dalton's crime was a felony. He reached that conclusion on the sole ground that punishment for unlawful cohabitation, so far as the imprisonment part of it was concerned, was imprisonment in the penitentiary, therefore an infamous crime, a felony. It was generally held in law, he contended, that crimes punished by imprisonment in the penitentiary were felonies and that in such cases officers had a right to kill if necessary in taking the man wanted, if he resisted or attempted to flee from arrest.

Conflict over PolygamyHCBut the statute creating the offense, of unlawful cohabitation, and designating it expressly as a "misdemeanor," did not provide that the imprisonment should be in the penitentiary; the fact that those convicted under the law were so imprisoned, was only because being tried before a United States court, under a United States statute, and placed in the hands of the United States marshal—he had no prison other than the penitentiary under his control in which to confine them. Imprisonment in the penitentiary in these cases designated in no particular fixes the quality of the offense; and the prosecuting attorney who devoted seven columns of his eight-columned speech in an attempt to prove that unlawful cohabitation was a felony, because those convicted of the crime were imprisoned in the penitentiary, and therefore fell under the class of cases in which an officer had a right to kill in the event of an offender fleeing from arrest, added nothing to his reputation as a lawyer that day. The instructions of the court to the jury were in line with the prosecuting attorney's presentation of the law supposed to govern the case. With the prosecuting attorney and the court taking this attitude, it was not difficult for the anti-"Mormon" jury brought in on an open venire, to do the rest, viz., to so interpret the accounts of the killing of Dalton as to justify the deputy marshal—and hence the verdict of "not guilty."

Conflict over PolygamyHC120On the record of the first district court of Utah in this case is a crimson stain—it failed to administer justice in the case of the State vs. Wm. Thompson, for the unlawful killing of Edward M. Dalton, charged with the misdemeanor of unlawful cohabitation.

Conflict over PolygamyHC120With the segregation principle in practice and the law enforced in the spirit indicated by the above described course of the federal courts in Utah, many men, and among them some of the first citizens of the community, went into exile, rather than to submit to so monstrous an administration of the law as obtained in this crusade; and from first to last these amounted to many hundreds.

Conflict over PolygamyHCAt this point it will be pertinent to remark that the supreme court of the United States on the question of the plural marriage system of the Latter-day Saints being submitted to them as a solemn principle of religion, seemed not to be impressed with either the averment or the argument in support of it; for the judges set aside the contention, giving light and trite, but vain illustrations of their supposed wisdom, in support of their denial (already previously commented upon); but now, with the testimony of suffering that was endured, the humiliations and indignities heaped upon the Latter-day Saints in support of, and defense of this, to them, sacred principle; the exiles enforced, or otherwise submission to an illegal, tyrannical, brutal, insufferable regime; to the fiendish segregation interpretation saddled upon the law by the judges and the prosecuting officers of the courts; the outrageous conduct of the desperate and often drunken deputy marshals designated to make arrests of alleged offenders against the law, and the witnesses to convict them; I refer to all this suffering—extra judicial and infamous—endured by the Latter-day Saint community of Utah and other territories of the intermountain west, as well as to the fact that more than thirteen hundred fathers and husbands who suffered fines and imprisonment rather than prove recreant to this principle which they believed and accepted as God-given—a revelation from God; and I present this evidence of suffering and the volume of it at the bar of history, and to the enlightened intelligence of humanity, and ask judgment on the point as to whether or not the plural marriage system of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was to the members thereof a principle of religion. The evidence and the proof it constitutes may not be denied.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 25th, 1885, where the discourse is published in full.
[^2] See Cooper's American Politics, bk. ii, p. 75.
[^3] Ibid, p. 71. The Republican Platform of 1884 also favored the appointment to offices in the territories being made from the citizens and residents of the territories "wherein they are to serve;" but the platform designated these citizens to be so appointed, to be "bona fide citizens;" which meant in this case, beyond all doubt, Gentile residents and citizens. (See Republican Platform 1884, in Cooper's American Politics, bk. ii, p. 75).
[^4] St. John x:11-13.
[^5] Exodus ii:16.
[^6] I Samuel xvi:2.
[^7] I Kings xviii:3, 4.
[^8] I Kings xix:3, 4.
[^9] Acts ix:25. The foregoing cases were cited in the Deseret News, weekly, of March 17th, 1886. A much more extended list of such cases were published by a correspondent. Ibid, April 21st, 1886.
[^10] See reference to the matter in signed announcement of President Taylor's death by Geo. Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith. (Millennial Star, vol. xlix, pp. 524-526).
[^11] Deseret News, weekly, Feb. 17th, 1886.
[^12] "It was within his [George Q. Cannon's] power," said the Salt Lake Tribune, defending the action of United States Marshal Ireland in offering the reward of $500 for information leading to the arrest of Mr. Cannon—"It was within his power to have stopped all this trouble [i.e. the judicial crusade then going on]; it was he who whipped the people into their present fury to defy the laws. Surely the country ought to know the fact that the United Sates officers here are doing their full duty and in a most capable manner." (Salt Lake Tribune, impression of Feb. 14th, 1886).
[^13] See Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 10th, 1886.
[^14] Mr. Byron Groo, of the Salt Lake Herald received the following dispatch: "George Q. Cannon arrested. No bail granted." (Salt Lake Herald, Feb. 16th, 1886).
