B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

122CHAPTER CLXI

122LAST PUBLIC DISCOURSE AND RETIREMENT FROM PUBLIC VIEW OF PRESIDENT JOHN TAYLOR—GEORGE Q. CANNON'S ARREST

122AMONG those who evaded the rigors of the crusade described in the preceding chapter were President John Taylor, his counselors, and several of the apostles. President Taylor returned from a rather extended tour of the Latter-day Saint settlements in Arizona and southern Utah in the latter part of January, and on Sunday the 1st of February, 1885, he delivered an address to the assembled saints in the Salt Lake tabernacle, which, as things turned out, was his last appearance in public, and his last public discourse. In it he reviewed conditions both in Arizona and Utah with reference to the crusade then being carried on, and advised the people to conform to the requirements of the law as far as they could without violence to their consciences, and an adherence to true principles; and to submit even to wrong, rather than resort to violence in resisting it. To the question he propounded—"what would you do?" That is in the case of these extra judicial and lawless proceedings, he answered as follows:

PRESIDENT TAYLOR'S COMMENT ON THE CRUSADE POLICY

"Would you resent these outrages and break the heads of the men engaged in them, and spill their blood? No, avoid them as much as you can. * * * What! won't you submit to the dignity of the law? Well I would if the law would only be a little dignified. But when we see the ermine bedraggled in the mud and mire, and every principle of justice violated, it behooves men to take care of themselves as best they may. That is what I have told people while I have been in the south—to take care of their liberties, to put their trust in the living God, to obey every constitutional law, and to adhere to all correct principles. But when men tamper with your rights and with your liberties, when the cities are full of spies and the lowest meanest of men are set to watch and dog your footsteps; when little children are set in array against their fathers and mothers and women and children are badgered before courts and made to submit, unprotected, to the gibes of libertines and corrupt men, when wives and husbands are pitted against each other and threatened with pains, penalties, and imprisonment, if they will not disclose that which among all decent people is considered sacred, and which no man of delicacy, whose sensibilities had not been blunted by low associations, would ever ask; when such a condition of affairs exist, it is no longer a land of liberty, and it is certainly no longer a land of equal rights, and we must take care of ourselves as best we may, and avoid being caught in any of their snares. I cannot think that this crusade is aimed entirely at us; from many circumstances that have transpired, I have been led to believe that whilst we are made the victims, these proceedings are introduced as a political ruse, for the purpose of embarrassing the incoming administration. What would you do? Would you fight them? No, I would take care of myself as best I can, and I would advise my brethren to do the same." [^1]

A NEW NATIONAL POLICY RESPECTING UTAH LOOKED FOR

In connection with the reference to "embarrassing the incoming national administration," it should be remembered that in the national election held in the preceding November, Grover Cleveland had been elected president of the United States, the first Democratic president to be elected since Buchanan in 1856—a period of twenty-eight years. For some years the "Mormon question" had been a special feature in Republican national platforms, especially since 1874. The platform of 1884 had been particularly pronounced against the "Mormon" church, pledging the party to rigid enforcement of the laws against polygamy "by the civil authorities if possible, and by the military if need be." [^2] On the other hand the Democratic party platform for 1884 had declared that "the selection of federal officers for the territories should be restricted to citizens previously resident therein;" [^3] and was silent on the subject of "Mormon" prosecutions. The difference in the attitude of the two parties naturally suggests the desire of the outgoing administration to embarrass the incoming one, as hinted in the remarks of President Taylor.

IN RETIREMENT

Administration of John TaylorHCThe night following the delivery of the discourse quoted above—1st of February, 1885,—President John Taylor and his first counselor, George Q. Cannon, went into retirement, accompanied by Elder L. John Nuttall as secretary, and Charles H. Wilcken as guard. Joseph F. Smith, President Taylor's second counselor, because of the special intensity of anti-"Mormon" feeling against him, had some time previously gone into retirement, and finally went to the Hawaiian Islands where he remained several years.

Administration of John TaylorHC124Much was made by anti-"Mormon" agitators over this retirement of the church presidency and other leading brethren of the church, apostles, presidents of stakes, and bishops; and the changes were rung ad nauseam on the passage of the "false shepherd" who, seeing the wolf coming, leaves the sheep, and the true shepherd who gives his life for the sheep. [^4] These critics cared nothing for the "sheepfold" they feigned was deserted, and had nothing to prompt their lamentations but the chagrin they felt at not being able to lay their hands upon the "shepherds" in question. As a polemic the outcry against the "fleeing shepherds" had no value, as both the Old and the New Testament, are replete with instances where the servants of God, and even the Christ himself, fled from their persecutors, and went into retirement to avoid the edicts of tyrants, then the laws of the countries and of the times in which they wrought their service for mankind.

ANCIENT SCRIPTURAL EXAMPLES OF RETIREMENT OF GOD'S SERVANTS

The press of the United States echoed these "false shepherd" cries of the "Utah ring" and some sectarian missionary priests of Utah, who had charged cowardice. The San Francisco Post said: "It is a pretty picture, this, of leaders hiding away from hardship and leaving their followers, when they should have been the first to court conviction and the dungeon for their religion's sake." The Chronicle, of the same city, said: "This constant hiding, however, places the apostles in a very undignified position, and probably suggests to the skeptical Mormons that there must be something wrong with their religion when it cannot shield its chief exemplars from persecution." The United States judge of the first judicial district of Utah said: "I have sometimes thought, when I have reflected upon this matter, that it would have been a peculiar state of affairs for the prophets of old to have been hiding from the consequences of their religion." Neither the papers nor the judge seemed aware of the fact that they were subjected to the following overwhelming answer:

125"Moses is one of the most prominent of Biblical heroes and noted prophets. Of him it is recorded:

125'But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian.' [^5]

125'Samuel the Prophet hid himself in Ramah to escape from King-Saul, and when he was commanded of God to go to Bethlehem to anoint a new king, he exclaimed: How can I go? If Saul hear it he will kill me.' [^6]

125David, the Lord's anointed, fled from the face of Saul and hid in the cave of Adullam. On one occasion it is written: 'Michael let David down through a window, and he went and fled and escaped.' A very undignified thing for David, the prophet of the Lord and Israel's specially anointed king to be doing! The story of his hiding in various places is told in the 1st Book of Samuel.

125It is related of Obadiah, an ancient prophet and the governor of King Ahab's house: 'Now Obadiah feared the Lord greatly, for it was so when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the Lord, that Obadiah took an hundred prophets and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.' [^7]

Elijah the prophet was entertained by Obadiah when he went to see King Ahab by command of God. But Jezebel made it 'so hot for him,' seeking for his life, that it is written of Elijah: 'And when he saw that, he arose and went for his life, and came to Beersheba, and left his servants there, but he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness.' [^8]

126Joseph, the reputed father of Jesus, fled into Egypt with the child and his mother, and hid there until Herod the murderous ruler was dead. The Saviour himself several times slipped through the crowd and retired to a mountain or some vessel where he could be secure, and was in hiding with his disciples watching while he prayed, when betrayed by Judas Iscariot for a reward. Saul of Tarsus, afterwards Paul, the great apostle to the Gentiles, when the Jews sought his life, was hidden by the disciples and they 'took him by night and let him down by the wall in a basket'." [^9]

A PRICE OFFERED FOR THE ARREST OF GEORGE Q. CANNON

About a year after the retirement of Presidents Taylor and Cannon from public view—they in the meantime directing the affairs of the church by general epistles to the saints, by private correspondence and secret meetings with trusted brethren—a bulletin in the form of a hand bill was widely circulated and posted, offering a reward of $500 for information leading to the arrest of George Q. Cannon. A reward, though less in amount, was also offered for the apprehension of President John Taylor. It was doubtless thought at the time that the offering of a less amount for the arrest of President Taylor than for the arrest of George Q. Cannon, his counselor, was, if possible, to make President Taylor appear depreciated, and despicable; the petty action simply revealed the bitterness and the littleness of those directing this anti-"Mormon" crusade. [^10]

COPY OF REWARD OFFERED

"$500.00"

126"I will pay the above reward to any person for information leading to the arrest of George Q. Cannon, against whom an indictment is now pending in the third district of Utah. The names of any persons giving information will be held in strict confidence.

126[Signed] "E. A. IRELAND,

126Salt Lake City, Feb. 8th, 1886." [^11] U. S. Marshal."

127The reason assigned for singling out George Q. Cannon for this special assault was, first, that he was the "active presidency of the Mormon church;" this on account of the absence of Joseph F. Smith in the Hawaiian Islands and the great age—seventy-eight—of President John Taylor; second, the anti-"Mormons" conceded to George Q. Cannon great abilities of leadership, proclaimed him to be the "power behind the throne," and attributed to his influence the successful thwarting of their purposes, and the continuance of the resistance to the Gentile regime. [^12] Of course, in all his activities President Cannon but followed the direction of his chief, and represented him. It was merely the force of circumstances—the great age of President Taylor and the prolonged absence of his fellow counselor, Joseph F. Smith, which placed upon President Cannon the duty of larger activity than would have fallen to him under normal conditions.

THE PURSUIT OF PRESIDENT CANNON

The reward of $500 was posted immediately after an unsuccessful raid upon the farm home of Mr. Cannon on Sunday, the 7th of February, by the United States marshal and five deputies, at which time a number of witnesses were placed under bonds ranging from $500 to $2,000, to appear when wanted. [^13] No sooner was the reward of $500 made than it increased the activities of the hordes of deputy marshals in Salt Lake City and vicinity.

In view of this determination to capture President Cannon it was considered prudent by his brethren to have him leave the territory; and as there was some unfinished business to close up connected with the church land purchases in Mexico as places of refuge for those who felt themselves persecuted in the United States, he was appointed to attend to that business. Accordingly in company with Elder Erastus Snow, of the council of the twelve, and Samuel H. Hill and Orson P. Arnold, he started upon this mission, intending to go to Mexico via San Francisco. While passing through Nevada, however, President Cannon was placed under arrest at Humbolt station, midway through the state of Nevada—by Sheriff F. M. Fellows, of Nevada, who had been advised of four men boarding a sleeper outside of Ogden, one of whom was suspected to be President Cannon. The sheriff had some difficulty in identifying the man he sought, but finally satisfied himself and made the arrest.

128United States Marshal Ireland immediately went to Nevada and took charge of the prisoner, at Winnemucca, to which point he had been brought by the Nevada officer. The question of bail was considered but the marshal demanded the sum of $10,000 for bail, which the prisoner refused to consider, [^14] being excessive for bail when the charge was only misdemeanor, punishable by the law with but six months imprisonment, and $300 fine. The prisoner consented to return to Utah without giving the marshal the trouble of suing out extradition papers. [^15]

ALLEGED ATTEMPT TO ESCAPE

On the return journey—16th of February—when near Promontory station, about fifty miles northwest from Ogden, Mr. Cannon in the early morning—scarcely daylight—stepping to the rear platform of the train to get relief from the stuffiness of the sleeping car—claims that by a sudden lurch of the car he lost his balance and fell from the train [^16]—said to be going at a speed of about twelve miles an hour.

129Of course the United States officers quite generally scoffed at the idea of Mr. Cannon having "fallen" from the train, and believed that the prisoner had made a mad attempt to escape. A brakeman had seen the prisoner standing on the platform, "and his opinion was that he had jumped off." [^17]

USE OF MILITARY POWER TO BRING IN THE PRISONER

Arrangements were quietly made in Salt Lake City by United States officials for a special train to go out to Promontory, for the prisoner and his captors. In nearly all the experiences of the Latter-day Saints there has ever been an itching desire to employ the military power against them. It was so in Missouri, it was so in the Illinois troubles, it has been repeatedly so in their Utah experiences, as abundantly disclosed in these pages. And so now.

THE MILITARY SUPPLANTS THE CIVIL AUTHORITY

Without the slightest reason for such an action Deputy Marshal Vandercook, in charge of the force of deputies in the absence of Marshal Ireland, made such representations of the "threatening situation" to General McCook in command of the garrison at Fort Douglas, that he secured the detail of twenty-seven men of Company K, sixth infantry, under command of Captain Penney and Lieutenant Shaw, to act as a special guard for the expedition to bring in the single prisoner already in the hands of the United States marshal and his deputies, and willingly consenting to return to Utah without putting his captors to the trouble of obtaining extradition papers!

130Excitement among the people of Utah existed, of course, it could not be otherwise, all the conditions considered. But that there was anything that presented the slightest indication of physical resistance to the law or its officers, is here emphatically denied. Even the organ of the anti-"Mormon" "ringites," the Salt Lake Tribune, in its account of Deputy Marshal Vandercook's application to General McCook for a military force can cite no case of violence, or of any preparation for violence. It is all hypothetical phraseology in which the application is justified. It is "in view of the signs of turbulence and the rage exhibited by many of the brethren, which seemed likely at any moment to break out into violence," that application was made to the military power to bring in the prisoner. [^18] No act of violence, no act of organization looking to preparation for violence, could be cited in justification of the appeal to the military power. It was an appeal of a coterie of men then representing the federal government in Utah, first, to please their petty vanity and increase, their seeming importance and power; and, second, to awe the people into submission to their regime, and for the purposes further on to be developed in this chapter.

When starting for Salt Lake City a very unusual thing occurred. Marshal Ireland, representing the civil authority, abdicated his functions as the officer in charge of the prisoner, and turned over the whole train into the absolute control of the United States military authority, represented by Captain Penney and Lieutenant Shaw, and the squad of soldiers that had been detailed as a guard to the expedition to bring in Mr. Cannon. "All persons," said the Salt Lake Tribune's account "except the officers and Frank J. Cannon, were excluded from the car in which the prisoner was confined and marched into the other coach at each end of which a sergeant was stationed with orders to permit no one to enter or leave the car. Six soldiers then filed into the apartment in which Mr. Cannon was lying and were stationed around him." [^19] On seeing this military display the prisoner asked Marshal Ireland "if the military power had taken preference over the civil," but to this inquiry received no satisfactory answer. [^20] Thereafter any questions that were asked respecting the journey, or the coming or going from one car to the other, as well as the presence of newspaper reporters, were referred to Captain Penney.

131The scene in the car upon the military taking possession of it was thus gloatingly described and commented upon by the Salt Lake Tribune's account of the incident:

131"The scene in his (Cannon's) car was most dramatic and suggestive, and could it have been witnessed by the ranting leaders of the church who are endeavoring to emulate their captured chief, would have afforded them food for reflection for many days to come. The trembling, moaning, disfigured object, whose terrified gaze met nothing but grim soldiers and loaded muskets, was the man who, under the cloak of religion, for years had defied the laws of his country and has claimed to exercise greater authority than the government those soldiers represented. It was a picture that should have been impressed on the mind of every blind bigot and roaring fanatic of the Mormon church." [^21]

131Malice, and despicable hate, could not go beyond this in gloating over a helpless opponent.

MARSHAL IRELAND'S FEARS

Marshal Ireland seems to have been a very timid man; for on the 16th, before the arrival of the special train and the troops in Ogden, he expressed fear that there would be a demonstration and perhaps violence on the prisoner arriving at Ogden, and claimed to have received word to that effect. Whereupon, President George Q. Cannon, to quiet his fears, sent the following dispatch to Richard J. Taylor, son of President John Taylor, and a prominent citizen of Ogden:

132"Promontory, Feb. 16th.

132R. J. Taylor: Marshal Ireland is apprised that there is danger of tumult in Ogden. This would be bad. Will arrive tomorrow morning.

132[Signed] "GEORGE Q. CANNON."

132At Promontory, President Cannon received the following answer:

132"Ogden, Feb. 16th, 1886.

132President George Q. Cannon:

132Everything quiet in Ogden. Tell Marshal Ireland there is no danger of any tumult here. [Signed] "L. W. SHURTLIFF,

132R. J. TAYLOR." [^22]

132Mr. Shurtliff was president of the Weber stake of Zion in which Ogden is located, and had signed the dispatch with Mr. Taylor, no doubt, to make the assurance of the peace status at Ogden doubly sure.

UNDER BONDS

The journey to Salt Lake City was made without accident, or further incident.

132Arrived at the depot the soldiers filed along the platform as if there were apprehensions of danger. It was an unnecessary precaution as none of President Cannon's friends contemplated any resistance to the law or its officers. The prisoner was taken immediately before the third district court and gave, first a bond of $25,000 to appear in the case against him for unlawful cohabitation; then two more warrants—in pursuance of the segregation policy of the prosecution, naming different dates on which the same offense was committed—were produced on which the prisoner was required to give bail in the sum of $10,000 in each case, making the total bail required for the offense of unlawful cohabitation $45,000—for a misdemeanor! So named in the law creating the offense—the Edmunds law (section 3)—the extreme penalty for violation of which was six months imprisonment and a fine of $300!

Footnotes

"Promontory 2:26 p. m.

Feb. 16th, 1886.

Father slipped accidentally from the train at the Promontory and is badly bruised. Inform the folks but don't alarm them.

[Signed] "F. J. Cannon." (Deseret News, weekly, Feb. 24th, 1886, p.81).

---
Notas:
[^1] Salt Lake Tribune, of Feb. 12th, 1886.
[^2] Daily Salt Lake Tribune, of Feb. 16th, 1886.
[^3] "It is firmly believed by many that plural marriage is the cause of our persecutions," wrote President Joseph F. Smith, March 10th, 1886, "and if abandoned by us, we would have no cause to fear any further persecutions. The present crusade is not a struggle against plural marriage alone, nor in the interest of morality. Quite the reverse. It represents a despotism of the most grinding character, for the destruction of every vestige of local self-government. And it works by falsehood, fraud, trickery, usurpation, and tyranny, while its battle cry against 'polygamy' is created to deceive, and repeated and echoed to mislead. 'It is simply a ruse de guerre to hide the brutal villainy and outrageous hypocrisy of the whole infamous plot.'" (Letter to Deseret News, weekly, of March 31st, 1886, p. 168).
[^4] Report of the Utah Commission of April 29th, 1886, transmitted to President Arthur, May 6th, 1884, 48th Congress 1st Session, Executive Document, No. 153.
[^5] Utah Legislature's Memorial to Congress, Congressional Record, 10th of April, 1886.
[^6] Ibid, for 13th of Jan., 1887, house proceedings.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] Report of the Utah Commission of April 29th, 1884.
[^9] Report of the Utah Commission of Sept. 24th, 1886, in Deseret News, weekly, October 27th, 1886.
[^10] Governor's Report is copied in Deseret News, weekly, of October 27th 1886.
[^11] Deseret News, weekly, of April 7th, 1886.
[^12] Ibid, of April 14th, 1886.
[^13] Hand-Book of Mormonism, Coyner, 1882, last page, but one.
[^14] Congressional Record of 13th of Jan., 1887, house proceedings.
[^15] Salt Lake Daily Tribune of June 3rd, 1886: and Deseret News, weekly, of June 9, 1886.
[^16] Salt Lake Daily Tribune of Feb. 12th, 1886. Italics are mine—the lines so written indicate the trend of the thoughts of the "crusaders."
[^17] Salt Lake Tribune, impression of 16th of Feb., 1886.
[^18] This sentence of extreme penalty for the violation of this law, fell with such regularity that it was with grim humor spoken of by the victims as the "six by three" size of punishment, abbreviated finally to the symbol of "6 by 3," which if one did not get he was jestingly regarded only as an inferior hero of the times by his fellow prisoners of the "6 x 3" class.
[^19] See Jenson's Church Chronology, from 16th of September, 1885—when the policy was presented to the grand jury of the third judicial district, by Judge Zane, and by Judge Powers to the grand jury of the first judicial district on the 23rd of the same month,—to the 7th of Feb., 1887, when the segregation policy was overthrown by the supreme court of the United States. Between those two dates a number of such cases as are referred to in the text are given in the long list of trials and convictions there recorded. Eight such "victims" were languishing in the Utah penitentiary under this illegal segregation regime when relieved by the decision of the United States supreme court; and ten had to be so released from the Detroit, Michigan penitentiary to which place they had been sent to serve their prison term. (See Church Chronology, date of 7th and 8th, and 9th of Feb., 1887, pp. 143-145).
[^20] Congressional Record of Jan. 13th, 1887, house proceedings.
[^21] See Edmunds-Tucker Law, Compiled Laws of Utah, 1838, pp. 114-125.
[^22] Both dispatches will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 24th, 1886.
