B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

133CHAPTER CLXII

133A CHAPTER OF COMMENT: THE REAL STRUGGLE POLITICAL NOT RELIGIOUS

133IT WAS in the United States of America, in the closing decades of the 19th century that such scenes as are described in the two preceding chapters occurred, and in which such a policy was pursued. Of course it is but fair to say that those conducting this crusade claimed to be guided by the purest patriotism, by the most disinterested motives. It was not their purpose to persecute anybody! Far from it! They sought only to protect the monogamous home, the bulwark of the national life, the chief corner stone of the republic; they only desired to see the national law submitted to as supreme, "that the full sovereignty of the republic should be vindicated and reestablished." "There is no vindictiveness in this crusade," said the Salt Lake Tribune, "though a great deal has been charged. There is no wish that any Mormon shall be injured in person or property, the skulking charge that a sinister motive is behind the demand that the laws shall be supreme is but the gibberish of knaves and fools, but the determination that this business shall stop is growing more and more fixed daily." [^1]

133SELF-ASSERTION OF ANTI-"MORMON" PURITY OF PURPOSE

133Later the same organ said:

"They [the 'Mormon' polygamists] ought, like sensible people, to remember that there is no desire on the part of any here or elsewhere to harm them one penny's worth in property; there is no desire for benefits through any misfortune to them; there is no wish to persecute them; but there is a fixed determination that they shall obey the laws of the country, and so the machinery of the courts are [is] set in motion against them for the same purpose and in the same spirit that the men of the north a quarter of a century ago were organized into armies and moved against the south. It was not for plunder; it was not for vengeance; it was simply that the laws of the republic should be enforced and that the full sovereignty of the republic should be vindicated and reestablished." [^2]

134The quoted passages above, I think, state the case of the "crusaders," as they would desire to appear in history. Yet it is difficult to believe that all this disinterestedness, all this patriotism, all these lofty ideals were without some alloy. Such idealism,—such saintly sweetness, in fact, this hungering and thirsting for the establishment of the righteousness of "Mormon" life and the supremacy of law—is a little incompatible with the character of the men engaged in the crusade. While not in any way inclined to answer railing with railing, or charge with countercharge, yet the truth cannot be blinked that if from first to last a list were to be made out of the names of the would-be reformers of the "Mormon" people, and their characters were exposed, so that they stood fully and fairly revealed, it would be no flattery to the civilization, to the patriotism, to the Christian morality they claimed to represent, in contradistinction to the supposedly "different civilization," "patriotism," and "morality" of the Latter-day Saints.

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE REAL CAUSE OF THE UTAH CONFLICT

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe coterie of men who plotted against the peace of the Latter-day Saints, and sought through these later years to destroy the last vestige of local self-government, in the name of preserving the purity of the American home, were, in many cases, and it is safe to say in the majority of cases, not exemplars of that chastity they in this struggle affected, nor, indeed, of a character in their daily walk and conversation that gave any confidence that they had any really deep concern about the "purity" of the American home. [^3] Honorable individual exceptions to this arraignment of the anti-"Mormon" "crusaders" are cheerfully and gladly conceded, but they are exceptions. For the rest, the indictment for hypocrisy, sex immorality, indifference to the purity of the home, on the part of the "crusaders," stands. Their concern about the alleged evils of polygamy was mere pretense.

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe real cause of this anti-"Mormon" crusade was a fight for the political control of Utah on the part of the "crusaders." Their souls were vexed with the thought that although they held the chief places in the executive and judicial departments of the territorial government, by appointment of the president of the United States, they and their factotum following had no voice in the legislative department, no control of the people's treasury, they could not hope under existing conditions to be elected to the local offices still within the gift of the people, of which there were between two and three thousand; and they were not the leaders in local community thought and power. From the first the federal appointees, with a very few honorable exceptions, made war upon the Latter-day Saints—who were the people of Utah, constituting an overwhelming majority of the people of the territory—about eighty percent in the period under consideration—for these offices and this local domination.

Conflict over PolygamyHC135Here it is important to present the evidence of the relative numerical strength of the church membership with non-members in its chief gathering place—Utah.

Conflict over PolygamyHCIn its report to the secretary of the interior, the Utah Commission, created by the Edmunds law and placed in control of the election machinery of the territory, said: "The present population [i. e. of Utah] is estimated at 160,000, about four-fifths being Mormon." [^4] The Utah legislature two years later stated the population to be 85 per cent "Mormon" and 15 per cent Gentile; and seven-tenths of the voters to be "Mormon" and three-tenths Gentile. [^5] In this connection is set down a compilation of Utah statistics made from the census of 1880, by Utah's delegate in congress and used by him in a speech against the Edmunds-Tucker bill, that is instructive and disproves the claims so persistently made by anti-"Mormons" to the effect that Utah's population, chiefly "Mormon," as shown above, was foreign born:

Conflict over PolygamyHC136"Another unfounded slander [said Mr. John T. Caine, Utah's delegate to congress] spread abroad most industriously by our enemies, is the charge that the population of Utah is largely made up of foreigners, who are ignorant and unfit to be citizens of the United States. What do the statistics prove? According to the census of 1880 the total population of Utah was 143,963. Of this number 74,509 were males, and 69,454 females—the males outnumbering the females by 5,045. Of the total population 99,969 were native born, and only 43,994 foreign born. There were 52,189 native born females and 44,780 native born females; and the foreign born males were 22,320, and the foreign born females 21,647. While the proportion of the foreign born population of Idaho is 44,062 to 100,000; of Wisconsin, 44,548; California, 51,217; Minnesota, 52,168; Dakota, 62,117; Arizona, 65,798; Nevada 70,065; in Utah it is only 44,062." [^6]

Conflict over PolygamyHC136On the same occasion the delegate from Utah pointed out the fact that of all the states and territories in the Union there were but "thirteen showing a lower percentage [than Utah] of total population who could not read." Connecticut having the same as Utah, 3.37 percent. [^7]

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe proof that the chief effort of the anti-"Mormon" "crusaders"—generally the federal appointees and their Gentile associates who hoped to profit by the success of their schemes—was to seize the whole territorial government by destroying the people's control of it—that "pelf" not "purity" was their aim—is supplied by the pages of this History dealing with the progressive record of this controversy; and by the fact that in these last stages of the controversy the "crusaders" were seeking for the universal political disfranchisement of the Latter-day Saints, and the utter destruction of the local government of Utah territory by the substitution for it of a legislative commission form of government, with all the local officers heretofore elected by the people—or appointed by agencies created by them—made appointive, from which, of course, all "Mormons" would be excluded. By way of summary, however, let the following facts be recalled:

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe usurpations of Governor Eli H. Murray in the attempt to appoint many, in fact most, of these officers under the Hoar amendment to the Edmunds law of 1882; and his repeated recommendations of the commission form of government, with its enlargement of the appointing power of the governor or the president. See also the repeated recommendations of the Utah Commission in its reports to the department of the interior, recommending that the United States commissioners be given concurrent jurisdiction with justices of the peace, in matters civil and criminal; also suggesting that the law give power to the governor or district judges to appoint "certain territorial and county officers which under the existing law were elective. [^8] Also their approval of the Edmunds-Tucker bill, making the county probate judges and school commissioner appointive. [^9] Governor West also in his report to the secretary of the interior of October, 1886, recommended the same legislation, and called attention to the fact that a long list of officers which the then pending legislation would make appointive had been filled by the recent August election, and their terms were for two years. "If the bill," said the governor (Edmunds-Tucker bill), "is to become a law—as it should at the coming session of congress—it ought to provide for vacating the offices, that they may be filled [by appointment] in accordance with its provisions." [^10]

THE ONLY COURSE LEFT TO THE PEOPLE OF UTAH

Conflict over PolygamyHCIn the presence of such an issue as this what was left for the Latter-day Saint community to do? They must either contend for their rights or surrender them. By surrendering them they would have proved themselves possessed of the slavish nature charged against them by the "crusaders," which neither then nor since has been acknowledged by the rank and file of the Latter-day Saints, any more than by their leaders. Such obedience as they gave to the counsel of their leaders was the act of free men moved by conviction that the thing required, the policy outlined, was for the best good of all. With a brave, strong people there was but one thing to do in the issue forced upon them by the "crusaders," and that was to contend for the full measure of their rights. This both people and leaders resolved upon, and hence the fight for the political control of Utah. On the part of the people it was their objective to keep as large as possible the sphere of local self-government—extend it if possible—and administer the government by officers elected by the people, or appointed by agencies created by the people's legislature. In this policy the people of Utah and their leaders were united. The solidarity of the Latter-day Saint community was not the result, as claimed by their opponents, of priestly domination. It resulted from a common understanding of the situation. It was the only thing for them to do in a struggle for the maintenance of their political rights—a veritable struggle for community existence.

Conflict over PolygamyHCOBJECTIVE OF THE ANTI-"MORMON" "CRUSADERS"

Conflict over PolygamyHCOn the part of the "crusaders" the objective was to enlarge the federal authority, to increase the sphere of its control of things political by enlarging the scope of authority and increasing the number of the federal appointees; and finally, also, to abolish, if possible, the local government altogether, and institute new forms of government rooted in arbitrary power, and giving as bloom and fruitage the monarchial spirit rather than the spirit of Americanism, strong in its confidence in the ability of the people for self-government, and the inherent power of self-correction of evils that ever accompanies the idea of ability for self-government. The Latter-day Saints—practically the people of Utah—had the advantage of community solidarity, what they called, when it was touched by religious fervor, the unity of the saints. The anti-"Mormon" "crusaders" had the advantage of an appeal to the national prejudice against supposed religious "heresy," especially when the "heresy" took on the character of what they were made to believe was a menace to the American home. Also the "crusaders" affected with great success the roll of patriots struggling for the preservation of the very fundamentals of the republic. For the most part they were excellent examples of Dr. Johnson's declaration that patriotism is the last refuge of scoundrels. This language may be thought severe. Especially in view of the changed conditions now—1930—and for some years past in Utah, over forty years removed from the period of bitterness and injustice under consideration. I am treating of the decade of 1882-1892, portraying the spirit of those times with such fidelity to truth as I may possess. It matters not that there has been a change wrought with the passing years, a better understanding had on the part of individuals on both sides of the controversy discussed. But I am concerned at this point of my work with the events and the spirit of the above decade, and fidelity to the truth of history requires no less than the statement here made. The actions of men, like the facts of events, are peculiarly alike in this, that they admit of no denial in history. Let regret, and repentance do what they may, the acts of men remain of record—

Conflict over PolygamyHC140"The moving finger writes; and, having writ, Moves on: nor all your piety nor wit Shall lure it back to cancel half a line, Nor all your tears wash out a word of it."

Conflict over PolygamyHC140That is what is meant when men speak of the inexorableness of history. "History will vindicate us," say the men confident of the rectitude of their own intentions, desires, ambitions, or actions; so, too, men may be assured history will condemn them when their aims and ambitions are unholy and vicious. Before the bar of history as before the bar of God the actions of men will lie in their true light, and they themselves, "in the very teeth and forehead of their faults must give in evidence."

Conflict over PolygamyHCBe it understood, furthermore, that I am dealing with the "crusaders" here, not with the majority of the non-"Mormon" population of Utah or Idaho or of Arizona; but with that active minority of non-"Mormons," both politicians and such of the sectarian priests as joined with them in this crusade. That these priests did join in the political hue and cry against the civil and political rights of the people of Utah, the Latter-day Saints, admits of no question. At a Presbyterian convocation of ministers and sectarian school teachers in the mission service of that church in Utah, held early in April, 1886, resolutions were adopted by that body respecting a Washington, D. C., dispatch to the effect that no further legislation was needed for Utah because of the work which the churches and schools were accomplishing. Respecting this the convocation recommended—"First, that this statement be declared unwarranted by the facts and calculated to do great mischief. Second, that while the Christian churches and schools are doing a most salutary work, which is increasing in power every year, there is still great need of radical legislation by congress." [^11] At this convocation there were eighteen ministers, chiefly from Utah, but some were from Wyoming and Nebraska; there were also sixteen teachers in attendance all engaged in the sectarian "reform work" in Utah.

Conflict over PolygamyHC141About this time also Bishop Tuttle of the Episcopal church, who before and afterwards said many kind words for the "Mormon" people, now went over to the radicals and said concerning polygamous "Mormons"—"make it hot and still hotter for them until they are forced to yield to our demands." [^12] As early as 1882 the bishop of Utah and Idaho joined with seven other prominent sectarian priests, R. G. McNiece, D. L. Leonard, L. A. Rudsill, J. M. Coyner, G. D. B. Miller, E. Benner, and T. B. Hilton in issuing an address "To the Patriotic Citizens of America," in which this statement occurs:

Conflict over PolygamyHC141"While it is true that a large proportion of the adult population are of foreign birth, and are generally ignorant and unlearned in regard to those things that fit them to be intelligent citizens of a free government; it is also true, as we believe, that under proper training they would in time become liberty-loving, patriotic citizens, as they are now industrious and economical. But they are so controlled by the Mormon leaders that until this power is broken by some means, there is no hope that Utah will ever be in harmony with the rest of the Union. We fully believe that the welfare of Utah, as well as that of the nation, demands that the political power of the Mormon hierarchy be at once effectively and permanently broken." The best means of doing this they proposed to leave to statesmen. [^13]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE SAINTS DEFENDED IN CONGRESS

Conflict over PolygamyHCIt has already been said that the affected concern of the "crusaders" about sex morality and the preservation of the purity of the American home was mere pretense. As Mr. John T. Caine, Utah's delegate in congress said upon the floor of the national house of representatives, when speaking against the passage of the Edmunds-Tucker bill—

Conflict over PolygamyHC"It is our ecclesiastical and not our moral polity that is aimed at—that is sought to be overthrown. The men who are here from Utah, clamoring for the disfranchisement of the 'Mormon' people, who insist that every office within the territory shall be vacated and filled by appointees, that even our selectmen, who make the assessments of property, and the tax collectors shall give way to non-'Mormons,' are not afraid of the contamination of their own or their families' morals. They know as all the world knows, that a purer, more orderly, upright, God-fearing and God-serving community does not exist upon the earth than the exclusively 'Mormon' settlements of Utah. It is simply because the minority cannot, under a Democratic American form of local government, rule the majority that these men are here clamoring for our disfranchisement."

Conflict over PolygamyHC142The Utah delegate a little later said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC142"I tell you Mr. Speaker, I tell you solemnly, that in the United States, in the whole world, there is no people more loyal to the eternal truths of liberty, as expressed in the Constitution of this country, than my constituents; and there will come a time, a time when the mists which now befog the understanding of the American people and its legislators, when the refuge of lies erected by characterless charlatans shall have been swept away—there will come such a time, when my words will stand forth marked clear and bold and untarnished as their truth justifies." [^14]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE THREAT OF VIOLENCE

Conflict over PolygamyHCThis crusade, then, in the light of the facts here considered, was an effort to depose the "Mormon" leaders, a condition precedent to the installation of the coterie of "crusaders" into leadership. It was a course, however, which drove the Latter-day Saints into a closer union, and to a solid support of their leaders in a struggle for the full measure of their rights, both as religionists and citizens of the republic, a struggle for their very community existence. Then this solidarity, resulting from their policy, is declared to be a menace to free government, and must be given up by the Latter-day Saints or dire consequences are to follow. Sometimes these consequences were presented in very threatening terms of a most aggravating form by the organ of the "crusaders," as witness the following in an editorial:

Conflict over PolygamyHC"The pope of Utah [i. e. referring to President John Taylor] should in his underground retreat, read thoughtfully one sentence in the late letter of the pope of Rome to the Spanish bishops. It is this: 'I would strongly impress upon you that, although politics are based upon religion, you must not engage in politics.' When the pope of Utah sends a message like that out to the shepherds of his flock, the troubles here will nearly all pass away. The interfering with politics in Illinois is what cost Joseph Smith his life; the anger which is caused by all the thousands of Mormons in Utah voting solidly as directed, will never cease until that rule shall be relinquished. It is a menace to free government which Americans will never submit to. When it grows dangerous enough, if no other remedy can be found, the one resorted to in Illinois will be invoked again." [^15]

Conflict over PolygamyHC143As the "remedy" resorted to in Illinois was the assassination of some of the church leaders and the expatriation of the Latter-day Saints as a body, the threat of the anti-"Mormon" organ, was decidedly vicious.

WAS AN EXODUS OF CHURCH LEADERS INVITED

Conflict over PolygamyHCA little before this, about the time of George Q. Cannon's arrest, the Tribune manifested both its desire and its willingness to get rid of the "Mormon" leaders in another way, that of withdrawal to some other country. Some rumor evidently had reached the "crusaders" of the purchase of lands by the church in Mexico, and Canada, about this time, for colonization purposes, and what they heard brought forth the following gleeful suggestion through the anti-"Mormon" organ:

Conflict over PolygamyHC143"It seems to be generally understood that the polygamists here who are bound to continue the practice are quietly preparing to make a home in a foreign country. If this is really the fact, why would it not be better for the chiefs to communicate the fact? If it really has been determined to seek rest under another government, why not let it be known at least to the authorities? We do not know the fact, but judging by the sentiments which we think govern, we believe that a truce of six months might be agreed upon in which prosecutions would cease if the chiefs of the organization would but say it was their intention to leave the country with such of their people as were determined not to obey the laws. On the same ground we believe that those in prison might be pardoned out."

Conflict over PolygamyHC143Then after saying that the determination that plural marriage shall stop is growing more and more fixed daily, this follows:

Conflict over PolygamyHC144"If the chiefs realize this and have determined that a movement of the 'keys' from Zion is necessary, we are sure, if they will but make that purpose known, every advantage will be offered them to carry out the laudable undertaking. If this really is the arrangement why is not a hint given to the present legislature [then in session] to pass the necessary laws to make this region to conform to other portions of the republic? They could be made to take effect six or eight months after their approval. This would stop all the trouble and there would not, we presume, be any vetoes interposed to harrow up the souls of the saints. If the arrangement has not been quite perfected, would it not be the wise thing to perfect it? What hope is there for the chiefs? Do they expect to continue indefinitely as they now are? Do they expect to spend the rest of their lives either skulking, and hiding, or in prison? Do they expect to keep their people in apprehension and despair until the law finally attacks their property and leaves them penniless? What hope have they in persisting in remaining here and defying the laws." [^16]

Conflict over PolygamyHC144This was before the arrest of George Q. Cannon in February. After his arrest and return to Salt Lake City the Tribune took up again the matter of the withdrawal of the leaders from Utah to some other country, much in the same spirit as in the above paragraph. "If on their own account," says the editorial, "they are unwilling to do this, they ought for the sake of the peace and prosperity of their brothers in the faith, to do it." [^17]

Conflict over PolygamyHC144In all this the reader may see the deep anxiety of the "crusaders" for the departure of the leaders of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, that Utah might be left a world for them to bustle in as leaders. Or was it the hope that an exodus from Salt Lake might afford another Nauvoo opportunity for plunder?

NOTWITHSTANDING

Notwithstanding the federal courts of Utah were sending men to prison daily, and with little ceremony, so easily were convictions to be had under the then interpretations and administration of the law;—

Notwithstanding the rule was in unlawful cohabitation cases for the extreme penalty of fine and imprisonment—six months imprisonment and three hundred dollar fine [^18] —to be imposed on the victims of "the law";—

145Notwithstanding in what were considered aggravated cases the segregation policy could be resorted to by which the penalty of the law could be augmented to three and four times that amount of penalty—and in a number of cases was so augmented; [^19]—

145Notwithstanding the possibilities of increasing the punishment by that policy were well-nigh without limit;—

145Notwithstanding the deputy marshals could, or at least did, arrest witnesses on warrants—not subpoenaes—and place them under bonds to appear before grand juries and trial courts, and when they refused to testify—even as to matters confessedly not essential to the establishment of the crime—sexual intercourse—the judges could, or at least did, send them to prison;—

145Notwithstanding the courts could, or at least did, compel wives to testify against their husbands;—

145Notwithstanding the federal judiciary of the territory had special funds appropriated by the federal government to employ a large force of deputy marshals, United States commissioners and assistant prosecuting attorneys, to carry on this crusade;—

Notwithstanding that it was possible for the federal officers to put a price upon the heads of prominent churchmen, against whom their animosity was especially aroused, thus giving encouragement for deputy marshals enforce to repeatedly raid the homes and the offices of these men;—

146Notwithstanding that in addition to the large numbers that were daily being sent to prison and fined, and more by the extra judicial administration of the law were driven into exile;—

146Surely all this would have been sufficient to have suppressed polygamous marriages and polygamous living in a short time. "But is it polygamy that is aimed at?" asked Utah's delegate to congress on the floor of the house when the Edmunds-Tucker bill was under discussion. "If so," he continued, "why not give the laws already enacted and so vigorously, nay so ruthlessly enforced, an opportunity to work out their legitimate effects? If they will not extirpate polygamy, surely no legislation of a kindred character ever will. If you are impatient and must have quicker results why not act upon the declaration of an assistant attorney-general of the United States, who deliberately said that it would have been an act of mercy to have put all grown-up Mormons to the sword." [^20]

Finally, notwithstanding a veritable "reign of judicial terror" had been created by this unwarranted procedure, which made Utah more resemble some Russian province where suppression of freedom was in progress than a political subdivision of the republic of the United States—the Utah "ringites," including the federal officials, were not satisfied with their powers, but sought for more, through further special congressional legislation. Hence through these first years of the crusade, described in the two preceding chapters—from its beginning under the Edmunds law—1883—to the passage of the Edmunds-Tucker bill in February, 1887—the anti-"Mormon" "ringites" were industriously agitating the country for the passage of more stringent legislation, especially insisting that the legislation demanded should provide for the government of Utah by a legislative commission which meant, of course, the disappearance of the last vestige of local self-government in the territory. The determination was to supplant "home rule" by "carpetbag rule."

Conflict over PolygamyHCPASSAGE OF THE EDMUNDS-TUCKER BILL

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe result of this anti-"Mormon" clamor for further special legislation was the passage of the Edmunds-Tucker bill; which, infamous as it was, fell very far short of being as vicious and infamous as the measures sought for by the Utah "ringites" and the anti-"Mormon" agitators throughout the United States.

Conflict over PolygamyHC147It constituted polygamy as a continuous offense under the title of "unlawful cohabitation." It created a federal returning board to take charge of the re-registration and all the election machinery of the territory. It abolished woman suffrage. It also abolished the Emigration Fund Company; and also dissolved the church as a corporation. It escheated in large part the church property and established an odious test oath for voters. It also abolished the Nauvoo Legion.

NAUVOO LEGION ABOLISHED

All the laws of the "Provisional State of Deseret," and the territory of Utah, relative to the organization of the Nauvoo Legion and the militia of the territory were annulled; provision was made that the militia be organized and subject in all respects to the laws of the United States regulating the militia in the territories; provided, that all general officers of the militia shall be appointed by the governor of the territory, by and with the advice and consent of the council thereof, but the laws passed by the legislature for the organization of the militia were to be subject to the approval of congress. [^21]

148The implication of the section relating to the militia, is that the organization of Utah's militia under the name and title of the Nauvoo Legion was not "organized and subjected in all respects to the laws of the United States regulating the militia in the territories;" and this is a very unjust and untruthful implication; for Utah's militia of the early years of the territory was organized strictly in harmony with the laws of the United States, then in force on the subject, and held itself subject to those laws. Prejudice existed against its name, and also against the idea of the existence of a citizen soldiery in the commonwealth which might have some suspicion of sympathy with the people.

148This bill was received by President Cleveland, but was not returned by him to the house of congress in which it originated (the senate) within the time prescribed by the Constitution of the United States, it became a law therefore without his signature, and went into effect March 3rd, 1887.

148It was the last act of anti-"Mormon" legislation passed by the congress of the United States against Utah. While one rejoices that such an act became a law without the signature of the president of the United States, one can only regret that Grover Cleveland did not veto such a purely un-American thing.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See epistle in Minutes of April Conference, Millennial Star, vol. xlvii, pp. 290-296.
[^2] Ibid, pp. 296-297, where the resolution in full and the names of the committee—twenty-two in number—will be found.
[^3] The statement of grievances, protests and synopsis of speeches, etc., will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of May 6th, 1885, pp. 244-5. A complete report was published in pamphlet form at the time, but the pamphlet is now rare. Copies, however, are on file at the Church Historian's Office, Salt Lake City.
[^4] A full report of their interview with President Cleveland, signed by the committee, was submitted to the tabernacle congregation on the 31st of May, and is published in full in the Deseret News, weekly, of June 3rd, 1885, p. 316.
[^5] See a communication to the Deseret News, weekly, of June 3rd, 1885.
[^6] The opinion of the court in full will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 17th, 1886, pp. 66, 67.
[^7] See review of this decision in Deseret News, weekly, of 24th Feb., 1886, pp. 86-87.
[^8] See Deseret News, weekly, of March 17th, 1886, p. 137.
[^9] Washington Post Dispatch of May 10th, 1886. See also editorial Deseret News, weekly, of May 26th, 1886. For decision see United States Supreme Court Reports, 118.
[^10] Deseret News, weekly, May 26th, 1886.
[^11] United States Supreme Court Reports, 120. See also Deseret News, weekly, Dec. 1st, 1886, p. 732.
[^12] See Congressional Record of 13th of January, 1887.
[^13] Deseret News of July 13th, 1887.
[^14] This on 16th of March, 1888, see Congressional Record of that date, senate proceedings.
[^15] The heading of the Deseret News account of the affair was sensational and embodied the above idea, see impression of Sept. 16th, weekly, 1885. For editorial comment see same impression, p. 553; also Ibid September 23rd, p. 567.
[^16] Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 25th, 1885.
[^17] History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, p. 885.
[^18] See History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, pp. 885-6, and Deseret News, weekly, of July 8th, 1885.
[^19] Ibid, July 22nd.
[^20] Salt Lake Tribune, July 10th, 1885.
[^21] Butte Miner, Montana, 19th July, 1885.
