B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

149CHAPTER CLXIII

149RESISTANCE TO ANTI-"MORMON" AGGRESSIONS

149ALL this invasion of the rights of American citizens by judicial decisions, and congressional enactments; all these thrusts at the rights of an American community to self-government, were not submitted to by the Latter-day Saints without protest and strenuous effort to prevent the inroads being made. In the first place at the annual conference of the church held at Logan in April, 1885, the first presidency of the church in an epistle addressed to the conference from their retirement called attention to the fact that the male members of the church living in the practice of plural marriage represented but about two percent of the entire membership of the church. "And we consider it an act of great injustice to the ninety-eight percent," said the president, "to be abused and outraged, and have all their business relations disturbed, values of every kind unsettled, neighborhoods agitated and alarmed, and the property of the people generally jeopardized, because of this 'raid' upon these alleged breakers of the law." [^1]

AN ADDRESS TO THE PRESIDENT AND PEOPLE OF THE UNITED STATES

In view of this statement of the epistle the conference appointed a committee to draft resolutions and a protest to the president of the United States, and to the nation, setting forth in detail the wrongs the people of Utah had suffered, and were still suffering "from the tyrannical conduct of federal officials," and "asking for the same treatment to which other citizens of the United States were entitled." [^2] This committee reported to a mass meeting held in the great tabernacle on 2nd of May, 1885. The tabernacle was crowded to its capacity—from seven to eight thousand people. John T. Caine, Utah's delegate to congress, acted as chairman of the meeting. The statement of grievances and protest of the conference-appointed committee were supported by strong speeches from many prominent elders of the church and finally passed unanimously with enthusiasm by the great mass meeting. This statement of the grievances of Latter-day Saints extended beyond the borders of Utah and was made to cover Idaho and Arizona also, where abuses similar to those in Utah were being perpetrated on the people. "In Utah, Idaho and Arizona," said the statement, "concerted assault is made upon the 'Mormon' people."

SUMMARY OF STATEMENT

"Spotters dog their footsteps. Delators thrust themselves into bedchambers and watch at windows. Children are questioned upon the streets as to the marital relations of their parents. Families are dragged before commissioners and grand juries, and on pain of punishment for contempt, are compelled to testify against their fathers and husbands. Modest women are made to answer shamefully indecent questions as to the sexual relations of men and women. Attempts are made to bribe men to work up cases against their neighbors. Notoriously disreputable characters are employed to spy into men's family relations. Contrary to good law, persons accused of crime are held to be guilty until they prove themselves innocent. The burden of proof rests upon the accused instead of upon the accuser. Trial by jury in the territories is no longer a safeguard against injustice to a 'Mormon' accused of crime. Accusation is equivalent to conviction. Juries are picked to convict, and if they fail to find a verdict against the accused when he is a 'Mormon,' insult and abuse are heaped upon them by the anti-'Mormon' press. Men, fearful of not obtaining justice in the courts, are avoiding arrests, believing no fair and impartial trial can be had under existing circumstances."

150"These are our grievances," said the document, "now hear our protest:"

PROTEST

"We protest against unfair treatment on the part of the general government.

151We protest against a continuance of territorial bondage, subversive of the rights of freemen and contrary to the spirit of American institutions.

151We protest against special legislation, the result of popular prejudice and religious interference.

151We protest against the conscience of one class of citizens being made the criterion by which to judge another.

151We protest against the tyranny of federal officials, and the continuance in office of men who disgrace their positions and use their official powers as a means of oppression.

151We protest the partial administration of the Edmunds law—the punishing of one class for practicing their religion, and exempting from prosecution the votaries of lust and crime.

151We protest against the breaking up of family relations formed previous to the passage of the Edmunds law, and the depriving of women and children the support and protection of their husbands and fathers.

151We protest against the prosecution of persons, many of whom are infirm and aged who entered into plural marriage before it was declared a crime and never violated any law.

151We respectfully ask for the appointment by the president of a commission to fairly and thoroughly investigate the Utah situation and pending its report we solemnly protest against the continuance of this merciless crusade." [^3]

ACTION UPON THE STATEMENT OF GRIEVANCES

A committee of three, John T. Caine, Utah's delegate to congress, John W. Taylor, a member of the council of the apostles, and a son of President John Taylor, and John Q. Cannon, son of George Q. Cannon, were chosen as a delegation to present the statement of grievances and protest to the president of the United States. Mass meetings for the ratification of this protest against injustice were held in all prominent towns and cities of the Latter-day Saints, in the three territories where the injustice complained of obtained, and in every case the statement and protest was unanimously adopted.

PRESIDENT CLEVELAND ON THE MEMORIAL

On the 13th of May the committee appointed by the mass meeting at Salt Lake City, waited upon President Cleveland, at the White House in Washington.

152An account of the interview was sent out by the Associated Press and appeared in practically all the newspapers of the country in part as follows:

152"The president listened courteously and attentively, to the address and upon its conclusion, said: 'Well, gentlemen, so far, of course, as the Edmunds law is concerned, I had nothing to do with that. Of course it is my duty to see that it is enforced, as well as all other laws. You are entitled to fair consideration and to have the law impartially administered, as you have asked, and, so far as any appointments which I shall make are concerned, I will endeavor to give you a character of men who will see that the law is impartially administered. I hope soon to be able to get at these matters, but it will require a little time.'

152The president's face broke into a smile as he concluded, 'I wish you out there could be like the rest of us.'

152'All we ask,' rejoined Mr. Caine, 'is that the law shall be impartially administered.'

152'You are entitled to that,' said the president; 'and, so far as I am concerned, I shall see that it is done. I will give these matters my attention as carefully as possible'."

152The statement and protest was later introduced into the United States senate by Seth M. Blair, of Missouri. [^4]

152Unfortunately to President Cleveland's smilingly expressed wish—and having in mind, of course, the question of plural marriage—that the saints "could be like the rest of us," some overzealous Latter-day Saints gave a sinister meaning, when clearly none was intended on the part of the president. [^5]

152So far as known the "Statement of Grievances and Protest" did not affect the course of events in Utah, or in the other territories, Idaho and Arizona; but it did bring before the country through the press an account of the injustice being perpetrated in administering the Edmunds law in Utah.

CONTESTS BEFORE THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

Conflict over PolygamyHCBefore the supreme court of the United States a contest also waged for the rights of the people. The vicious judicial policy of segregation in respect of the misdemeanor of unlawful cohabitation was brought before the tribunal in the Lorenzo Snow case. His was the first case sentenced under the segregation policy. His fines in the three cases for the same offense, amounted to $900; and his terms of imprisonment to eighteen months, having been given the extreme punishment on each count. An appeal was taken to the territorial supreme court. This on the 6th of February, 1886.

Conflict over PolygamyHC153The Snow case involved two points; first, the legal definition of the term "cohabitation;" and, second, the segregation of the single offense into many by division and subdivision of the time through which the offense ran. The supreme court of the territory sustained the definition of cohabitation of the lower court, namely, that "the offense of cohabitation is complete when a man to all outward appearances is living and associating with two or more women as his wives!" sexual relations not a necessary element of cohabitation and cohabitation with the legal wife assumed. [^6]

Conflict over PolygamyHC153The supreme court of the territory also, had unanimously sustained the segregation policy followed in the trial court in the two other sentences. [^7] Thirty days in all were allowed for preparation of an appeal to the supreme court. An effort was made to have the case advanced on the United States supreme court calendar, but this could not be done while the defendant was at liberty under bonds. On learning this Lorenzo Snow voluntarily went to prison that the case might be advanced, as a number of others, as well as himself, were interested in having these points of the law settled. [^8]

Conflict over PolygamyHCAfter hearing arguments in the case the supreme court decided on May 10th that it had no jursidiction in the cases and dismissed them. The court had previously, but at the same term, considered the Angus M. Cannon case, involving some of the same points as the Snow case, but the question of jurisdiction had not been raised. It was raised, however, by the supreme court itself, in the Snow case, and the Cannon case was recalled and dismissed as well as the Snow cases for want of jurisdiction. [^9] This caused great rejoicing in the anti-"Mormon" "ringite" camp, as it left the Latter-day Saints charged with unlawful cohabitation entirely at the mercy of their persecutors.

Conflict over PolygamyHC154"The rejoicings which are had over the decision of the upper court," said the Deseret News, editorially, "show that fair investigation is what the promoters of the raid upon the 'Mormons' least desire. They gloat over the opportunity which it assures of unchecked assaults upon the liberties of the people of Utah. It settles no point of law, it does not say that the Utah courts are right in any particular, but it leaves an unpopular people to the onslaughts of their persecutors in the name of the law, without appeal to a proper tribunal. Those who can rejoice over such a condition of affairs are not to be numbered among the magnanimous of the earth, and their names would be sadly out of place in the list of the just." [^10]

Conflict over PolygamyHC154The Snow case was again taken to the supreme court on a writ of habeas corpus, to release the defendant from an illegal imprisonment for the segregated cases; and on the 7th of February, 1887, the procedure of the Utah courts was reversed, and the segregation policy, conceived in malice, and vindictively executed, came to an end.

Conflict over PolygamyHC154The decision of the supreme court is severe in its implied censure of the Utah courts. On the segregation of Snow's single offense into three the court said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC155"The division of the two years and eleven months [into three periods] is wholly arbitrary. On the same principle there might have been an indictment covering each of the thirty-five months, with imprisonment for seventeen years and a half, and fines amounting to $10,500; or even an indictment covering every week, with imprisonment for seventy-four years, and fines amounting to $44,400; and so on, ad infinitum, for smaller periods of time. It is to prevent such an application of penal laws, that the rule has obtained that a continuing offense of the character of the one in this case can be committed but once, for the purpose of indictment or prosecution, prior to the time the prosecution is instituted." [^11]

Conflict over PolygamyHC155The strong speech of Mr. Caine, against the passage of the Edmunds- Tucker bill has already been referred to, as manfully resisting the passage of the bill which so far invaded the rights of the people. [^12] Of the same character was the dignified Memorial of the Utah legislature of March, 1886, against the injustice of the absolute veto power of the governor, which was presented to the house of representatives on the 19th of April, 1886.

STATEHOOD AGAIN

An effort was made to escape the annoyances of this seemingly irrepressible conflict between the people of the territory and the anti-"Mormon" "ringites"—chiefly federal officeholders—by another effort to obtain statehood for Utah. This in midsummer of 1887. All polygamists had now been disfranchised in Utah, and it was thought that a convention made up of those who could take the form of oath prescribed for electors by the Utah Commission—completely eliminating polygamists—could draft a Constitution that would be acceptable to congress and to the people of the United States. Accordingly, a constitutional convention assembled in Salt Lake City on the last day of June, 1887, and taking a Constitution adopted by a previous convention as a working basis, by the 7th of July, a draft of a Constitution was completed for submission to the people at the ensuing general election, to be held on the 1st of August. The Constitution thus submitted received 13,000 votes in its favor and less than 500 against it.

156The chief hope of its acceptance by congress consisted in the fact that it contained a provision—section 12>>>>>>>>>>, article xv—inhibiting, and operative without the aid of other legislation, bigamy and polygamy. The offense was not barred by statute of limitation under three years, and not pardonable without the approval of the president of the United States. Section 2 of article xvi provided that there should be no amendment or abolishment of this provision without the consent of congress.

156The Deseret News commenting on the insertion of the anti-bigamy and polygamy section of this Constitution of 1887, said:

156"It has come to be a matter of certainty in the popular mind, that Utah cannot be admitted into the Union as a state, without some constitutional provisions against practices about which the country has been much misinformed and unduly excited. Former efforts for statehood without such provisions have been treated with the coldness that arises from reference to a committee which usually freezes over with silence on the subject. * * *

156The provisions in regard to bigamy and polygamy, which are unusual in state constitutions, have been inserted as a political necessity arising from a peculiar condition of affairs requiring political settlement." [^13]

156The Constitution was presented to congress and representative citizens appeared before congressional committees in advocacy of its passage; the senate committee on territories to whom the Constitution and accompanying Memorials had been referred finally reported adversely to the admission of Utah, and was discharged from further consideration of the subject. [^14]

REGRETTABLE INCIDENTS IN THE UTAH CONTROVERSIES

The foregoing were all honorable and dignified methods of resistance under the law to the invasion of the people's rights. I wish no other methods had been adopted; but that is too much to expect, perhaps, in a community controversy so long continued, so bitterly waged, and carried on by mortal men. These things considered, it is matter of astonishment that there are so few regrettable incidents on the side of the Latter-day Saints to chronicle. Among these, however, was one utterly execrable. I have reference to the hurling of "filth pots" into the homes of United States District Attorney Wm. H. Dickson, United States Commissioner William McKay, and Assistant United States District Attorney Chas. S. Varian. The outrage occurred about one o'clock on Sunday morning, September 13th, 1885. The missiles were two quart glass jars filled with human excrement, and several of them at each of the above named residences were thrown through the windows or the transoms into the houses. Mr. Varian was absent from home at the time, and Mrs. Varian alone with five children was greatly alarmed by the crash of breaking glass when her home was assaulted. Unfortunately the persons who perpetrated this outrage escaped discovery. Naturally the United States officials whose homes were thus assaulted and desecrated, and the Gentile population generally, charged the "Mormons" with the outrage. The "Mormon press" insisted at the time that it was a vile trick on the part of the anti-"Mormons" to bring odium upon the Latter-day Saint community, and perhaps precipitate a crisis in their affairs. Arguing that the "Mormons" could receive no possible advantage from such a dastardly assault, while it would make martyrs of the officials, "in a small way, at but little personal expense to themselves," and would make "their official seats more secure," "Mormon" editors reached the conclusion that anti-"Mormons" were guilty of that Sunday morning atrocity. [^15]

Of course since the parties who were guilty of the loathsome act were never found out, speculation is idle and one opinion may be as good as another, but this should be said of it, if it was the work of members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, the deed was a disgrace to them, to all who had guilty knowledge of it, or who were in any degree responsible for the conception of it, or the carrying of it out. It was the deed of a low-bred mind, of a depraved understanding. Unhappily there are such characters that attach themselves to every cause however exalted. It was an act which in no way could affect conditions only to make them worse; and as an expression of resentment towards these United States officials, perniciously active as they were in the anti-"Mormon" judicial crusade, it was as cowardly as it was loathsome.

A COUNTER OFFENSIVE

Another regrettable thing done on the part of the Latter-day Saints, and growing out of the sense of unfairness attending upon the administration of the federal laws by the federal officials, led some overzealous men, officers of the city government, then entirely in "Mormon" hands, to arrange by a system of secret espionage on such characters in the city as resorted to places of prostitution, and by prosecution of them make, at least, public exposure of their crimes. It was believed that many prominent in prosecutions of polygamy and unlawful cohabitation cases would be entrapped.

158Great consternation prevailed in certain quarters. It was rumored, and was matter of press comment, that "the anti-'Mormon' element had become wild with excitement, and wondered where the lightning would strike next. Many vague rumors were afloat, as to a list of from four to six hundred offenders being in the hands of the city officers, and there were more blanched cheeks and shaking knees than Salt Lake has ever before contained, notwithstanding the assertion regarding the anti-'Mormon' purity." [^16]

159Really there should have been no complaint made by the Latter-day Saints at this distinction; for it was fitting that those who were seeking, under divine sanctions, to renew a feature of honorable marriage clearly approved of God among his people in ancient times, should not be placed, even by their enemies on a level with those universally recognized as guilty of gross sex immorality, by the practice of promiscuity. This was matter for congratulation rather than of complaint.

HALF MASTING OF THE FLAG INCIDENT

On the 4th of July, 1885, an unfortunate circumstance occurred in the half masting of the national flag, at the City Hall by some of the city's officers, and by other parties at the Salt Lake county courthouse; also at the Salt Lake Theater, Z. C. M. I. Building, Deseret News Office, Church Tithing Office, the Gardo House—the residence at the time of President John Taylor; at the temple, and the tabernacle. There was of course no intention in any way to dishonor the flag. Placed at half mast it is an emblem of mourning; and as the community was then terrorized by a cruel mal-administration of the law against the Latter-day Saints, as subsequent reversals and condemnations of the procedure by the supreme court of the United States and the dismissal of federal officers by the national administration attest—it was evidently a time of mourning for the Latter-day Saints in Salt Lake City, who constituted the majority of her people; and the city officers thought themselves justified in thus expressing that sorrow. Such the explanation of the city marshal, Mr. Wm. G. Philips—"half masting of the flag expressed the feelings of the majority of the citizens." [^17]

As soon as the half masting of the flag became known among the non-"Mormon" part of the citizens great indignation and excitement arose, and angry crowds gathered at the City Hall and at the Z. C. M. I. store where for a time riot threatened. A committee of citizens consisting of United States Marshal Ireland, Major Wilkes,—who was an ex-confederate soldier—Captain Evans, and C. L. Haines, went to the City Hall and demanded to know the reason for the flag being at half mast. Nobody knew except that Marshal Philips had ordered it to be so placed. The mayor and marshal, being in attendance at a meeting at the Salt Lake "Mormon" tabernacle, were sent for, and on arriving at the City Hall the marshal took full responsibility for the half masting. After consultation had with the committee the flag was taken down, but later in the day it was raised to the head of the staff by order of the mayor, Hon. James Sharp. A request by the offended citizens was sufficient to cause Sheriff Groesbeck, at the county courthouse, to order the flag raised to full mast. The flag at the Salt Lake Theater was raised to full mast early in the day, so too was the flag at Z. C. M. I. At the other places enumerated above it remained at half mast throughout the day.

160When word of the event was brought to the G. A. R. encampment being held that day in the suburbs of the city, fiery speeches were made, equally warm resolutions passed demanding that the flag be raised to full mast. It was claimed that the governor had telephoned to General McCook for military assistance, but that the general refused to interfere, judging that there was no necessity for such action. [^18] So the incident closed except for some inconsequential mass meetings that followed. One held at the Methodist church, at which Governor Murray spoke; and one held by the general public in the federal court room. [^19]

160It was thought that a conflict over the question of half masting the flag would come up again on the twenty-fourth of July, as that was Utah's Pioneer Day, and it was the custom to celebrate the day—would it be done by half masting the flag?

161Such representations were made to the press of the east that the question of "Mormon" loyalty was very generally discussed. From Salt Lake City appeals were made to members of the G. A. R. to ex-confederate soldiers, and to men in the mining camps to come to Salt Lake City on the 24th of July to prevent what was alleged would be an intended insult to the flag by half masting it on that occasion.

161"The ex-confederate soldiers," said the local announcement in the Salt Lake Tribune of this meeting, "are talking of holding an indignation meeting here on the 24th inst., to express their views on the insult offered to the flag on July 4th by the Mormon church in this city."

161"The federal court room has been obtained, the railroads have agreed to give half-fare rates from Park City, Ogden and the mining camps, and the hotels such reasonable rates as to make it an object. The sentiments of the ex-confederates are to be embodied in the form of resolutions to be sent to the southern states and congressmen, politicians and newspapers in that section * * * It is a good move, and for another reason. There is talk on the streets to the effect that on the 24th—'Pioneer's Day'—the Mormons intend to drape the flag in mourning and float it at half mast. That would be a good day for the presence in this city of two or three thousand old soldiers, federal and confederate. It would probably result in a speedy and effectual settlement of the whole Mormon business, for with such men here in force the nation's flag would not be insulted with impunity." [^20]

Such representations were made to President Cleveland as to the prospect of a riot in Salt Lake City that he gave orders on the 17th of July to General O. O. Howard, in military command of the west, to station divisions of the army along railroad lines at points from which they could readily be rushed into Salt Lake City in case they should be needed. The Lincoln Post G. A. R., Butte, Montana, on the 18th of July, on the strength of reports from General Howard and "information from comrades of the G. A. R., resident in Salt Lake City," made tender of service to Governor Murray of two companies "A" and "B" of that post, numbering "eighty strong," "armed, uniformed and equipped," and "every man of them a veteran." [^21]

THE WHOLE NATION HALF-MASTED THE FLAG ON JULY 24TH, 1885

On the part of the Latter-day Saints the most formidable function planned for that day in Salt Lake City was the meeting of a mammoth Sunday School convention in the tabernacle. [^22] Things looked ominous; but strangely enough the United States flag throughout the United States, as also in Utah, was at half mast that 24th day of July, 1885; for ex-president of the United States, and national hero, U. S. Grant, at Mt. McGregor, New York, after a lingering illness, died at 8:08 on the morning of the 23rd of July. Everywhere throughout the nation the flag was placed at half mast; and the threatened crisis in Utah passed without a conflict.

THE MCMURRIN-COLLIN AFFAIR

About this time, near the close of the year 1885, another incident occurred which produced great excitement in Salt Lake City. This was the McMurrin-Collin affair. Joseph W. McMurrin, a young night watchman at the Church Tithing Office was coming through an alleyway north of the old Social Hall, on State street—the alley cutting in two the block between South Temple and First South streets—when he suddenly came in contact with Deputy United States Marshal Henry F. Collin. It was about 7:30 p. m. when the men met, and being the 28th of November, it was dark by that time. The two men had previously had some words on the occasion of the deputy marshal subpoenaeing witnesses in connection with the case against young McMurrin's father for unlawful cohabitation. Meeting thus suddenly in the dark, McMurrin as he recognized the deputy marshal struck at him, when the latter dodging the blow and having his pistol in hand, placed it against McMurrin's abdomen and fired twice, both shots taking effect. After this the men sprang apart, the deputy marshal running eastward up the alley, in which he lived, and McMurrin staggering westward out of the alley and thence a few rods northward where he sank down at a gateway between two residences, helpless but conscious. To a man passing—William Lloyd, a shoemaker on his way home—he called for help, telling Lloyd he was shot. The latter started to the police station near by for help and met officers who had heard the shooting running in the direction of the firing. The wounded man was taken to the City Hall, and as he was supposed to be dying he made a statement which he signed setting forth the above facts in the case. [^23]

163The deputy marshal's story was that to avoid three men standing near the Social Hall entrance he crossed to the north side of the alley where he encountered McMurrin with the result stated. [^24] Collin claimed that some five or six shots were fired besides those which he fired at McMurrin, presumably, according to his version of the affair, by those men near the Social Hall whom to avoid he crossed the alley and met McMurrin. [^25] The latter, in his supposedly dying statement, said that he returned the fire of the deputy marshal. [^26]

Such the story. On the one side it was regarded as an attempted murder by a deputy marshal at an accidental meeting in the alleyway; on the other it was the waylaying of a faithful officer of the law by a gang of "Mormon thugs" to take his life.

164The important thing about the incident is its influence upon the affairs of the community. For ridiculous as it may seem the matter became a national incident—a matter for municipal investigation; of a report to the president of the United States; of sending additional United States troops to Utah; of establishing a provost guard in Salt Lake City to keep the peace.

164On the 1st of December, two days after the McMurrin-Collin incident occurred, the Salt Lake Tribune had said:

164"We seriously think that, in addition to perfecting measures of self-defense, the Gentile should en mass petition the president to place the territory under martial law, and give some discreet, just, and brave soldier the position of military governor, and back him with such force as may be necessary to command peace and to enforce the laws."

164There was no petition en mass made to President Cleveland, but Governor Murray, Marshal Ireland, and United States Assistant District Attorney Varian made representation to President Cleveland that there was danger of a "Mormon" uprising; that the property and lives of non-"Mormon" were insecure; that military protection was necessary. Under these representations a battery of artillery was sent from Omaha to strengthen the military force at Camp Douglas. The announcement of this "action" produced a very hysteria of delight in the Salt Lake Tribune, the anti-"Mormon" organ, which proclaimed the coming of this battery under the following headlines:

164"GOD REIGNS! AND THE GOVERNMENT AT WASHINGTON STILL LIVES! IT WILL GIVE PROTECTION TO ITS OFFICERS AND CITIZENS A COMPANY OF TROOPS TO BE STATIONED IN THE CITY. A BATTERY OF ARTILLERY EN ROUTE FROM OMAHA." [^27]

165About the same time it was announced that a provost guard of forty-five men under Captain Charles G. Penney of Company K, sixth infantry, would be stationed in the central part of the city. The guard established its station in the city on the 7th of December.

165These representations to the national authorities and their results aroused the indignation of the city authorities, since they slandered the good name of the city and brought reproach to the whole community. The city council at once proceeded to an investigation of the charges of insecurity of non-"Mormon" property and lives with a view to the refutation of the slanders. The council first telegraphed Utah's delegate in congress, Hon. John T. Caine, asking him to represent to President Cleveland that no excitement existed in Salt Lake City, and that the military measures were uncalled for. Utah's delegate gave the dispatch of Salt Lake City's mayor to the Associated Press, and it was sent out from Washington to all the papers of the country as follows:

LETTER OF SALT LAKE CITY'S MAYOR TO DELEGATE JOHN T. CAINE

"Salt Lake City, Utah, Dec. 7th.

165To Hon. John T. Caine, House of Representatives, Washington, D. C.

165We understand that representations have been made to President Cleveland that there is danger of an uprising on the part of the 'Mormons'; that the property and lives of non-'Mormons' are insecure, and that military protection is required. The city council is making an official investigation and have invited both the federal and military officials, and all others having information bearing on the matter to appear and testify. The investigation has proceeded, and was enough to demonstrate the utter falsity of these rumors, and that no foundation exists for them in fact. A battery of artillery arrived from Omaha today, and a company of troops is quartered in the city, ostensibly to protect citizens and property. Represent the matter fully to President Cleveland and immediately, stating that no excitement exists, and that these measures are uncalled for and entirely unnecessary. The property and personal safety of all citizens are perfectly secure.

165[Signed] "JAMES SHARP, Mayor of Salt Lake City, Utah."

Delegate Caine conveyed this information, and more as the investigation proceeded at Salt Lake City, to President Cleveland. [^28]

166The next move was for the city council in special session, December 5th, to determine upon an investigation of the rumors of threatened lawlessness in the city, and to this end a communication was sent to a large number of federal officials, including Governor Murray, Secretary of the Territory Arthur L. Thomas, Marshal Ireland, United States Assistant District Attorney C. S. Varian, the military authorities at Fort Douglas, and many prominent gentlemen of Salt Lake City, inviting them to attend said investigation, and to furnish the city council any information concerning the rumors "affecting the peace and welfare of the city" that might be in their possession. All these invitations were declined. [^29]

166The inquiry was prosecuted vigorously, and such rumors as had taken definite form, and were reported to the city officials, were refuted. Among these was the gathering of armed men into the city:

GENTILE FULMINATIONS

"That armed men lined the road to the penitentiary for the purpose of taking United States Deputy Marshal Collin from the custody of the United States officers;

166That threats were made to lynch Collin after the shooting of McMurrin;

166That quantities of arms and ammunition were secreted in general tithing storehouses;

166That the Mormons were arming themselves and organizing under the direction of their leaders, and that in the outer settlements they were held in constant readiness to reach at a moment's notice Salt Lake City."

166The whole review of conditions ended in the adoption of the following resolution:

CITY COUNCIL'S DENIALS

"Be it resolved by the mayor and city council of Salt Lake City, that the reports or rumors of any condition of affairs other than of the most peaceful character prevailing at the present time in this city, are false.

167That at no time in the history of this city have the lives and property of its non-'Mormon' inhabitants been more secure than now.

167That the reports to the contrary have been accredited and circulated by federal officials of this territory for some purpose best known to themselves.

167That to the extent they or any others have circulated these false reports abroad, they have defamed the city and injured its people." [^30]

167Of the original parties to this McMurrin-Collin incident, Collin was released on bail on the 16th of December; and in the month following, after several days examination before Commissioner McKay, he was discharged from custody and later left the territory. Joseph W. McMurrin, though so seriously wounded, and having dictated and signed what was thought to be his dying statement, he did not die. His recovery was regarded as miraculous by his friends. Attendant surgeons and the physicians from the first thought his wounds would prove fatal. But he was visited by two of the twelve apostles of the church, John Henry Smith and Heber J. Grant, the latter now (1930) president of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. They anointed him with oil and blessed him with the laying on of hands—the ordinance of the church for the healing of the sick—and they promised him recovery, and life and health. He speedily recovered, regained perfect health, and is now (1930) still alive, a member of the first council of the seventy in the church, and active in missionary duties.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Millennial Star, vol. xlvii.
[^2] The revamping of an old slander many times refuted. (See this History, chapter cxxiv).
[^3] This was before the passage of the Edmunds- Tucker law, which did in effect the things here urged by Mr. Dickson.
[^4] See Salt Lake Tribune, July 29th, 1886, impression of Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 4th, 1886.
[^5] Deseret News, weekly, Aug. 4th, 1886; also Salt Lake Tribune of the same period.
[^6] See Democratic Platform for 1884, Cooper's American Politics, bk. ii, p. 71. The Republican Platform contained a similar passage respecting federal appointees in the territories, but was immediately followed by a strong anti-"Mormon" plank. (Ibid, p. 75).
[^7] History of the United States, Bryant, Gay & Brooks, vol. v, p. 554. "Civil service reform, notwithstanding serious drawbacks, made substantial progress during President Cleveland's term." (Ibid, p. 565).
[^8] For summary of bills and the fate that befell them see Deseret News, weekly, of March 24th, 1886, p. 155.
[^9] Both dispatches will be found in the Deseret News, weekly, of March 24th, 1886, under the caption—"Kicked Out!"
[^10] The message will be found complete in Deseret News, weekly, March 24th, 1886, p. 145.
[^11] New York Herald quoted in Deseret News, weekly, of March 31st, 1886, p. 168.
[^12] Letter of Delegate John T. Caine to President Cleveland is published at length in Millennial Star, vol. xlviii, pp. 69-70.
[^13] See editorial in Deseret News, weekly, of April 21st, 1886, p. 216.
[^14] This on 16th of March, 1888, see Congressional Record of that date, senate proceedings.
[^15] The heading of the Deseret News account of the affair was sensational and embodied the above idea, see impression of Sept. 16th, weekly, 1885. For editorial comment see same impression, p. 553; also Ibid September 23rd, p. 567.
[^16] Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 25th, 1885.
[^17] History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, p. 885.
[^18] See History of Salt Lake City, Tullidge, pp. 885-6, and Deseret News, weekly, of July 8th, 1885.
[^19] Ibid, July 22nd.
[^20] Salt Lake Tribune, July 10th, 1885.
[^21] Butte Miner, Montana, 19th July, 1885.
[^22] After reviewing the many warlike preparations that were under way for the 24th of July in Salt Lake City, the Deseret News in an editorial said: "But the 24th will be a holiday, having been made so by law. The occasion will be used as a fitting opportunity for a Sunday School Jubilee, the program for which has been arranged by assistant superintendent of the Sunday School Union—Brother George Goddard." (Deseret News, weekly, of July 29th, 1885, p. 439).
[^23] The statement will be found in Salt Lake Tribune of Dec. 17th, 1885, in an account of habeas corpus proceedings for the release of Collin. Also in Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 23rd, 1885.
[^24] Collin had been assaulted on the street a few days before this—on the 10th of November, by Deputy Sheriff Andrew Burt, for which the latter had been fined $25 in the police court, and hence Collin's apprehensiveness that led him to carry his pistol in his hand, ready for instant use. This assault on Collin grew out of his charging Burt with being a "spotter" against the federal officers. (Deseret News, weekly, of November 18th, 1885).
[^25] See report of the case in Salt Lake Tribune for Nov. 29th, and Dec. 1st, 1885.
[^26] "Put down that I returned that fire in the excitement, but then I guess I missed him." (McMurirn's (supposedly) Dying Statement).
[^27] Salt Lake Tribune, heading of December 5th, 1885.
[^28] Two letters sent to the president on the subject from Delegate Caine will be found in Millennial Star, vol. xlviii, pp. 20-22 and 69-70.
[^29] All these communications will be found in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 88-9.
[^30] All the official documents in the case will be found in Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 887-891.
