B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

168CHAPTER CLXIV

168THE GENERAL CONFERENCE OF THE CHURCH CHANGED FROM SALT LAKE CITY—G. A. R. CAMPFIRES IN UTAH—A CHANGE IN THE NATIONAL ADMINISTRATION

168WHAT resistance could be made to the growing hostility of the anti-"Mormon" minority group of Utah? To the triumphant, though not yet satisfied minority of political adventurers; also what of the sectarian plotters against a rival but successful faith and church which neither their logic nor their interpretation of scripture, nor their supposed "superior" Christian spirit and behavior could make headway? In the legitimate fields of persuasion and even of just opposition to the New Dispensation, they stood defeated and helpless, and confessedly so, and hence the unholy alliance with political adventurers. These sought, by national enactments to invoke physical forces to seize upon—to their own advantage—the government of the people; and the sectarian plotters hoped to see humiliated and crushed the faith and church they could not prevail against by moral suasion and spiritual forces. Yet, what may be invoked by way of counter resistance to these unfair opponents? Not much may be done by the Latter-day Saints, for their means are limited and not formidable; but such as they are it is to their credit that they used them, for resistance to oppressive measures, however feeble, is at least an evidence of virility and heroism. And this is what the church authorities did, though at some sacrifice to their own people and to some of themselves, through affecting the welfare of business institutions with which they were connected.

CHANGE IN THE PLACE OF HOLDING L. D. S. GENERAL CONFERENCES

The general conferences of the church, annual and semiannual, during the troubled years of 1885 and 1886, and the April conference of 1887, were held in other places than Salt Lake City. Two were held in Logan, two in Provo, and one in Coalville, Summit county.

169This action on the part of the church authorities was met with loud protests from the Gentile merchants of Salt Lake City. Indeed, judged by the loudness of the out-cry, protest, and lamentations of non-"Mormon" business houses over the event, the blow struck was not so feeble as might be supposed. At these annual and semi-annual conferences the Salt Lake merchants, Gentile as well as "Mormon," reaped a regular annual and semi-annual harvest of trade. Literally thousands of people, many of them from the remotest settlements of the saints, not only in Utah, but from the whole intermountain west came regularly to Salt Lake City to do their spring and fall shopping, induced thereto by the reduced railroad rates for the conference. Hence great disappointment and vexation was felt and expressed by the Gentile merchants when this coup was adopted by removing the conference to other places than Salt Lake City, which resulted in very few from the outside settlements coming either to the conference or to trade. [^1]

GRAND ARMY OF THE REPUBLIC PASSES THROUGH SALT LAKE CITY

In 1886 the Gentile population of Salt Lake City, or at least the leaders of the anti-"Mormon" crusade among them, took advantage of the passing of the large eastern companies of the Grand Army of the Republic through the city, en route for San Francisco—where the great G. A. R. encampment was to be held that year,—to hold "campfires" in a large skating rink in the heart of the city. The meetings began on the evening of the 24th of July, 1886, and were held also on the evening of the 29th, 30th and 31st of July; also on the first of August. At the meeting of the 30th of July, General John A. Logan, of national fame, delivered a really great speech on the character and power of the American government.

170The anti-"Mormon" local "crusaders" supplied the texts to such speeches as were made by the visitors; and a bitter anti-"Mormon" flavor was imparted to each campfire gathering—hatred and rage chiefly characterized what was said. Nearly every speech by a local man—in every instance a federal officeholder or local missionary of one or the other of the Christian sects—urged the use of the influence of members of the G. A. R.—said then, 1886, to have a membership of 500,000—on their return home, to bring to pass more stringent anti-"Mormon" legislation, preferably the disfranchisement of the whole "Mormon" people, or the establishment of a legislative commission form of government for the territory; and if these measures were to fail, then to invoke the military power to destroy the "Mormon" church. There was scarcely any legislative or military extravagance that was not invoked by the local anti-"Mormon" "crusaders," and in turn pledged by the G. A. R. visitors. One of the mottoes which decorated the hall in which the meetings were held, and several times commented upon, was—

170"OUR LOYAL PEOPLE WELCOME THE COUNTRY'S VETERANS"

170From which "loyal people" it was quite generally agreed, the "Mormons" were excluded. General Beaver, of Pennsylvania, said in his speech, "It was something new to him, this intimation that a portion of the people were disloyal. * * * The idea of disloyalty conveyed by the motto made the heart of every man who had worn the blue beat as it had not done for twenty years!" "If there was a disloyal organization that defied the government," he continued, "then it was the duty of every man who wore the blue to step forward and assist in putting down that organization."

170Chaplain Jackson, of Fort Douglas, in a speech delivered a few minutes later, assured him there was such an "organization in Utah."

The United States district attorney for Utah, Mr. Dickson, declared in one of the campfires that "The Mormon church was steeped in disloyalty. * * * One of its prime purposes was the overthrow of the American home. The people who are the adherents to the church were steeped in disloyalty. * * * He had it from good authority that when Lincoln was assassinated and the news reached here (i. e. Utah) that Brigham Young, then governor, (sic!) could not repress his exultation. [^2] * * * The authorities of the church are disloyal, and why should the nation hesitate to wrest from these disloyal citizens the ballot? There is nothing un-American in it [^3] * * * We [i. e. the Gentiles, I do not know if Mr. Dickson had any right to speak for them] do not ask for any offices; we only ask that the power be taken away from the Mormons. We can never reach the root of the evil here, until the civil power is taken from them. All we ask is for congress to take the government. The Gentiles are willing to have the ballot taken from them. They are willing for congress, or a commission appointed by the president, to rule. This would not give the Gentiles the power. The only successful measure will be to strike the civil power from the Mormon people." [^4]

171All which sounds very like the pleading of the mother of the dead child, before King Solomon, for the cutting in two of the live child; Mr. Dickson would consent to have the right of local government slain, to sacrifice the Gentile right of suffrage, if only the federal government would take away the political rights and power of the Latter-day Saints.

General Maxwell, local anti-"Mormon" attorney, and member of the local G. A. R. organization, and formerly United States marshal for Utah, "warned the visitors that the G. A. R. post [at Salt Lake] would see to it that they [the visiting posts] kept their promises to put Mormonism down." [^5]

THE INCOMING OF A NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC ADMINISTRATION

With the advent of a national Democratic administration in 1884, a somewhat radical change had been looked for in the administration of Utah affairs, by a change of federal officers. The Democratic party's principles place more emphasis upon the right of the local community to self-government than Republican party principles do; the Democratic platform of 1884 had contained no anti-"Mormon" plank, and had declared in favor of choosing federal officers for the territories from "among citizens previously resident therein." [^6] But the party was also pledged to "honest civil service reform," and this was something of a hobby with President Cleveland. The army of place hunters in Washington, therefore at the inauguration of the first Cleveland administration, "were disappointed. * * * For the time being, office hunting was deliberately discouraged." [^7]

It was President Cleveland's policy to make no changes in the appointments of his predecessor except for gross misconduct or the expiration of the terms for which they were appointed. In the case of the Utah federal appointments another reason, no doubt, operated to make the changes slower, viz., a too hasty dismissal of those who had been extremely zealous and active in suppressing polygamy and polygamous living would subject the administration to the charge of favoring the "Mormons" and "Mormonism," for which there was no compensating gain since the "Mormons" possessed no political power, to affect national parties for good or ill. The anti-"Mormon" "crusaders" in Utah appreciated this fact and recklessly increased the bitterness of the judicial crusade and their general anti-"Mormon" course, confident that the administration would not dare invite the censure of public sentiment by removing them.

173This policy, however, the federal officials in Utah followed too far. In his dealings with the 1886 legislative assembly, the 27th, of the territory, among many other bills vetoed by him, Governor Murray vetoed the general territorial appropriations bill, which very greatly interfered with the administration of government in Utah in all its departments. The legislature had been in session for sixty days; 88 bills had been introduced in the house and 46 in the council. Of these 62 were passed and sent to the governor, who vetoed 15 of them, 10 he ignored, which was equivalent to vetoing them, and 37 received his sanction. [^8] Four days after vetoing the appropriation bill Governor Murray was practically dismissed from office by the administration at Washington, through the secretary of the interior, telegraphing under date of 16th of March, 1886, for his resignation. [^9]

173Governor Murray's chief reason for vetoing the general appropriations bill, as set forth by himself in his veto message, was that the money would be subject to disbursement by the territorial treasurer and accounted for by the territorial auditor, whom he insisted were not legal officers, not being appointed in the manner prescribed by the organic act of the territory—which question was then pending before the supreme court of the United States.

"This bill," said Governor Murray in his veto message, "contemplates the continuance in authority of the present usurping incumbents of the offices of territorial auditor and treasurer, and to permit the disbursements of the public moneys through these agencies." [^10]

174The rest of the message was a glorification of his own course of action while governor of the territory—and his determination to bring Utah into harmony with the national law, etc. The governor was well aware that great inconvenience would ensue to the territorial government from this action, it would "suffer for want of funds necessary to carry it on;" but he indicated what he doubtless thought might be done to avert catastrophy, what his hope was, and what would further his purposes in taking from the territorial treasurer and auditor the handling of territorial funds, viz., that congress may appropriate the moneys collected here, and disburse them through agencies chosen by itself. Instead of this course being followed, the governor's resignation was demanded.

174While vetoing the general appropriations bill was the immediate cause of asking for Governor Murray's resignation, it was not the only reason. Misrepresentation of the alleged threatened uprising of the "Mormons" against the federal government, sent out from Salt Lake City by Governor Murray and his anti-"Mormon" associates had quite as much to do with it according to the Washington correspondent of the New York Herald. "The president has been fully advised," said that correspondent, "in regard to Murray's conduct, and he was perfectly satisfied that in his veto of appropriations he was not actuated by worthy motives. Since Murray sent sensational telegrams to Washington in the early part of December, representing the imminence of an uprising by the Mormons, the president has been convinced that he was unworthy of confidence." [^11]

Under date of March 10th, John T. Caine, Utah's delegate in congress, wrote President Cleveland very fully respecting these matters, and his letter must have been convincing to the president since the demand for his excellency's resignation followed six days later. The delegate forwarded with his letter of the 10th the official report of the municipal council of Salt Lake City, denying the charges of the likelihood of riot and of prospective "Mormon" uprising in Utah. "I am sure that you will be convinced, after reading the official report of the city council," said Mr. Caine, "that the federal officials grossly misrepresented the character of the 'Mormon' people, and there was not a scintilla of truth in the statements they made to you of danger to life and property at the hands of lawless men inspired by 'Mormon' leaders." [^12]

175Naturally, on the side of the Latter-day Saints, the demand for the resignation occasioned rejoicing; on the part of the anti-"Mormon" "ringites," it occasioned dismay; for Governor Murray served their interests with fidelity, and the demand for the resignation was unlooked for, and, from their standpoint, undeserved.

OTHER DISMISSALS—POWERS, IRELAND, DICKSON, et al

Other changes in Utah federal officials soon followed. Judge O. W. Powers had for some time officiated as United States district judge, in the first judicial district, though his appointment had not been confirmed by the United States senate. His nomination had met with such pronounced opposition from his political opponents in Michigan, from which state the judge hailed, that President Cleveland on the 12th of April withdrew his nomination, apparently to avoid refusal of confirmation of his candidate by the senate. The fight against the judge was independent of the "Mormon question," and the reasons urged for his rejection were based on his conduct before coming to Utah. But as he had taken an extremely anti-"Mormon" attitude in respect of the anti-polygamous prosecutions, especially as to the segregation policy of the courts in unlawful cohabitation cases, the withdrawal of his name by President Cleveland was gratifying to the Latter-day Saint population of Utah. [^13]

176Marshal Ireland's term of office expired in June, 1886, and he was succeeded by Frank H. Dyer, a resident of several years standing in Utah, but originally from the state of Mississippi. None of the federal officials of the Murray regime in Utah were bidden a more hearty "good-riddance" than Marshal Ireland. He was an illustration of the truism that weakness is often more despised than wickedness, and more severely censured, and punished.

176About a year later the Washington administration demanded the resignation of Mr. W. H. Dickson, United States district attorney for Utah since April, 1884, at which time he succeeded Philip T. Van Zile. He, too, had been relentless in his prosecution of one class of offenders against the law—"Mormons" for violation of the Edmunds law—and beyond question had exceeded the law's limits in his desire to achieve his ends, which may not be allowed always to have been solely patriotic, though that quality is claimed for them. Mr. Dickson was succeeded by George S. Peters of Ohio.

JUDGE CHARLES S. ZANE

Judge Charles S. Zane who became chief justice on the 1st of September, 1884, was permitted to serve out his full term of office to September, 1888, when he was superseded by Elliott Sanford of New York, whose nomination was confirmed by the United States senate on the 20th of July. A fourth judicial district was considered necessary for Utah, and provision was made for it by the appointment of John W. Judd, of Tennessee, to the new judgeship, at the time of Sanford's appointment. Judge Zane, despite some difference of personal character from the rest of the group of attorneys and judges who inaugurated the judicial crusade in Utah against the Latter-day Saints in 1884—the like of which is not elsewhere to be found in the history of American jurisprudence—will stand classed with them in history as sharing in responsibility for the cruelty and injustice of that regime, which marks the saddest period of Utah's history; and but for which Judge Zane's career in Utah would have been unblemished. It may be urged, of course, that the duty of the judge was to administer the law, he was not responsible for its existence; and that is true. But there is administration and administration. Much discretion is lodged with the judge in the administration of the law, that there may be elasticity in its application, and the ends of justice thereby more surely attained. But in this particular class of cases—unlawful cohabitation cases—where men in the dock were every whit as sincere in their convictions of the rectitude of the course they followed as was the judge upon the bench in his-there Judge Zane never divorced himself from his deep-seated prejudice and vindictiveness against this class of offenders and their religious faith; nor framed a less severe penalty than the extreme penalty allowed by the law; and this he sought to augment by the strained devices of the segregation policy of the courts in Utah by which a single offense under the law could be divided and subdivided into an indefinite number of offenses. For the inauguration of this policy in the courts Judge Zane was responsible, whoever may have first conceived the scheme. Happily, though not without much difficulty, the iniquitous interpretation of the law, as we have already seen, was quashed by an adverse decision of the supreme court of the United States. As stated in commenting upon the Utah career of James B. McKean, so now, I may say, history has little concern with the private life and virtues of Judge Zane; it is with his career as connected with the administration of the Edmunds law, especially enacted against the Latter-day Saints and aimed at the destruction of a principle and practice of their religion, that history is concerned with him. It is in respect of his administration of that law that history calls him to the bar for judgment. It is the historian's duty in respect of him, as in respect of all others, to set forth the facts of history in their true light; if nothing is extenuated, certainly nothing must be set down in malice, and that is what is here attempted. And history will be compelled to say that in Judge Zane's administration of the laws in respect of those cases which involved belief in and practice of the Latter-day Saint marriage system, there was much unnecessary harshness, and much that was extra judicial and spiteful in his course upon the bench; and the proof of it comes from the overturning of some of his rulings and interpretations by the supreme court of the United States.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Governor West like the man he succeeded, Eli H. Murray, was a Kentuckian. He was a Democrat, and in the late war between the states had fought on the side of the south. He was a lawyer by profession, and at the time of his appointment as Governor of Utah, was county judge of Harrison county, Kentucky. According to Whitney "he enjoyed the friendship of such men as John G. Carlisle (secretary of the treasury in Cleveland's second administration), Senator Blackburn, and Governor McCreary, and it was through their influence that he became governor of Utah." (History of Utah, vol. iii, p. 505).
[^2] See Salt Lake Tribune, daily, of May 8th; and Deseret News, weekly, of May 12th, 1886.
[^3] Whitney gives an account of a previous visit to the penitentiary by Governor West, and an interview with Elder Snow, this before the action of the supreme court relative to lack of jurisdiction on writs of error in unlawful cohabitation cases. Reference to this former visit is made in the interview of the 13th of May (which see). The first visit is described in excerpts from Snow's letter giving an account of it, and quoted by Whitney. It was merely a personal interview. (History of Utah, vol. iii, pp. 507-8).
[^4] United States Reports, 118.
[^5] Reported by Mr. Patterson, who was the court reporter for the third district court of Utah, Salt Lake City, and published in Deseret News, weekly, May 26th, 1886.
[^6] Deseret News, weekly, of June 2nd, 1886, p. 306.
[^7] "The Proclamation" complete is published in Deseret News, weekly, of July 21st, 1886, p. 428.
[^8] Ibid, p. 425.
[^9] For the report in full see Deseret News, weekly, Oct. 27th, 1886, pp. 642-3.
[^10] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 27th, 1886, p. 648, editorial interview with Mrs. Newman. See also Washington Associated Press dispatch Ibid, Dec. 22nd, p. 772, citing letters of secretary of interior and Mrs. Newman to Senator Edmunds.
[^11] All the articles of incorporation are published in Congressional Record, vol. xix, part 10, Appendix, p. 556.
[^12] "There are doubtless more than three hundred thousand good and noble women of the United States who, in a perfunctory way, are moved to sympathize with the 'dependent women and children of Utah and Idaho'; but thus far they have confined themselves to words of encouragement to those of their number engaged in organizing a great charity which has to exist and subsist upon the public treasury." (Speech of Utah's delegate, John T. Caine, Congressional Record of Oct. 4th, 1888).
[^13] See general appropriation bill for 1886, sect. 221, Congressional Record, Aug. 4th, house proceedings.
