B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

179CHAPTER CLXV

179GOVERNOR WEST — PROPOSITION TO ABANDON POLYGAMY — WOMAN'S INDUSTRIAL HOME—PRESIDENT JOHN TAYLOR'S DEATH

179GOVERNOR Caleb Walton West [^1] arrived in Salt Lake City on the 5th of May, 1886. He was met at Ogden by a double delegation of citizens, one headed by Secretary of the Territory, Arthur L. Thomas, and, ad interim, acting governor, and the other by the mayor of Salt Lake City, Francis Armstrong, and members of the city council. Both gave the new governor hearty welcome to the territory. [^2] The day following his arrival Governor West took the oath of office before Judge Zane. On the 7th a public reception and ball was given in his honor at the Salt Lake Theater, by the municipal authorities of Salt Lake City, which was said to surpass in brilliancy any such function that had ever preceded it in the history of the territory.

GOVERNOR WEST'S VISIT TO THE PRISONERS FOR CONSCIENCE SAKE

Undoubtedly Governor West had come to represent the spirit in which the Cleveland administration desired to conduct the affairs of Utah, so far as they were to be affected by action of the federal officers of the territory. It was this fact which led the governor eight days after his arrival in the territory to visit the brethren incarcerated in the penitentiary, on convictions for violating the anti-bigamy laws passed by congress. This on the 13th of May. [^3] It perhaps will be remembered that the supreme court of the United States had decided that it had no jurisdiction in the Snow case coming before it on writs of error; and the court also, for the same reason—want of jurisdiction—vacated its judgment and recalled its mandate in the Cannon case, decided at the same term of court, but at which time the question of jurisdiction was not raised. All this "in order," to use the language of the court itself, "that the reported decision may not appear to be a precedent for the exercise of jurisdiction by this court in a case of this kind." [^4]

180This decision left the interpretation of the Utah courts in respect of the Edmunds law in full force. Latter-day Saints involved in the plural marriage relations allowed by their church were thus at the mercy of the Utah courts, packed juries of their avowed enemies, and judges whose gratuitous lectures and almost invariable sentences to the full extent of the law, but too plainly revealed the bitterness and spirit of hatred in which they administered the law.

180Under these circumstances Governor West, with the approval of the United States district attorney, Mr. Dickson, and Chief Justice Zane—the two men perhaps most responsible for the above described judicial status of things—thought the time propitious for submitting to the brethren then imprisoned in the Utah penitentiary the question—would they promise for the future to obey the law "as interpreted by the courts." If so, these federal officials, and others, would petition the president of the United States to pardon them; while adherence to their promise would be their guarantee for immunity from further suffering, and the policy, of course, would apply to all who accepted it, outside as well as inside the prison.

With this proposition in mind Governor West, et al, appeared at the penitentiary and held a conference with the brethren there incarcerated, first with Elder Lorenzo Snow, of the council of the twelve apostles, afterwards with the other brethren—forty-nine in all. The interview with Elder Snow was not very satisfactory. On the main points it ran as follows: [^5]

INTERVIEW BETWEEN GOVERNOR WEST AND ELDER LORENZO SNOW

"Governor West—Mr. Snow, I suppose you are advised of the action of the supreme court in your case?

181Elder Snow—Yes, sir; I have heard they concluded they have no jurisdiction in my case.

181Governor—Of course, you are aware that that determination by that court makes final the decision of that case by the supreme court here?

181Snow—I suppose so.

181Governor—Under those circumstances, of course, that is now the law, because it is the decision of the highest judicial tribunal to which it could be submitted, and I conceived that it would be a very opportune time to call and submit to you a proposition, which, in conjunction with Judge Zane and Mr. Dickson, we have thought advisable to make, in order to show you and the people of the territory that they are mistaken in believing that those charged with the execution of the laws in the territory are animated by any spirit of malice or vindictiveness towards the people who are in the majority in the territory; that on the contrary their only wish and only desire, one which is nearest to their hearts, is to have the people of the territory obey and respect the law. Upon consultation with Judge Zane and Mr. Dickson, and they supporting the view that I have suggested, I have come to say to you and your people here that we would unite in a petition to the executive to issue his pardon in these cases upon a promise, in good faith, that you will obey and respect the laws, and that you will continue no longer to live in violation of them.

181Snow—Well, governor, so far as I am concerned personally, I am not in conflict with any of the laws of the country. I have obeyed the law as faithfully and conscientiously as I can, thus far, and I am not here because of disobedience of any law. I am here wrongfully convicted and wrongfully sentenced."

181Of course the governor could not agree with this view which would require a repudiation of the ruling of the courts. The governor renewed his proposition to which the reply was made:

182"Snow—Well, now, governor, of course, there is no use wasting time on this. If you ask me if I will renounce the principle of plural marriage I will answer you at once.

182Governor—No; that is not the question. The question I ask is will you agree, in good faith, sincerely, in the future to respect and obey the laws as interpreted by the courts, which I and every other good citizen ought to do and must do, and failing to do, will incur punishment?"

182Elder Snow replied that he had been asked that question in court and had declined to answer it.

ANSWER OF THE UTAH PRISONERS

Under date of 24th of May, however, the prisoners whom the governor visited made formal answer to his propositions. Gratitude for interest manifested in them by the governor, they said, prompted their answer, and they trusted that their reply would not be construed into a defiant attitude towards the government, as their silence had been. The main part of their reply was as follows:

182"Of the forty-nine elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints now imprisoned in the penitentiary for alleged violation of the Edmunds law, all but four had plural wives from its passage to thirty-five years prior to its passage. We were united to our wives for time and eternity by the most sacred covenants, and in many instances numerous children have been born as a result of our union, who are endeared to us by the strongest paternal ties. * * * So far as compliance with your proposition requires the sacrifice of honor and manhood, the repudiation of our wives and children, the violation of sacred covenants, heaven forbid that we should be guilty of such perfidy. Perpetual imprisonment, with which we are threatened, or even death itself, would be preferable. [^6]

THE GOVERNOR'S PROCLAMATION

Governor West after this tender of good offices—in which there is no question but what he acted in all sincerity, and out of a desire to help conditions in Utah—became pronounced in his sympathies with the anti-"Mormon" "ringites," doubtless regarding any proposed policy of conciliation with the Latter-day Saints, on the basis of their submission to the law as then "interpreted by the courts," as hopeless. On the 16th of July he issued a formal proclamation warning all violators of the law, as to the marriage relation, that they incurred and subjected themselves to heavy fines and imprisonment; and also warned all well disposed persons from associating themselves with any person or organization for the purpose of immigrating to Utah to enter into or maintain any marriage relation other than that allowed, and sanctioned by law; or to aid and abet others in so doing. [^7]

183In one of his statements, on which his warning is based, the governor remarked: "Said church in its places of worship through its public teachers and press openly proclaims the right and duty of its members to violate the law of the land upon the subject of marriage." This the News editorially denied. [^8]

GOVERNOR WEST'S REPORT TO THE SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR

In October the governor made a report to the secretary of the interior—agreeably to the request of that officer—"on the operations of this territory, together with such suggestions of importance requiring the attention of congress."

183Governor West emphatically urged the passage of more strenuous legislations for Utah. He deplored the fact that congress had not enacted the legislation pending before the last session of that body, making many of the local territorial offices appointive. Now an election had been held—in August—and new officers had been elected for the full term of two years. "If the bill is to become a law,—as it should, at the coming session of congress," said the governor—"it ought to provide for vacating the offices, that the law may become operative, and that they may be filled in accordance with its provisions." [^9]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE WOMAN'S INDUSTRIAL HOME

Conflict over PolygamyHCIn 1886 there was witnessed the opening of the "Woman's Industrial Home," in Salt Lake City, created to "provide homes and employment for homeless and destitute polygamous wives and their children." This philanthropic movement was inaugurated by women of the nation under a corporation bearing the title "The Industrial Christian Home Association of Utah." Its promoters, at the head of whom was Mrs. Angie F. Newman, of Lincoln, Nebraska, denied that the establishment of the "Home" was intended to be an act of "cold charity to the Mormon people." [^10] "Rather," according to Mrs. Newman, "its intent was to extend its benefits over every class—Mormon, Jew and Gentile." In support of this view may also be cited the sixth article of the association's act of incorporation, which does not limit the operations of this charity to any one class of people. [^11] It was intended to be of a general educational, industrial movement for women and children, and had a very long and very high-sounding list of objects to achieve. But the association in pursuance of its purposes—funds in response to its appeals to the charitably inclined women of the United States coming in very slowly, and consisting chiefly in "words of encouragement" to those engaged in this charity [^12]—appealed to congress for appropriations, basing that appeal on alleged "awful conditions" existing in Utah in consequence of the enforcement of the Edmunds law. The "Industrial Christian Home Association" was incorporated on the 15th of March, 1886, and within a month a delegation was besieging congress for an appropriation of $100,000. But congress only appropriated $40,000 in 1886. [^13] Two years later, February 1st, 1888, a further appropriation was made of $40,000; and still later, viz., October, 1888, an additional appropriation was asked for.

Conflict over PolygamyHC185The appropriations, however, amounting in this October campaign to $32,000, and in all up to this time, to $112,000, were obtained; but in securing the aid of government appropriation the "Industrial Christian Home Association" corporation lost control of the movement.

Conflict over PolygamyHC185Against this diversion of the management of the institution from the original association, Mrs. Newman protested, but all in vain. Had the federal officers of Utah in their capacity of manipulating politicians "worsted" the good and philanthropic but misguided women of the "Association?" [^14] It looked very much like it.

Conflict over PolygamyHC185Of the appropriations made, $50,000 was designated for the erection of a suitable building for the "Home." This to come from such unexpended balances from previous appropriations, supplemented by $24,000 also now appropriated for that purpose. There was also appropriated, in addition to this, $4,000 to furnish the "Home;" and $4,000 more to aid in the emigration of those who should come to the "Home" and desire to remove permanently from the territory to escape polygamy. [^15]

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe "Home" building was erected in the heart of the city on 5th East street. The main part was three stories high with two wings two stories high. In June, 1889, the "Home" was opened in its own building and then, as well as in the rented quarters it had previously occupied, was manifested the utter uselessness of this extravagant outlay of the people's money.

Conflict over PolygamyHCA GHASTLY FAILURE

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe "Home" was a ghastly failure from first to last. There were but very few women of the class designated, for whom it was built, who entered the "Home," even on the showing of the institution in its strained reports, [^16] and the fact of these belonging to the class contemplated in the acts of congress as beneficiaries of the "Home" is questioned. [^17] In the rented quarters the highest number of inmates that had ever been in the "Home" at one time was twenty-seven, and these were not of the class of women and children for which the "Home" was sustained by congressional appropriation, but paupers; and the average number of such inmates as these was seven.

Conflict over PolygamyHC186The "Home For Polygamous Wives" was a jest in Salt Lake City and Utah, and after the completion of the building the question was often asked what should be done with it. For a number of years it served as a very convenient headquarters for the Utah Commission. In 1890 it was urged that it be made the government building—post office, etc.—for Salt Lake City, but to this strong objection was made. After a useless existence of ten years, the building and grounds were sold at auction to the highest bidder in Washington, D. C., on the 7th of September, 1899, for $22,500; [^18] and it is now converted into and run as a "family hotel."

THE UTAH LOYAL LEAGUE

This year 1886 saw the birth of another "Gentile" move in the anti-"Mormon" controversy, viz., the organization of the "Utah Loyal League." According to the preamble to its constitution the "League" was to be an association "open as to its general object and purpose, but secret as to its membership and proceedings." Its purpose was set forth in the form of its enrolling list as follows:

187"The objects of the Utah Loyal League are to combine the loyal people of Utah, male and female, irrespective of politics, in opposition to the political rule and the law-defying practices of the so-called 'Mormon church;' to oppose the admission of Utah into the Union until she has the substance as well as the form of republican government; to raise money to maintain agents in Washington or elsewhere to labor for these ends."

187Undoubtedly the "League" was effective in supporting the Gentile lobby that was sustained at Washington through these years of "Mormon-Gentile" conflict.

187Meantime prosecutions for violations of the Edmunds law continued with constantly increasing vigor. After the Edmunds- Tucker law became effective convictions became easier and multiplied. The expenses of the courts in Utah in the fiscal year of 1887, and paid that year, were over $63,000, "a large increase over former years," said Representative Struble in the house of representatives, on the 4th of October, 1888; "occasioned, it may be supposed, by reason of further attempts to enforce the laws against illegal cohabitation and polygamy." [^19]

Administration of John TaylorHCTHE DEATH OF PRESIDENT JOHN TAYLOR

Administration of John TaylorHCIt was in the midst of these troublous times and threatening portents that President John Taylor died in his retirement at the home of Thomas F. Rouche at Kaysville, Davis county, about fifteen miles north of Salt Lake City. The president had been in retirement two and a half years—from the 1st of February, 1885, to the 25th of July, 1887, the day of his death.

Administration of John TaylorHCIt was a sad ending of a noble life. Thirteen days before the end came Elder Joseph F. Smith, second counselor to President Taylor, arrived from the Hawaiian Islands, where he had been in exile for over two years and a half, and joined George Q. Cannon at the bedside of the dying president. The president was very weak and low, but he was conscious, and recognized his returned friend and counselor. His attention was called to the fact that the first presidency were once more together—the first time since December, 1884—

Administration of John TaylorHC"I feel to thank the Lord!"

Administration of John TaylorHC188he said. After this he continued to grow weaker, with only intervals of consciousness, until the end came.

188It is not necessary to dwell either upon the life or the character of President John Taylor, both are interwoven in the narrative of this History. "President Taylor escaped the death which the assassins of Carthage jail assigned him," said his counselors in making official announcement of his death. "His blood was then mingled with the blood of the martyred Prophet and Patriarch [Joseph and Hyrum Smith]. He has stood since then as a living martyr for the truth. But today he occupies the place of a double martyr. President John Taylor has been killed by the cruelty of officials who have, in this territory, misrepresented the government of the United States. There is no room to doubt that if he had been permitted to enjoy the comforts of home, the ministrations of his family, the exercise to which he had been accustomed, but of which he was deprived, he might have lived for many years yet. His blood stains the clothes of men, who with insensate hate have offered rewards for his arrest and have hounded him to the grave. History will yet call their deeds by their right names." [^20]

188We do not hesitate to fulfill the prophecy: They were deeds of heartless murder. In Utah was finished what Carthage began!

OBSEQUIES

The funeral services were held in the Salt Lake taber-nacle on the 29th of July, where the body laid in state, and was viewed by a sorrowful multitude. After processional honors were paid to the departed president, interment took place in the city cemetery. [^21]

189I think it proper to place in this History what I have elsewhere said of the personal and commanding appearance of this venerable president of the church whom we have seen attain to a great age in the development of the New Dispensation of the gospel with which he has been so closely and for so long identified.

189In person President Taylor was nearly six feet in height and of fine proportion, that combination which gives activity and strength. His head was large, the face oval and the features large, strong and finely chiseled. The forehead was high and massive, the eyes gray, deep set, and of a mild, kindly expression, except when aroused, and then they were capable of reflecting all the feelings that moved his soul, whether of indignation, scorn or contempt. The nose was straight and well formed, the mouth expressive of firmness, the chin powerful and well rounded. In early life he was of a fair complexion, but with age the face grew swarthy, and even in middle life his abundant hair turned to a silvery whiteness, which but added beauty to his brow and made his appearance venerable.

In his manner he was ever affable and polite, easy and gracious, yet princely in dignity. There was no affectation in his deportment, no stiffness; his dignity was that with which nature clothes her noblest sons. It did not spring from self-conceit, or self-sufficiency. Nor was it studied or copied, or put on for state occasions. He carried it with him whereever he went—into his own home, into the homes of his friends. It was with him in courts and palaces, among the refined and the titled nobility of this world; he never plucked it off on entering the humblest cottage of the poor. He was to his manners born, and they were suited to the man. In any assembly he was a striking figure.

190A universal benevolence, powerful intellect, splendid courage, physical as well as moral, a noble independence of spirit, coupled with implicit faith and trust in God, a high sense of honor, unimpeachable integrity, indomitable determination, and a passionate love of liberty, justice and truth marked the outlines of his character. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints had the right to be very proud of the third president in the New Dispensation.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The five apostles were Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, Franklin D. Richards, Moses Thatcher, Heber J. Grant.
[^2] The epistle complete is published in Millennial Star, vol. xlix, pp. 545-6.
[^3] Salt Lake Daily Herald, impression of 9th Oct., 1887.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] Conference Minutes in Millennial Star, for April, 1889, vol. li, pp. 291-2.
[^6] For full statement of the case, with complaint against the church, and order of the court in full see Millennial Star, vol. xlix, pp. 540-544.
[^7] See Compiled Laws of Utah, 1876, ch. v. The incorporation was made first under the authority of the "Provisional State of Deseret," approved Feb. 8th, 1851, (ch. xvii). Brought over and approved by resolution of the territorial legislative assembly, Oct. 4th, 1851.
[^8] Compiled Laws of Utah, 1876, p. 233.
[^9] See proceedings of the court published in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 10th and 17th; also a summary of the compromise and of the findings and decrees of the court will be found in the decision of the case by the United States supreme court in United States Reports, vol. x, pp. 732-812.
[^10] United States Reports, p. 884.
[^11] See court proceedings and orders, published in Deseret News, weekly, of March 9th, 1889.
[^12] See Congressional Record in proceedings of house and senate of the above dates, 1893; also Millennial Star, vol. lv, p. 738; also Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 4th, 1893, pp. 612-13, where joint resolutions in full will be found, senate amendments, etc.
[^13] Millennial Star, vol. lvi, p. 144.
[^14] The resolution passed the senate on the 18th of March, and the house on the 24th. (See Congressional Record in both senate and house on those respective dates).
[^15] Election returns will be found in Deseret News, daily, Feb. 14th, 1888.
[^16] Salt Lake Herald of Feb. 29th, 1888.
[^17] The city council committee was as follows: W. W. Riter, Thomas G. Webber, W. S. McCornick, James Sharp and George D. Pyper: the legislative committee, Honorables I. W. Shurtliff and Thomas Marshal of the council, and Honorables Wm. H. King, E. S. Kimball and E. D. Hoge of the house. (Deseret News, weekly, of March 7th, 1888).
[^18] See special Washington dispatch to Deseret News, daily, 7th Sept., 1899.
[^19] Congressional Record, vol. xix, part 10, Appendix, p. 562.
[^20] The document will be found in full in Life of John Taylor, pp. 410-416.
[^21] Full account of the services will be found in Millennial Star, vol. xlix, pp. 546, 553 and 561-5.
