B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

191CHAPTER CLXVI

191SUCCESSION IN THE PRESIDENCY—APOSTOLIC AD INTERIM—THE CHURCH PROPERTY SUITS

191FOLLOWING the funeral services of President John Taylor, held on the 29th of July, the counselors of the late president, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, met with five of the twelve apostles, [^1] and Daniel H. Wells, (the latter had recently returned from presiding over the European Mission) in council meeting. It was decided that the two counselors to the late president should preside over the church until the members of the council of the apostles could be convened. This arrangement lasted until the 3rd of August. On that date eight of the apostles met, with the two counselors of the late president, to consider the matter of the presidency of the church. Elders George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith were reinstated in their former positions in the quorum of the twelve whence they had been taken to act as counselors to the late President John Taylor—this was fifth and sixth place respectively. President Wilford Woodruff with the approval of this meeting issued a brief address "To the Saints Throughout the World," announcing the death of President Taylor, and also declaring that, as upon two former occasions in the history of the church, "the duty and responsibility of presiding over and directing the affairs of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in all the world, devolved upon the twelve apostles," for the time being, and expressed the hope that with the blessing of the Lord and the faith and prayers of his people they would be able to do their duty until they, too, would be laid to rest. [^2]

THE TWELVE AGAIN THE PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH

At the general conference of the church in October following, the quorum of the twelve, with Wilford Woodruff as president, was sustained "as the presiding council and authority of the church, and with their counselors, as prophets seers and revelators."

192One of the pleasing features of this general conference of October 1887 was, that two of the apostles and some other leading elders of the church, who had been in retirement for some years on account of the judicial crusade that had raged in Utah, appeared upon the stand of the tabernacle. The Salt Lake Herald thus describes their appearance—referring to the morning session of the third day:

192"A surprise was in store for the congregation, which gave great satisfaction. It was the appearance of Erastus Snow, the founder and upbuilder of southern Utah. It is the first time he has been seen in public in a number of years." [^3]

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC192At the commencement of the afternoon session of the 4th day of the conference, the venerable Wilford Woodruff, now president of the church, by virtue of being the senior member of the apostles' quorum, walked into the stand,—and now the Herald's account:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC192"The crowning incident of surprise for those who assembled in the tabernacle on Sunday afternoon, was the sudden appearance, a few minutes before the hour of beginning the services, of President Wilford Woodruff. It was a happy denouement! The venerable and respected leader entered the building at the west end, went directly to the stand of the presidency, and made his presence known to the seated multitude by a bow and wave of the hand. He was recognized immediately, and before he had time to think the congregation arose en mass and gave vent to warm ejaculations of welcome. It was a spectacle which will long be remembered. Among the thousands who thus welcomed an honored and beloved apostle who had labored faithfully for more than half a century in the cause of the salvation of mankind, and whose hair had grown grey and white in the service, were those whose memories carried recollections of his good deeds in the past; and they beheld him standing before them after an enforced absence of some three years, their pent-up-feeling found vent in tears, and as they resumed their seats they were seen to weep for joy." [^4]

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC193THE ORGANIZATION OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY, APRIL, 1889

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC193The arrangement as to the presidency of the twelve apostles over the church, voted for at this conference, continued eighteen months, then the first presidency for the third time since the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith was reorganized at the general conference of the church held in April, 1889. Wilford Woodruff was sustained as president of the church with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as counselors. [^5] The three vacancies created in the quorum of the twelve by the advancement of these apostles to the presidency were not filled until the October conference following, when Marriner W. Merrill, Anthon H. Lund and Abraham H. Cannon, the last a member of the first council of seventy, were chosen to fill these vacancies.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC193The vacancy in the first council of seventy occasioned by the advancement of Abraham H. Cannon to the apostolate was filled at the April conference of 1890, by the selection of Elder George Reynolds to the position. Elder Reynolds, it will be remembered, was the one whose case, when he was charged with polygamy, went to the supreme court of the United States to test the constitutionality of the anti-polygamy law of 1862, and who had suffered a two years' term of imprisonment (1879-1881) in consequence of that action. A previous vacancy in this council, occasioned by the death of Horace S. Eldredge (September 6, 1888), had been filled by the selection of Elder B. H. Roberts for that place at the October conference of 1888.

THE ESCHEATED CHURCH PROPERTY PROBLEMS

One of the most serious problems that President Woodruff's administration had to deal with was the matter of the escheat proceedings of the United States against the property of the church. As already stated when reviewing the various provisions of the Edmunds- Tucker law, the attorney-general was directed by that law to institute and prosecute proceedings to forfeit and escheat to the United States the property of the corporation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints obtained or held in violation of the act of 1862,—all real estate in excess of $50,000; provided that no buildings or the grounds appurtenant thereto occupied exclusively for the worship of God, or parsonage connected therewith, or burial ground should be forfeited. Also, it will be remembered that the church as a corporation was dissolved by this act and the attorney-general was directed to cause such proceeding to be taken in the supreme court of the territory of Utah as was necessary to wind up its affairs.

194The first step in carrying out these directions of the Edmunds- Tucker law was the institution of a suit in the supreme court of the territory by United States district attorney for Utah, against the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints for all property in excess of $50,000 held by its trustee-in-trust. This on the 30th of July, 1887, the day following the burial of President John Taylor. [^6]

When the legislation that culminated in the Edmunds- Tucker law was pending in congress—as it was for several years before it was finally enacted into law—the church leaders, under the suggestion of their legal advisers, took some steps for the protection of the property the trustee-in-trust held for the church. The act under which the church was incorporated [^7]—in respect of obtaining and holding both real estate and personal property—its power in this respect was limited only by the proviso that the gifts or donations that it received should not be "incompatible with the principles of righteousness or the rules of justice;" and the said property was also "to be used, managed, or disposed of for the benefit, improvement, erection of houses for public worship, and instruction, and the well being of said church." [^8] The corporation was authorized at general or special conferences to elect one trustee-in-trust, and not to exceed twelve assistant trustees, to manage its affairs; but no assistant trustee or trustees was empowered to transact "business in relation to buying, or selling, or otherwise disposing of church property without the consent or approval of the trustee-in-trust of said church.

195Under these plenary corporate powers the one corporation had held all the church property real and personal in all the settlements of the saints in Utah from the time of its incorporation in 1851. Had such a condition been allowed to continue until after the aforesaid bill became a law, very much more property would have been seized by the government than was seized. But as already suggested the church authorities under the advice of legal counsel took precautions to lessen the impending blow. Under the territorial law each ward and each stake also, where realty was held that could not properly fall under the ward organization, was converted into a corporation and such property as the general church corporation held within its limits was granted unto said local corporation.

PRESIDENT TAYLOR'S VIEW RESPECTING ESCHEATED PROPERTY

Such property as could not well be disposed of in this manner was subject to seizure. Still even as to such property steps were taken to preserve it from the despoilers as far as possible, and in some instances after the passage of the Edmunds- Tucker bill by the two houses of congress, 19th of February, 1887, but before the law became effective, March 3rd, of the same year. President John Taylor, according to George Q. Cannon, his counselor, had personally been averse to putting the church property out of his hands with a view to saving it from seizure.

196President Taylor, however, must have been dissuaded from this personal view to the policy of putting forth every effort to save the property of the church from seizure. Accordingly after the passage of the Edmunds- Tucker law, recognizing that the church no longer existed as a body corporate, on the 19th of May, 1887, Wm. B. Preston, R. T. Burton and John R. Winder, the presiding bishopric of the church, were appointed and qualified before the probate court of Salt Lake county, as trustees for the unincorporated religious society known by the name of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and to them President Taylor transferred by deed the temple block and buildings, the deed bearing date of June 30, 1887. And later, viz., on the 2nd of July—same year—other men to whom had been conveyed in trust other real estate before the Edmunds- Tucker act became effective, conveyed to these trustees the realty held by them, namely, the Gardo House; and the Tithing House and grounds. Other property than this was also held in similar trust; and there was seizure by the government of other property than the above, both of real estate and personal property, belonging to the church.

THE ESCHEATED PROPERTY AGREED UPON AND LISTED

Mr. Frank H. Dyer, United States marshal for Utah, was appointed by the Utah supreme court receiver of the church property for the federal government, and he made diligent effort to find all such property. Some property was seized that clearly did not fall under the description of the property to be escheated by the Edmunds- Tucker law, such was the Temple Square and the President's Office. Finally, after much petitioning and questioning in court and conferences between opposing counsel an agreement upon facts was made, and a decision arrived at as to the real and personal property that should be turned over to the receiver, upon which agreement and decision the litigants would take the case before the courts, with the understanding that the case would go finally to the supreme court of the United States for adjudication.

197This compromise arrangement was made on the 8th of October, 1888, and the findings and decrees of the court were filed a few days later. Accompanying the compromise agreement was a notice of appeal to the United States supreme court by attorneys for the church. [^9]

THE DECISION OF THE UNITED STATES SUPREME COURT

When the case was considered by the supreme court and judgment rendered, May 19, the court sustained the constitutionality of the Edmunds- Tucker law, and with very slight modification the decrees of the territorial court. These modifications related to the handling of the personal property which the supreme court dealt with in a subsequent decision, May 25th, 1891. It was directed by the court that since at the dissolution of the church corporation there did not exist any trust or purpose within the objects for which said personal property was originally acquired and for which it could be used; and there did not exist any body or association who is legally entitled to said property, therefore it had devolved upon the United States and ought to be limited and appointed to such charitable purposes, lawful in their character, as most nearly correspond to those to which it was originally destined. This to be ascertained by a special master in chancery, whose findings and recommendations were to be approved by the supreme court of the territory.

197The court, however, was divided, Chief Justice C. J. Fuller and Associate Justices Field and La Mar dissenting—Chief Justice Fuller writing the dissenting opinion. [^10]

UNITED STATES RECEIVERS OF CHURCH PROPERTY—FRANK H. DYER

All listed real and personal property noted in the compromise proceedings before the Utah supreme court by this ruling went into the hands of the receiver, Mr. Frank H. Dyer. Mr. Dyer's bond was $250,000. There were wide differences of opinion on the subject of compensation for the receiver, and much controversy about it. The court referred the subject for examination and report to Judge Ezra T. Sprague, master in chancery. In his report the judge fixed the sum to be paid the receiver at $25,000; and to each of his attorneys, Parley L. Williams and George S. Peters—the latter was the United States district attorney for Utah—he recommended the payment of $10,000 to each, and for expenses of the receiver, $7,865.63, making a total of $52,865.63. This was cut by the court to the amount stated of which $10,000 was allowed to the receiver, and $5,000 and $4,000 respectively, to the attorneys. [^11]

198After a year's service the receiver was allowed compensation, which with fees, for his attorneys—Williams and Peters—and his expenses, amounted to $26,825.63. Mr. Dyer continued in the office of the receiver until the 14th of July, 1890, when he resigned.

HENRY W. LAWRENCE—RECEIVER

Marshal Dyer two days after his resignation was succeeded by Henry W. Lawrence, who will be remembered as active in the Godbeite movement of previous years. Being regarded as an "apostate Mormon" his appointment was obnoxious to the Latter-day Saints who still held an interest in the property to be turned over to the receiver.

198Mr. Lawrence continued in office as receiver until August 31st, 1894, when he was superseded by the appointment of John R. Winder, counselor in the presiding bishopric of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. He was required to give bonds in the sum of $100,000.

During the continuance of the service of the second receiver, Mr. Lawrence, various orders were made for special examinations and reports by the Utah supreme court as to the uses to be made of this church property, both as to the real estate and the personal property. Judge Loofbourow was appointed on the first of July to conduct such an inquiry, as master in chancery. This inquiry began on the 19th of October, 1891, and became important in the annals of the church—as we shall see later—because of the interpretations it elicited respecting the scope of the Woodruff Manifesto discontinuing plural marriage in the church, which meantime had been announced by the church.

RETURN OF ESCHEATED PROPERTY TO THE CHURCH

With reference to the escheated church property, Judge Loofbourow, in his report, recommended that the escheated property be devoted to the benefit of public schools. This on the 15th of January, 1892. On November 12th of the same year, the supreme court rendered a decision authorizing the use of the personal property of the church under the direction of a trustee, for the building and repairing of houses of worship and the support of the poor. Leonard G. Hardy, son of Leonard W. Hardy, so long a counselor in the presiding bishopric of the church, was made the trustee for the expenditure of these funds, and was placed under $500,000 for the faithful performance of his duties.

Before any action was taken in the expenditure of these funds, however, an event occurred which returned to the church its personal property to be disposed of by the officers of the organization charged with that duty under its administrative policy. This was accomplished by the passage of a joint resolution of congress in 1893, to restore the said personal property to the church. The resolution was introduced by Mr. Joseph L. Rawlins, Utah's delegate to congress at the time, on the 9th of September. It came up for consideration in the house on the 5th of October and was passed, being ably championed by Mr. Rawlins. It passed the senate, with some slight amendments, on the 21st. The house two days later agreed to the senate amendments, and on the 25th of October it was signed by President Cleveland. [^12] This act caused to be paid over to the first presidency of the church, by order of the supreme court of Utah, personal property of the value of $438,174.39. This the 10th of January, 1894.

200It was not until 1896—after the admission of Utah into the Union—that the real estate escheated to the government was restored to the church. In the very last legislative assembly held in the territory of Utah—1894—Mr. C. S. Varian, formerly the United States district attorney for Utah, introduced a Memorial to congress asking for the restoration of the real estate to the church, which was passed without opposition. [^13] When the congressional delegation from the state of Utah were duly installed, both in senate and house, resolutions were introduced to restore the escheated real estate to the church; and the senate resolution, introduced by Senator Frank J. Cannon, on the 11th of February, 1896, finally passed both houses, and received President Cleveland's signature on the 28th of March. [^14] In June following—the 4th—the supreme court of the state of Utah entered the decree and gave the order to the receiver, to deliver the church real estate with all rents and profits arising therefrom and now in his hands, after paying the expenses of said receivership, to the presidency of the church.

Thus ended an act which, had it been carried to the end proposed by those who projected it, would have virtually involved the federal government of the United States in an act of confiscation that would have been most discreditable and indefensible. As it was, though not carried to the final end of despoilation proposed in the beginning of the action, yet it profoundly disturbed a whole community through about nine years, involved them in vexations and very expensive litigation by which much of their community substance contributed to charitable and religious purposes was wasted, and their sense of justice outraged.

CONCESSIONS TO THE MINORITY PARTY IN MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS

In the biennial municipal election in Salt Lake City of 1888, there was a departure from the policy of electing a solidly People's party—"Mormon" municipal administration. Four places on the ticket were tendered by the People's party convention to the Liberal—Gentile—party; which tender the more conservative elements in the latter party, under the leadership of Governor West, Marshal Frank H. Dyer, J. L. Rawlins, W. H. Dickson, J. R. McBride and others, accepted, much to the disgust of the radical wing of that party. The tender was made by the People's party in recognition of the right of the minority to representation in municipal affairs.

201In further courtesy to their former opponents, the ticket thus made up was called the "Citizens Ticket." The four places on the ticket accorded the Liberals was one alderman and three councilors. Mr. W. S. McCornick, a leading Salt Lake banker was named as the Liberal candidate for alderman, and John E. Dooly, M. B. Sowles and Boliver Roberts for councilors.

201The radical wing of the Liberal party placed a ticket in the field and a bitter municipal campaign followed.

The citizens ticket was triumphantly elected by an average majority of 1,750 to 860. [^15] Mr. Francis Armstrong, a prominent business man, was the mayor of this fusion administration—it was his second term as mayor. During this administration the city council presented to the territory a site for territorial or state buildings out of the corporation lands, on what was called "Arsenal Hill," on the north central part of the city plot, almost immediately at the foot of Ensign Peak.

SALT LAKE CITY'S GIFT OF A CAPITOL SITE TO THE STATE OF UTAH

The matter of the capitol site was introduced by Mr. Heber J. Grant, one of the city councilors, on the occasion of the last session of the 1886-1888 city administration, the 28th of February, 1889. The following is an excerpt from the city council minutes of that date: "Mr. Grant represented to the city council that for many years past land had been held by the city on Arsenal Hill with the tacit understanding that at some time state capitol buildings would be erected upon it. He therefore moved that * * * a committee be appointed to select and present to the territory a site for the capitol buildings, say about thirty acres, making a resolution to that effect." [^16]

THE CAPITOL SITE

The site was located by Mayor Armstrong, Governor West, a committee from the legislature, and a like committee from the city council, [^17] on February 29th, 1888.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Report of Utah Commission for the 23rd of Sept., 1889, p. 4.
[^2] These figures are from the Report of the Utah Commission, 23rd of September, 1889. The Deseret News, weekly, of Aug. 10th, conceded six members of the house and two of the council. The commission likely presented the official returns.
[^3] The result, most gratifying to the members of the Liberal party, and correspondingly distasteful to the People's party, was the demonstration that, in a hotly contested election, the Liberal party, had polled a majority of 41 in the vote of the city of Salt Lake, and had secured a voice which could be heard and an influence which could be felt in both branches of the legislature." (Report of Utah Commission, 23rd Sept., 1889, p. 15).
[^4] See current numbers of both Deseret News, and Salt Lake Tribune, from 17th of August, et seq.
[^5] See decision published in full in Deseret News, weekly, of December 7th, 1889, pp. 754-760.
[^6] Record of the hearing in full will be found in the Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 30th and Dec. 7th.
[^7] A full account of this organization, and of its constitution and principles is published in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 5th, 1889.
[^8] Mr. Scott was a native of New York state, born in 1835. In 1852 he went to California via Isthmus of Panama, where he remained until he came to Utah in 1871 and established himself in the hardware business, especially in mining machinery. (Biographical Record, Whitney, 1902, p. 311).
[^9] These representatives were Elder John Morgan, late president of the Southern States Mission, and B. H. Roberts, at the time associate editor of the Salt Lake Herald. They sought representation through the New York, Philadelphia, Boston, and Chicago papers. George Q. Cannon operated in the same interest at Washington, D. C., among his former congressional associates in congress, some of whom were men of national influence; but all to little or no purpose—the American people were set in their convictions against the Latter-day Saint community, and nothing apparently could change them.
[^10] All five of the registration officers in Salt Lake City were non-"Mormons" and four out of the five became nominees of the Liberal party in the election.
[^11] For the returns of the election see Deseret News, weekly, of Feb. 22nd, 1890.
[^12] "We won because we had the most people on our side." (Powers Interview in the San Francisco Chronicle, copied into Deseret News, weekly, March 8th, 1890).
[^13] See Zane's decision in full Deseret News, weekly, of March 1st, 1890.
[^14] Utah Reports, vol. vii, pp. 252-5. This decision was not rendered until June, 1891.
[^15] The legislature had meantime changed the time of holding the biennial municipal elections in Utah from February of the even years to the first Tuesday in November of the odd years, at which time the general territorial election was also held.
[^16] Salt Lake Herald of Feb. 29th, 1888.
[^17] The city council committee was as follows: W. W. Riter, Thomas G. Webber, W. S. McCornick, James Sharp and George D. Pyper: the legislative committee, Honorables I. W. Shurtliff and Thomas Marshal of the council, and Honorables Wm. H. King, E. S. Kimball and E. D. Hoge of the house. (Deseret News, weekly, of March 7th, 1888).
