B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

CHAPTER CLXVII

A BREAK IN THE SOLIDARITY OF POLITICAL PARTIES IN MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS—THE LIBERAL VICTORY OF 1890

IN the city election of 1890 the radical wing of the Liberal party determined upon making an effort to capture control of Salt Lake City. The fact that in the recent fusion movement and election they could count more than one-third of the voters for their candidates, gave them hope that with the greater part of the election machinery under anti-"Mormon" control, and with the facilities for colonizing voters in the city from the surrounding mining camps, they could win control of the city. In the municipal election at Ogden in February, 1889, after a bitter contest, the Liberal, that is to say the Gentile, party was victorious, and for the first time in its existence Ogden passed out of "Mormon" control. Frauds in the registration of voters and in the voting were charged by the leaders of the People's party, but no action was brought "to test the legality of the election of any officer, either as to the manner of registration, or as to illegal voting at the polls, or as to the canvass of the returns," said the Report of the Utah Commission. "Nor has any specific charge of fraud ever been brought to the knowledge of this commission," the report continues, "but only general charges made through the party newspapers or by individual members of the People's party, wholly unsupported by proof." [^1] Also in the election of members for the legislature in August, 1889, the Liberal party elected two members of the legislative council and five members of the lower house; [^2] and as of these one Liberal member of the council and three members of the house were elected from Salt Lake City—the average Liberal majority in Salt Lake being forty-one [^3]—all this gave encouragement to the Liberals that they could succeed in the municipal election in 1890.

PRELIMINARY STEPS TO THE ELECTION

Plans accordingly were early laid for the next city campaign. Colonization of voters in the city began to be charged as determined upon by both parties as early as August, 1889. [^4] The territorial law required but six months' residence in the territory, and thirty days' residence in the precinct previous to registration to qualify citizens as voters. As a matter of fact both parties colonized voters in the city for the impending election. Also an effort was made by both parties to qualify as many aliens to vote as possible by naturalization. This method of increasing voters on the part of the People's party was estopped by a decision of Judge Thomas J. Anderson, associate justice of the supreme court of Utah, and acting judge of the third judicial district—the district including Salt Lake City—who rendered a decision on the 30th of November, in which he declared that "an alien who is a member of the church (i. e. the Church of the Latter-day Saints) is not a fit person to be made a citizen of the United States." [^5]

The case came up on an application of nine alien Latter-day Saints to become citizens. The hearings on the cases began on the 14th of November and continued until the 30th, with the result noted. There was a great array of legal talent, R. N. Baskin and W. H. Dickson appeared in behalf of the Liberal party which was objecting to the naturalization of "Mormons." Le Grand Young, J. H. Moyle, R. W. Young appeared for the applicants, and Mr. Charles S. Varian, United States district attorney for Utah, near the close of the hearing announced that he appeared as "the official representative of the United States to object to the naturalization of Mormons." A very large number of witnesses was examined, including a number of high church officials. The testimony dealt very largely with "endowment house ceremonies" as related to the loyalty of the "Mormon" people. The evidence was conflicting, the testimony of Latter-day Saints denying the imputations of disloyalty laid in these ceremonies, the testimony of apostate "Mormons," in the main, alleging disloyalty. One notable exception in the latter class was Mr. E. L. T. Harrison of Godbeite movement fame, who insisted that there was nothing tending to disloyalty in these ceremonies. [^6]

NATURALIZATION—NO "MORMON" NEED APPLY

The decision, judging from its full text, was based chiefly upon excerpts from extreme and angry utterances of "Mormon" leaders during times of stress, and the disorders of "Echo Canyon War" times, rather than upon a careful analysis and synthesis of the testimony actually before the court. And unquestionably the decision of the court was influenced by the felt need of excluding from citizenship those whose votes would be cast against the Liberal party in the pending election. But for all that the decision seems to have settled the judicial policy of the Utah courts for some years with reference to the admission of Latter-day Saint aliens to citizenship. "No 'Mormon' need apply," was the common parlance in which the conclusion was announced when the acquiring of citizenship by Latter-day Saints was mooted.

MARCHING CLUBS

In the latter part of September, 1889, People's party clubs began to be organized, the first in the 7th ward, September 28th. [^7]

206Although the Liberal party's nominating convention was not to be held until the 14th of January, 1890, and the People's party nominating convention not until the 27th of the same month, and the election would not be held until the 10th of February; yet political rallies, torchlight and daylight processions, leading to great political excitement, began early in November, 1889. On the 2nd of that month the first Liberal party torchlight procession was held, and more than two thousand men were in line. A second parade of the kind was held on the night of the 29th of the same month, said to be the greatest affair of its kind ever seen in Utah. A great Liberal drum corps was organized and led the procession, bonfires and red lights illuminated the line of march. Though it was midwinter there were outdoor rallies. At one of these, held on the day following Christmas, the Liberals erected a flagpole one hundred and ten feet high. Not to be outdone in things of this sort the People's party held rallies and organized parades equally gigantic in proportions, and even surpassing in numbers the Liberal parades, and rallies. The Liberal party was led by Judge Orlando W. Powers, late of Michigan, but who had acted for a time as one of the United States district judges of Utah, and who, it will be remembered, had failed of confirmation in his appointment by the United States senate. The People's party was led by Franklin S. Richards, the leading attorney for the church in those troublous years.

THE CANDIDATES

The Liberal party's candidate for mayor was George M. Scott, a hardware merchant of the city since 1871. [^8] The People's party candidate was Spencer Clawson, a prominent young business man, a man of good family, a native of the city, the son of Bishop Hiram B. Clawson. Interest in this municipal election was nation wide. Not a paper of any prominence in the United States but what both before and after it occurred commented upon it. Indeed so far was public opinion aroused in the event, and so generally was the sympathy of that opinion on the anti-"Mormon" side, that it was thought necessary by the church authorities to send representatives of the Latter-day Saints to the east to stem the tide of adverse editorial opinion if possible. [^9] Little could be done, however, though interviews were obtained and special articles were written, and editorial comment influenced to some extent by presentation of the pro-"Mormon" side of the contention. Yet in the main the press face was set hard as flint against the "Mormon" community, and nothing of moment could be accomplished.

CHARGES OF FRAUD—FUTILE BEFORE A COMMISSION HOSTILE TO THE PEOPLE

There were charges of intent of corruption on both sides in this municipal election. In anticipation of frauds in both registration and in conducting the election, the Liberal party having the control of both the registration and the election machinery, through the appointments made by the Utah commission [^10]—ex-Police Inspector Bondfield, of Chicago, with other detectives, was employed by the People's party to watch their interests and prevent or expose frauds.

The election resulted in a victory for the Liberal party, its majorities for the city officers running, in round numbers, from eight hundred to four hundred, and the city council by majorities with even less variation. [^11]

208There were general charges of fraud in the organs of the People's party, the Deseret News and Salt Lake Herald, but there was nothing exposed that affected the general results. The Utah Commission in its report to the secretary of the interior, dated August 22nd, 1890, expressed the belief "that the election was a fair one" and they had "no doubt that the Liberal party fairly won the day." Judge Powers was of the same opinion! [^12] The Utah Commission being in complete sympathy with the Liberal party gave practically no heed to the "hundreds of affidavits" that were tendered them both as to registration and election frauds, and allowed such arbitrary and unlimited administrative powers to their appointees, both to registration officers and judges of election—of which the Liberal party had in each precinct a majority—that it was practically impossible to get by them with charges of corruption. The commission's report to the secretary of the interior—22nd of August, 1890—on this February election should be considered in connection with an editorial review of it by C. W. Penrose of the News, and especially with reference to letters from the editor to the commission both previous to the election and afterwards, in which he refers to many registration and election frauds accompanied by affidavits, but all of which though mentioned in the commission's report, was lightly set aside by them.

208CONTESTS COURT-WON—BUT FUTILE

Three councilmen from the fourth ward of the city were elected by the People's party, but the certificate of election was given to their defeated opponents. On an appeal to the third district court through mandamus proceedings, Judge Zane declared the People's party candidates elected, [^13] and ordered the certificates of election to be given to them. An appeal was taken from this decision to the supreme court of the territory. In its review of the case the supreme court unanimously confirmed the decision of the district court, [^14] but the People's party councilmen meantime were kept out of their offices for nearly eighteen months of a two years' term, while their defeated opponents had occupied their seats in the council during that time.

THE LIBERAL PARTY ADMINISTRATION

The Liberal city administration rushed into extravagant expenditures for municipal improvements, and the criminal elements flocked into both Ogden and Salt Lake City as if they expected a toleration before unknown. In this they were not disappointed. Notwithstanding this, two years later, the same party was given a new lease of power. Mr. R. N. Baskin, a bitter anti-"Mormon" of many years standing was elected mayor. It must be said, however, to the honor of Mr. Baskin, that in this second Liberal administration he sought to restrain, and by the vigorous use of the veto power he did restrain some of the reckless extravagance of the party, bent, apparently, not only upon looting the city treasury, but also upon ruining the city's credit. By the end of four years of Liberal rule the people were glad enough to be rid of it, Gentiles as well as "Mormons," and so in the municipal election of November, 1893, [^15] they united on a citizen's ticket, headed by Mr. Baskin for mayor, who had won the confidence of the people by his sturdy resistence to the extravagance and dishonesty of the Liberal city council. In this election the citizen's movement was successful. They elected the mayor and all the city officers, except treasurer, and ten out of the fifteen city council, and Liberal party rule came to an inglorious end in Salt Lake City.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Congressional Record, 50th Congress, vol. xix, part 10, p. 9231.
[^2] Cannon, Deseret News, October 18th, 1890.
[^3] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. viii, p. 794.
[^4] Ibid.
[^5] See Baskin's Reminiscences of Early Utah, pp. 183-6. He refers to it with great satisfaction, and while saying that it did not pass, "its pendency was 'the last straw which broke the camel's back.'" (Ibid, p. 186).
[^6] "The expression of Mr. Fred T. Dubois, was uttered a few days ago, the making of the assertion being admitted by him in open court under oath. (Deseret News, weekly, of May 19th, 1886, p. 279; see also News of Nov. 17th, 1886, p. 659, and Ibid for 7th and 14th of November, 1888. For account of the remarkable action of the Latter-day Saints of Idaho in withdrawing from the church to effect a political purpose, and the comments for and against such action; see passim daily impression of the Salt Lake Herald and Tribune from 1st of the 14th of November, 1886.
[^7] See United States Reports, sec. 133, pp. 299-302. Chief Justice Field delivered the opinion.
[^8] Utah Commission Report for September, 1889, pp. 27, 37.
[^9] Baskin's Reminiscences, p. 184.
[^10] Although for a time, in 1889, there seemed good reasons to hope that statehood might be granted, of which further remarks in a more appropriate place.
[^11] Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 21st, 1889, where the address, bearing date of Dec. 12th, 1889, is given in full. See also History of the Mormons, a brochure by George Q. Cannon, 1891, pp. 17, 18.
[^12] Sermon in full Deseret News, weekly, July 20th, 1889.
[^13] Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 14th, 1881; also Woodruff's Journal for 1889-1890 passim.
[^14] The proclamation of the fast and the explanation of its purposes will be found in full in the Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 21st, 1889.
[^15] See Woodruff's Journal, Ms., of April 23rd and 24th, 1889.
