B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

210CHAPTER CLXVIII

210NUMBER OF CONVICTIONS FOR POLYGAMOUS MARRIAGES AND FOR POLYGAMOUS LIVING—PENDING LEGISLATION—THE WOODRUFF MANIFESTO

210MEANTIME through these years in which other things have been considered, the relentless prosecution of men for maintaining their family relations under the plural marriage system of the church, was going on. The records show that more cases were prosecuted under the first Cleveland administration than under all the Republican administrations preceding it; and in the first session of the 50th congress, 1888, there was a sharp and unpleasant controversy in the house as to which of the great national parties was to be credited with the overthrow of the "twin relic." The Republicans claimed the initiative and earnest prosecution of the work, until the end was in sight; the Democrats insisted that during the Cleveland administration "and only through his administration," said one congressman, "has this evil been brought to bay and extinguished."

210THE NUMBER OF CONVICTIONS UNDER ANTI-POLYGAMOUS LAWS

210The following report of convictions under the antipolygamy laws was made to the house of representatives of the 50th congress, 1st session, under date of September 13th, 1888, by the acting United States attorney-general; and it may be observed that the number of convictions progressively increased through Cleveland's first administration, 1885-1889:

"There was one conviction in Utah in March, 1875; and one in April, 1881; in October and November, 1884, one in Idaho and three in Utah; in 1885, beginning with the March term, 39 in Utah and 16 in Idaho; in 1886, 112 in Utah and 20 in Idaho; in 1887, 214 in Utah and 6 in Idaho; and in 1888, 100 in Utah and 5 in Idaho—in all 589 convictions. There have been collected in Utah fines and costs in the above cases to the amount of $45,956.90, and in Idaho to the amount of $2,351.10—in all $48,208 of fines and costs, and in Utah in April, 1886, a forfeiture of $25,000.

211Very Respectfully,

211[Signed] "G. A. JENKS,"

211Acting Attorney-General.

211The Speaker of the House of Representatives." [^1]

211Of course there were many convictions after the date of this report to the house, that is, after September 13, 1888; for finally 1,300 were imprisoned for the violation of law in this kind. [^2]

THE TRUE CAUSE OF INCREASED NUMBERS OF CONVICTIONS

Conflict over PolygamyHCIt is due to the truth of history, however, to say that the increase in the number of convictions in the latter part of the Cleveland administration, was owing to the fact, not of increased vigilance or effectiveness or vindictiveness in the administration of the law but because the federal judicial appointees of the Cleveland administration were disposed to pass less severe sentences than their Republican predecessors had done; the element of mercy entered into the administration of the law, and men subject to trial and conviction, regarded the time as opportune to rid themselves of the charges against them, and came from retirement and exile, pleaded guilty, and often received but half the amount of penalty hitherto inflicted upon violators of the law in this kind.

Conflict over PolygamyHCUnlawful cohabitation cases under sentences passed by the Cleveland-appointed judges gave, almost invariably less harsh sentences than under their Republican predecessors, imprisonment often being omitted. In this connection also should be remembered the statement of President Taylor when going into retirement, that the severity of the crusade began in 1885 and was pushed to extremes in order to embarrass the then incoming Cleveland administration. It was while Judge Sanford, Cleveland's appointee for chief justice of the territory occupied the bench in Utah, that George Q. Cannon went into court and pleaded guilty, as also did many other prominent brethren.

Conflict over PolygamyHC212It appears that President Cleveland, like some Democratic members of the 50th congress, believed that the question of polygamy in Utah was a settled issue, for in his fourth annual message to congress he said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC212"Though prior to March, 1885, there had been but six convictions in the territories of Utah and Idaho under the laws of 1862 and 1882, punishing polygamy and unlawful cohabitation as crimes, there have been since that date nearly six hundred convictions under these laws and the statutes of 1887; and the opinion is expressed that such a firm and vigilant execution of these laws and the advance of ideas opposed to the forbidden practices, polygamy within the United States is virtually at an end." [^3]

Conflict over PolygamyHC212The president also reported the progress of the escheat proceedings against the church as follows:

Conflict over PolygamyHC212"Suits instituted by the government under the provisions of the act of March 3, 1887, for the termination of the corporations known as the Perpetual Emigration Fund Company and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, have resulted in a decree favorable to the government, declaring the charter of these corporations forfeited and escheating their property. Such property, amounting in value to more than $800,000, is in the hands of a receiver pending further proceedings, an appeal having been taken to the supreme court of the United States." [^4]

Conflict over PolygamyHCYet notwithstanding the satisfactory progress reported from these high sources against the plural marriage feature of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, still more drastic legislation against the polygamists of the Utah community was being urged upon congress. This legislation was crystalized in what was known as the Struble bill, of which Mr. Robert N. Baskin, representative of the Utah Gentiles at the capital, was the real author, in which fact he took great pride. [^5] It was, however, in congress called the Cullom-Struble bill, since Mr. Cullom of Illinois, introduced the measure in the senate, as Mr. Struble, of Iowa, did in the house; and in each case it was referred to the committee on territories, of which the two gentlemen named were the respective chairmen.

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE TEST OATH

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe test oath of this bill was practically identical with the somewhat celebrated "Idaho test oath." This oath had been embodied in a territorial law of Idaho, approved by the governor—Bunn—on the 3rd of February, 1885. It had for its purpose the disfranchisement of the Latter-day Saints in Idaho. Its constitutionality was affirmed by the courts of Idaho, and the result had been that the Latter-day Saints in that territory were practically disfranchised. In the election of 1888, in order to rid themselves, if possible, of intolerable political conditions, large numbers of the Latter-day Saints withdrew from membership in the church, that they might qualify as electors by taking the test oath to the effect that they were not only not bigamists or polygamists, but that they were not even members of "any sect or organization which teaches, advises, or encourages the practice of bigamy or polygamy, or any other crime defined by law, as a duty or privilege resulting, or arising from the faith or practice of such order or organization." In some counties those who thus withdrew from the church were permitted to register and vote, in others they were denied that privilege by the arbitrary action of the registration and election officers. Large numbers of them voted, however, but failed of the attainment of their purpose since the anti-"Mormon" candidate for congress, Fred T. Dubois, Republican, was successful at the polls, over Jas. H. Hawley, Democrat. The successful Republican candidate, Fred T. Dubois, is the same man who a short time previously, while United States marshal for Idaho, and a bitter anti-"Mormon," boasted in open court that under the legislation then "law" in Idaho, that "he had a jury impaneled to try unlawful cohabitation cases that would convict Jesus Christ if he were on trial." He admitted having made the assertion when confronted with it in open court, and under oath. [^6] The boast reveals the spirit in which these laws were administered in Idaho.

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE TEST OATH HELD VALID BY THE SUPREME COURT

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe validity of the "Idaho test oath law" was sustained by the supreme court of the United States, February 3rd, 1890, in its decision in the case of Davis vs. Beason.

Conflict over PolygamyHC214The court also held that under the authority granted to the territory, its "legislature was authorized to prescribe any qualifications for voters, calculated to secure obedience to its laws." The court also held that the part of the law of Idaho "requiring every person desiring to have his name registered as a voter to take an oath that he does not belong to an order that advises a disregard of the criminal law of the territory, is not open to any valid legal objection to which our attention has been called." [^7]

Conflict over PolygamyHCA "TEST OATH" FOR UTAH SOUGHT

Conflict over PolygamyHCIt was this decision that encouraged the Utah anti-"Mormon" "ring" to think a similar law could be enacted by congress to disfranchise the Latter-day Saints in Utah, and thus deliver the political control of the territory over to the minority who had so long hungered for it. The justification for this statement will be found in the fact that such a law was not necessary to extirpate polygamy and polygamous living, for men were being sent to prison by hundreds every year. [^8] So successful were the operations of the law against these offenses that one of the Utah Commission, General John A. McClernand refused to sign with the rest of the Utah Commission the report for September 23rd, 1889, making recommendations increasing the severity of the laws and making more effective their already cruel administration; but on the contrary made a separate report from the majority, deprecating the newly proposed severity.

Conflict over PolygamyHC215Even Mr. Baskin does not claim for the bill be formulated the virtue of being necessary to the suppression of polygamy, but says plainly—even bluntly—"The purpose of the bill was to wrest from the hands of the priesthood [i. e. the Mormon priesthood] the political power which it had wrongfully usurped and shamefully abused." [^9]

Conflict over PolygamyHC215The Struble bill, however, though reported from the house committee and placed upon the house calendar never became a law. The reason was that a number of things culminated in the summer of 1890 which led to an action on the part of the church authorities, and of the church itself, which was to prove an important turning point in the history of the church in the New Dispensation. This was the issuance of the celebrated Woodruff Manifesto, officially discontinuing the practice of plural marriages in the church.

Conflict over PolygamyHC215THE CULMINATION OF IMPORTANT THINGS IN 1890

Conflict over PolygamyHCOf the several things referred to as culminating in the summer of 1890, and producing this event, was consciousness on the part of the leading church authorities of the fact of the general helplessness of the church against the forces of the federal government arraigned against her. Hundreds of her leading elders were in prison; more hundreds had passed through prison terms; more hundreds had been in exile—all to no purpose; except to bear witness of the sincerity of the people in their acceptance of the principle for which they suffered. The church property, real and personal, had escheated to the federal government, and was now in its possession, in value about one million dollars. The constitutionality of the laws escheating this property had been affirmed by the supreme court of the United States. Every effort to escape the pressure of the federal laws and the policy of the federal government by acquiring statehood for Utah had failed. [^10] A most earnest official denial of many things charged against the church and the Latter-day Saint community, as well as a declaration as to many other things commonly believed to enter into and comprise its policy—the paper covering all the points of the "Mormon" controversy, past and present,—and signed by the first presidency, the entire quorum of the apostles, and their counselors, had evidently not impressed the country to win it to the side of the Latter-day Saints. [^11]

Conflict over PolygamyHC216To this heart-moving appeal no favorable reaction was discernable. The hearts of men were steeled against the appeal. The very heavens seemed as brass over their heads!

Conflict over PolygamyHC216MORE CULMINATING THINGS OF 1890

Conflict over PolygamyHC216And now resuming the narrative of the culminating things of the fateful year 1890:

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe courts had recently (November 20, 1889), decided that "Mormon aliens," though in all things else qualified, could not become citizens of the United States, because of their membership in the "Mormon" church. Political control of Salt Lake City, a richer political asset for the party possessing it than the political control of the territory, was lost to the People's party, which is to say to the Latter-day Saint community. The supreme court of the United States had affirmed the constitutionality of the Idaho test oath, and there was the pendency of the Cullom-Struble bill in congress, embodying the same test oath as that of the Idaho law which meant the disfranchisement of the entire Latter-day Saint population of Utah, or a wholesale abandonment of membership of the church—and hence, if that obtained, its destruction. The congress seemed not only willing, but eager to enact this bill into law.

Conflict over PolygamyHCSOME SAINTS WEARY OF THE CONFLICT

Conflict over PolygamyHCThere was a certain restiveness manifested among many of the church membership that desired the cessation of the conflict by concessions to the demands of the country respecting the plural marriage practices of the church. This was manifested by the number of those who were willing, against the general policy of the church leaders, to promise obedience to the anti-polygamy laws for the future and thus escape punishment; by the submission of the Constitution of 1887 for the proposed state of Utah, containing the following concession to the sentiment of the country: "Bigamy and polygamy being considered incompatible with a republican form of government, each of them is hereby forbidden and declared a misdemeanor." The declaration was made effective by providing penalties and making these parts of the Constitution unrepealable and unamendable except with the approval of the congress of the United States and the proclamation of the president of the United States; this Constitution had been accepted by the people, by a vote of 13,195 in its favor, as against 504 who voted against it. There were murmurings and complainings among the people on account of the longcontinued controversy, which gave no promise of coming to an end. "I hear of murmuring," said George Q. Cannon, in a notable sermon delivered on the 14th of July, 1889. "I hear of murmuring—this is a time of trial for the Latter-day Saints. We have now for upwards of four years been undergoing persecution. * * * One class have been greatly tried"—meaning those who were involved in the plural marriage system of the church. He predicted that the others would also be tried and all would need the help of God equally and hence they should be united in sustaining each other. [^12]

Conflict over PolygamyHC218There was also the counsel of powerful non-"Mormon" friends, some of them among the foremost men of the nation, urging the church leaders to abandon this practice which arrayed the whole nation against the church and made defense of the Latter-day Saints so hopeless a task for them. The matter is alluded to in the sermon by George Q. Cannon cited above: "I have ever been assured hundreds of times, by men, too, of wisdom and discernment, that our overthrow was inevitable unless we conformed to the demands of public opinion and renounced all peculiarities of faith; that the world was arrayed against us, and that it was folly to-suppose we could withstand these continued assaults upon us."

Conflict over PolygamyHC218President Woodruff in like strain said: "I have been called upon by friends outside of the church, and urged to take some steps with regard to this matter. They knew the course which the government was determined to take. This feeling has also been manifested more or less by members of the church." [^13]

Conflict over PolygamyHCA DAY OF FASTING AND PRAYER IS PROCLAIMED

Conflict over PolygamyHCA special day of fasting and prayer was appointed by the first presidency of the church "for all the Latter-day Saints throughout these mountains," on 23rd of December, 1889—the eighty-fourth anniversary of the birth of the Prophet Joseph Smith—and faithfully observed by the Latter-day Saints. The purpose of the fast was thus described in the official announcement of it. The saints were to join in supplicating the Lord on that day for his Holy Spirit to be poured out upon his servants and upon all the saints as a witness that he was still with them. Also that the enemies of Zion might be confounded in their wicked works and designs, and that the hearts of the rulers and people of the United States might be softened to the end that they might be induced to deal justly and mercifully with the saints, and be willing to hear their cause and grant to them those rights and privileges which belong to citizens who are true to the Constitution and institutions of the United States. "All this," said the announcement, "should be done in the spirit of meekness and faith. There ought to be no expressions or desires for wrath and judgment upon those who have persecuted, reviled, and falsely accused us, and who seek to oppress us, but rather that they may turn from their wicked ways and be led to do right." [^14]

Conflict over PolygamyHC219Hence the day of fasting was proclaimed. It was faithfully observed by the church, but so far as confounding the enemies of Zion, or making the people of the United States more friendly disposed towards the saints was concerned, it appeared to bring no immediate results; but it may have prepared the saints themselves in mind and heart for the mighty change then pending.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHCTHE WOODRUFF MANIFESTO

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHCIt was in the midst of these conditions and threatening congressional legislative portents that President Wilford Woodruff faced the problem of issuing his now famous Manifesto, changing the long-continued policy of the church in respect of the practice of plural marriage. President Woodruff mentions the action in his daily kept Journal in connection with a number of commonplace matters connected with the routine administration of his office. The Manifesto was issued on the 25th of September. President Woodruff with his first counselor, George Q. Cannon, H. B. Clawson and others had recently returned from a visit to San Francisco.—21st of September—where they had met with such men as Judge Morrill M. Estee, who had acted as chairman at the then recently held Republican convention at Chicago, which nominated Benjamin Harrison for president of the United States; with W. W. Stow, who brought about the interview between the brethren and certain prominent Southern Pacific Railway officials, and United States Senator Leland Stanford, of California; [^15] with Henry Biglow of the San Francisco Examiner, and others. [^16]

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC220On the 24th of September President Woodruff makes this entry in his Journal:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC220"September 24: I signed 25 recommends. I received 19 letters. I signed 23 school certificates—I met with three of the twelve apostles and my counselors upon an important subject."

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC220Presumably the "important subject" was the issuance of the Manifesto. Following is the entry on the day of issuing the Manifesto:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC220"September 25: I have arrived at a point in the history of my life as the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints where I am under the necessity of acting for the temporal salvation of the church. The United States government has taken a stand and passed laws to destroy the Latter-day Saints on the subject of polygamy, or patriarchal order of marriage; and after praying to the Lord and feeling inspired, I have issued the following proclamation which is sustained by my counselors and the twelve apostles." [^17]

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC220The document was published as follows:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC220OFFICIAL DECLARATION [^18]

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC220"To Whom it May Concern:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHCPress dispatches having been sent for political purposes, from Salt Lake City, which have been widely published, to the effect that the Utah Commission, in their recent report to the secretary of the interior, allege that plural marriages are still being solemnized and that forty or more such marriages have been contracted in Utah since last June or during the past year; also that in public discourses the leaders of the church have taught, encouraged and urged the continuance of the practice of polygamy—

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC221I, therefore, as president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, do hereby, in the most solemn manner, declare that these charges are false. We are not teaching polygamy, or plural marriage, nor permitting any person to enter into its practice, and I deny that either forty or any other number of plural marriages have, during that period, been solemnized in our temples or in any other place in the territory.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC221One case has been reported, in which the parties alleged that the marriage was performed in the Endowment House, in Salt Lake City, in the spring of 1889, but I have not been able to learn who performed the ceremony; whatever was done in this matter was without my knowledge. In consequence of this alleged occurrence the Endowment House was, by my instructions, taken down without delay.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC221Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the court of last resort, I hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and to use my influence with the members of the church over which I preside to have them do likewise.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC221There is nothing in my teachings to the church or in those of my associates, during the time specified, which can be reasonably construed to include or encourage polygamy, and when any elder of the church has used language which appeared to convey such teaching he has been promptly reproved. And I now publicly declare that my advice to the Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden by the law of the land.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC221[Signed] "WILFORD WOODRUFF,"

Administration of Wilford WoodruffConflict over PolygamyHC221President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^19]

Conflict over PolygamyHC221At the October conference following, this act of President Woodruff's was submitted to the church for its approval or disapproval. Following the reading of it at the morning session on the 6th of October, Elder Lorenzo Snow, of the council of the twelve—and the president of the council, moved the following action:

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE SNOW RESOLUTION

Conflict over PolygamyHC"I move that, recognizing Wilford Woodruff as the president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and the only man on the earth at the present time who holds the keys of the sealing ordinances, we consider him fully authorized by virtue of his position, to issue the Manifesto which has been read in our hearing, and which is dated September 24th, 1890, and that as a church, in general conference assembled, we accept his declaration concerning plural marriages as authoritative and binding."

Conflict over PolygamyHCGEORGE Q. CANNON JUSTIFYING THE MANIFESTO

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe vote in support of this motion was nearly unanimous. [^20]

Conflict over PolygamyHC222George Q. Cannon followed with a discourse in justification of the action taken by President Woodruff. That justification was based upon two considerations: First, when a commandment is given to the children of men and they are effectively hindered by their enemies in carrying out that commandment, then it is for God to accept their offering and to require that work at their hands no more; second, the authority which gives a commandment has the right and power to revoke it. [^21]

Conflict over PolygamyHC222"It is on this basis," remarked Elder Cannon in his discourse, "that President Woodruff has felt himself justified in issuing this Manifesto." [^22] President Woodruff followed in the same strain.

Conflict over PolygamyHCWAS THE MANIFESTO A BELATED ACTION

Conflict over PolygamyHCOne of the difficulties anticipated on the part of the church authorities was that some among the members of the church would regard this step as a belated action. If this was to be the termination of this long controversy—the surrender of the practice of plural marriage, why was not the surrender—as some had desired—made sooner, and the suffering of past years avoided? More than one thousand three hundred men had endured imprisonment for this principle, to say nothing of those who had suffered exile from their homes by flight, even to foreign lands, while others had gone into retirement in their own land to escape the punishment provided by the law. Why was not this Manifesto delivered sooner and the people relieved of these trials through many years? On this head George Q. Cannon in the discourse delivered at the time the Manifesto was first read at the conference, rather admirably said: "We have waited for the Lord to move in the matter." [^23]

Conflict over PolygamyHC223A year later, referring to the same subject, President Cannon said:

Conflict over PolygamyHC223"God gave the command [i. e. for plural marriage to be practised by the church], and it required the command of God to cause us to change our attitude. President Woodruff holds the same authority that the man did through whom the revelation came to the church. It required that same authority to say to us. 'It is enough. God has accepted your sacrifice. He has looked down upon you and seen what you have passed through, and how determined you have been to keep his commandments, and now he says, it is enough.' It is the same authority that gave us the principle. It is not the word of man. Now, it is for us to obey the law." [^24]

Conflict over PolygamyHC223But notwithstanding all this assurance from the church leaders there were many of the church members that were distressed in their spirits over the action which the church had taken in respect of this principle. The Latter-day Saints were a sincere people. They had accepted this marriage doctrine as from God. They had suffered greatly on account of it. They were prepared to suffer more. The thought of surrendering it had never occurred to the great body of the church, and they were slow to be reconciled to the action of the authorities of the church. [^25]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTESTIMONY OF CHURCH LEADERS BEFORE THE MASTER IN CHANCERY ON THE SCOPE OF THE MANIFESTO

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe reference to the testimony of the brethren before the master in chancery, previously referred to, has reference to testimony given before Judge Loofbourow, appointed by the supreme court of the territory to take testimony to determine what charitable uses the escheated church property could most justly be applied. The church authorities made application for the property to be turned over to them for the relief of "the poor and distressed members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and to the building and maintenance of houses of worship for members of said church." The uses to which representatives of the federal government proposed to put the fund was for the benefit of the common schools. [^26] This attempt to have the escheated property returned to the church, brought the presidency and other prominent brethren upon the witness stand, and raised the question of the interpretation of, and the scope of, the recently issued Woodruff Manifesto, a matter of grave importance. The witnesses were under oath and both the direct examination and the cross examination were most searching. The presidency, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, and Joseph F. Smith; Lorenzo Snow, president of the quorum of the twelve apostles, and Anthon H. Lund, of the same council, all testified with the following result:

Conflict over PolygamyHC1. It was established most positively that all regarded the Manifesto as the result of the inspiration of God upon the mind of President Wilford Woodruff; that in effect it was the word of the Lord to the church forbidding the practice of plural marriage; but it did not deny the rightfulness nor the divinity of the doctrine of plural marriage. The same authority had directed the discontinuance of plural marriage by the church as had inaugurated it in the first instance.

Conflict over PolygamyHC2252. In effect, though not in express terms, the Manifesto went to the matter of polygamous living in violation of the law, as well as to the contracting of plural marriages; the counsel of President Woodruff covered the whole scope of the laws of congress forbidding unlawful marriages and the relationships established thereby. [^27]

Conflict over PolygamyHC2253. The practice of plural marriage by the church was definitely abandoned without the expectation of its renewal as long as the present order of things remains.

Conflict over PolygamyHC2254. The prohibition of polygamy was to be universal, as well in foreign countries as in the United States—the decrees against its practice were effective in all the countries of the world.

Conflict over PolygamyHC225Replying to Mr. Varian, who with Mr. Joseph L. Rawlins, represented the federal government in this hearing, President Woodruff said:-"The Manifesto was intended to apply to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints everywhere in every nation and country. We are giving no liberty to enter into polygamous relations anywhere."

Conflict over PolygamyHC225It could not be otherwise. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is the church universal. It is not the church, etc., for the United States, or of England, but of the whole world; and when its general conference acted in this matter it acted for the church in all nations—the church in the whole round world. Its action prohibited plural marriage everywhere.

Conflict over PolygamyHC5. Anyone violating the inhibition of polygamy, promulgated by the Manifesto, was liable to excommunication from the church. [^28]

Conflict over PolygamyHCTHE PRACTICE OF PLURAL MARRIAGE AND ITS RELATIONS ENDED BY THE CHURCH

Conflict over PolygamyHCThus the practice of the system of plural marriage in the church, clung to so tenaciously by the church leaders and the Latter-day Saints generally, terminated.

Conflict over PolygamyHC226In this matter of plural marriage the Latter-day Saints are neither responsible for its introduction nor for its discontinuance. The Lord commanded its practice, and in the face of the sentiment of ages, and in opposition to the teachings of their own traditions, many of the saints obeyed the commandment, and in the midst of weaknesses, of great attendant difficulties, and dangers sought to carry out the law as revealed to them. For about half a century they maintained its practice in the face of opposition sufficient to appall the stoutest hearts. They defended it in the public press, proclaimed it from the pulpit, debated it on the platform with all who chose to assail it, and practiced it in their lives, nothwithstanding fines and imprisonments and exile followed as consequences. A whole generation had been born and had grown to manhood and womanhood in this marriage system, and the affections of family ties were entwined with it. Then, under the pressure of suffering brought upon the people through the laws of the United States, the president of the church proclaimed its discontinuance, and the people with sorrowful hearts submitted to it, and there the matter rests. If the labors and sufferings of the church of Christ for this principle have done nothing more, this much at least has been accomplished—the saints have borne testimony to the truth. And it is for God to vindicate his law in his own time, and in his own way.

Conflict over PolygamyHCSTILL, WHY

Conflict over PolygamyHCAnd still, doubtless the question will persist: If it was to be of such temporary existence—introduced and then so soon dispensed with, why was it ever introduced to so plague the church, try the saints, afford such opportunities to their enemies for successful opposition to the church and array against it the prejudices and scorn of the world? For everywhere the saints were despised for this thing. There can be but one answer—perhaps two—to that question.

Conflict over PolygamyHC227There was doubtless some law of righteousness associated with this principle of plural marriage else it would not have received the divine sanction of which God's word, the Bible, gives such unmistakable evidence, [^29] some true thing connected with it that God's holy prophets of ancient times sustained, that required it to be brought forth in the "times of the restitution of all things spoken by the mouths of God's holy prophets since the world began;" hence it must be restored in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times—which means also a dispensation of the fulness of the truth restored; and this our New Dispensation could not have been if this true feature of marriage had not been brought forth; that dispensation would have been by so much incomplete and lacked of fulness.

Conflict over PolygamyHC227Being so restored it was fitting that God's church, however much of suffering it involved, should bear witness of it as true. That they did so, witness the evidence supplied by the chapters of this work dealing with this subject.

Conflict over PolygamyHCThe other possible reason mentioned as justifying the introduction of plural marriage into the New Dispensation is the publicity value of it. Of course, it would be insufferable to mention such a thing if the principle itself were not true and pure and good and necessary to be established for completeness to the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. But plural marriage being all that is here said of it, I see nothing amiss in referring to it as possessed of a certain publicity value to the whole work of God. And I know of no single thing in the New Dispensation that has done so much to keep that dispensation and its major message before the world as this same principle of plural marriage and the practice of it by the church. It has kept the message well-nigh constantly before men; through the press, daily, weekly and monthly. It has been the incentive to the multiplication of books on "Mormonism" ad libitum. It has kept the New Dispensation before state legislatures and congress—house and senate. Before successive United States presidents and their cabinets. Before state and territorial courts; and time and again before the supreme court of the United States, and through that court has attracted the attention of leaders of thought in all the world.

Conflict over PolygamyHC228One thing stands out in bold relief in this controversy respecting plural marriage—the surender of the practice of it was no triumph for sectarian Christendom. The priests were soon distanced in the contest, and were nowhere in evidence at the finish. The controversy, in the last stages of it, was between the Latter-day Saints and the politicians, not with the priests, except as the latter stood afar off and shouted their support to their warring allies. It was to the force of effective government processes rather than to the power of the sectarian churches that the Latter-day Saints seemingly surrendered the practice of plural marriage. Scarcely to the state either; for as Mr. Varian, the United States district attorney for Utah, during the inquiry conducted before the master in chancery in the escheated property cases passionately exclaimed, after the testimony of President Woodruff et al was given to the court—and this according to the report of the proceedings was "shouted by Mr. Varian, his voice reaching an angry tone": [^30]

Conflict over PolygamyHC228"They [the Latter-day Saints] are not obeying the law of the land at all, but the counsel of the head of the church. The law of the land, with all its mighty power, and all the terrible pressure it was enabled to bring with its iron heel upon this people crushing them to powder, was unable to bring about what this man did in an hour in the assembled conference of this people. They were willing to go to prison; I doubt not some of them were willing to go to the gallows, to the tomb of the martyr, before they would have yielded one single iota."

Conflict over PolygamyHC229And such was the truth in the case. The saints in this matter of surrendering the practice of plural marriage obeyed God, not man.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The same that was used at the public dedication of the temple a few days later, and found in full in the Deseret News, weekly, of May 23rd, 1888, p. 297.
[^2] See Woodruff's Journal from 13th of May to the 19th which gives an account of the journey to Manti—of the private dedication and the return journey to Salt Lake City. See also Tucker's Origin, Rise and Progress of Mormonism, chapter ii; also Kennedy's Early Days of Mormonism, ch. ii. What became of the Seer Stone immediately after this is not known. The writer knows, however, that it was in the possession of the president of the church for possession of it by him was a matter of conversation between President Joseph F. Smith and himself; and the writer has reasons for knowing that it is now in possession of the church—this year of 1930.
[^3] Accounts of these manifestations were published at the time, Deseret News, weekly, for May 30th, 1888; also in Millennial Star. vol. 1, pp,. 521, 522. Anti-"Mormon" prints in Salt Lake City of the period ridiculed the reports and others deplored the reports as ministering to superstition.
[^4] The House of the Lord a Study of Holy Sanctuaries, Ancient and Modern, by James E. Talmage, one of the twelve apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, illustrated, 1912, Deseret News print, p. 155.
[^5] Minutes of the Annual Conference, Deseret News, weekly, for April 9th, 1892.
[^6] Deseret News, weekly, May 6th, 1893.
[^7] The World's Parliament of Religions, Barrows, chairman of the general committee, 1893, vol. i, p. 18. The two volumes of this work constitute the official report of the parliament.
[^8] Improvement Era, July, 1899, vol. ii, pp. 676-7, where the letter of the presidency is given in full.
[^9] As a matter of fact, the management of the parliament had been at great pains to induce representatives of oriental religions tolerating polygamy, to be present and participate in the parliament, and they actually admitted to the parliament a representative of the Mohammedan faith—Mohammed Alexander Russell Webb—who was permitted to deliver two addresses in explanation and defense of his religion, including polygamy, his speech being reported in the official record of the parliament, published by Rev. John H. Barrows, chairman of the general committee of religious congresses, vol. ii, pp. 989-96, and 1040-52.
[^10] The whole subject is treated at length in a series of three articles under the title "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at the Parliament of Religions," Improvement Era, for 1899, beginning with the June number. In these articles will be found all the correspondence and interviews between the representative of the church and the authorities of the parliament, including the open letter to them published in the Chicago Inter-Ocean. The address prepared for the parliament is also published in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, 1907, vol. i, pp. 7-22.
[^11] Chicago Inter-Ocean of Sept. 28, 1893. Also Improvement Era for Aug., 1899, pp. 764-66.
[^12] The Chicago Herald, editorial of Oct. 3rd, copied into the Deseret News, weekly of Oct. 7th, 1893.
[^13] Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 14th, 1881; also Woodruff's Journal for 1889-1890 passim.
[^14] The proclamation of the fast and the explanation of its purposes will be found in full in the Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 21st, 1889.
[^15] See Woodruff's Journal, Ms., of April 23rd and 24th, 1889.
[^16] See Woodruff's Journal, Ms., from 3rd to 16th September, 1890, passim.
[^17] That is to say with the three apostles named as being present at the meeting of the previous day. The other members of the twelve were absent in various parts of the church—four of them at Kanab and St. George, setting in order the affairs of the church at that point.
[^18] Usually called The Woodruff Manifesto.
[^19] Deseret News, weekly, of October 4, 1890, p. 476. This, editorially, is announced as the officially signed document, previous copies published by the associate press and other publications had condensed it "which poorly conveys the sentiment of the writer." (Ibid. See also Millennial Star, vol. lii, p. 648; also Doctrine and Covenants following sec. cxxxvi).
[^20] See Minutes of Conference in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 11th, 1890, p. 526.
[^21] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxiv, verses 49, 50. That revelation has reference to the failure of the saints to build the city and temple in Jackson county, Missouri.
[^22] The discourse in full is published in the Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 18th, 1890, pp. 550-2.
[^23] Deseret News, weekly, Oct. 18th, 1890.
[^24] Sermon at Logan, Nov. 1st, 1891. Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 21st, 1891.
[^25] Juvenile Instructor, vol. xxvi, p. 671. The same is reported as a synopsis in minutes of the Box Elder stake conference, published in Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 7th, 1891, pp. 626-7. But the report in the Juvenile was by President Cannon, and given in full on the particular question here referred to.
[^26] A party of citizens from Ogden represented that at least $90,000 of the amount of money held by the receiver had been contributed by the counties constituting the northern subdivision of the first judicial district, to wit: Weber, Cache, Box Elder, Morgan, and Rich counties; and prayed that so much of the fund be set apart to be used solely for charitable purposes in said counties, under such restrictions as might be deemed proper. Another use, suggested by Richard W. Young at a late hour in the procedure, yet admitted for consideration, was that the fund be used for the benefit of a proposed "Young University." As already stated in a preceding page of this chapter, the master in chancery recommended the use of the escheated property for the benefit of the common schools of the territory, but ultimately the property, personal and real, was returned to the church.
[^27] It could not be otherwise. Once counseling submission to the laws of the land on the question of contracting plural marriages, inexorable logic would demand that it be extended also to polygamous living—unlawful cohabitation—equally a subject of congressional legislation; and said laws had been declared to be equally constitutional with those forbidding plural marriages, and therefore the church president could not say obedience should be given to one part of the law and not to the other.
[^28] See proceedings before the master in chancery, Judge Chas. F. Loofbourow, published in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 24th and 31st, 1891, pp. 573-583, in the first number, and pp. 608-613 in the second; the second number, in synopsis, contains the arguments in the case.
[^29] See this History, chapter xlv.
[^30] Deseret News account of the hearing, weekly, Oct. 31st, 1891.
