B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

230CHAPTER CLXIX

230DEDICATION OF THE MANTI AND SALT LAKE TEMPLES—THE CHURCH AT THE PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS

230THE next events in President Woodruff's administration are of a strictly ecclesiastical or religious character: among them the dedication of two temples, the one at Manti, and the other at Salt Lake City.

DEDICATION OF THE MANTI TEMPLE

The temple at Manti was dedicated in May, 1888. First there was a private dedication of it on the 17th by President Woodruff, George Q. Cannon and a number of the twelve apostles, among them Lorenzo Snow, president of the quorum, Brigham Young and F. M. Lyman; there were also a number of local leading brethren present. President Woodruff offered this first dedicatory prayer. [^1]

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHCDEDICATION OF THE SEER STONE ON THE ALTAR OF THE MANTI TEMPLE

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHCOne item mentioned by President Woodruff about the private dedicatory services at Manti is of more than passing interest. "Before leaving," he writes, "I consecrated upon the altar the Seer Stone that Joseph Smith found by revelation some thirty feet under the earth (ground), and carried by him through life." This is the very Seer Stone that the Prophet Joseph Smith used part of the time when translating the Book of Mormon; the one he took from the well he was digging with his brother Hyrum, near Palmyra, for Mr. Clark Chase, and which he was falsely accused of taking from the children of Mr. Chase, spoken of in chapter x of this work. [^2]

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHC231The dedication of the Manti temple was at a time when many of the leading elders of the church were in retirement, avoiding arrest by United States officials, hence this private dedication that the leading authorities of the church might be present, and afterwards the public dedication. Daniel H. Wells was appointed president of the temple, Anthon H. Lund to be his chief assistant, and Moses F. Farnsworth as chief recorder. On the 21st of May the public dedicatory services took place, continuing through three days. Immense throngs were in attendance, coming from all the surrounding settlements of southern Utah with many leading brethren and sisters from all sections of the church territory.

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHCSPIRITUAL MANIFESTATIONS DURING THE DEDICATION

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHCDuring the services and on each of the three days there were spiritual manifestations enjoyed by some of the saints present. In some cases the speakers were reported to be surrounded by halos, and others heard strains of music and soft chorus singing, to which many scores gave their names as witnesses. Others claim to have seen the spiritual personages of early leading elders of the church.

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHC231"A bright halo of light was seen by a number of persons over and around the heads of the following speakers—viz: Lorenzo Snow, Jacob Gates, Robert Campbell, John Henry Smith, Francis M. Lyman, John W. Taylor and A. M. Cannon. Brother Canute W. Peterson, of Ephraim, [a very reliable and able man of affairs], observed this halo around the heads of all the speakers. While the public dedicatory prayer was being offered by Brother Lorenzo Snow, near the middle of the prayer, during a pause, the words 'Hallelujah, hallelujah, the Lord be praised,' was uttered by a voice in a very soft and melodious tone, heard by Brother Lewis Anderson, one of our assistant recorders here."

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHC"On the 21st of May, before the opening exercises commenced, Brother A. C. Smyth, the chorister, seated himself at the organ, and rendered a piece of sacred music, a selection from Mendelssohn, at the conclusion of which, persons sitting near the center of the hall, and also on the stand at the west end, heard most heavenly voices and singing—it sounded to them most angelic, and appeared to be behind and above them, and they turned their heads in the direction of the sound, wondering if there was another choir in some other part of the temple."

Construction and Dedication of Other Temples in UtahHC232The names of fourteen persons follow this statement as being witnesses of this spiritual phenomenon. [^3]

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCCAPSTONE OF THE SALT LAKE TEMPLE LAID

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCThe capstone of the Salt Lake temple was laid on the 6th of April, 1892, thirty-nine years from the time the corner stones were laid. It was estimated that about forty thousand people were present, and participated in the exercises.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC232The act of laying the capstone was quite dramatic. There was a procession led by bands of music. The Temple Square was crowded, as were also the adjacent streets. The platform from which the services were conducted had been erected on the south side of the massive granite pile that made a noble background for the group of leading church authorities, four of whom only were general authorities of the church when the corner stones of the temple were laid thirty-nine years before. The day was fair and beautiful, with a gentle, warm breeze occasionally passing over the assembled multitudes. There were anthems by the choir and old-time hymns in which the great audience joined. The house tops and windows of near by buildings were crowded by the people. At twelve o'clock, noon, the formal services began. After prayer—by Joseph F. Smith, second counselor in the presidency—the anthem by Stephens, "Grant Us Peace, O Lord," was rendered. The anthem was worthy of the ancient psalmist himself, and at his best.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC232"The capstone is now ready to be laid!" shouted the architect from the top of the building. President Woodruff, stepped forward and said:

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC233"Attention, all ye House of Israel, and all ye nations of the earth. We will now lay the top stone of the Temple of our God, the foundation of which was laid and dedicated by the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator, Brigham Young."

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC233He pressed an electric button, and the stone settled to its place; at the same moment the great crowd led by Elder Lorenzo Snow gave the sacred shout:

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC233"Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! to God and the Lamb! Amen! Amen! and Amen!"

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC233This was thrice given, with the waving of handkerchiefs and every expression of joy. A moment later the assembled thousands led by the choir sang Zion's most soul-stirring congregational hymn—

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC233"The Spirit of God like a fire is burning,

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC233The Latter-day Glory begins to come forth," etc.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC233"The spectacle and effect of the shout," said a chronicle at the time, "was grand beyond description, the emotions of the multitude being stirred up in the greatest intensity of devotion and enthusiasm."

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC233"The topstone, and the granite block upon which it immediately rests," says Elder Talmage in his "House of the Lord," "form a sphere. Within the lower half a cavity had been prepared; and in this were placed certain books and other articles, so that, as the capstone was laid, it formed a secure and massive lid to this stone receptacle. The stone contains a copy of the Holy Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Voice of Warning, Spencer's Letters, Key to Theology, Hymn Book, Compendium, Pearl of Great Price, and some other books; also photographs of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, and Joseph F. Smith, a photograph of the temple as it appeared at the time. * * * Later in the day, the topstone was surmounted by the great statue—a figure intended to represent Moroni, the heavenly messenger who ministered to the youthful prophet, Joseph Smith, in 1823. The figure, over twelve feet in height, is of copper, heavily gilded. It is in the form of a herald with a trumpet at his lips." [^4]

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC234Under the capstone of the temple was laid a fine polished copper plate engraved by David McKenzie with the following information upon it:

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCHOLINESS TO THE LORD

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCThe Temple Block Consecrated and Ground Broken for The Foundation of This Temple, February 14th, 1853.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC234The Corner Stones were Laid April 6th, 1853, Commencing At the Southeast Corner.

GENERAL CHURCH AUTHORITIES

April 6, 1853

234First Presidency—Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard Richards.

234Twelve Apostles—Orson Hyde, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, Wilford Woodruff, John Taylor, George A. Smith, Amasa M. Lyman, Ezra T. Benson, Charles C. Rich, Lorenzo Snow, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Dichards.

234Patriarch to the Church—John Smith, son of Asael.

234First Seven Presidents of Seventies—Joseph Young, Levi W. Hancock, Henry Herriman, Zera Pulsipher, A. J. Rockwood, Jedediah M. Grant, Benjamin L. Clapp.

234Presiding Bishop—Edward Hunter.

234T. O. Angell, Jos. D. C. Young, architects.

234April 6th, 1892

234First Presidency—Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith.

234Twelve Apostles—Lorenzo Snow, Franklin D. Richards, Brigham Young, Francis M. Lyman, George Teasdale, John W. Taylor, Anthon H. Lund, Moses Thatcher, John H. Smith, Heber J. Grant, Marriner W. Merrill, Abraham H. Cannon.

234Patriarch to the Church—John Smith, son of Hyrum.

234First Seven Presidents of Seventies—Jacob Gates, Seymour B. Young, C. D. Fjeldsted, John Morgan, B. H. Roberts, George Reynolds, Jonathan G. Kimball.

234Presiding Bishop—William B. Preston.

234Robert T. Burton, John R. Winder, counselors.

234The capstone was laid April 6th, 1892, by President Wilford Woodruff.

234

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCRESOLUTION TO COMPLETE THE TEMPLE IN ONE YEAR

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCApart from the main event the chief thing attending the laying of the capstone was the offering of a resolution by Elder Francis M. Lyman, of the council of the twelve, as follows:

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCRESOLUTION

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC"Believing that the instructions of President Woodruff, respecting the early completion of the Salt Lake temple, is the word of the Lord unto us, I propose that this assemblage pledge themselves, collectively and individually, to furnish, as fast as it may be needed, all the money that may be required to complete the temple at the earliest time possible, so that the dedication may take place on April 6th, 1893."

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC235The resolution was put to the meeting, that it might have the endorsement of all Israel. The result was a deafening shout of "aye" from the assembled host.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC235Elder Lyman then stated that he would head a subscription list with a donation of one thousand dollars to aid in the attainment of the object expressed in the resolution. [^5]

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC235Accordingly the church undertook the accomplishment of this task, and successfully carried it through, although the undertaking was immense and many doubted the possibility of its achievement. It was completed, however, though the last finishing touches to the interior of the building were made in the afternoon of the 5th of April, the day preceding the day of dedication. In the evening of that day the temple was thrown open for general inspection; not only were members of the church admitted, but many honorable men and women who were not members of the church were invited to the number of over one thousand, and they passed through the temple from basement to top. Giving honorable members of the non-"Mormon" community an opportunity to go through this sacred building, was attended with the happiest results. It was greatly appreciated and highly spoken of by the non-"Mormon" press of the city.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCOFFICIAL DAY OF DEDICATION

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHCThe official day of the dedication was the 6th of April, 1893,—forty years from the laying of the corner stones already described in these pages. Dedicatory services, however, were held daily—at which the dedicatory prayer was always read from the 6th of April to the 18th of May inclusive.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC236Generally two sessions were held each day, but on the 7th of April, an evening session was added. Children under eight years of age not being baptized members of the church, were not admitted to the general sessions, special days were set apart for their attendance. April 21st and 22nd, Friday and Saturday, were reserved for Sunday School children, under the age for baptism.

Construction and Dedication of the Salt Lake TempleHC236The attendance at the dedicatory services of the Salt Lake temple is not definitely known, since many attended more than one of the many sessions held. The attendance of course was by card, and the least number in attendance was at the evening session of April the 7th—this service being arranged to accommodate the overflow from previous sessions of that day; and even at that session 2,100 were present. At other sessions more than 2,600 passed through the doors. "Estimating the five children's sessions as being attended by 12,000, half of whom had not attended before," says the Deseret News, editorially, "it is a thoroughly conservative calculation to say that the dedication services have been attended by 75,000 people." [^6]

THE CHURCH AT THE WORLD'S PARLIAMENT OF RELIGIONS

It was in this same year of the temple's dedication, 1893, that the church sought a hearing at the World's Parliament of Religions, held in connection with the World's Columbian Exposition at Chicago. The idea of the World's Parliament of Religions originated with Mr. Charles Carroll Bonney in the summer of 1889, who, in the Stateman's Magazine of that year, set forth his views. The chief things to be accomplished by such a parliament, were authoritatively set forth in part as follows:

236"To bring together in conference, for the first time in history, the leading representatives of the great historic religions of the world.

236To show to men, in the most impressive way, what and how many important truths the various religions hold and teach in common.

237To promote and deepen the spirit of human brotherhood among religious men of diverse faiths through friendly conference and mutual good understanding. * * *

237To set forth, by those most competent to speak, what are deemed the important distinctive truths held and taught by each religion, and by the various chief branches of christendom." [^7]

237The promoters of the parliament had failed for some reason to send any literature, or any invitation whatever to the authorities of the Church of the Latter-day Saints to participate in this world's great gathering of religions; but it was determined by the church authorities to seek representation.

237"Appreciating the value and importance of such a parliament as this is set forth to be," said the presidency in a communication to Mr. Charles C. Bonney, president of the World's Congress Auxiliary, "we are solicitous that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints should be represented; and present for consideration of the eminent religionists who will in this congress be assembled, what we regard as the 'supreme truths,' and 'distinguishing characteristics' of our faith."

237In support of the desirability of such representation they added:

237"It will be scarcely necessary for us to call your attention to the fact that an abiding interest centers in what the world calls 'Mormonism;' that its purely American origin will make it of special interest in such a religious parliament as the one proposed; that its success in the face of the stupendous opposition it has encountered gives it the right to be heard in such an assembly by its own accredited representative. All this we believe will be patent to you, and we therefore respectfully ask that the privilege be accorded us of sending a delegation to represent the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at the World's Religious Congress." [^8]

No answer was received to this communication, and after waiting ten days a representative of the church was sent to inquire into the causes of the delay, and to personally solicit a representation and a hearing. The representative of the church appointed to this undertaking was Elder B. H. Roberts of the first council of the seventy. In the interview with President Bonney the representative learned that the letter of the first presidency had been referred to the general committee of the management of the parliament, and there was much difference of opinion as to just what reply ought to be made to the application for a hearing. The prevailing opinion was that the church ought not to be admitted to representation, for the reason that it would doubtless prove to be a disturbing element in the parliament. Replying to the inquiry what grounds the committee had for thinking the church of the Latter-day Saints would be a disturbing element in the parliament, President Bonney answered "because of the great prejudice that existed against the church on account of its plural marriage system." "How would you answer," said Mr. Bonney to the representative of the church interviewing him—"the objection urged against the representation of your church in the parliament because of its belief and practice of polygamy?" The answer was that such an objection to the admission of the Church of the Latter-day Saints to such a parliament as was to assemble ought not to be considered for a moment. The oriental religions, a number of which at least tolerated the practice of polygamy, were not barred from representation in the parliament on that account; and if they admitted un-christian and polygamous religions from the east they ought not to bar those that were considered un-christian and polygamous from the west. [^9] In the second place, the Church of the Latter-day Saints had officially announced the discontinuance of plural marriages and therefore it was not a matter that should be considered when the question was discussed as to whether it should be admitted to the parliament, as reference to its marriage system need form no part of the statement of its faith further than to announce the official discontinuance of the practice. It was further urged upon Mr. Bonney's attention that the church had been accused of prosecuting its propaganda only among the ignorant, and that it would not dare to come into contact with the enlightenment of the age and of civilization; but now it proposed to come where the rays of religious light and truth were supposed to be focused, and place a statement of its doctrine and message to the world side by side with the creeds of all other religions; and for the parliament to object to its admission after such charges had been made against it, would be inconsistent with the character of the great gathering and would come with bad grace from officers of the parliament.

The outcome of this interview and one or two others had with Mr. Bonney and Reverend John Henry Barrows, chairman of the parliament meetings, and after much correspondence on the subject, was that the representative of the Church of the Latter-day Saints was to be admitted to the parliament, and was to make the address which meantime had been prepared and submitted in writing to these gentlemen, and pronounced by them a "good paper."

A HEARING IN A CORNER REFUSED

The time of the parliament's setting was drawing to a close when word was sent to the representative of the Church of the Latter-day Saints requesting him to deliver his address on the 25th of September, in "Hall 3," one of the committee rooms at the side of the great Columbus Hall where the main body of the parliament assembled, and was known as the "Scientific Section of the World's Congress Auxiliary," and capable of seating perhaps from fifty to a hundred people. The representative of the Church of the Latter-day Saints answered that he would be pleased to make an address before the gentlemen who were wont to gather in the "Scientific Section," provided such address would not bar him from making his address before the main parliament in the Hall of Columbus. In reply the representative was informed verbally by Reverend Dr. Barrows that the hearing in "Hall 3" was the only hearing intended to be granted the "Mormon church." In answer to this the representative replied through a written note to the effect that to ask him to make his address in "Hall 3," and have that the only hearing that "Mormonism" was to have, looked very like an effort to "sidetrack" the church he represented; for as a matter of fact, under the circumstances proposed by Mr. Barrows, the great parliament would hear of the "Mormon faith and church either not at all, or else only as in a corner and darkly." A hearing such as could be obtained in "Hall 3" was not the kind of hearing the "Mormon church" had asked for or could accept. She asked to speak through her representative in the full parliament before all the world, having full time (half an hour) allotted to her, as to other religions, in which to proclaim what to her were the great truths of her faith. If that could not be accorded her by the parliament, she would be content with the distinction of being the one voice in all the world that could not be heard in such an assembly, and would seek other means for declaring her views, and announcing her mission.

That terminated the matter so far as the parliament was concerned; but the representative of the Church of the Latter-day Saints made a statement for the press covering the whole treatment of the church he represented, which appeared in the Chicago Inter-Ocean of September 28th, in the form of an open letter to Charles C. Bonney, president of the World's Congress Auxiliary, and to Reverend Dr. John Henry Barrows, chairman of the general committee of the Parliament of Religions. [^10] A synopsis of the open letter was sent out by the associated press and widely commented upon editorially, especially by the great Chicago dailies, and quite generally adversely to the managers of the parliament, who attempted no defense of their treatment of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. [^11]

PRESS COMMENT

Comment upon the treatment of the representative of the church was very widespread. Of these the comment of the Chicago Herald of October 3rd, 1893, may be said to be typical and for that reason is given here:

241"At the last moment he [the church representative] was notified that he could not read his paper before the regular congress, but might, if he pleased, speak to a select assemblage in another hall. This was most discourteous treatment. The fact that Elder Roberts is a Mormon had nothing to do with the case. The gathering at the Art Institute is a parliament of religions—not a parliament of Christians or a parliament of monogamists. The people in attendance knew what they might expect when they accepted invitations to the congress. If they desired to hear only what was entirely agreeable to them they might better have stayed away. The slight put upon Elder Roberts was unjustified and will detract from the value and the reputation of the whole gathering." [^12]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See ante chapter xxiv this History.
[^2] Salt Lake Tribune, Oct. 10th, 1919.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxv:12.
[^4] The House of the Lord a Study of Holy Sanctuaries, Ancient and Modern, by James E. Talmage, one of the twelve apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, illustrated, 1912, Deseret News print, p. 155.
[^5] Minutes of the Annual Conference, Deseret News, weekly, for April 9th, 1892.
[^6] Deseret News, weekly, May 6th, 1893.
[^7] The World's Parliament of Religions, Barrows, chairman of the general committee, 1893, vol. i, p. 18. The two volumes of this work constitute the official report of the parliament.
[^8] Improvement Era, July, 1899, vol. ii, pp. 676-7, where the letter of the presidency is given in full.
[^9] As a matter of fact, the management of the parliament had been at great pains to induce representatives of oriental religions tolerating polygamy, to be present and participate in the parliament, and they actually admitted to the parliament a representative of the Mohammedan faith—Mohammed Alexander Russell Webb—who was permitted to deliver two addresses in explanation and defense of his religion, including polygamy, his speech being reported in the official record of the parliament, published by Rev. John H. Barrows, chairman of the general committee of religious congresses, vol. ii, pp. 989-96, and 1040-52.
[^10] The whole subject is treated at length in a series of three articles under the title "The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints at the Parliament of Religions," Improvement Era, for 1899, beginning with the June number. In these articles will be found all the correspondence and interviews between the representative of the church and the authorities of the parliament, including the open letter to them published in the Chicago Inter-Ocean. The address prepared for the parliament is also published in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, 1907, vol. i, pp. 7-22.
[^11] Chicago Inter-Ocean of Sept. 28, 1893. Also Improvement Era for Aug., 1899, pp. 764-66.
[^12] The Chicago Herald, editorial of Oct. 3rd, copied into the Deseret News, weekly of Oct. 7th, 1893.
