B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

242CHAPTER CLXX

242CONTEST OF THE TABERNACLE CHOIR AT THE CHICAGO COLUMBIAN EXPOSITION—LATTER-DAY SAINT HYMNOLOGY

242IT WAS during this period of the World's Parliament of Religions that the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir visited the World's Fair at Chicago and entered the musical contest of choirs held in connection with the World's Columbian Exhibition. Four choirs entered the contest and the prizes were $5,000 and $1,000 respectively. The contesting musical organizations were, two choirs from Scranton, Pennsylvania—the Scranton Choral Union and the Scranton Welsh Choir, the Cleveland, Ohio Choir, and the "Mormon" Tabernacle Choir, Salt Lake City. The first prize was awarded to the Scranton Choral Union, the second to the "Mormon" Tabernacle Choir, Evan Stephens, conductor and Joseph J. Daynes organist. The numbers of the competition were: "Worthy Is The Lamb," from Handel's "Messiah;" "Blessed Is The Man Who Fears Him," from Mendelssohn's "Elijah;" and "Now the Impetuous Torrents Rise," from the Oratorio, "David and Saul," by David Jenkins.

ACHIEVEMENT OF THE TABERNACLE CHOIR AT THE WORLD'S COLUMBIAN EXPOSITION

It was a marked distinction to win even second place in such a contest and on such an occasion, and time, and place. The contest was held on the 8th of September, 1893. The respective choirs were nearly even in numbers, two hundred and fifty members in each; though all told, counting the friends of the Tabernacle Choir, the Utah company numbered over four hundred, among whom were the presidency of the church, Presidents Wilford Woodruff, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith.

CONCERTS EN TOUR

En route to Chicago the choir gave a concert in the Auditorium at Kansas City. Also they visited Independence, Missouri—Zion! The reception at this great center of interest and of past experience and of future hope in its relation to the work of God, was generous on the part of the Missouri citizens, and greatly to the delight of the visitors, singing on the temple site, dedicated as such by the Prophet Joseph Smith, sixty-two years before. A brief impromptu concert was also given in the Town Hall at Independence, where the entire group of Utah people were welcomed by the mayor with a response by President Woodruff. The mayor hailed the visitors as "American freemen from a land of fruits, of flowers, of milk and honey;" and he received them as the representative of the citizens of Independence, Missouri, "a broad open people, free from bigotry, generous, law-abiding, God-fearing and lovers of liberty;" and in their name and behalf he extended fellowship and a hearty welcome to Independence. Both Presidents Woodruff and Cannon made response in a like friendly spirit, expressing pleasure at the cordial reception given the whole Utah group.

243The choir continuing its tour gave a concert in the Exposition Building at St. Louis. Following the day of the contest they gave a concert in the Music Hall, Chicago. Tempting offers were made by Major Pond, noted promotor of public entertainments, to the Utah singers to give concerts in Carnegie Music Hall, New York; also in Boston, Washington, and Philadelphia; but time limits made it imperative that they return home, which they did, but singing at Omaha, en route.

UTAH DAY AT COLUMBIAN EXPOSITION

Following close upon the heels of the choir, was the Salt Lake Chamber of Commerce and their friends, carried by special train, arriving in Chicago in time for the contest and to participate in Utah Day celebration at the Fair, fixed upon for the 9th of September, following the day of the choir contest, and occurring on the sixty-third anniversary of the creation of Utah territory by act of congress. Governor Caleb W. West and the train load of Commercial Board members and their friends attended the Tabernacle Choir contest as the members of the choir and their friends attended the Utah Day celebration, and added greatly to the interest of that occasion. Both Governor West and Presidents Woodruff and Cannon made addresses on that occasion, and the event passed off with mutual satisfaction.

244HYMNOLOGY OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINT CHURCH

244Here in connection with this visit of the Tabernacle Choir to Chicago and engaging in this contest which brought Latter-day Saint musical performance to a great climax, a word may be said with reference to Latter-day Saint hymnology in a general way.

244Since it is natural for man to express his highest emotion, perhaps, in music and especially in sacred music, it would be expected that the highly religious emotions attendant upon the religious events of the church of the New Dispensation, would be to give birth to an hymnology and to music of a somewhat special kind. This it has doubtless done.

INSPIRATION SOURCE OF HYMNS

In the first place there are the unique events of the New Dispensation, the remarkable first vision of Joseph Smith, the revelations that resulted in bringing forth the Book of Mormon, the joy and importance of its assurance of an enlarged message of the Christ, but tinged with the sadness that goes with the revealment of what, on the whole, must be thought upon as the sad and melancholy experiences of the peoples and nations of ancient America. The strange bringing forth of the church in the New Dispensation; the persecutions endured, the wonderful experiences of the first great Prophet, his final martyrdom, the inspiring hopes of reunion with him and with all saints in the renewal of the hopes of an early resurrection and its joys, which the New Dispensation gives. The songs of the exodus across the plains and over the mountains; the celebration of the "Mountains High," the new temple, the sending forth of the message to the nations, the gathering of the people from all lands—these stirring events and emotional hopes could not fail of producing song and anthem contributions to the world's music somewhat unique, and rich, though the great Oratorio of the New Dispensation remains to be written.

GENERAL CHARACTER OF HYMNOLOGY

With reference to the general character of this new hymnology and the music created or adapted for it, it may be said not to resemble the solemn grandeur of vatican or cathedral music; nor the heavy tropes of German composition; nor yet does it resemble the hysterical thinness of modern revival hymnology of early American days, or the more recent Moody and Sankey melodies of the same school. It is more nearly allied, I am assured by those who know, to the lighter English sacred music than to any other class, and yet some shades lighter in vein than this. Sacred earnestness touched with joy would be my own characterization of it, as typified in such examples of hymns and anthems as the following. The light aria or pastoral in "Joseph Smith's First Prayer" by George Manwaring—

245"O, how lovely was the morning," etc.

245The message of the angel Moroni revealing the existence of the Book of Mormon, by Parley P. Pratt:

245"An angel from on high, the long, long silence broke," etc. As sample of a touch of melancholy and sadness coming into Latter-day Saint hymnology from the Book of Mormon people, see Parley P. Pratt's hymn beginning—

245"Oh, who that has searched, in the records of old, And read o'er the last scenes of woe," etc. Also the ballad-like hymn— "Oh stop and tell me red man, who are you, why you roam?" etc. That sunburst of the New Dispensation, also by Elder Pratt- "The morning breaks, the shadows flee, Lo, Zion's standard is unfurled," etc.

246Hymns dealing with the New Dispensation are usually light and joyous, and full of exaltation, the one by William W. Phelps—and composed for the temple dedication at Kirtland is of the type.

246"The Spirit of God like a fire is burning,

246The latter-day glory begins to come forth," etc.

246To this class belongs Philo Dibble's contribution—though a bit touched with old fashioned straining to make its measures meet requirements—

246"The happy day has rolled on,

246The truth restored is now made known," etc.

HYMNS IN MEMORY OF THE PROPHET

In memory of the Prophet and the sadness of his fate the list is long, comprising John Taylor's noble hymn, beginning—

246"The Seer, the Seer, Joseph the Seer,

246I'll sing of his memory ever dear," etc.

246Also Phelps'—though little sung now—

246"O give me back my Prophet dear,

246And Patriarch, O, give them back," etc.

246And also Phelps'—seldom sung—

246"Come to me, will ye come to the saints that have died." Another hymn by the same author, on the same theme, is very frequently sung and with great eclat, and joyously—

246"Praise to the man who communed with Jehovah,

246Jesus anointed that Prophet and Seer."

246Also in the same spirit, and which, while applicable to every prophet who comes to be the prophet, seer, and revelator of the church, yet this hymn was composed by its author, William Fowler, with the first Prophet in mind, and him it celebrates:

247"We thank thee, O God, for a prophet

247To guide us in these latter days."

247The ordinances of the gospel are celebrated: Baptism by the solemn hymn—

247"Lo, on the water's brink we stand

247To do the Master's will," etc.

THE HOLY SACRAMENT CELEBRATED

The holy sacrament of the Lord's Supper is a fruitful source of inspirational hymn writing to Latter-day Saints, and is richly and beautifully and sacredly wrought out in fine spirit. In this group of hymns is the one by Eliza R. Snow Smith, wife of the Prophet Joseph Smith, beginning—

247"How great the wisdom and the love,

247That filled the courts on high, etc."

247A humbler poet, Andrew Dalrymple, contributes a hymn on this subject, most excellent for combining prayer, admonition, and faith in the beautiful mystery of the sacrifice—"salvation purchased on that tree," beginning—

247"O Lord of Hosts, we now invoke

247Thy spirit most divine," etc.

247John Nicholson, a great soul, on this theme has written a noble hymn, the first verse of which has become a solemn recitative prologue to the sacrament when administered to the young:

247"While of these emblems we partake, In Jesus' name and for his sake, Let us remember and be sure, Our hearts and hands are clean and pure."

THE RESURRECTION

The great theme of the resurrection, with the hope of its fulfillment drawn nearer by the New Dispensation, as might be expected inspired many hymn writers to treat the theme. First among these is Wm. Clayton's "Resurrection Day"—full of sadness because of memories both of Missouri and Nauvoo, but full of hope founded on the assurance in the half refrain in the close of each verse. The hymn, almost a dirge—begins—

248"When first the glorious light of truth Burst forth in this last age."

248"Mourn not the dead who peaceful lay Their weary bodies down."

248Rich in its fine comparison of awakening spring, and enfranchised life from the tomb.

248Henry W. Naisbitt has contributed several very noble hymns to this great theme, one is—

248"Rest, rest for the weary soul."

248It contains in two lines the finest poetic imagery I know:—

248"Rest, rest where the gates are closed

248With each evening's setting sun."

248It is sweetly set to appropriate music, the composition of George Careless, of whom more later.

PHILOSOPHY

The theme of gathering to Zion and her redemption, the Christ and his atonement, admonition to righteousness, even the philosophy of the New Dispensation does not escape attention, nor, of course, the mountains and the joy of them; the weary trek of the saints to them by "covered wagon" oxdrawn, and the handcart painful journey are fruitful sources of Zion's songs and hymns of the last days. Of the philosophical group, unusual to hymn composition, is William W. Phelps' hymn:

"If you could hie to Kolob in the twinkling of an eye." This hymn might well be considered the voice of the doctrine of "eternalism;" and contains in nine verses more fundamental philosophy than many solemn tomes written on that subject by the learned among men. To the same class, though limiting itself to the great doctrine of pre-existence of the spirit and life of man and his future union with the Father, is Eliza R. Snow Smith's—

249"O, my Father, thou that dwellest In that high and glorious place," etc.

249This has become known as the typical "Mormon" hymn; and was so sung as a solo throughout the Tabernacle Choir's tour to the World's Columbian Fair and Choir Contest.

249To this unusual class of hymns also should be added the noble ode to "Truth" by John Jaques—

249"O say, what is truth? Tis the fairest gem That the riches of worlds can produce."

THE GATHERING—COME, COME YE SAINTS

Of the many gathering and trek-to-Zion hymns, the best known, and perhaps the most dearly loved, is the hymn that was composed at the request of President Brigham Young for a hymn of encouragement and faith that would bring comfort and joy to the saints in their toilsome journey over the plains and the mountains. In response to this request made to him personally, Wm. Clayton gave to the saints this soul-stirring hymn—

249"Come, come ye saints, no toil nor labor fear, But with joy wend your way," etc.

249It is within the truth to say that this hymn has brought more joy to the hearts of Latter-day Saint Israel than any other song or hymn that has been written, and its mission did not end with the "covered wagon" period of the saints gathering to Zion, its popularity seems to increase with the passing years.

MORE AMBITIOUS MUSICAL EFFORTS

In addition to the hymns created out of the spiritual and adventurous experiences of the New Dispensation are the more ambitious productions of anthems, odes, and cantatas. Among these, and the few named are not in disparagement of those not mentioned, are Evan Stephens' "Grant Us Peace, O Lord," words and music by the same author, and which for beauty of expression, and balance, and deep religious emotion, is worthy to be accounted classic. By the same author is the soul-stirring "Hosanna Anthem," composed for the dedication of the Salt Lake temple. He is also the author of two cantatas, "The Vision," celebrating Joseph Smith's first vision; and "The Martyrdom," dealing with the death of Joseph Smith. B. Cecil Gates, grandson of Utah's great Pioneer, President Brigham Young, is the author of "The Restoration," a cantata. "The Plan of Salvation" is the ambitious offering of Henry E. Giles; and in a somewhat different vein, but of conceded grandeur, and one that has won fame for Utah's composers is John J. McClellan's "Ode to Irrigation," sung at the Irrigation Congress at Seattle, and repeated a few days later at Portland. Words of the Ode were by Mrs. Gilbert McClurg. John J. McClellan is also the composer of the tender music to which Latter-day Saints sing the immortal hymn by Isaac Watts, "Sweet is the Work My God My King." In this list of anthems should be included Arthur Shepherd's "The Lord Hath Brought Again Zion." The words of this anthem are from Section lxxxiv of the Doctrine and Covenants, and are the unaltered words from that revelation. This anthem is worthily accorded a place among Latter-day Saint musical classics. [^1]

ADOPTIONS AND ADAPTATIONS

In addition to the many hymns and spiritual songs used by the Latter-day Saints—their official choir book publishes 419—in addition to those of original composition there are many that are taken from the hymns and music of other churches. Of these Wesley's collection perhaps is most frequently drawn upon, and supplies seventeen hymns in the collection published by the church referred to above. Also Rippon's collection is lightly used, as was Plymouth's collection in the earlier days.

ISAAC WATTS

To these collections in an earlier period, individual writers not of the Latter-day Saint faith, have also been very liberally drawn upon, especially is this true of the highly spiritual-minded Isaac Watts, contemporary of the Wesleys, John and Charles, founders of Methodism—1703-1791; he contributes, by adoption, into the Latter-day Saint collection, twenty-four hymns, and those adopted reflect amazingly the spirit, doctrine and thought of the New Dispensation.

251Montgomery contributed two hymns, of which one is the martyr song of Carthage prison—

251"A poor wayfaring man of grief," etc.

251and the other the universal prayer hymn—

251"Prayer is the soul's sincere desire," etc.

251There are other individual contributors by adoption, among them, Sarah F. Adams—

251"Nearer my God, to thee."

251Baring-Gould—

251"Onward Christian Soldiers."

251P. P. Bliss—

251"Let the lower lights be burning."

251William Cowper—

251"God moves in a mysterious way."

251Miss Fletcher—

251"Think Gently of the Erring One."

251Felecia Hemans—

251"Glorious Things of Thee Are Spoken."

251John Howard Payne—

251"Home Sweet Home."

Also there are some others of this class. Nor is this selected adoption of hymns from other than original Latter-day Saint composers inconsistent with the spirit of the New Dispensation church; for as it recognizes among revolutionists and religious reformers and leaders of the 16th and 17th centuries, and the fathers of the American republic as the vanguard of the great on-coming and preparation for the New Dispensation, so also the church recognizes in the spiritual awakening through sacred songs and hymns, the spirit of that on-coming New Dispensation which when it comes, may consistently appropriate that which it recognizes as of its own nature. There are earlier lights in the morning than the outburst of the rising sun. There is the twilight zone of the morning in which is revealed much of landscape beauty and singing birds; and in the twilight zone of the coming New Dispensation many gifted with song caught the spirit of that dispensation. Hence the selective adoption of hymns and music of other composers than Latter-day Saints, san reproach.

MUSIC COMPOSERS

As to musical composition that makes up an important part of the Latter-day Saint hymnology, necessarily much of other church music already existing had to be used, as there were no composers in the early years of the new church. Gradually, however, as the membership multiplied, and especially as the British converts came into the church, music composers increased and soon began to supply original music for Latter-day Saint hymns, until now a somewhat definite school of sacred music is being formed suitable to the devotional emotion, doctrinal conception and adventurous experiences of the New Dispensation. I name a few of these composers to indicate the general character of the music, but cannot make anything like a complete list of those who have ventured into this field; and especially we do not enter the field of Sunday School song composition.

JOHN TULLIDGE

Among these earlier composers was John Tullidge, brother to Edward Tullidge, the journalist and historian. He gave the church music to—

253"An Angel From On High," "Come All Ye Sons of God," and the music to Parley P. Pratt's prophetic hymn on New York—"Adieu to the City Where Long I Have Wandered;" and "Think Not When You Gather to Zion."

253Andrew C. Smythe gave to the church "Come Thou Glorious Day of Promise," and "Zion Stands With Hills Surrounded."

253In the same period came Charles J. Thomas, for years musical conductor in the Salt Lake Theater. He gave the church "Sons of Michael, He Approaches."

GEORGE C. CARELESS

Then came George C. Careless, a member of the church since 1850, coming to Utah in 1864, and still living (1930). He was a student of music in his youth at the Royal Academy of Music at London and became somewhat noted in musical circles before coming to Utah. He has composed the music for sixty-two of the hymns of our collection, among them—"Arise My Soul Arise," "Author of Faith, Eternal Word;" also "Softly Beams the Sacred Dawning;" and the courage-inspiring hymn, "Though Deep'ning Trials Throng Your Way." The character of his music may be written down as soul-moving; for its soft persuasiveness, gentleness, and high spiritual value.

EBENEZER BEESLEY

Of the same period is Ebenezer Beesley, born in Oxfordshire, England, 1840, a member of the church since 1849, and ten years later arrived in Utah. He was leader of the Tabernacle Choir from 1880 to 1889. He contributes sixteen compositions for our church collection of hymns named herein, among them—"Great Is the Lord, 'Tis Good to Praise" and "High On the Mountain Top a Banner is Unfurled."

JOSEPH J. DAYNES

Another prolific Latter-day Saint composer of sacred music is Joseph J. Daynes, for over thirty years organist at the great tabernacle. He contributes twenty-six compositions to the Latter-day Saint collection, among which is included—"Come Listen to a Prophet's Voice" and "Great God Attend While Zion Sings." And apart from his large contribution of music to the Latter-day Saint hymn collection, is his great anthem—"The Nations Bow to Satan's Thrawl," the words of which were written by John Nicholson.

EVAN STEPHENS

Evan Stephens is the most prolific writer of sacred music yet known to the church; he is both hymn writer and composer, and anthem producer par excellent. He has contributed to the Latter-day Saint official collection of sacred hymns, ninety-three. These beside patriotic songs celebrating Utah, his mountain home. In his contribution to the hymnology of the church he runs the entire gammut from light and joyous compositions to deep and solemn religious majesty—

254"Ho, ho, for the Temple's Completed,"

254"Behold the Great Redeemer Died,"

254"Ye Simple Souls Who Stray."

254Needless to say in both volume and quality he ranks high as producer in Latter-day Saint hymnology.

254Among the later and younger producers of Latter-day Saint sacred music should be mentioned Thomas C. Griggs, Edwin F. Parry, Henry A. Tuckett, H. H. Petersen, A. C. Smyth, Henry E. Giles, John S. Lewis, Wm. C. Clive, Tracy Y. Cannon, George H. Durham, Lorenzo D. Edwards, H. W. Dougal, Edward P. Kimball, Willy Reske.

254Of course, as in the case of hymn writers, so in the case of composers, there has been both adoption and adaptation of hymnal and anthem composition in the hymnology used by the Latter-day Saints, and with the same consistent justification of it as in the case of hymn writers previously mentioned.

DAILY TABERNACLE ORGAN RECITALS

Among other Latter-day Saint contributions to music should not be overlooked the services of the somewhat widely known Tabernacle Choir, and the Organ Recitals supplied to the people of the city and laterally to the nation by grace of radio invention.

255For many years occasional organ recitals were given on the great tabernacle organ, and these were greatly increased in frequency after John J. McClellan became organist in 1900; and a little later the general church authorities established daily recitals throughout the tourist season for Salt Lake City, and so famous became the recitals, and so continuous the stream of tourists through Salt Lake City that for a number of years the recitals have been given daily throughout the year, and are now a unique daily feature of the city's life, nationally known and appreciated.

255The character of these recitals may be known from a typical program or two, consisting of the classical numbers in each recital mingled with the arranged old melodies and special typical Latter-day Saint hymns which gives delightful variety and balance to each program.

255SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1929

255Tracy Y. Cannon at the Organ

255National Anthem

2551 Toccata and Fugue in D Minor——————————J. S. Bach

2552 a Moderato in G—————————————Felix Mendelssohn

255 Litany ——————————————————Franz Schubert

2553 a Favorite "Mormon" Hymn, "O Say, What Is Truth?"

255—————————————————————Arr. by Organist

255 An Old Melody——————————————Arr. by Organist

2554 Grand Choeur —————————————————————Enrico Bossi

255WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 1929

255Frank W. Asper at the Organ

255National Anthem

2551 Chorale in B Minor——————————————————Cesar Franck

2552 a Adagio e Dolce from the Third Sonata——————J. S. Bach

255 Meditation from "Thais" ——————————Jules Massenet

2553 a Favorite "Mormon" Hymn, "Come, Come, Ye Saints"

255—————————————————————Arr. by Organist

255 An Old Melody——————————————Arr. by Organist

2554 The Lost Chord———————————————————Arthur Sullivan

256The organists who give the recitals, alternating therein, are: Edward P. Kimball, Tracy Y. Cannon, Alexander Schreiner, Frank W. Asper.

256Occasionally special recitals are given to meet time requirements of parties, to very notable visitors to the city. Such an occasion as the latter occurred on the visit of the universally esteemed King Albert and his gracious queen, Elizabeth, of Belgium. At this recital, October 10th, 1919, John J. McClellan, tabernacle organist since 1900, nationally and even internationally known, was at the console, and who with Queen Elizabeth, herself a highly trained musician, arranged the special impromptu program. I give the account of the event as published in the Salt Lake Tribune:

KING ALBERT AND QUEEN ELIZABETH IN SALT LAKE CITY

"John J. McClellan (tabernacle organist) gave a short concert selected by Queen Elizabeth. The king and queen were so much interested in the music of the great organ that they requested permission to go to the back of the hall to get the effect of the music from that place. This wish was granted, and for a few moments the royal party stood at the rear of the hall on the balcony, and there listened intensely while Mr. McClellan played a number of old-time melodies.

256Formal Program

256Belgian National Anthem

2561 Toccata in E Major (from the 6th Symphony) ——————C. M. Widor

2562 Berceuse Heroique ————————————Claude DeBussy

256 (Pour rendre hommage a S. M. le Roi Albert I, de Belgique

256 et a ses Soldats.) (Arranged for Grand Organ by Mr. J. J.

256 McClellan.)

2563 Communion in G Major————————————————Eduard Batiste

2564 An Old Melody, arranged by organist———————————————————

2565 Grand Selection from "Cavaleria Rusticana" ————Pietro Mascagni

2566 The Star Spangled Banner" [^2] —————————————————————

Another advance has recently come to this sort of Latter-day Saint contribution to musical enjoyment to the world. With recent radio development has come the possibility of the national "hook-up" by which radio connection is made throughout the United States and Canada, from the Atlantic seaboard to the Pacific coast, and to, and beyond, the north and south limits of the United States. In the summer of 1929 the church authorities enlarged this service of the church by authorizing the installing of the national "hook-up" for the Tabernacle Choir, each Monday afternoon exactly at four o'clock. What this means to the church, and to the highly spiritual uplift of our country may be gathered from the report of Salt Lake City radio authorities of this service rendered on Monday afternoon of April 7th, 1930, while the first Centennial Conference was in progress, and the Monday afternoon's session was shortened to make the necessary connections for the broadcast.

257President Grant in the afternoon when dismissing the general conference meeting that preparation might be made for broadcasting the program from the tabernacle explained that it was likely that more than seven millions would listen in to the program to be rendered.

257The first Prophet of the church, Joseph Smith, early appreciated the force of music to be developed as a church force, and under the inspiration of the Lord to him, he appointed his wife, Emma Smith, to make a selection of sacred hymns, "which," says the Lord, "is pleasing unto me, to be had in my church. For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads." [^3]

257A LATTER-DAY SAINT SCHOOL OF MUSIC

In view of this large interest in sacred music it is not surprising that out of it there has been established a Latter-day Saint School of Music, which may become a distinctive school in the divine art representative of the New Dispensation and reflecting its spirit. This took form first in the autumn of 1920 when the department of music of the L. D. S. University reorganized as the L. D. S. School of Music, with Guy C. Wilson as president, and became a separate institution, and began its activities with an enlarged enrollment and broader basis. The school was first located in the historic Gardo House. Later this school of music changed its name to the McCune School of Music, and moved its quarters to what had been the palatial residence of Mr. Alfred W. McCune and family at 200 North Main street. Mr. McCune had been a wealthy mining man in Utah and other western states, his large mining interests had extended as far as Peru, South America. The residence referred to above, of a value of $50,000, he had given to the church, and the church bequeathed it to what had been (and what is now, in fact) the Latter-day Saint School of Music; but to honor the McCune name, whose former residence the school now occupies, is called the "McCune School of Music and Art." Guy C. Wilson; first president as above noted, was succeeded by Sylvester Q. Cannon, presiding bishop of the whole church, 1927, and is now (1930) its president; and there is a full staff of officers and professors.

258The school was originally organized by direction of President Heber J. Grant and has been sponsored by the Church of the Latter-day Saints since that time.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Acts viii:1-4.
[^2] Deseret News, weekly, Dec. 10th, 1884.
[^3] Deseret News, weekly, Feb. 25th, 1885.
