B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

259CHAPTER CLXXI

259EFFECT OF THE JUDICIAL CRUSADE ON CHURCH COLONIZATIONS

259"AND at that time there was a great persecution against the church. * * * And they were all scattered abroad throughout the regions; * * * therefore they that were scattered abroad went everywhere preaching the word." [^1]

259Thus the very persecutions of the saints in primitive Christian times contributed to the spread of their faith. It has proved to be so in the New Dispensation.

259The judicial crusade in Utah, extending through the Taylor, Woodruff, and Joseph F. Smith administrations, resulting in so many leading men being driven into exile, unexpectedly benefited the church in two ways: first, many of the exiles went into the foreign missions of the church and greatly increased their efficiency, because they were men of matured minds, large experience, and of earnest purpose; second, it contributed to the territorial expansion of the church, since it compelled men involved in this order of family life to seek for homes in other countries than the United States, where parts of their families could be located without infringement of law; and this was done, chiefly in Mexico and Canada.

THE LAW ENFORCEMENT IN ARIZONA

The movement into Mexico first began from the Arizona settlements, where the enforcement of the law against polygamy and polygamous living at first was not less rigid in the cases that came before the courts than in Utah; and a number of those convicted were sent to the "house of correction" at Detroit, Michigan. Indeed at one time the enforcement of the laws in Arizona against the marriage system of the saints threatened to be even more severe than in Utah. Judge Howard, at Prescott, sentenced three of the brethren to three years and six months imprisonment, and to pay a fine of $500 each for the misdemeanor of unlawful cohabitation, which the court construed into "polygamy," and tried and convicted the three brethren accordingly. This on December 5th, 1884. [^2] After nearly two years of unjust imprisonment, in consideration of the fact that they had been wrongfully imprisoned, the three brethren were pardoned by President Cleveland, Oct. 13, 1886.

260Detroit, to the brethren in Arizona was the "American Siberia," and banishment to it increased the severity of the punishment very greatly, both in the minds of those who were sent there, and in the community mind. "I was hardly prepared today to suppose that we needed an 'American Siberia'," said President John Taylor, in his last public address, and just after his return to Salt Lake City from Arizona; "but this is the fact. We have here in America today an 'American Siberia' in Detroit, to which place, upwards of two thousand miles from their homes—men are banished for a term of years." [^3]

THE FIRST EXILE COLONY PLANTING IN MEXICO

The first company to leave Arizona for Mexico was formed at Snowflake, under the leadership of Edward A. Noble. This in February, 1885. The company numbered about seventy souls, and went via Luna valley, New Mexico, and by the seventh of March, reached the vicinity of Ascension, on the Casas Grandes river, state of Chihuahua, where they formed a temporary encampment. Their presence here created some excitement among the native Mexicans, and the governor of Chihuahua, on the 9th of April, ordered them to leave the state within fifteen days. Some of the leading elders in the company and Elder George Teasdale, of the council of the twelve, who had come to the encampment at Ascension, hastened to Chihuahua, the capital of the state, and presented the case of the exiles to the governor, who consented to refer the matter to the federal authorities at the City of Mexico. Here the following month Elder Brigham Young, son of the late President Brigham Young, and Elder Moses Thatcher, both of the council of the twelve waited upon and had several interviews with President Porfirio Diaz and members of his cabinet, Mariscal, minister of foreign affairs, and Carlos Pacheco, minister of the interior and of colonization. The result of the interviews was that the order of the governor of Chihuahua was revoked; and sometime afterwards when under anti-"Mormon" pressure he issued another order for the Latter-day Saint exiles to leave the state, he was removed from office. [^4]

OTHER MEXICAN COLONIZATION PROJECTS

Recognizing the necessity for some place of refuge for brethren likely to be hard pressed in the Latter-day Saint settlements in Arizona, and Utah, the general church authorities at Salt Lake City early in January, 1885, had sent an exploring and purchasing committee to northern Mexico to look for desirable locations. The eastern slope of the Sierra Madre Mountains, in northern Chihuahua, were explored, and tracts of land selected and purchased on the Piedras Verdes river, southwesterly from Casas Grandes, and here the Arizona exiles and others settled, naming their settlement Juarez, after the Mexican hero general, and late president of the republic.

The "Mormon" settlers held a public celebration on the occasion of naming their city, raised a flagpole and saluted the Mexican flag. This on the 21st of March, 1886. Later it was found that the town site selected was outside of the purchased area, which necessitated the removal of the settlement some two miles westward from the first location. This became the prosperous and beautiful Colonia Juarez, the home of many Latter-day Saints. Other settlements were formed in this region of northern Chihuahua. A town site was surveyed on lands purchased north of La Ascension, and a ward organized, of which Wm. D. Johnson was chosen bishop. The survey was made in August, and the ward organized on the 9th of November following. [^5] The settlement was named Colonia Diaz, in honor of the president of the republic. A settlement was planted in Corrales Basin, called Colonia Pacheco, in honor of the Mexican minister of the interior and colonization, Carlos Pacheco. In February, 1891, Pacheco was made an ecclesiastical ward with Jesse N. Smith, Jun., as bishop. The same year, July 18th, the saints who had settled near Casas Grandes in a most noble plateau valley, were organized into a ward under the name of Dublan, with Winslow Farr as bishop. These several colonies and a number of settlements in the state of Sonora—Oaxaca, Morelos, and San Jose being the principal ones—were platted very much in the same manner as the Latter-day Saint settlements in Utah. In addition to carrying on diversified farming, fruit culture and stock raising in these Mexican colonies, sawmills were established in the timber belts of the Sierra Madre Mountains, and an era of material prosperity attended upon the people. At a special conference held at Colonia Juarez on the 9th of December, 1895, the several Latter-day Saint settlements were organized into a stake of Zion, with Anthony W. Ivins as president, and Henry Eyring and Helaman Pratt as counselors. [^6]

All the helps in government were established that attend upon and everywhere follow the church organization—Women's Relief Societies, Sunday Schools, Young People's Mutual Improvement Associations, and Primary organizations for children; and, what was most important of all in this line, the Juarez Stake Academy was founded, where a four years' course of high school and some college work was given; an example of educational advancement much needed in the republic of Mexico, as were also the examples in advanced methods of fruit growing, farming, gardening, colonizing, and home building generally. But all these enterprises and examples so advantageous to northern Mexico were seriously halted by the anarchy that prevailed in Mexico from 1911 until recently—1928-1930.

SUFFERINGS OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINT COLONISTS FROM THE REVOLUTION

Of all foreign colonists who suffered in loss of property, lives, and peace from the reign of anarchy through those trying years in Mexico, the Latter-day Saint colonists suffered most. First from revolution following the forced abdication of President Porfirio Diaz in 1911, by the movements of troops through their settlements, first upon the part of one side and then of the other, and who preyed upon the colonists well-nigh equally for supplies for their armies; and second, from the instability of the several governments successively following each other since the revolution of 1912, and the frequent though minor uprisings in northern Mexico that have attended upon these weak and uncertain administrations of government. Since the return of the Latter-day Saint colonists to their homes, of course, the suffering of the colonists in this second period has been much less than from the revolution of 1911-1912.

THE EXODUS

It was during this first period that the Latter-day Saints were forced from their settlements in the states of Chihuahua and Sonora and compelled to take refuge in the United States border cities of Douglas, Hachita and El Paso—mostly in the last named city, where some twelve hundred of the refugees were gathered in the latter part of September, 1912; and ultimately other refugees found asylum in the other cities named to swell the number from fifteen to eighteen hundred souls, and some have held the number of refugees from Mexico to be two thousand. The loss of property was estimated to be at least one million dollars. From nine to twelve men, Latter-day Saint American citizens, were killed outright by the revolutionists. At Colonia Diaz, situated about fifty miles north from Casas Grandes, and near the Mexican village La Ascension, the Latter-day Saint colonists were driven away, the town looted and later most of the homes of the people, stores and public buildings were burned down by direction of the revolutionary chieftain, Rojas. Several of the colonists during the periods of raids were taken captive and held for ransom; for two of them, Arthur McCormic and J. T. Cameron, the ransom money demanded was $35,000; for the first, $5,000 was demanded; and for the second $30,000. In another case, that of A. P. Spillsbury, $3,000 was demanded. As to whether these particular ransoms were paid, or any part of them, our records are silent. Subsequent ransoms, of smaller amounts, however, were paid through the succeeding several years of unsettled conditions. The expulsion of the colonists from Morelos and Oaxaca, in the state of Sonora was final; their lands were seized by the revolutionist chieftain Rojas and published as held for Mexicans. Very few of the colonists from these settlements returned to their lands and homes. In the evacuation of the settlements from the state of Chihuahua, in 1912, from the settlements of Juarez, Dublan and southward, the women and children—amounting to four hundred—were sent out of the country by train to the American border city of El Paso; the men were left to follow as best they could; and as the distance was considerable—one hundred and fifty miles—and through a region infested by revolutionists, their safety was precarious, and their long and slow journey through the mountains the occasion of much anxiety to their families.

NEUTRALITY OF AMERICAN L. D. S. COLONISTS

The Latter-day Saint colonists, nearly all American citizens, sought to maintain a position of neutrality between the contending federal and revolutionary forces of Mexico, refusing not only to commit themselves to either side by taking up arms in the struggle, but refusing also to supply either with food, cattle, horses or war material, relying upon the fact of their being American citizens to justify their neutral attitude. This resulted, however, in their expulsion from the country by the revolutionists, as above detailed, and the confiscation of cattle, and horses and food supplies by both federalists and revolutionists as now one and now the other swept through, or possessed their settlements.

NOT A MATTER OF RELIGIOUS PERSECUTION

It should be noted that in all this there was no question of religion involved. No complaint arose against the religion of the Latter-day Saints from either side; nor was the expulsion of the colonists occasioned by their religious faith or any feature of it; the issues were purely political, accompanied by the fact that the colonists were foreigners—and the hated American foreigners at that. The Mexican federalists, sustaining the established government, could not consistently demand the expulsion of these colonists from the country, for they were there with the consent of that government, and agreeably with its laws and concessions to colonists; and as a matter of fact the federalists made no effort to expel them, and took no part in their expulsion, though they did confiscate food supplies, wagons, and cattle, and horses, to supply their armies. On the other hand it can well be understood that the revolutionists would desire to force the colonists into action against the federal government; and also, since the colonists were Americans, and as the revolutionary cause might be helped by the intervention of the United States, aggression upon these American colonists, or their expulsion from the country, might force the desired intervention. This it was the policy of the United States, both in the closing months of the Republican Taft administration, as well as in the Wilson Democratic administration, to strenuously avoid. True, when in northern Mexico—March, 1916—bandits which the Mexican government could neither suppress nor control crossed the American border and attacked the town of Columbus, in New Mexico, General Pershing was sent into Mexico at the head of a "punitive expedition," and penetrated Mexican territory with a military force for four hundred miles in pursuit of the bandits—who easily kept out of his way. But this "punitive expedition" did not constitute an "intervention" in Mexican affairs as that term is understood in the interpretations of international law. Neither was the earlier action of the United States government (April, 1914), when in protest of the arrest of American sailors who had landed at Tampico to make purchases, demanded an apology, and sailors and United States marines were landed and seized Vera Cruz, in which action the American force lost eighteen men and a number of Mexicans were killed. [^7]

266But notwithstanding these incidents, throughout the troubled years of Mexican revolutions and counter revolutions; and notwithstanding Mexican outrages upon American industries, and assaults upon American citizens, including the outrages upon the American Latter-day Saint colonists, the United States persevered in its policy of non-intervention.

266On the part of the Latter-day Saint Mexican colonists, the fact that they were American citizens, justified them in their neutral attitude, though it resulted in their suffering and their expulsion as herein detailed. Indeed they could do not other than that which they did.

ACTION OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

Strong appeals were made to the government of the United States to give protection to these American citizens in Mexico, and reestablish them in the possession of their homes and lands legally acquired. Their appeals met with much sympathy from the government at Washington, though intervention in the internal affairs of Mexico, was strenuously avoided by the United States. The government, however, assisted all refugees fleeing from Mexican anarchy and misrule, including the Latter-day Saints. Army tents were rushed to El Paso and other points to give shelter to the homeless. One hundred thousand dollars was appropriated by congress to provide all refugees from Mexico with food and shelter during their enforced absence from their Mexican homes; and of this appropriation the Latter-day Saint refugees received a fair proportion. Also the state department of the government was watchful of their rights and interests through its foreign diplomatic agencies and kept their case with that of all other American cases, before the responsible government of Mexico. Of the government's impartial treatment of Latter-day Saint refugees the presidency of the church in their Christmas greeting to the church, 1912, were able to say:

THE FIRST PRESIDENCY ON THE MEXICAN SITUATION

"In the Mexican uprising, the 'Mormon' refugees have been accorded their full share of the generous appropriation made by congress for the shelter and sustenance of Americans driven from their possessions, and for their transportation to points where they could be secured and be with relatives and friends and find means of self-support. The wise policy of the administration in dealing with the questions arising in maintaining proper relations with the Mexican Republic, under the revolutionary outbreak, endangering the lives and property of Americans residing there, is worthy of all praise and is duly appreciated by our friends who have escaped from threatened horrors and dangers. While deprived for a time of their homes and other fruits of their toil, they have yet cause for gratitude to God and their country in their salvation from greater possible evils. The ready responses of their co-religionists to calls for help and the facility with which the great majority of the colonists have found temporary or permanent abiding places, speak forcibly in commendation of the good counsel and loving care of the leading men during the time of danger, and the splendid system of our church organization." [^8]

268THE POLICY OF NON-INTERVENTION APPROVED

268It will be observed that the address not only witnesses the fairness of the government's treatment of the Latter-day Saint Mexican refugees, but speaks approvingly of its policy of "maintaining proper relations with the Mexican Republic"—non-intervention is meant—an approval which President Smith publicly repeated on several occasions. Especially is this true in his address at the October conference, 1912, when he said:

268"I feel so thankful in my heart that wisdom, a higher wisdom, has dictated the course of the executive authorities of our nation, by which they have kept their hands clean from the shedding of blood; by which they have kept our people, our friends, our brothers, and perhaps our fathers from being drawn into a protracted war with Mexico, which might last for years, and cost untold blood and treasure, even if the whole power of the United States should be brought to bear to quell the disturbances there and to bring peace to the land." [^9]

CHURCH AID FOR THE REFUGEES

The address also alludes to the aid given to the refugees by the Latter-day Saint Church. This indeed was worthy of commendation, for it was liberal in aiding to supply their material necessities, and also there was sent to them from the church headquarters men of experience and knowledge in Mexican affairs to direct their action. Among these was Elder Anthony W. Ivins, of the council of the twelve apostles. For a long time he had been a missionary in the Republic of Mexico, and later, and for a number of years, he was the president of the Juarez stake of Zion. He was experienced therefore in Mexican affairs, a wise counselor, and spoke the Spanish language fluently. Early in the troubles he visited Juarez and other points in the zone occupied by the Latter- day Saint colonists and was a strength and comfort among the refugees at El Paso and other American border points; and he was especially fitted to communicate the state of affairs to officials at Washington and elsewhere. O. P. Miller, first counselor in the presiding bishopric of the church also visited the refugees along the American border, and aided in the distribution of needed supplies, and in giving counsel to the refugees. The man, however, who really stood at the head and negotiated and directed, in larger part, the exodus from the state of Chihuahua, Mexico, was the president of the Juarez stake, Junius Romney, ably assisted in the management of the affairs of the colonies on the eastern line of their settlements by Bishop O. P. Brown and Elder Guy C. Wilson, president of the Juarez Stake Academy. The movements of the colonists on the west line of settlements, in the state of Sonora, were largely directed by Bishop F. D. Haymore of Oaxaca, and Bishop Charles W. Lillywhite, of Morelos.

THE PROBLEM OF THE REFUGEES' RETURN

Naturally the desire of the refugees to return to their homes was very great. The efforts of a lifetime had been put into acquiring their homes and farms and stock, mills and merchandizing; and first prospects for returning were eagerly watched. But the civil strife in Mexico was long drawn out. One revolution followed another, as elected presidents were overthrown one after another, and dependable government seemed impossible. So discouraging seemed the situation that the presidency of the church officially declared the Juarez stake of Zion disorganized, and released all the people from their obligations to it, and freed them from all responsibility to maintain any organization in Mexico. This in order to leave the people free to choose for themselves what their action would be with reference to returning.

DISORGANIZATION OF THE JUAREZ STAKE OF ZION

The notice of discontinuance of the stake organization and releasing the saints from further responsibility in the matter is given in a signed proclamation by the first presidency of the church—Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, and Charles W. Penrose—published in the Deseret News, October 12, 1912.

270"* * * The Juarez stake and ward officers and members, one and all may consider themselves honorably released from any further sense of duty to return or remain in Mexico."

270They declared themselves unwilling to assume the responsibility of giving counsel or direction to the people as to the disposition they shall make of themselves. "But to all who may desire to return, we cheerfully say, go with our sanction and blessing and our prayers, for your preservation and success."

270Even under these circumstances, however, some began to return, so dear to them were their holdings and the ties of their Mexican homes. But the return was slowly effected, and of those who had been compelled to flee from the country perhaps not more than one-half ever returned. In evidence of this slow but partial return, I cite the report made of conditions in Mexico by the first presidency to the church of such conditions in December of 1914—more than two years after the main exodus:

270"Our people there (Mexico) were advised to withdraw and either make new homes at convenient localities in Utah or obtain lands or suitable employment near the border so that when conditions shall be changed they may obtain that redress which is their due and if possible rebuild and restore the settlements thus vacated. Some of them have returned and are doing their best to retain their homes and properties, but are in continual danger of incursions from brigands and other disturbers of the peace. At present there appears to be little prospect of permanent stay in that unhappy land." [^10]

THE SLOW RETURN OF THE REFUGEES

Those who returned to the settlements in the state of Chihuahua found in many cases their homes had been and were then occupied by native Mexicans, but these were turned over to the owners willingly. But few of the refugees ever returned to the west line of Latter-day Saint settlements in the state of Sonora. Mexican squatters possessed the land and to avoid complications the representatives of the colonists negotiated the sale to the government of these lands, "and received a fair price for them," writes Elder Rey L. Pratt, president of the Mexican Mission. [^11] And this was true in relation to all the colonial lands sold back to the Mexican government.

271Meantime the saints who returned to their settlements have not since been overtaken by any disaster from the political unrest and uncertainty of government that still obtains there. They have rebuilt many of their waste places, resumed their business of merchandizing and milling and farming and stock and fruit raising. Their American schools are again functioning, and the Juarez Academy has resumed without interruption its mission of first steps in higher education for both the natives of the country and the colonists.

THE MEXICAN MISSION MOVEMENTS

In these unsettled years of war and anarchy the Mexican Mission established and maintained by the church as already set forth in Chapter cl of this History as well as the colonies which made up the Juarez stake of Zion, greatly suffered by being hindered in the development of its work.

It has already been stated how on account of the revolution of 1911-12, and the bitterness which arose against Americans, made it necessary to withdraw the elders from the United States laboring in Mexico. That formal and official withdrawal was complete by the year 1913; but the mission was not disorganized by the withdrawal of the United States missionaries. On the contrary, under instructions from President Joseph F. Smith and the twelve apostles the work was continued by Elder Rey L. Pratt by correspondence with the native presidents of the Mexican branches of which there were more than twenty, officered by native brethren holding the priesthood. And to the credit of those local Mexican officers and members be it said, they manifested great faithfulness and the work grew during all the years of the absence of the foreign missionary elders. The mission in the city of Mexico and vicinity was visited by the president, Elder Rey L. Pratt, in October and November of 1916; but it was not feasible at that time to resume work with missionaries from the United States. Nearly all the branches, however, were visited and set in order, and readjustments made that the work under native management might be made more efficient, and faithfulness increased. In common with all the people of the country the native Mexican saints had suffered greatly because of the state of war continuing. Many of them had lost their lives; and many of the brethren had been drafted into the armies contending against each other. An effort was made early in the following year (February) to remove some of the saints from Mexico, but conflicting emigration regulations between the United States and Mexico made this impossible.

REGULAR MISSION WORK RESUMED IN MEXICO

In March, 1921, President Rey L. Pratt again went into Mexico with eight elders from the United States, and regular missionary work was resumed in the City of Mexico and other sections of the country, and continued without interruption for a number of years. It is recorded in The History of the Mexican Mission, Ms., at this point, that though in some districts of the mission the people had been without the missionary elders "from Zion," in some cases for nine years, and in the City of Mexico and vicinity for seven years, "it is not only a fact that they had lived spiritually during all this time, but had positively grown in faith and testimony of the gospel; and through the teaching of the native brethren many honest-hearted souls had been converted to the gospel and became baptized members of the church, * * * the work being done by the local native Mexican priesthood." [^12]

273The work in Mexico continued after this to prosper under the direction of President Rey L. Pratt, and the regular missionaries from the United States until 1926. In September, 1925, President Pratt was called to assist Elder Melvin J. Ballard of the council of the twelve and Rulon S. Wells of the first council of the seventy to open a mission at Buenos Aires, Argentina, South America. He was not released from the presidency of the Mexican Mission, but Elder Kenneth Haymore was appointed to preside temporarily until Elder Pratt's return. The latter was absent on his mission to South America about eleven months.

EXPULSION OF FOREIGN MINISTERS FROM MEXICO

It was during this time that the Mexican government began the enforcement of the constitutional provision that had been adopted by the Mexican Republic in 1917, which in effect precluded foreign ministers from functioning in Mexico. This was revolutionary in character and doubtless aimed at the dominance of foreign priests sent into the country by the Roman Catholic church, but, of course, must operate equally upon all foreign ministers. Elders of the Church of the Latter-day Saints were deported as early as February, 1926, but some remained until August that year, when the departure of all the elders not of Mexican nativity was effected. The provision of the Mexican Constitution debarring foreign ministers from functioning in Mexico is:—

273"Article I: To exercise within the territory of the Republic of Mexico the office of minister in any church, it is necessary to be a Mexican by birth." [^13]

The other articles of this part of the Constitution, of which there are in all twenty-two, concern themselves with details of carrying into effect this article and providing for restrictions of priestly activities in education, politics and ownership and management of church property.

274As in the case of the withdrawal of the elders from the United States from the Mexican Mission in 1913, so now the carrying on of the functions of the church had to be left to the local Mexican priesthood, and it so continues now, directed by correspondence by President Rey L. Pratt from the headquarters of that mission in the United States, located (1930) at the city of Los Angeles, California.

UNITED STATES BORDER ADDENDA TO THE MEXICAN MISSION

In 1915, Elder Pratt was requested by the presidency of the church to establish missionary work among the Mexican people in the American states bordering the northern Mexican line. Since then the groups of Mexican people in these border states, from Brownsville on the Gulf of Mexico to San Diego on the Pacific coast are made part of the Mexican Mission, with headquarters at Los Angeles, and presided over by Elder Rey L. Pratt, who resumed the presidency of the Mexican Mission on returning from his temporary absence in South America, and is now (1930) directing the work among the Mexican people throughout these border states and supervising the work in the Republic of Mexico by correspondence with the respective branches through their native presidents.

EXTENSION OF THE WORK INTO WESTERN CANADA

The movement to establish Latter-day Saint colonies in Canada began by President John Taylor appointing Charles O. Card, president of the Cache Valley stake of Zion, to explore British Columbia and the province of Alberta with a view to finding desirable places for settlement by the Latter-day Saints. This in September, 1886. [^14]

He reported favorably of locations in southern Alberta province; and, in the following spring, in company with Thomas E. Ricks of Rexburg, Idaho, president of the Bannock, now (1930), the Fremont stake of Zion; Bishop Thomas Smith of Logan, Utah; and Elder Nills Monson, he located a place for settlement on Lee's Creek, a tributary of St. Mary's river, Alberta, Canada. A few days later settlers from Cache county, Utah, arrived and plowing and other work of founding the colony began in good earnest. By October of the year following the colony had increased to such numbers that at a conference of the settlers held on the 7th of that month, an ecclesiastical ward was organized by Francis M. Lyman and John W. Taylor, of the council of the twelve apostles. Anthony Woolf was made the bishop, and the settlement was named Cardston, in honor of its founder, Charles O. Card. Seven years later there were in existence three bishop's wards in Alberta province; Cardston, already described, Aetna, on St. Mary's river, and Mountain View, on Fish Creek, the last two having been organized 1893. The three wards were organized into a stake of Zion on the 9th of June, 1895, with Charles O. Card as president, and John A. Woolf and Sterling Williams as counselors. After this settlements multiplied quite rapidly throughout the southern part of the province of Alberta, until it was found necessary, in August, 1903, to divide the Alberta stake of Zion into two stakes; the group of settlements in the western division retaining the name of Alberta stake, and the group of settlements in the eastern division forming Taylor stake, named in honor of John W. Taylor, then a member of the apostles' quorum, who had been active in promoting the development of these Canadian colonies. Since then, viz., 1910, another stake, known as the Lethbridge stake of Zion has been organized. This also in the province of Alberta. The colonies are prosperous and constitute a permanent territorial division of the church. In proof of which it is only necessary to state that on the 27th of July, 1913, the site for a temple was dedicated at Cardston by President Joseph F. Smith and a company of high church dignitaries from Salt Lake City. It was the first temple site to be designated and dedicated by the church outside of the United States.

276Although the Canadian settlements were founded by men involved in the plural marriage system of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, it was not the purpose of the church authorities to introduce polygamous living into the dominion of Canada, nor have they done so; but the existence of these colonies did make it possible for men involved in the plural marriage system of the church to locate a family in these settlements, and care for it with something like freedom which but for such a place of refuge, under the judicial crusade then carried on in Utah, Arizona, and Idaho, would have required them to neglect or abandon such parts of their families. The completest harmony and good feeling have always existed between the Latter-day Saints and both the provincial and the dominion governments of Canada. [^15]

276The remaining events to be treated in President Woodruff's administration are largely of a political character, and will be grouped in a chapter by themselves.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See ante chapter clxiv.
[^2] Note has already been taken of the effort to align the people of Utah with the national political parties in 1872, in connection with the statehood movement of that year, and its failure. (See chapter cxliv).
[^3] Such a conclusion would be justified by the fact that on the one hand the Republican party had really inaugurated the anti-"Mormon" national legislation, and on the other, such objections as had been made against anti-"Mormon" legislation, as being destructive of human rights and therefore unconstitutional, had come from the Democratic side of both the national legislative houses.
[^4] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 855-6, where the telegram in full will be found.
[^5] Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, p. 856.
[^6] See Tullidge's History of Salt Lake City, pp. 857-8.
[^7] Mr. Thurman's description of this change of front on the part of the Herald was most humorous. He said the Herald had for a long time talked Democracy; it pined for Democracy: and when it got Democracy from the "Sagebrush" party it said it was satisfied with the brand it had received, and which it proposed to sustain. Then all of a sudden, it stopped! Stopped short, like "Grandfather's clock," "never to go again." A little hesitancy of speech in the speaker, not quite a stutter, added a charm to the verbal description.
[^8] See chapter clxii, this History.
[^9] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for August 12th and 13th, 1887; and Feb. 2nd, 1888.
[^10] Ibid, October 20th, 1888.
[^11] See Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for Dec. 20th, 1888.
[^12] "President Cleveland signed the bill providing for these additions to the family of states on the 22nd of February, 1889, . . . The conditions precedent to their admission, however, were not fulfilled until later, and President Harrison made proclamation of the final acts of admission during the first year of his administration." (History of the United States, Bryant-Gay-Brooks, vol. v, p. 578).
[^13] See Congressional Record of March 2nd, 1889, house proceedings.
[^14] See Republican Party Platform, Salt Lake Tribune, June 22nd, 1888.
[^15] It has already been stated that Sanford had inaugurated a milder administration of the anti-polygamy laws than Utah had previously known, and it was this leniency that was complained of at Washington.
