B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

277CHAPTER CLXXII

277THE FIRST CLEVELAND ADMINISTRATION AND ITS EFFECT ON AFFAIRS IN UTAH—PRESIDENT HARRISON'S ADMINISTRATION AND "THE MORMON QUESTION"

277IT has already been said that with the advent of the national Democratic administration in 1884, marked changes in the federal administration of affairs in Utah had been hoped for, and how those hopes had met with disappointment and why. [^1] But while the expected changes did not come for some time—and in some respects did not come at all—through the appointment of federal officers for the territory, the Democratic national victory of the year named stimulated movements in Utah that did ultimately lead to important results in the affairs of the commonwealth and the relations of the Church of the Latter-day Saints to the state. [^2]

UTAH RATED AS A DEMOCRATIC TERRITORY

For some time John T. Caine delegate from Utah, elected by the People's party, had been a member of the Democratic congressional campaign committee; George Q. Cannon had quite generally been regarded as affiliating with that party, so that Utah was understood as being Democratic in its political tendencies. [^3] For a time it seemed that enthusiasm over the party's victory in the nation would unite "Mormon" and Gentile Democrats of Utah in celebration of it; but the times were not ripe for such a consummation. In the midst of the preliminary steps for bringing about the formal celebration to take place on the night of November 8th, the parties discovered that they were still "Mormons" and "Gentiles," and the elements were not yet prepared to drop these distinctions and amalgamate as citizens in a united political party. However the spirit of the national victory had seized the people who felt that they were Democrats and the celebration went on, although somewhat informally. There were bonfires at several points in Salt Lake City; at the head of Main street, at sundown, cannons which had been silent since 1870, when the territorial militia was disbanded, fired a hundred salutes; speeches were delivered from the balcony of the old City Hall. A dispatch conveying congratulations to Grover Cleveland was sent from this meeting saying: "Ten thousand citizens of Salt Lake tonight are enthusiastically celebrating your election. Their joy is as sincere and honest as their jollification is demonstrative." It was signed by John T. Caine as chairman. [^4]

278On the 19th of the month the Gentile Democrats, posing as the real Democrats of the territory, held a more formal meeting at the Walker Opera House, in which a strong anti-"Mormon" sentiment developed, captain Ransford Smith, who in the election just then closed had been the badly defeated opponent of John T. Caine in the race for delegate to congress, remarking that it had been "left to the Democrats to wipe out the remaining 'twin relic'." [^5] It was doubtless the purpose of the Gentile Democrats to fall heir, if possible, to the federal appointments in Utah.

THE NATIVE "SAGEBRUSH DEMOCRACY"

Meantime there had grown up in Utah native sons of the territory, who had taken to educational pursuits and professional life, and while largely of "Mormon" parentage felt only in a limited way the religious enthusiasm of their fathers for the full faith of the New Dispensation. These were growing restive under the restraints and limitations enforced upon the territory by reason of the local contentions of church and anti-church parties, and desired to be rid of the strife. A number of such native sons of Utah, between the election of 1882 and that of 1884—but more especially in the summer of 1884—undertook the founding of Democratic clubs, through which they sought to change conditions by insisting upon obedience to the anti-polygamy laws and the seeming necessary separation of church and state. [^6] On the other hand they were opposed to the anti-"Mormon" plan of working for the establishment of a Utah Legislative Commission. "Local self-government is a cardinal principle of democracy," they said in the fifth paragraph of their declaration of principles, "and as such we endorse it." They said this principle was in danger from both of the local political parties.

279The thing in which the movement most gave offense to "Mormon" church members, at the time, was a suggested abandonment of their struggle for the right to practice a principle of their religion; and of their right to continue their struggle against what they regarded as an unconstitutional law, contained in the eighth and ninth declaration of the platform, viz:

279"We firmly repudiate the idea that any citizen is under obligation to take his political counsel from those whose avowed purpose is a continued violation of law.

279We shall struggle to make predominant the sentiment that every citizen should and must obey every law until, by legitimate agitation if obnoxious or unjust, its abrogation or repeal can be secured."

It cannot be questioned but that this Democratic club movement took high ground. It reaffirmed and endorsed the national platform adopted at Chicago on the 8th of July, 1884. It held that "the affairs of the government can be safely entrusted to the intelligence of a free people." About this declaration, and one other viz., that "politically all men are created free and equal; the priest and the layman must stand upon the same plane, we reaffirm that the affairs of the church and state ought to, and must be, forever separate and distinct, locally and nationally—" on these declarations the whole movement rested.

280The coterie of young men who instituted this club movement for the relief of Utah from what was rapidly becoming intolerable conditions, was very respectable and very honorable, comprising men who afterwards became noted as contributing to the commonwealth's progress.

280A daily newspaper was begun in support of the movement, the Salt Lake Daily Democrat, the first number of which was issued on 2nd of March, 1885. Both the club movement and its organ had but a precarious life, lasting only about two years; the Democrat went out of existence in July, 1887, and with its demise, interest was lost in this premature movement for Utah political redemption.

THE POLITICAL CAMPAIGN OF 1888—"SAGEBRUSH" CANDIDATES

What the Democratic club movement of 1884-1887 failed in, the "Sagebrush Democracy," though in less formal manner, undertook to do in the political campaign of 1888. Early in October advantage was taken of the presence in Salt Lake City of many Democrats from all parts of Utah territory, who were either in attendance upon the semi-annual general conference of the Church of Latter-day Saints, or who had taken advantage of the low railroad rates always allowed on these annual and semi-annual occasions, to visit the city. About one hundred Democrats in all gathered at the old City Hall on the corner of First South and State street, and here effected their organization, and although the meeting was largely impromptu, it placed a candidate in the field for delegate to congress. This was S. R. Thurman, of Provo, then a young practicing attorney at law. They also nominated members for the council districts, comprising Salt Lake, Davis, and Tooele counties—R. C. Chambers, Jos. L. Rawlins, John A. Marshal, C. E. Mitchner; for members of the lower house from Salt Lake, Davis and Morgan counties— Wm. G. Sharp, Jos. M. Benedict, Abram F. Doremus, A. L. Williams, H. D. Ripetto, Stephen Hales; for Salt Lake county, superintendent of public schools, Jos. T. Kingsbury; for selectman for Salt Lake county, Boliver Roberts. None of these candidates were elected.

281The movement elicited much humor both from the Republicans of the territory and many of the older Democrats, who were persuaded that nothing could come of such an effort to align the people of Utah with the national parties under conditions then existing. Both the People's party and the Liberal party—"Mormon" and Gentile, frowned upon this new political bantling, which the Salt Lake Tribune contemptuously dubbed "Sagebrush Democracy." The promoters of the party, true to the American genius in such things, seized upon this derisive term and made it the party title, and the "sagebrush"—the "artemisia" of Fremont's books, and scientific classification-became the party's emblem.

281For a time the Salt Lake Herald sustained the movement, but Mr. John T. Caine, candidate of the People's party was part owner of the Herald, and many of his friends were owners in it—they held doubtless the majority of the stock—and it could not be expected that they would tolerate support of any opposing candidate to Mr. Caine. It suddenly withdrew its support from the "Sagebrush" party, and supported the "People's party" candidate, John T. Caine. [^7] Mr. Thurman polled but 511 votes, and "Sagebrush Democracy" was as dead as was the Democratic club movement which preceded it.

STILL ANOTHER EFFORT FOR STATEHOOD—1887-8

It has already been noted that an effort was made during the first Cleveland administration, 1887, to obtain statehood for Utah; that a clause was inserted in the Constitution submitted to congress declaring against bigamy and polygamy, making each a misdemeanor; making the section operative without further legislation, and irrepealable and unamendable without the concurrence of the president of the United States and congress; the amount of fine and imprisonment was fixed, and the offenses were not barred under three years by statute of limitations. [^8] All this, however, being but the action of a constitutional convention, and not the action by the Church of the Latter-day Saints, did not appeal to the Democratic congress then sitting, as sufficient to meet the demands of public sentiment in the United States, and therefore it refused to act upon a measure for Utah statehood. [^9] This movement, however, was strongly supported by the first presidency and other leading elders of the church; and President Joseph F. Smith was sent to Washington to direct the efforts of the friends of Utah at the capitol.

282The senate committee on territories, to whom the Utah Constitution and accompanying Memorials and Petitions of 1887 had been referred, reported adversely on the subject on the 26th of March, 1888, and was discharged from further consideration of the subject.

Notwithstanding this disappointment administered by a Democratic congress, a determined effort was continued by leading church authorities for the admission of Utah through the influence of the administration, [^10] in the closing months of 1888, and during the months of 1889 through which the Cleveland administration continued. It was proposed to the church authorities in this period that there should be an official abandonment of plural marriage, in connection with this effort for statehood, and the form of the renunciation was presented for consideration to the council of the apostles, but at that time, December, 1888, the proposition was unanimously rejected by the apostles—then the presiding council of the church. [^11]

283It was in the closing months of President Cleveland's administration that provisions were made for the admission of four new states into the Union, viz., North Dakota, South Dakota, Washington, and Montana. [^12] Strenuous efforts also were being made for the admission of Idaho, Wyoming and Arizona. It was hoped that in this "omnibus" movement, Utah also could secure admission.

283The congressional committee made its report to the house on the 6th of February, recommending the admission of Idaho, Wyoming, and Arizona, but not Utah. [^13]

HARRISON ADMINISTRATION—ATTITUDE TOWARD UTAH

Naturally there was some anxiety as to what would be the attitude of the incoming Republican administration towards Utah and the Latter-day Saints, with Benjamin Harrison, president.

283The Republican platform of 1888 had promised to do everything in its power "to facilitate the admission of the territories of New Mexico, Wyoming, Idaho and Arizona to the enjoyment of self-government as states;" but respecting Utah, the platform said:

283"The political power of the Mormon church, in the territories, as exercised in the past, is a menace to free institutions and dangerous to be longer suffered; therefore, we pledge the Republican party to appropriate legislation asserting the sovereignty of the nation in all the territories where the same is questioned, and, in furtherance of that end, to place upon the statute books, legislation stringent enough to divorce the political from the ecclesiastical power, and thus stamp out the attendant wickedness of polygamy." [^14]

284Elected upon a platform pledged to such a policy it is no marvel if there was some discouragement experienced in Utah with reference to territorial and "Mormon" church affairs when news arrived in Utah of Harrison's election. Moreover, the appointments made by President Harrison indicated that he was in full harmony with the platform declarations of his party. There was no such delay in making the federal appointments for the territory as in the case of Cleveland's administration. About two months after his inauguration (viz., May 6th, 1889), the president appointed Mr. Arthur L. Thomas, governor of Utah, succeeding Caleb W. West. Mr. Thomas had indicated for some time strong anti-"Mormon" tendencies both as former secretary of the territory and later as a member of the Utah Commission, from which position he was now advanced to the governorship. Thomas was succeeded on the commission board by Mr. Alvin W. Saunders of Nebraska, who received his appointment on the 14th of May. The day following Thomas' appointment as governor Elijah Sells was appointed secretary of the territory, succeeding Wm. C. Hall; and Ellsworth Daggett was made surveyor general.

REAPPOINTMENT OF CHARLES S. ZANE CHIEF JUSTICE

Judge Chas. S. Zane was reappointed chief justice of Utah, this on the 24th of May, and took the oath of office on the 3rd of June, succeeding Judge Elliott Sanford, dismissed. As Judge Zane's former term as chief justice did not expire until July, 1888, he was out of office in Utah less than one year. The harshness of Judge Zane in the administration of the congressional anti-polygamy laws has already been noted, and naturally his reappointment was regarded as ominous for Latter-day Saint offenders in that class of cases.

The controversy that arose over the removal of Chief Justice Sanford to make way for the reappointment of Judge Zane is of great interest. When informed by Harrison's attorney-general, Mr. W. H. Miller, that in the opinion of the president the public service would be subserved by a change in the office of chief justice of Utah, and he would be pleased to receive his resignation, Judge Sanford asked if there were any charge of misconduct or malversation in office, or any complaints preferred against him. "In case of such charge," he wrote Attorney-General Miller, "I think you will agree with me that it will be unwise, unbecoming, and improper to resign the office of chief justice until they have been either proven or disproven and disposed of. * * * I may add that if a change is necessary for political reasons only, the president can have my resignation as soon as the business of the court and the proper disposition of matters now pending before me will permit."

285Replying to this inquiry the attorney-general said:

285"I beg to say that there are on file in this department some papers complaining of the manner in which your judicial duties are discharged. [^15] Independently of these particular complaints, however, the president has become satisfied that your administration of the office was not in harmony with the policy he deemed proper to be pursued with reference to Utah affairs, and for this reason he desired to make a change, and out of courtesy gave you an opportunity to resign. As you did not see fit to embrace this opportunity, the president has removed you and appointed your successor."

285Answering this announcement of dismissal from office Justice Sanford very nobly said:

285"I have the honor to say that my earnest purpose while on the bench, as chief justice of this territory, has been to administer justice and the laws honestly and impartially to all men, under the obligations of my oath of office. If the president of the United States has any 'policy' which he desires a judge of the supreme court to carry out in reference to Utah affairs, other than the one I have pursued, you may say to him that he has done well to remove me." [^16]

The appointment of Judge Zane was followed, about a month later, by the appointment of Elias H. Parsons to be United States marshal, succeeding Frank H. Dyer, resigned; and Charles S. Varian, United States district attorney, succeeding George S. Peters, resigned. Both these men, but especially Mr. Varian, had been prominently identified with the anti-"Mormon" party in Utah.

INTERVIEW WITH CALIFORNIA LEADERS BY CHURCH AUTHORITIES ON UTAH AFFAIRS

All these Harrison appointments foreshadowed a vigorous enforcement of the Republican anti-"Mormon" policy in Utah.

In the latter part of the month of April, 1889, Presidents Woodruff and Cannon, in company with Bishop H. B. Clawson, visited San Francisco, where they met Mr. W. W. Stow and other gentlemen connected with the Southern Pacific Railroad, Mr. C. P. Huntington, Mr. A. N. Towne, Mr. Gay; also with Leland Stanford, United States senator from California. Judge M. M. Estee, who had been the permanent chairman of the Republican party convention at Chicago, which had nominated Mr. Harrison for president, Mr. Alexander Badlam, a nephew of Samuel Brannan, of early "Mormon" and San Francisco fame, and Mr. Isaac Trumbo who seemed, with Mr. Stow, to have been active in bringing about this interview. All of them professed more or less interest in Utah and "Mormon" people affairs. Mr. Stow suggested and finally rather insisted upon Senator Stanford writing a letter to President Harrison requesting him not to make Utah appointments hastily, but to wait until he came to know more about the situation. [^17] Senator Stanford's letter did not reach President Harrison in time to influence his appointments for Utah, either as to haste of making them, or in personnel; or else he decided not to be influenced by what the California senator presented. [^18] Most likely the latter determination prevailed. Senator Stanford expressed his doubts as to anything he might write upon the subject influencing Harrison in the matter, as he had approached the president upon the subject of Utah affairs sometime before, and expressed to the gentleman present at the interview his "fear" that Harrison was bigoted, "and is too much wedded to the Presbyterian church," to do anything in toleration of the "Mormon" situation. Still Stanford promised to write the letter requested. Meantime the vigorous prosecutions under the congressional anti-polygamy laws continued in Utah.

287THE VISIT OF PRESIDENT HARRISON TO UTAH, 1891

287President Harrison visited Salt Lake City on the 9th of May, 1891, on the occasion of his returning from the Pacific coast. His welcome to Utah and Salt Lake City was most hearty, but the occasion was somewhat marred by the local division of the people existing at the time, there being a manifest determination on the part of the committee in charge of the president during his brief visit to the city—part of one day only—"to keep," so one account rendered it, "the virtues and progress of the 'Mormon' people as far as practicable in the shade." [^19]

287The remark quoted is made in connection with the account of a gathering of all the "Mormon" Sunday School children of the city with the celebrated Tabernacle Choir ready to render patriotic songs in honor of the president, for whose coming they waited for hours—"but the president was not allowed by the governor and the committee in charge of the day's proceedings, to pay a visit, however brief, to the building which is one of the chief attractions of the city. [^20]

PRESIDENT HARRISON'S SPEECH AT LIBERTY PARK

The president gave no evidence of having softened the declared policy of the Republican party with reference to the Church of the Latter-day Saints, notwithstanding the Woodruff Manifesto that had been adopted by the church, published between the time of Mr. Harrison's election and the time of his visit to Salt Lake City. In his speech at Liberty Park the president spoke glowingly of the recent admission of the Dakotas, Washington, Montana, Idaho and Wyoming; but coming directly to the problem which Utah presented, with reference to entering the Union, he said:

288"We are a people organized upon principles of liberty; but, my fellow countrymen, it is distinguished from license; it is liberty within and under law (cheers). I have no discord as a public officer with men of any creed, religious or political, if they will obey the law. * * * And now, my countrymen, I beg to assure you that in every hope you have for Utah, running on these lines of free government, on these lines of domestic and social order, I have for every one of you the most cordial greeting, and enter with you into your most gorgeous hopes. God bless and keep you all, and guide you in those same paths of social purity and order and peace that shall make you one of the great commonwealths in the American Union." [^21]

PETITION FOR AMNESTY

Subsequently, viz., December 19th, 1891, a petition for amnesty was sent to President Harrison in behalf of those who were "under disabilities because of the operation of the Edmunds-Tucker law." This because the object of the government had been attained—the vindication of its own authority—in the surrender of polygamy by action of the church in accepting the Woodruff Manifesto. The closing paragraphs of the petition are as follows:

288"To be in peace with the government, and in harmony with their fellow citizens who are not of their faith, and to share in the confidence of the government and people, our people have voluntarily put aside something which all their lives they have believed to be a sacred principle.

288Have they not the right to ask for such clemency as comes when the claims of both law and justice have been fully liquidated?

288As shepherds of a patient and suffering people, we ask amnesty for them and pledge our faith and honor for their future.

288And your petitioners will ever pray." [^22]

289This petition was signed by the presidency and all the apostles of the church. It was written at the suggestion of some Gentile friends, who had been asked to join in an appeal for amnesty several times for individuals—"why not draw up a petition for general amnesty," they asked and so the petition for general amnesty was written, and sent to President Harrison.

289The president did not respond to this petition until the 4th of January, 1893, and then in a very guarded way, and not until such action had been recommended by the Utah Commission in its report of September 15th, 1892, and then only to be available to those who since November, 1890, had obeyed the law respecting unlawful cohabitation. [^23]

289"The amnesty from President Harrison appears in the papers this morning, but it is of little benefit to the people," was the comment of President Woodruff. [^24] It had been represented to the presidency of the church during the national presidential campaign of 1892—and it was evidently misrepresentation—that President Harrison had grown more favorable towards the saints, etc. The spirit and strictly guarded limits of the amnesty, did not indicate any change in President Harrison's attitude. A similar amnesty, yet a little more liberal was issued by President Cleveland in his second administration, bearing date of September 25th, 1894. [^25] This misrepresentation of President Harrison's attitude towards the Latter-day Saints and Utah was not only untrue, but especially shameful in its mendacity during the period named. The misrepresentations were made by Utah parties during these campaign months of the presidential election of 1892, and made to deceive President Wilford Woodruff.

During Harrison's visit to Salt Lake City, a banner stretched across the front of the Juvenile Instructor Office, on South Temple street—the Cannon Building—bore this inscription:

"Welcome to the Grandson of Tippecanoe!

290Under Harrison, Freedom Dawned in Utah."

290The last line was meant to hint gently, no doubt, that statehood would come to Utah in Harrison's administration; but such was not the case, and Utah obtained statehood in the manner described in subsequent chapters of this work.

EFFECT OF THE WOODRUFF MANIFESTO ON FEDERAL OFFICERS—JUDGE ZANE

It was inevitable that the issuance of the Woodruff Manifesto, surrendering the practice of polygamy by the Church of the Latter-day Saints, would have a direct effect upon the local political parties of the territory. Anti-"Mormons" in general, and the anti-"Mormon" federal officers of the territory in particular, however, were slow to accept as in good faith the action of the church in this sudden change of front on so important a subject. As to the federal officers, it may be said, there was but one exception; that of Chief Justice Chas S. Zane. In the third judicial district court, on the 7th of October, 1890,—the day following the acceptance of President Woodruff's Manifesto by the church in general conference assembled, the judge in admitting several persons to citizenship let it be understood that he accepted in good faith the Manifesto, and that hereafter in his court he would not make "the single fact that an applicant is a member of the Mormon church a bar to his admission to citizenship." [^26] One may not omit calling attention to the fact, however, in passing, that this is a confession by the judge that in the past, in his court, the simple fact that an applicant for citizenship was a member of the Church of the Latter-day Saints was sufficient to bar him from admission. "The simple fact" that such a policy obtained is a disgrace to the history of the federal jurisprudence of the territory. It will not be unfair to the "upright judge," to suppose that he felt the disgrace of that policy, established by the decision of Judge Anderson—considered in preceding pages,—and hastened to depart from it at the first opportunity that presented itself. [^27]

291The judge consistently continued to maintain this attitude toward what he regarded as the changed conditions. A year later he contributed an article to the November, (1891), Forum, in which, among many other good things he said of the people, was:

291"It is idle now to think of disfranchising the Latter-day Saints. They are an industrious, temperate people, as a rule; and my observation has led me to believe that they are law-abiding since the church took its stand under the law against plural marriage. I am aware that now and then individuals will report violations of that law since the Manifesto; but upon investigation such charges are seldom sustained. It would be strange if there were no breaches of it; there are some such cases among non-Mormons. I do not believe that such marriages have been authorized or sanctioned by the officers of the Mormon church since the Manifesto."

JUDGE ANDERSON'S POSITION

Judge Thomas J. Anderson, of the second judicial district, whose judicial investigation and decision inaugurated the policy of denying alien Latter-day Saints citizenship because they were members of the "Mormon" church was the very opposite of the attitude of Judge Zane. In November following the issuance of the Manifesto, he reaffirmed his former ruling, "having no faith" in the action of the leading authorities of the church, or of the church itself. The judge on the occasion of reaffirming his former decision said that "a member of the Mormon church no matter how good his moral character was otherwise, was not fit to be a citizen." His decision refusing seven "Mormons" to citizenship was sent as a special dispatch from Beaver—southern Utah—to the Salt Lake Herald. Also it could be held, from the Anderson point of view, that the issuance of the Woodruff Manifesto did not in a vital way reach the graveman of the infamous Anderson decision, on which the policy of the courts was based, viz., upon the false statements that the said church "is both a temporal and spiritual kingdom, and should rightfully control, and is entitled to the highest allegiance of men in all their affairs. * * * That this kingdom will overthrow the United States, and all other governments. * * * That the teachings, practices and aims of the Mormon church are antagonistic to the government of the United States; * * * and that its members are animated by a feeling of hostility towards the government and its laws, and therefore an alien who is a member of said church is not a fit person to be made a citizen of the United States."

ATTITUDE OF GOVERNOR THOMAS

The prompt action on the part of Judge Zane in accepting the Manifesto was in marked contrast with that of Arthur L. Thomas, governor of the territory, who in making his report to the secretary of the interior in 1891 gave but a guarded acceptance of the Woodruff Manifesto, though he stated in referring to the indorsement of the document by the church in the general conference, that he "accepted their action as a sincere expression of their views;" and added that "their action should be regarded as sincere until there is good reason for thinking otherwise."

THE UTAH COMMISSION'S ATTITUDE ON THE WOODRUFF MANIFESTO

Again and especially was the action of Judge Zane in marked contrast with that of the Utah Commission. The 1890 report of the Utah Commission dealt chiefly with the municipal election at Salt Lake City, in February of that year and the Liberal party victory. It took occasion, however, to recommend the passage by congress of the Idaho test oath law for Utah—by then affirmed by the supreme court of the United States to be constitutional—which could well have been entitled "An act for the disfranchisement of all members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints." It stated that "in all the teachings of the tabernacle and the church organs every effort of the government to suppress this crime (polygamy) is still denominated as a persecution, and those charged with ferreting out and prosecuting the guilty are denominated persecutors of the saints. The church seems to grow more and more united from day to day under these teachings." [^28] The commsision's report for 1890 bears date of 22nd of August, so that like the annual report of Governor Thomas for that year, it was issued before the Woodruff Manifesto. But in the report of 1891, they very unworthily discounted and discredited both the action of President Woodruff and of the church.

293"How much weight," the commission proceeds to argue, "should be given to the declaration of a man who dares to assert that the spirit of God came upon him to charge that the Utah Commission was the retailers and peddlers of falsehoods, and by reason of that fact he was to declare to the world that the church he commands will now change front completely, and abandon the ordinance of God which had heretofore been so delightful a work for them, can be judged to a degree from the declaration itself." [^29]

293Fortunately it can, and one would think to the confusion of this commission; for the "declaration" does not purport to change the policy of the church in an important matter because the Utah Commission has sent out false reports respecting plural marriages in Utah, within a given time period, as stated in their report; but for the very much more serious and dignified reason which the Manifesto specifically assigns for said action, viz:

293"Inasmuch as laws have been enacted by congress forbidding plural marriages, which laws have been pronounced constitutional by the court of last resort, I hereby declare my intention to submit to those laws, and to use my influence with the members of the church over which I preside to have them do likewise. * * * I now publicly declare that my advice to the Latter-day Saints is to refrain from contracting any marriage forbidden by the law of the land.

294(Signed) "WILFORD WOODRUFF,"

294President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^30]

FALSE REPORT OF THE UTAH COMMISSION ON "MORMON" CRIME IN UTAH

After a most confusing tabulation of sexual crimes in the territory since their report of the previous year, in which all the said crimes in the territory, Gentile as well as "Mormon," are recorded—but in such form as to leave the impression that they are all "Mormon" crimes—the commission in the concluding paragraphs of its report expresses satisfaction at the progress which President Woodruff's Manifesto marked "on the road to a better civilization; * * * but [they] cannot recommend the withdrawal at this time of any portion of the safeguards thrown around this people by the law-making power of the government." The commission was also most "emphatic in expressing its opinion that it would not at this time be safe to entrust to this people the responsibilities and duties of statehood as they so much desire."

The commission (in some ill temper, however), reported that "notwithstanding the Manifesto" reports had been received by them expressing the belief that "eighteen male persons, with an equal number of females * * * had entered into polygamous marriages during the year." The year before they had reported forty such marriages, it will be remembered. The accusation brought forth a most vigorous official denial by the church leaders at the October conference following—1891. A special committee was appointed to bring in a protest and resolutions upon the subject, both as to the commission's charges about polygamous marriages and also respecting the political domination of the church members by church authorities. The committee composed of influential members of the church and also recognized as being among the first citizens of the territory, [^31] reported upon both these matters. [^32]

DENIAL OF UTAH COMMISSION'S REPORT BY FIRST PRESIDENCY

In addition to this the first presidency issued the following:

OFFICIAL DECLARATION

"Concerning the official report of the Utah Commission made to the secretary of the interior in which they allege 'During the past year, notwithstanding the Manifesto, reports have been received by the commission of eighteen male persons who with an equal number of females, are believed to have entered into polygamous marriages, during the year,' we have to say, it is utterly without foundation in truth. We repeat in the most solemn manner the declaration made by President Wilford Woodruff at our general conference, held last October, that there have been no plural marriages solemnized during the period named.

295Polygamy or plural marriage has not been taught, neither has there been given permission to any person to enter into its practice, but on the contrary, it has been strictly forbidden.

295[Signed] "WILFORD WOODRUFF,

295GEORGE Q. CANNON,

295JOSEPH F. SMITH,"

295First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^33]

295The resolution and the official declaration of the presidency were sustained by unanimous vote of the conference.

COMMISSIONER MCCLERNAND'S DISSENTING VIEWS FROM HIS COLLEAGUES

The report of the commission for 1891, here being considered, was not a unanimous report, General John A. McClernand, with the consent of his colleagues of the commission made a separate report differing radically in spirit and statement of conditions as also in recommendations. In this matter of polygamous marriages. For instance, he substituted "official evidence" for the "extra-official accusations" of the registrars; such official "evidence coming through the district courts of which there were four in number." The time period was from the first of September, 1890, to 1st September, 1891. According to this evidence there were but four convictions for polygamy, one from each judicial district, one of which—the case in the third judicial district, Judge Zane presiding, was not a "Mormon" case. [^34]

296ATTITUDE OF THE "SALT LAKE TRIBUNE," ORGAN OF THE ANTI-"MORMONS"

The Salt Lake Tribune, the organ of the anti-"Mormon" "ringites" declined to put any confidence in the Manifesto, and for some years insisted upon keeping conditions in the territory in statu quo, as well in relation to political relations within the territory, as between the territory and the federal government until time should demonstrate the genuineness of the Latter-day Saint Church action. [^35] But neither the people nor the conditions would remain in statu quo. A revolution had begun in the issuance of President Woodruff's Manifesto. Impatience at its slow development was at times manifested. It involved the disintegration of the old local political parties. The earliest move leading up to that event appears to have been the organization of a Democratic club in the office of Marshal Frank H. Dyer, in April or early in May, 1890, and all interested in the Democratic cause ("Mormons included!") were invited to become members. [^36] On May 10th the club held an outdoor meeting, "T. B. O'Brien spoke on the principles of Democracy and gave the Liberal party a vigorous toasting," says the chronicle of the meeting. [^37] The meeting adopted a Memorial to congress, protesting against the passage of legislation then pending in that body (the Struble bill), "to deprive a large number of American citizens of the elective franchise solely on account of their membership in an unpopular religious organization." The Memorial declared "the motive of the effort" to be "purely political;" and "with the view of transferring to the minority of the voters in the territory the local control which of right should be vested in the majority." "We who are Gentile citizens of this territory," continued the Memorial, "denounce this attempted legislation as unrepublican, undemocratic, and unnecessary." The Memorial declared "practical polygamy" to be fast disappearing in Utah, they favored constitutional legislation for its entire extinction. "We will also support any lawful plan to keep separate and distinct the affairs of any and every church from the affairs of state and from politics. But we are opposed to persecution on account of creed or worship, and to any interference with civil or religious liberty." [^38]

297The meeting also passed resolutions denouncing the proprietors and editors of the Salt Lake Tribune, who controlled the associated press dispatches from Salt Lake City, and judging that because of prejudice they would color to the disadvantage of Democrats the reports of developments in Utah, the meeting petitioned Senator Calvin S. Brice, chairman of the national Democratic committee, to use his influence to have a fair minded man appointed as associate press agent in Salt Lake City. [^39] Nothing immediately practical came of these several resolutions, but the organization of Democratic clubs and the activities indicated the important changes taking place in Utah political affairs, and led finally to the organization of the Democratic party in the territory.

BIRTH OF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY IN UTAH

About a year later the Republicans hitherto connected with the local parties took steps to organize the Republican party in Utah. A great mass meeting was held at the Salt Lake Theater on the 20th of May, 1891, at which it was resolved that "political parties in Utah should be organized with reference to national questions and politics, and to act in harmony with the national parties." The resolutions met with strong opposition, but were finally sustained, it was estimated by "a vote of two to one." [^40] A committee of eight was appointed to draft an address "To the People of Utah," [^41] which a few days later was published.

298In closing the document gave a general invitation to the people to join the Republican party, and called for the appointment of precinct meetings and county conventions to choose representatives to a territorial convention where the party's organization might be effected and its platform adopted. On the 25th of May the Central Republican Club of Utah was organized "as an educating, social medium." [^42]

OPPOSITION TO THE ORGANIZATION OF THE NATIONAL PARTIES IN UTAH

There was considerable opposition to the organization of the national parties in Utah by the Democrats and Republicans, respectively, in the Liberal party, as they were not convinced that the time had come for a division on national party lines. The Democrats, under the leadership of Judge O. W. Powers, Judge R. N. Baskin, et al, held a public meeting on the 25th of May, 1891, at which it was claimed a thousand people were present, and after many speeches and much excitement and ill feeling were manifested, a resolution was adopted announcing to the people of the territory that "the Democrats of Salt Lake City are true to the Liberal party, and ask all loyal citizens to stand with them shoulder to shoulder for American principles." [^43]

299There had been in the territory for some years a "Republican committee," composed chiefly of Republican officeholders in Utah, which after the fashion of the "three tailors of Tuele street," affected to be the Republican party of Utah. They had kept in touch with the national party through the party conventions and the congressional and national committees. This became the Republican party which for so many years had controlled the federal patronage in the territory. A majority of this Republican territorial committee—the whole number was fifteen—was highly incensed that any movement should be made for the organization of the party at large in the territory without taking counsel and direction from them; and accordingly nine of the fifteen met in the office of the Utah Commission and formulated a protest against the proposed division. "We hold," they said—

299"We hold that the division by loyal men on party lines in Utah at this time would be an irrevocable, fatal mistake, as it would place the absolute rule of the territory in the hands of the first presidency of the Mormon church; as it would speedily result in giving statehood to this territory and that statehood would be under control of the Mormon theocracy.

299Resolved, That Utah is not yet prepared to accept the trust of statehood, because a majority of her people still maintain a higher allegiance to the theocracy under which they have all their lives served than to the government of the United States." [^44]

DISSOLUTION OF THE PEOPLE'S PARTY PROPOSED

On the 29th of May, Mr. Franklin S. Richards the chairman of the central committee, at a meeting of the precinct committees and club officers of the People's party for Salt Lake county, submitted to them for consideration a series of statements and a resolution that had been formulated by the central committee, proposing the dissolution of the People's party, and proclaiming its members free to ally themselves "with the respective national parties, according to their individual preferences." After much discussion the proposal to dissolve the party in the county was carried without a dissenting vote. [^45]

300Ten days later a similar action was taken by the territorial central committee for the entire party. The meeting was held on the 10th of June. A committee was appointed to draft resolutions. They reported that a radical change had taken place in the territory; that progressive people had determined to bury old strifes, dissolve merely local combinations and make national questions paramount; that both Democrats and Republicans who had formerly united with the Liberal party had severed that connection and organized under the respective national parties; that each of these organizations had repudiated the Liberal party policy designed to destroy the political liberties of the majority of Utah's people, and had declared against disfranchisement except for crime determined by due process of law; that it was desirable that the dissensions and struggles which had hitherto hindered the progress of the territory should be left behind in the march of the people toward their high destiny; therefore the committee recommended that the People's party dissolve and "leave its members free to unite with the great national parties." The committee's report was unanimously adopted. [^46]

The Liberal party, as before stated, refused at this time to disband. On the 29th of May it held a great rally in Salt Lake City at which there were between four and five thousand people present. The meeting was preceded by a street parade headed by the celebrated Liberal drum corps, dressed in Zouave uniforms. The speeches by the old leaders, Powers, Baskin, Dickson, Goodwin, Varian, Hoge, Stanton, Allen, et al, manifested strong feeling and in some cases bitterness.

301Mr. C. E. Allen (afterwards congressman from Utah) said: "Now you young men of Utah who have worked with the People's party heretofore, we don't want you; that is, we don't want you in the front ranks; if you join us you must remain in the rear and work that way; but don't come to the front and ask to join in the honor with us, because you are not entitled to it." [^47]

301The one refrain running through all speeches was the assertion of the unpreparedness of Utah for statehood—for all were agreed that the new movement meant statehood,—and the likelihood was that all the work of the Liberal party in the past would go for naught. [^48]

301The Liberal meeting passed no resolution, and gave no formal expression to the prevailing sentiment, but the Liberal party continued for some time, two years, as an organization.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] It appeared in the Salt Lake Times of June 23rd, 1891. It will also be found in Deseret News, weekly, of July 4th, 1891.
[^2] Articles of Faith, No. 12. Pearl of Great Price following writings of Joseph Smith, p. 58.
[^3] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxxxiv:3.
[^4] Ibid, sec. 58.
[^5] See Minutes of Conference for October, Deseret News, weekly, Oct. 10th, 1891: and an address of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to the world, submitted by the first presidency to the general annual conference of said church, April 5th, 1907, published in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. ii, pp. 237-254.
[^6] The previous legislature had been:
[^7] Utah Commission Report, minority, Sept., 1891.
[^8] See context in the Utah Commission Report. It is seen from the above that McClernand assumed that the seven thousand Liberals who constituted the remnant of the Liberal party in the election of 1891 were mostly Republicans; subsequent events demonstrated the correctness of the assumption.
[^9] The opponents of Mr. Caine in the several elections for which he stood and the results in each are here stated:
[^10] Returns show that Rawlins received 15,201; Cannon 12,390; Allen 6>,986>. (Deseret News, weekly, of Dec. 3rd, 1892, p. 751).
[^11] The above referred to pamphlet was named Nuggets of Truth; for a fuller description and the manner of issuing it, see Hearings in the Smoot Case Before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections, 1904, vol. i, p. 828; and for the matter of certificate of Mr. Cannon's standing, Ibid, p. 826. Mr. Cannon alludes to both these matters in his Under the Prophet in Utah, p. 124 (this was a bitterly anti-"Mormon" book); and charges the Republican territorial committee with issuing the Nuggets and the "certificate of standing" during his absence from the party's headquarters, and that he repudiated the action on his return to headquarters, and threatened to resign as a candidate. Mr. Cannon represents that the pamphlet was withdrawn but not until the mischief was done; he represents himself as deservedly defeated in the campaign of 1892, because of the use of such methods. He was made "the innocent victim of the atrocity!" Of all this, however, nothing was heard in Utah until the publication of the ex-senator's anti-"Mormon" book referred to above, and published in 1911—nineteen years after the election. The Democratic party of Utah issued a pamphlet in answer to the Nuggets of Truth, under the same title but with a subtitle—"Hear Ye the Whole Truth as to Joseph Smith's Political Views," and then followed a compilation from the church records of many passages setting forth the alleged views of the Prophet favorable to Democratic principles, and policies of government.
[^12] Deseret News, weekly, of March 25th, 1892, p. 440. In the Salt Lake Herald of Nov. 5th, 1895, will be found the Geo. F. Gibbs letter complete together with the history of the whole affair from 1891, to 1895, for this controversy arose again in the election of the latter year.
[^13] Full synopsis of the debate appears in the local papers—Herald and Tribune of current date.
[^14] Mr. Cannon's card is published in Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 12th, 1892, pp. 651-2.
[^15] There is much confusion in our Utah periodicals and other publications in the dates given for the introduction of these measures, the enabling act and the resolution for the restoration of the escheated personal property of the church. The former was introduced on the date given in the text, the sixth of September, 1893, and is recorded in the Congressional Record of Sept. 6th, p. 1276. The latter was introduced on the 9th of September, and the account of it is in the Congressional Record of Sept. 9th, p. 1362.
[^16] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., for Dec. 13th, 1893, cf. Salt Lake Herald of Oct. 28th, 1894.
[^17] Copied into Salt Lake Herald of Oct. 28th, 1894.
[^18] See Deseret News, weekly, Dec. 23rd, 1893, editorial, p. 9.
[^19] The dispatch to Mr. Trumbo and other papers on the subject will be found in proceedings before the committee on privileges and elections in the Smoot Case, vol. i, p. 830.
[^20] The measure was introduced into the house by Honorable John T. Caine, Utah's delegate in congress, on the 7th of January, 1892; and into the senate by Mr. Charles J. Faulkner, United States senator from West Virginia. The bill will be found in full in the Congressional Record of March 30th, 1892, and in Deseret News, weekly, of July 23rd, pp. 129-131. It consisted of 27 sections.
[^21] See Congressional Record of that date, house proceedings.
[^22] It was claimed, and by those who were in a position to know, that the Teller bill was hurriedly introduced merely as a Republican party offset to Democratic party action favorable to Utah. The Teller bill contained "no provision in the nature of an ordinary enabling act," and was not intended to go beyond its mere introduction. (Plain Talk, by C. W. Penrose, issued in campaign of 1894).
[^23] See Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, art, John T. Caine, pp. 726-737.
[^24] The Democratic plurality in the territory was 1,910 votes, according to the Utah Commission Report of this election: "The Democratic vote is 1,510 less than the combined vote of the Republicans and Liberals; the Republican vote is 5,330 less than the combined Democrats and Liberals; and the Liberal vote is 26,642 less than that of the Democrats and Republicans combined, or about ten per cent of the total vote, 33,482." (Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 25th, 1893, p. 713).
[^25] Salt Lake Tribune, Nov. 10th, 1893.
[^26] Deseret News, weekly, Nov. 18th, 1893.
[^27] A good summary of report will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 25th, 1893.
[^28] "There was a Populistic candidate in the field, Mr. H. L. Gaut, who received 555 votes. Mr. Cannon received 21,326. Mr. Rawlins, 19,505; Mr. Cannon's plurality was 1,821." (New York World Almanac election returns for 1895.
[^29] Certain questions put to the Republican candidate by a leading Democrat brought forth answers in personal cards from Mr. F. J. Cannon, and also from six gentlemen and Mr. Cannon who were the board of control of a corporation known as the "Utah Company," capitalized at $10,000.000. It was alleged, that the company was attacked by the questions submitted. The questions will be found in the Salt Lake Herald, Oct. 17th, 1894; and the cards in the Deseret News and Salt Lake Tribune of the 29th and 30th of Oct. respectively; also rejoinder by Judge Powers was published in the Salt Lake Herald of Oct. 31st, also in leaflet, Powers' Answer, in which the disclaims any attack upon the first presidency of the church, and points out that his questions had to do with F. J. Cannon, and certain undenied reports given out at Washington, D. C. about the time of the passage of the statehood bill, which from his standpoint justified the questions. Neither the News nor the Tribune would publish Powers' rejoinder. (See statement of Powers at Lehi, Salt Lake Herald of Oct. 31st).
[^30] Copy of his reply will be found in Deseret News, weekly, March 2nd, 1895.
[^31] The whole correspondence will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 29th, 1894, p. 458, with editorial comment, Ibid.
[^32] The senate during the first session of the 53rd congress stood 44 Democrats, 38 Republicans; 3 Populists; and 3 vacancies. In the 2nd session the number of Democrats remained the same; the Republicans lost two, and the Populists gained two. The vacancies remained the same. (See New York World Almanac, compilation of senate statistics, 1894, p. 363; and 1895, p. 373). The house of the 53rd congress was heavily Democratic, viz., 219 Democrats; 127 Republicans; Populists, 10. (New York World Almanac, 1894, p. 368).
[^33] Deseret News, weekly, of June 13th, 1891, p. 782.
[^34] Caine's Biography, Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, p. 737
[^35] 35. This was the Tribune's attitude from the first; see especially its editorial of Oct. 3rd, 1890; and through several years following, passim.
[^36] 36. Utah As It Is, 1904, pp. 141-2. Mr. S. A. Kenner, author of the work here quoted, puts the time of these meetings and the organization of the "Central Democratic Club," in June; but as early as May 10th, the club was active as described in the text.
[^37] 37. Deseret News account of the meeting, weekly, for May 17th, 1890, p. 690.
[^38] 38. Deseret News, weekly, of May 17th, 1890
[^39] 39. Salt Lake Herald of May 21st, 1891, where a very full account of the meeting—speeches and resolutions complete, and also final action will be found.
[^40] 40. The committee was Judge C. W. Bennett (Gentile), James Sharp ("Mormon"), H. M. Wells ("Mormon"), Wm. Balderston (Gentile), H. G. McMillan (Gentile), John Henry Smith ("Mormon").
[^41] 41. Deseret News, weekly, of June 6th, 1891, pp. 773-4.
[^42] 42. See Salt Lake Herald of May 26th for full account of this meeting.
[^43] 43. Deseret News, weekly, of June 20th, 1891, p. 830. Mr. Arthur Brown, a member of the committee, sought to have the other eight gentlemen change their views and issue a different statement—but in vain. He issued a minority statement and protest against the action of the committee. (Ibid).
[^44] 44. Deseret News, weekly, of June 6th, 1891, p. 763.
[^45] 45. The committee was Charles W. Penrose, of Salt Lake county; W. H. Brown, of Utah county; David H. Cannon, of Washington county; Fred Turner, of Cache county, and H. S. Gowans, of Tooele county. (For proceedings in full, see Deseret News, weekly, of June 20th, 1891, p. 835).
[^46] 46. See Salt Lake Herald and Deseret News account of Liberal meeting, impressions of May 30th, 1891.
[^47] 47. The account of this meeting is given at length in the Salt Lake Tribune of the 30th of May, Salt Lake Herald of same date; and a fair synopsis of the speeches will be found in the Deseret News, of same date.
