B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

302CHAPTER CLXXIII

302FEAR OF MORMON CHURCH CONTROL OF THE STATE—"CHURCH INFLUENCE"

302THE one thing which above all others seemed to hold in check the development of the territory of Utah into normal political conditions was the fear that the leading authorities of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and more especially the first presidency, would be able to, and would, dominate the political action of its members, and thus control to its own liking and purpose the state, when statehood should come; and that the large measure of control exercised by the federal government, while Utah remained a territory, would be withdrawn.

POLITICAL ATTITUDE OF THE CHURCH TO CIVIL GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS

To ascertain definitely what the attitude of the Latter-day Saint Church authorities would be with reference to this matter, a list of very carefully prepared questions was made by the editors and management of the Salt Lake Times, and submitted to the first presidency. These questions were taken under advisement, carefully considered and written answers made thereto, for which reason the "Times Interview" became a somewhat noted and official document in political controversies in Utah. [^1]

DIGEST OF THE "TIMES INTERVIEW"

Excerpts from the introduction to the "Interview" will disclose the reason for seeking it:

"The only reason put forward in opposition to the organization of parties on national lines in Utah is that the People's party is not sincere in the dissolution that has been effected and that a plot has been laid by which the Liberals are to be divided and the political control of Utah placed in the hands of the Mormon people for purposes adverse to the interests of the Gentile element. * * * In brief, it has been claimed that it is the purpose of the church to secure statehood for Utah, and through the alleged political control of its members, seize all the offices and carry on the government in the interest of Mormons and against the interests of non-Mormons. It is held that the church claims the right to exercise absolute authority over its members in all matters and that this extends to direct dictation as to whom they should vote for at all times. We are told that those who have joined the Democratic and Republican parties have done so at the direction of the heads of the church, that the People's party was dissolved at their dictation, and that its members will be subject at all times in the future to their absolute control. We are told further that polygamy has simply been suspended, to be reestablished in the future under the protection of state laws enacted by Mormon legislatures; and that these legislatures, elected by the decree of the church will pass other laws intended to oppress Gentiles and work virtual confiscation of their property."

303Such the charges made against the church, and these constitute the justification for seeking the "Interview" and the answers that were given.

303Following is a digest of the "Interview" the propositions being so stated as to include both the questions and the answers thereto:

303"1. The church will not assert any right to control the political actions of its members. As officers of the church they disclaim such right.

304The position here taken by the church authorities was again authoritatively set forth in the October conference following. It may also be said to have been the attitude of the church from the beginning, and any departure from a strict observance of the principles underlying this attitude in the Utah period of its history was due to the development of an attack upon the church, of which these pages bear abundant evidence. But the conception of the church respecting its relationship to civil government is thus authoritatively summarized and set forth by the church authorities, and sanctioned by action of a general church conference as follows:

304"We believe in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers and magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law." [^2]

304Such is the acknowledgment of the church's duty to civil governments. Again:

304"We believe that all governments necessarily require civil officers and magistrates to enforce the laws of the same, and that such as will administer the law in equity and justice should be sought for and upheld by the voice of the people (if a republic), or the will of the sovereign. We do not believe it just to mingle religious influence with civil government, whereby one religious society is fostered and another proscribed in its spiritual privileges, and the individual rights of its members, as citizens, denied." [^3]

304With reference to the laws of the church, it is expressly said:

304"Be subject to the powers that be, until he reigns whose right it is to reign [the Christ] and subdues all enemies under his feet.

304Behold, the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of the church, and in this light ye shall hold them forth." [^4]

304"That is to say, no law or rule enacted, or revelation received by the church, has been promulgated for the state. Such laws and revelations as have been given are solely for the government of the church." [^5]

THE GARDO HOUSE MEETING

Notwithstanding in the "Times Interview" it is stated that the dissolution of the People's party was not brought about by the "fiat or instruction of the church," it should be remembered that such were the relations of the People's party to the church, that party being its shield against unjust political assaults made upon it, and the instrument through which the church members had politically functioned—it was to be expected that when so weighty a matter as disorganizing that party was under consideration the leading authorities of the church would have a deep concern—and rightly—in such an important step. And hence in the annals of Utah there is reference to a certain meeting held at the Gardo House (for some time known as the "Amelia Palace;" it stood on the corner of South Temple and State streets, on the site now occupied by the Federal Reserve Bank Building) previous to the action by the chairman of the People's party taking steps to dissolve that party. It was said that many of the leading authorities were present and the idea of dissolving the party was favorably considered. It is doubtless to this circumstance that reference is made in the "Times Interview" where it says: "They [i. e. leaders of the People's party] have stated to us their convictions that the time had come for a division on national party lines. There has been a growing feeling in this direction for a long time." But though the matter of dissolution was considered at the Gardo House meeting, and assent to such action was given, it does not follow that the "order" for its dissolution was then promulgated; or that the dissolution of the party took any other course than that described in these pages and in the "Times Interview."

TRI-PARTY CAMPAIGN AND ELECTION OF 1891

The Gardo House meeting was referred to in remarks by President Joseph F. Smith, at Logan in May, 1896, and reported in the Salt Lake Tribune of May 10th, of that year. In the Smoot investigation before the senate committee on privileges and elections—the matter was developed as follows:

Attorney to President Smith:—"The 'Times Interview' account of the dissolution of the People's party is as follows: 'It is asserted that the People's party was disolved by direction of the church.' Is there any foundation for that charge?"

Ans. "The People's party was dissolved, as we understand, by the action of its leading members. They have stated to us their convictions that the time had come for a division on national party lines. There has been a growing feeling in this direction for a long time, and the dissolution of the People's party is the result of that sentiment, and not the fiat or instruction of the church. The first intimation we had of dividing on party lines came to us from Ogden. There is, therefore, no foundation for the charge that the church brought about the dissolution of the People's party."

306The result of all this agitation was that in the territorial election of August following, three tickets were before the people. The Liberal party elected four members of the legislative council; the Democrats eight; the Liberals elected eight members of the house of representatives, the Democrats sixteen. [^6] Taking the vote for the members of the house of representatives, the Democrats cast 14,369; the Republicans 6,397; the Liberals 7,411, scattering, 63. "Premising these figures," said General McClernand, a member of the Utah Commission, commenting on the result of this election in his minority report to the secretary of the interior:—

"Premising these figures, and assuming that the body of the Liberals had consistently, as professed Republicans, united with the distinctive Republicans, and that a number of Republican Mormons had done the same who did not, lest by so doing they should indirectly promote Liberal success, and, consequently, their own disfranchisement; premising these conditions as real or hypothetically reasonable, would not the election as between the Republicans and Democrats have been at least doubtful? Well-informed Republicans and Democrats in the territory have said so." [^7]

307From which circumstance, the near equality of numbers as between Democrats and Republicans, McClernand held, would safeguard the future state from church dictation. [^8]

307By the time the next election was held—the election for delegate to congress—the accessions to the Democratic and Republican ranks had been increased, but there were still enough Liberals remaining organized to put a ticket in the field. Mr. John T. Caine, who for five successive terms had been the nominee of the People's party, [^9] though a staunch Democrat, was persuaded not to seek the candidacy as it would doubtless be more in harmony with developing events to have a new candidate. Accordingly Joseph L. Rawlins, a native of Utah, and of "Mormon" parentage, but as to religion an agnostic, was the nominee of the Democratic party. Frank J. Cannon, son of George Q. Cannon, was nominated by the Republicans, and Mr. C. E. Allen by the Liberals. Mr. Rawlins was elected by a plurality of 2,811. [^10]

ALLEGED EMPLOYMENT OF "CHURCH INFLUENCE" IN THE CAMPAIGN OF 1892

There was a charge made that "Mormon church influence" was exerted in this campaign, owing to the issuance of a pamphlet in the interests of Mr. Frank J. Cannon, by which it was held that Joseph Smith the Prophet, and his brother Hyrum, were "old line whigs"—predecessors of Republicans in political principles— while other church leaders also were Republicans and of course protectionists. The pamphlet was illustrated with portraits of these church leaders, and with that of Frank J. Cannon. Further evidence of "church influence" was alleged by the issuance and circulation of a certificate bearing witness to the good standing in the church of Mr. Cannon—of which there was much question at the time—by men in high standing in the church, which, taken with the well-known agnosticism of Mr. Rawlins, was likely to greatly influence the election in Mr. Cannon's favor. [^11]

It was also charged that the name of the presidency of the church was being used to influence people who were Democrats to become Republicans. This in the territorial legislative election of 1891; and especially in connection with a municipal election at Logan, where it was held that a letter written by Mr. George F. Gibbs, secretary to the first presidency, had been effective in turning many Democrats from their party to the Republican fold. The incident is chiefly valuable in that when protest was made against such proceedings it brought forth a written statement from two of the first presidency—President Wilford Woodruff and Joseph F. Smith—which presents the attitude of the church presidency—and of course of the church—in the matter of their relationship to politics. In the statement they said:

309"We emphatically deny that we, or either of us, authorized Mr. George F. Gibbs or any other person or persons to use our names so as to influence citizens to vote the Republican ticket, at Logan or elsewhere. If our names have been used in any such way, it has been entirely without permission from us, and we hereby condemn it as wrong and reprehensive. If we have any desire in this matter it is that the people of this territory shall study well the principles of both the great national parties, and then choose which they will join, freely, voluntarily and honestly, from personal conviction, and then stand by it in all honor and sincerity. Each party should have the same rights, privileges and opportunities as the other. If any man claims that it is the wish of the first presidency that a Democrat shall vote the Republican ticket, or a Republican the Democratic ticket, let all people know that he is endeavoring to deceive the public and has no authority of that kind from us. We have no disposition to direct in these matters, but proclaim that, as far as we are concerned, the members of this church are entirely and perfectly free in all political affairs. But they should not indulge in ill-feeling or personalities. President George Q. Cannon is absent, but we are sure that if he were here he would sign this declaration with us.

309[Signed] "WILFORD WOODRUFF,"

309[Signed] "JOSEPH F. SMITH,"

309Of the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." [^12]

PASSAGES AT ARMS IN THE CAMPAIGN OF 1892

The campaign was enlivened by a conjoint debate between the candidates for the delegateship, one session of which was held at Ogden, the other at Salt Lake City. [^13] There was also a sharp passage at arms between the Democratic nominee and President George Q. Cannon relative to the latter bartering the "Mormon" vote for personal advantage in the matter of being relieved by the late Republican administration from the payment of the forfeited bonds in the unlawful cohabitation cases against him—already considered—in which the amount involved—with interest accrued—was $33,000. Mr. Cannon indignantly denied in a personal card the imputation that there had been any agreement respecting Utah votes for the Republican party. [^14]

310During Mr. Rawlins' term as delegate, he introduced a resolution in the house restoring the personal property of the Church of the Latter-day Saints that had been escheated by the government, amounting to nearly half a million dollars. It was passed by both the house and the senate and was finally approved by President Cleveland on 25th of October, 1893.

PASSAGE OF UTAH'S ENABLING ACT FOR STATEHOOD

On September 6th, Mr. Rawlins introduced an enabling act, authorizing the territory of Utah to frame a state Constitution and take the necessary steps to be admitted into the Union on an equal footing with the original states. [^15] The bill did not pass the house until the 13th of December of that year.

310On learning of the passage of the bill in the house, the following telegram was signed and sent to Mr. Rawlins:

310"Salt Lake City,

310Dec. 13th, 1893.

310On behalf of ourselves and the people of Utah, we heartily congratulate you on the successful passage of your bill by the house providing statehood for our territory. May complete triumph crown your labors, which we all highly appreciate.

310[Signed] "WILFORD WOODRUFF,"

310"JOSEPH F. SMITH." [^16]

310George Q. Cannon was absent from the city—in Washington in fact—hence his name does not appear on the message. The following was sent to Mr. Rawlins from the chairman of the Republican territorial committee:

311"Dec. 14>, 1893—Salt Lake City, Utah.

311Accept heartiest congratulations for the Republican party of Utah, for the results in the house yesterday of your magnificent fight for statehood. The Republican Territorial Committee.

311[Signed] "CHAS. S. CRANE." [^17]

311The Deseret News was ardent in its praise of the part taken by Joseph L. Rawlins in securing the passage of the enabling act through the house. [^18]

311Utah's enabling act did not pass the senate until the 10th of July of the following year, 1894. On the 16th of July, 1894, the bill was approved by President Grover Cleveland, and the way was thus cleared at last for Utah's statehood.

311As soon as the enabling act was signed by President Cleveland, the presidency of the Church of the Latter-day Saints was mindful to recognize other besides Democratic agencies, in securing statehood for Utah, among them Colonel Isaac Trumbo, who had interested himself in Utah affairs. He was important only, however, as he represented the California Republican group of politicians and business men before referred to as interesting themselves in Utah affairs. [^19]

THE "HOME RULE" BILL OF 1892

In 1892 an effort had been made to secure what was called "home rule" for Utah, a Democratic measure, designed, while falling short of statehood, to secure a very much larger participation by the people in the territorial government. It provided that all territorial officers from governor to precinct justices of the peace and constables should be elected by the people, as well the judiciary as the executive and legislative branches; said officers to be, of course, citizens of the United States, and citizens and residents of the territory of Utah. It was designed to abolish the Utah Commission, as well as Washington-appointed governors and judges; it was practically a statehood measure, except for the control of the territory legislation which under it would still inhere in the federal government. [^20] It was simply put forth as a measure of relief from intolerable injustice under the then existing territorial government, pending the time when Utah might be admitted as a state. All its advocates affirmed the readiness of the territory for admission into the Union, but feared it would be some time before public sentiment would justify congress in admitting Utah as a state, hence "home rule" ad interim. The Utah legislature memorialized congress early in 1892 to pass the bill, and in February elaborate hearings were had before the committees on territories of the senate and house respectively. Both prominent "Mormons" and Gentiles appeared before the committees "to urge its passage."

Some Utah Republicans, "Mormons" and Gentiles, opposed the measure, both in the territory and before the congressional committees, as being likely to retard the coming of statehood; and Liberals opposed it, because they were against enlarging the sphere of local self-government in the territory either by the passage of this "home rule" bill or by granting statehood. The bill was favorably reported to the house on March 30th. [^21] On the 8th of July it passed that body by a vote of 164 in its favor, to 41 against it; 123 being absent and not voting. The measure, however, failed to reach the senate for consideration; and indeed events were now forming so rapidly in favor of statehood for Utah that it would have been the height of unwisdom to have urged the passage of the "home rule" bill by the senate. Indeed so favorable had the sentiment grown in favor of statehood for Utah, that Mr. Henry M. Teller, United States senator from Colorado, as a Republican counter movement to the Democratic "home rule" bill, had introduced a bill in the senate for the admission of Utah as a state. [^22] And before the close of the second session of the 52nd congress, viz., on the 14th of January, 1893, Mr. Caine introduced a bill for an enabling act for the admission of Utah, which bill was reported back to the house ten days later, and placed on the calendar, but it failed of consideration in that congress. Mr. Caine had also prevailed upon United States Senator Faulkner, of West Virginia, and sponsor in the senate for the "home rule" bill, to introduce a similar bill for statehood in the senate, but that, too, failed of consideration, [^23] and securing the passage for an enabling act for the admission of Utah, took the course already described in this chapter.

ELECTION OF 1893—HOPELESS STATUS OF THE LIBERAL PARTY

In the territorial election in November of 1893, at which election members of the legislature were chosen, there were still three parties in the field, Democrats, Republicans and Liberals. In the council of the legislature the Republicans elected five, the Democrats five and the Liberals two; in the lower house the Republicans elected ten members, the Democrats eight, the Liberals six. [^24] This was the last election in which the Liberal party participated. In addition to the decline in their vote in the territorial election—it shrank in the legislative council districts to 3,420 as compared with 6,986 in their vote for delegate to congress the year before. They also lost political control of Salt Lake City in this election, as stated in the preceding chapter. It was evidently time to disband a party so helpless, and accordingly, immediately following the election of 1893, the Salt Lake Tribune counseled the party to disband; later, viz., on the 18th of December, 1893, the party at a formal meeting disbanded by resolution, sustained by speeches eulogistic of the party's achievements. [^25]

314"We believe it would have been better if this decision had been reached sooner," said the Deseret News, commenting on this Tribune recommendation. [^26]

UTAH READY FOR STATEHOOD—GOVERNOR WEST'S REPORT, 1893

Governor West in his annual report to the secretary of the interior, for the year 1893—bearing date of October 2nd—also radically changed the tone of his report from that of previous reports, and especially in the matter of his recommendations. Of Utah the territory, he said:

314"We now have a population of about 240,000. An assessed taxable valuation of $109,000,000. It is scarcely necessary to dilate upon or go into particulars as to Utah's population, wealth, stability, and material development entitling her to statehood. * * * Our improvements, both public and private, are upon a liberal and generous scale, commensurate with our wealth and ability.

314Educational and school advantages are good and constantly being improved. We have an enlightened, well ordered, strong, self-sustaining community, enjoying all the advantages and comforts of modern cultivation and civilization."

314Following this the governor urges a view that is of great value in considering the tribulations through which Utah had by slow and painful steps made her way towards the e of her high calling as one of the American states, viz:

"I know of no people who, in their preparation for statehood, have been confronted with as delicate and grave questions and as radical differences, requiring the cultivation and exercise of the highest public qualities, yet the responsibility has been met with patience and for-bearance, and our people, after years of earnest effort, have peacefully solved their difficulties and satisfactorily settled their differences. The salutary lessons inculcated in the school of actual experience have admirably trained and fitted them for the duties and responsibilities of a state government."

RESTORATION OF ESCHEATED PROPERTY URGED

The governor also recommended "the repeal of the provisions of the law of March 3rd, 1887 [the Edmunds-Tucker law] escheating the property of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints;" and favored a congressional enactment restoring the property to the church. "There is left," said he, "neither reason nor excuse, in my judgment, for taking from the Mormon church and people their property, and it ought to be restored to them." "The Mormon people," he continued, "while undergoing the many hardships and deprivations of the pioneer frontier life through many years, by their voluntary subscriptions created this fund, and when it is beyond all question that it will be devoted to no unlawful purpose, but to commendable and charitable uses, it ought to be returned to them. Such fair and just action by congress would give great satisfaction to the people of the territory, and encourage and strengthen the constantly growing sentiment of cordiality and good feeling among the people." "I earnestly urge that congress be recommended to promptly pass the desired relief, because 'he gives twice who gives quickly'." Such the closing sentence of the governor on this head of his report. Why the return of the "escheated" property, which is only a legal term describing the act of confiscation—should be treated as a "gift" to the "Mormon" people, is a little difficult to understand; but the governor meant well, and perhaps he thought the common-stock phrase of preachers might have its effect on congress! [^27]

AS DEMOCRATS AND REPUBLICANS IN UTAH—1894

In the election of 1894 the people for the first time were to meet each other aligned solely on national party lines in Utah. Mr. Joseph L. Rawlins was the Democratic, and Mr. Frank J. Cannon the Republican candidate for delegate to congress. It was at this election also that delegates were to be chosen for the constitutional convention. The tariff and "hard times," the latter alleged to be the result of Democratic victory of two years before, were the issues between the parties, and the Republicans won a very notable victory throughout the nation; also in Utah. Mr. Frank J. Cannon was elected delegate to congress by a majority of 1,819; [^28] and the Republicans elected sixty out of the one hundred and seven delegates required by the enabling act for the constitutional convention, a clear majority of thirteen. While the tariff and "hard times" were issues in Utah, as elsewhere throughout the nation, and were ably discussed, unfortunately there was injected into the campaign the question as to which of the national parties had befriended Utah most in her recent struggle for statehood, and to which party was her people most bound in gratitude. This gave rise to a very bitter local controversy in which prominent members of the church participated against each other as partisans with a zeal that carried them beyond the limits of what calm reason would dictate; and the literature of the campaign, both in editorials and in special articles in the newspapers current, as in the dodgers, leaflets, and pamphlets, representing attack and defense, reply and rejoinder, ran the whole gamut of intense debate. [^29]

317There was also an aftermath to this campaign in the form of a newspaper attack upon President George Q. Cannon and his alleged business and political methods. It was charged that he had entered into certain agreements and understandings with politicians of national reputation and standing, by which Utah was made a Republican state with trust-favoring senators assured; and in consideration of which certain large corporations and other business ventures in which Mr. Cannon—and, as alleged, the church through certain of its high officials were interested—were to be financed by eastern trusts. The charges alleging all this appeared in a seven-columned article in the New York Times of Feb. 13th, 1895, and was copied into the Salt Lake Herald and Tribune. The article created a national sensation and was widely commented upon. Mr. Cannon denied these charges and discussed them at length. [^30]

CHURCH AUTHORITIES AND POLITICS

The intensity of feeling attending upon the discussions during the campaign brought out a communication signed by President Woodruff which is an official document upon a question of great importance. On the 23rd of September, 1894, at a stake quarterly conference at Provo, the president made some remarks respecting the rights of the priesthood in giving counsel and direction to the membership of the church, which was sympathetically reported in the Salt Lake Tribune as follows:

"It is generally thought the first presidency should have nothing to say about politics. I picked up a paper this morning saying that we had no business to meddle in politics. We have a right to lead the people in spiritual and temporal affairs. We have the same rights of leadership that President Young had and that the Prophet Joseph Smith had. In temporal affairs? Yes. In political affairs? Yes. We have a right to advise both Democrats and Republicans to lead a pure campaign. We have a right to say to the people that they must be pure in politics as well as in temporal affairs. We have thousands of children growing to manhood in Zion. I am interested in their welfare, and I would like to see them brought up under proper influences and not under the influence of such a campaign as we had two years ago."

318A letter from the Tribune Publishing Co., then conducting the Daily Salt Lake Tribune, bearing date of Sept. 24th, submitted to President Woodruff—having in mind, of course, the formal declaration of the presidency in the Salt Lake "Times Interview," and other official statements considered—the following questions:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHCTHE TRIBUNE'S QUESTIONS

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC"The purpose of this inquiry is to ascertain with exactness:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC318First, whether your remarks were precisely as reported, and, if not, wherein they depart from precision.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC318Second, if the remarks were as reported, then in what sense do you wish them to be understood: whether as a claim to control the political actions of your people absolutely, or only as a citizen to advise the right.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC318Third, the claim is apparently made in your remarks that the church authorities claim the right to direct the people in their business and politics, and, in general, their temporal affairs, as well as spiritual. It is desirable to know whether this claim is really made and insisted upon at this time, and is to be in the future, while the public has been led to believe that claim a thing of the past.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC318Most respectfully,

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC318[Signed] "TRIBUNE PUBLISHING CO."

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHCPRESIDENT WOODRUFF'S ANSWER

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHCIn his answer President Woodruff said that his remarks as published by the Tribune were "substantially correct." Answering the second and third questions he said:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC"'The control of the political actions of our people absolutely' is not set up as a claim in my remarks, and I certainly would not wish them to be so understood. I hold that it is the right of the priesthood to advise at any and all times and under any circumstances those who profess to respect its powers, in all matters pertaining to their temporal welfare and their spiritual salvation; if in the matter of politics, that the Latter-day Saints should be governed by pure principles, and in political affairs should realize and act upon their responsibilities as saints and citizens. This is not to claim the right to advise them how or for whom they should vote, or which party they should join. We emphatically and sincerely approved the division of the 'Mormon' people on party lines, and we recognize every man's agency and respect his right to choose in these matters for himself. We have not advised, and do not advise our people how they shall vote; the elections that have been held in this territory since politics on national party lines were introduced, are proof of this policy; we have asked no Republican to vote the Democratic ticket, and no Democrat to vote the Republican ticket; we have never advised men to vote other than their convictions prompted them, and have no intention of giving such advice. At the same time, we claim the right, both as individuals and as leaders of the church, to counsel our people to keep aloof from the corruption, the scandal, and the filth of politics as too frequently practiced in the world, to set an example in this as in other things, and it is in this sense that I wish to be understood as asserting the right of the priesthood to give counsel in political affairs. As citizens we have the right of opinion and of speech; we also have responsibilities and duties to ourselves and to others; but until the foregoing can be construed as meddling in politics, I shall be unable to find ground for the uneasiness of which you speak. However, in the light of this statement of my meaning and views, I trust there can be no further cause of anxiety or unrest; I assure you there is no foundation for it.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC319[Signed] "WILFORD WOODRUFF." [^31]

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC319The Tribune editorially accepted as satisfactory President Woodruff's answer, saying:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC319"The reply is not a retraction of any powers professed by the church, but it does declare that no member of the priesthood would think of advising any Mormon to vote any ticket, only claiming the right, both as a man and a priest, to watch over the morals of the people and as far as possible to shield them from all that may be debasing or immoral in politics."

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC319The Salt Lake Herald also expressed its satisfaction:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC319"In this connection we wish to say that rational people will not object to the introduction of politics into the pulpit, in the sense mentioned by the Mormon president. It is only when the power of ecclesiastics is used as partisans, to unduly influence church members in favor of a party or a candidate that a protest is made."

A DISAPPOINTING ELECTION

It had been quite generally expected that Utah in this 1894 election would go Democratic. Rawlins' plurality in the previous delegate election—1892—had been 2>,811>, or 15,202 as against 12,390 for Cannon. This left 6,986 who voted the Liberal ticket out of the total vote of 34,577. Had this Liberal vote broken anywhere nearly even, in 1894, the Democrats should still have had a majority. But evidently the remnant of the Liberal party from 1892 was largely Republican, and when it disbanded its members joined the Republican ranks and made that party's victory of 1894 possible. Notwithstanding this unequal break of the Liberal party remnant, however, there were other considerations which to many still justified the expectation that Utah would go Democratic—viz: It had been a Democratic congress—the 53rd—and executive, which restored nearly half a million dollars of the personal property to the church; the enabling act for Utah's statehood had been introduced by a Democratic delegate from Utah; it was passed by a Democratic house and a Democratic senate; [^32] it had been approved by a Democratic president, and if Utah was to be admitted under the enabling act after her Constitution was formed, it would be by the proclamation of a Democratic president. In addition to these considerations it had been the declared policy of the Republican party to destroy the plural marriage system sanctioned by the Church of the Latter-day Saints, and pursuit of that purpose had led to the enactment of all legislation inimical to the "Mormon" citizens of Utah. Very naturally the tendency of this course on the part of the national Republican party was to incline the members of the church to the Democratic party, which, while it never sympathized with the Latter-day Saint religious institution under censure, it was not responsible for the open warfare made upon it, and some leading members of that party in congress did urge constitutional objections to some of the extreme features of the Republican legislation. Indeed it was so generally believed that "Mormon" sentiment was so far Democratic that when division on national party lines began to take place the fear was entertained by some that the "Mormons" would go over bodily to the Democratic party and that the result would be practically, that the "Mormons" would largely constitute the Democratic party and the "Gentiles" the Republican party; that there would be no change of parties, really, but only a change of names. This was the cause of much anxiety on the part of some leading churchmen, following the division on national party lines, and they urged that those members of the church who had at least no sharp-drawn convictions to the political issues between the national parties to be not in too great haste to commit themselves to party affiliation; and some, undoubtedly, were persuaded by the force of such suggestions to cast their lot with the Republican party, without regard to their convictions one way or the other.

Under the caption "Don't Be In A Hurry," the Deseret News, in harmony with what is said above, published a strong editorial on the subject. [^33]

STATEHOOD ASSURED NOTWITHSTANDING DISAPPOINTING ELECTION

It was feared in some quarters that the result of the election of 1894 in Utah might be so disappointing to the Democratic congress and the administration that it would endanger statehood; for having yet the second term of the 53rd congress to complete, and five months of a Democratic administration, pretexts for undoing what had been done, and holding up Utah's statehood would not have been difficult, and was at least a possibility. Accordingly a number of influential Utah Democrats, including John T. Caine, former delegate to congress, Governor West and others, went to Washington to inquire as to the likelihood of unfriendly action by the Democrats. They reported the feeling among Democrats at Washington to be that "while as Democrats, they were disappointed at the result of the late election in Utah, they declared that the territory had all the qualifications for statehood and was entitled to admission into the Union irrespective of politics, and it was the avowed policy of the Democratic party that the territory should be admitted before the close of that session." [^34]

Footnotes

In the council—Liberals—Anti-"Mormon" ............... 2

People's party—"Mormon" .............................. 10

—

Total ................................................. 12

In the house,Liberals .................................. 5

People's party ........................................ 19

—-

Total ................................................. 24

(Utah Commission Report for Sept., 1891).

1882 Caine—Van Zile ........................23,039—4,884

1884 Caine—Ransford Smith ..................21,130—2,215

1886 Caine—Col. Wm. M. Ferry ...............19,605—2,810

1888 Caine—R. N. Baskin—Thurman ...........10,127—3,484—511

1890 Caine—C. C. Goodwin, scattering .......16,353—6,912— 28

---
Notas:
[^1] See Proceedings of Constitutional Convention, vol. ii. pp. 1736-1749.
[^2] The appointment of the code commission was authorized by the first state legislature. (See chapter lxxxv of the Laws of Utah, 1896). It made its report November 7th, 1897, and the code was published and operative from January 1st, 1898. R. W. Young, Grant H. Smith, and Wm. A. Lee constituted the commission. (See Preface to the code, 1898).
[^3] The governor's message will be found in the Salt Lake Herald, of March 15th, 1901; also in proceedings in the Smoot Case before United States senate, vol. i. pp. 582-3.
[^4] Ibid, p. 334.
[^5] Ibid, p. 485.
[^6] For the Memorial see Salt Lake Herald of March 15th, 1904.
[^7] Ibid. vol. i, pp. 618-625.
[^8] State officers other than those named in the text were: Secretary of State, James T. Hammond; Attorney-general, A. C. Bishop; Auditor, Morgan Richards, Jr.; Treasurer, James Chipman; Supt. Public Instruction, Dr. John R. Park; Judges of the Supreme Court, Chas. S. Zane, Geo. C. Bartch, J. A. Miner. The vote for the Constitution stood 31,305 in favor of it; against it, 7,697. The vote for Governor Wells, Republican, 20,833; Caine, Democrat, 18,519 H. W. Lawrence, Populist, 12,051. For Representative in Congress: Allen, Republican, 20,563; Roberts, Democrat, 19,666. Allen's majority, 897. (New York World's election tables 1896—Utah, p. 440).
[^9] Indeed as early as October, 1892, it was decided that it would be best for certain high officers of the church not to actively engage in political campaign speaking, as will be seen from the following excerpt from President Wilford Woodruff's Journal, Ms., "Oct. 4th, (1892): . . . Met with the quorum of the twelve. Partook of the sacrament together. Talked over our political situation and expressed our feelings frankly. The general opinion was for none of the presidency, twelve, or the presidents of seventy to take the stump to make political speeches." Subsequently came the understanding respecting office-holding and political activity mentioned in the text.
[^10] The Democratic party in Utah favored election of United States senators by direct vote of the people, and in order to approach that method of choosing United States senators as nearly as possible, the party convention of 1895 nominated the men to be elected by the legislature should it be Democratic. Hence Mr. Thatcher went before the people in the campaign as the nominee of his party for United States senator. The other nominee for senator was Joseph L. Rawlins.
[^11] See statement of the case by Mr. Roberts in the Salt Lake Tribune of Oct. 14th, 1895; also Salt Lake Herald of same date. The statement is in the form of a signed interview. It will also be found in the Smoot Case Hearings, vol. i. pp. 751-760.
[^12] Testimony in the Smoot Hearing, vol. i, pp. 757-8; also pp. 813-816.
[^13] See interviews and discussion of these questions in the Salt Lake newspapers current at the time, Oct. and Nov., 1895; collected and published also in the Smoot Investigation before the senate committee on privileges and elections, and hence now government documents. (Proceedings in the Smoot Case, testimony of Judge O. W. Powers, vol. i, pp. 808-888).
[^14] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 19th, 1895, p. 553. The editorial of the News referred to is to be found in the same issue and page.
[^15] Viz., the first presidency, the twelve apostles, the presiding patriarch of the church, the first council of the seventy, and the presiding bishopric.
[^16] Minutes of the General Conference of the Church, published in Deseret News, weekly, of April 11th, 1896, pp. 532-4. See also Smoot Case Hearings, vol. i, p. 168.
[^17] Ibid, pp. 531-2.
[^18] See Thatcher's testimony in the Smoot Case, vol. i, p. 1037. See also account of the Charges, Findings and Decisions in the Thatcher Trial before the Salt Lake Stake High Council, Ibid, pp. 563-573. The case of Moses Thatcher enters very fully into the record of the Smoot Hearings before the senate committee on privileges and elections, both in the form of his own testimony, vol. i, pp. 936 to 947; and from pp. 937 to 1036. This last citation is the Calvin Reasoner pamphlet, The Late Manifesto in Politics—Practical Working of Counsel in Relation to Civil and Religious Liberty in Utah. It covers 90 pages of the Smoot Record. Also "The Thatcher Episode," Ibid, pp. 247-286. This is a criticism of Mr. Thatcher's position by Professor N. L. Nelson of the Brigham Young University at Provo, and represents the church side of the controversy.
[^19] The document in full is published in Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 28th, 1896, p. 742; a number of letters passing between Lorenzo Snow the president of the council, and the deposed apostle, is published in the News, of Dec. 5th, 1896, pp. 747-776. A fuller collection of letters and other documents will be found in the Calvin Reasoner pamphlet, in the Smoot Hearings, vol. i, pp. 960-967. At p. 967 of this record is the announced decision of the apostles in this case.
[^20] The case is reported at length in the Deseret News, daily, of Aug. 14th, 1897; also in Smoot Case Hearings, vol. i, pp. 564-573.
[^21] The president's signature was affixed to the proclamation at three minutes past ten a. m., eastern time, or three minutes past eight a. m., standard time in Salt Lake City. (Deseret News, editorial account of the signing of the proclamation, weekly, of January 11th, 1896.)
[^22] Proceedings in full will be found in the Salt Lake Herald and Tribune of the 7th of January, 1896; also in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 11th, pp. 113-120.
[^23] See Salt Lake Tribune, current for the period and now become the Republican party organ.
[^24] Salt Lake Tribune of January 15th and Deseret News, weekly, of January 18th, 1896.
[^25] Salt Lake Tribune, January 15th, 1896.
[^26] This, 1930.
[^27] Iliff's letter is published in Salt Lake Tribune of January 19th, 1896.
[^28] See Salt Lake Tribune of January 21st, 1896.
[^29] Salt Lake Tribune, editorial, impression of January 15th, 1896.
[^30] Copy of his reply will be found in Deseret News, weekly, March 2nd, 1895.
[^31] The whole correspondence will be found in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 29th, 1894, p. 458, with editorial comment, Ibid.
[^32] The senate during the first session of the 53rd congress stood 44 Democrats, 38 Republicans; 3 Populists; and 3 vacancies. In the 2nd session the number of Democrats remained the same; the Republicans lost two, and the Populists gained two. The vacancies remained the same. (See New York World Almanac, compilation of senate statistics, 1894, p. 363; and 1895, p. 373). The house of the 53rd congress was heavily Democratic, viz., 219 Democrats; 127 Republicans; Populists, 10. (New York World Almanac, 1894, p. 368).
[^33] Deseret News, weekly, of June 13th, 1891, p. 782.
[^34] Caine's Biography, Latter-day Saints Biographical Encyclopedia, p. 737
