B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

323CHAPTER CLXXIV

323UTAH'S CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION—STATEHOOD—FIRST STATE ELECTION

Utah Achieves StatehoodHC323UNDER the enabling act the Utah constitutional convention convened on the first Monday in March— the 4th—1895. Sixty of the one hundred and seven delegates were Republicans; forty-seven Democrats; and as the former had a working majority they proceeded with the organization of the convention under the caucus arrangements entered into previous to the meeting of the convention. Mr. John Henry Smith—son of George A. Smith—who was a cousin of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and prominent in early Utah history—was made president of the convention, and the organization throughout was, of course, Republican. The convention in all ran through sixty-six days, its closing session being held on the 8th day of May, 1895.

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCGENERAL CHARACTER OF UTAH'S CONSTITUTION

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCThe Constitution, of course, followed in general outline the Constitutions of other states of the American Union, differing chiefly in that it accorded to women equal suffrage with men. By the express terms of the enabling act the convention was required on behalf of the people of the proposed state to adopt the Constitution of the United States; to make the proposed Constitution Republican in form; to make no distinction in civil or political rights on account of race or color—except as to Indians not taxed; it was not to be repugnant to the Constitution of the United States and the principles of the Declaration of Independence; also the convention was required to provide by ordinance, irrevocable, without the consent of the United States, and the people of said state—

Utah Achieves StatehoodHC"That perfect toleration of religious sentiment shall be secured, and that no inhabitant of said state shall ever be molested in person or property on account of his or her mode of religious worship. Provided that polygamous or plural marriages are forever prohibited."

SETTLEMENT OF THE POLYGAMY QUESTION BY THE CONSTITUTION

All these things the convention did. In the last item, which of course was of special interest, the convention, in order to be sure of compliance with this named condition, adopted the exact language of the enabling act. This early in the convention's history—the seventeenth day—placing it in the bill of rights. Later Mr. Varian, of Salt Lake City, a non-"Mormon," and a lawyer of high standing, introduced an additional article on the subject, tending as he claimed to give further expression of good faith to the country on this subject, by the people of Utah. The object of this second article was to define polygamy and provide for its punishment in the Constitution, and not leave it for the legislature to give effect to the constitutional declaration that "polygamous or plural marriages are forever prohibited." The status of the law upon the subject was that there was in effect, so long as the territorial condition remained, the congressional law against both polygamy and polygamous living, or unlawful cohabitation. As soon, however, as Utah became a state these congressional laws—it was quite generally held by the lawyers in the convention—would cease to exist, and from Mr. Varian's point of view there would remain nothing against the practice of polygamy but the constitutional declaration that it should "forever be prohibited." But this provision, as Mr. Varian pointed out, was not "self-executing," and might or might not be made effective by action of the state legislature. He urged, therefore, that to leave the matter in this status might be regarded by those who would pass upon the work of the convention—the administration at Washington—as failing to comply with the spirit of the enabling act. The territorial legislature in 1892 had passed an enactment, which the governor had approved, defining in terms polygamy, unlawful cohabitation, adultery, incest, fornication, and providing penalties for the same; and this in practically the same terms as were used in the congressional enactments upon these same subjects. For the reason, however, that the territorial legislature had only paralleled the laws of congress, thus entering the sphere already occupied by the superior legislative authority, it was quite generally held that the territorial act was of no effect—was void; as a practical law it had no existence, and therefore would not and could not be brought over into the state as a law by the clause in the schedule of the Constitution which provided that "all laws of the territory now in force, not repugnant to this Constitution, shall remain in force until they expire by their own limitation, or are altered or repealed by the legislature." Under these conditions, then, Mr. Varian moved the insertion in the schedule of the Constitution (Article xxiv) the following:

325"The act of the governor and legislative assembly of the territory of Utah, entitled 'an act to punish polygamy and other kindred offenses, approved February 4th, A. D., 1892,' in so far as the same defines and imposes penalties for polygamy, is hereby declared to be in force in the State of Utah."

325This, it will be observed, was cutting the territorial enactment in two, adopting so much of it as defined and punished polygamy,—i. e. the act of marrying polygamously—but leaving out, and advisedly, the part which related to polygamous living, or unlawful cohabitation. The congressional law, which in its terms the territorial law, and hence the Varian article, followed—defined "polygamy" as follows: "As any person having a husband or wife living who marries another, and any man who simultaneously or on the same day marries more than one woman." The penalty was a fine of not more than five hundred dollars and by imprisonment for a term of not more than five years. The Varian amendment to the schedule article given above was adopted by a vote of seventy-two in favor of it, and sixteen against it; sixteen absent, and twelve paired. [^1]

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCEFFECT OF THE VARIAN CLAUSE

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCThe clear, unstrained effect of this act of the constitutional convention, in the settlement of this long-continued and vexed question, was to provide against future polygamous marriages and leave undisturbed the relationships that had been formed in the past under the sanctions of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. And that also, and only that, was the clear and unstrained meaning of the requirement of the enabling act, viz: "that polygamous or plural marriages are forever prohibited." That the effect of cutting in two the act of the governor and legislative assembly of the territory of Utah, and making that part which defines and imposes penalties for polygamy a part of the Constitution, while failing to incorporate the second division, relating to unlawful cohabitation, would have the effect by implication, and intent of the convention, to repeal the second part of it, even if it had been a valid law, all which was admitted in the debate on Mr. Varian's proposition. The territorial law was thus cut in two, was very generally held by the lawyers of the convention to be not valid; and therefore left the second division of the territorial law where the whole law always had been in the opinion of the foremost lawyers of the territory, ineffective, and void from the beginning.

Utah Achieves StatehoodHC326This then, was the settlement of the polygamy question by the constitutional convention:—the fountain of the supposed evil—polygamous marriages—was to be dried up; the streams that had their origin from that fountain, in the past, to run their course until lost on death's plains.

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCTHE REENACTMENT OF THE TERRITORIAL LAW ON POLYGAMOUS LIVING

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCUnfortunately, however, that settlement of the matter, so eminently just, and satisfactory to all concerned—for there was no protest made against it from any quarter —was not permitted to remain undisturbed. A code commission was appointed to compile the laws of Utah in 1896. [^2] They included in their compilation this invalid territorial law respecting polygamy and polygamous living, and as this compilation of law was presented to the legislature and passed as a bill, it saddled upon the state the part of the law which the constitutional convention did not consider necessary to incorporate in the Constitution in order to comply with the demands made upon Utah as a condition precedent to admission as a state, and certainly was not demanded by the people of the state. It is not putting the matter too strongly to say that its admission into the compilation of the laws was unnecessary to the settlement of the vexed question. But notwithstanding this reenactment of the old, void territorial law, the constitutional convention's settlement of the polygamy question, as set forth above, has been the one accepted and acted upon in the state of Utah, and despite some slight variations from the rule, the constitutional convention's adjustment of the polygamy question became the settled public policy of the state of Utah. The melancholy finality contemplated in that settlement was not remote and is practically an accomplished fact now—the elimination by death of that generation of men and women who were involved in the system of plural marriage under the sanctions of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. There are but few of them left now—1930—"and time is on the wing!" Indeed such families are practically extinct.

EFFORT TO RETURN TO THE CONVENTION SETTLEMENT

In 1901 an effort was made to nullify the effect of admitting into the code this void law of territorial days by the passage of an amendment to section 461 of the revised statutes of Utah, 1898, providing—that "no prosecution for unlawful cohabitation shall be commenced except on complaint of the wife or alleged plural wife of the accused; but this proviso shall not apply to prosecutions under section 4208>, defining and punishing polygamous marriages." This amendment passed the state senate March 8th, 1901, by a vote of 11 to 7; and the house a few days later by a vote of 25 to 17. This act awakened some opposition throughout the country and Governor Wells professing the fear that it would lead to widespread agitation vetoed the bill on the 14th of March, saying, however, in his veto message:

328"The broadminded and intelligent everywhere accept the situation here as it exists, and are content to let time complete the solution of the problem. Even the bigoted and the meddlesome have to admit that with some exceptions the conduct and integrity of the people are above reproach. * * * While it may be urged that in any event only the few could be made to suffer, is it not an odious thought, repulsive to every good citizen, of whatsoever creed or party, that the whole state should thus be put under a ban? Surely there is none so selfish and unpatriotic as to argue that this is preferable to the endurance of a few isolated instances of prosecution—unbacked as they are by either respectable moral support or sympathy." [^3]

President Joseph F. Smith in his testimony before the senate committee in the Smoot case stated in effect that he had not been prosecuted for unlawful cohabitation by the officers of the state of Utah, because of their respect for him; [^4] and later stated that "not only public opinion" but the Constitution of the state of Utah—having in mind doubtless the constitutional convention settlement of the polygamy question, and "the general conditions that exist in Utah"—justified him in living with his polygamous wives. [^5] Against this protest was made by a meeting of 187 men and one woman, held in Salt Lake City. A Protest and a Memorial was drawn up and sent to congress and to the senate committee on privileges and elections denying that they were condoners of the crime of polygamous living, they protested against its continuance "and demand that this law breaking be given up in all its forms." [^6] This action represented no general movement or state of feeling, and the fact remains that such tolleration did and does exist, as is made plain by testimony before the senate committee in the Smoot case, and from conditions in Utah that are matters of common knowledge. For evidence from the testimony in the Smoot case in addition to President Smith's testimony, that of E. B. Critchlow, and of Judge O. W. Powers, [^7] the judge said:

329"Those men [i. e. old members of the Liberal party] have felt, and still feel, that if this matter is to die out and pass away, they will not interfere with them [i. e. with Mormons living polygamously]. * * * We have not known what was best to do. It has been discussed, and people would say that such and such a man ought to be prosecuted. Then they would consider whether anything would be gained; whether we would not delay instead of hasten the time that we hope to live to see; whether the institution would not flourish by reason of what they would term persecution. And so, notwithstanding a protest has been sent down here to you, [at Washington] I will say to you the people have acquiesced in the condition that exists."

329"Mr. Van Cott, an attorney: You mean Gentiles?

329The Witness: Yes, the Gentiles."

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCFIRST ELECTION UNDER STATEHOOD

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCIn the Utah election of 1895, when there was chosen the first full set of state officers,—a congressman, and the legislature that would later elect the first United States senators from Utah—the Republicans were successful. They elected every officer, state and national by pluralities ranging from 897 to 2,314. Heber M. Wells, son of Daniel H. Wells, so prominent in the early history of the church in Illinois and in Utah territory, was elected governor. Mr. C. E. Allen, a non-"Mormon," was elected to congress; the legislature, under agreement in the Republican caucus, elected F. J. Cannon, son of George Q. Cannon, and a "Mormon," and Mr. Arthur Brown, a non-"Mormon" lawyer, of prominence, as senators. [^8]

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE CHARGE OF CHURCH INFLUENCE MADE

Political and Legal AffairsHCIn this 1895 campaign and election, as in the preceding one, the charge of ecclesiastical interference on the side favorable to Republican interests was freely made, and largely diverted the discussion of the campaign from national questions to local ones. Also for a time threatened to endanger the harmonious working of all the people of the state for the admission of Utah into the Union. The issue arose in this manner:

Political and Legal AffairsHCRunning on the Democratic ticket for the place of United States senator and representative in congress, respectively, were two of the general officers of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, Moses Thatcher, of the quorum of the apostles, and B. H. Roberts of the first council of the seventy. In a special priesthood meeting held at Salt Lake City on the seventh of October, the political canvass then being at its height, Joseph F. Smith of the first presidency of the church, indirectly referred to these Democratic candidates and churchmen as having accepted nominations which, if followed by election, would take them from their official church duties, and this without consultation had or arrangements made for their absence with their ecclesiastical superiors; and in this had failed to show due respect for church authority, and were acting contrary to church rule, as President Smith understood it, and in a manner to discredit the church authority and lower its dignity. Undoubtedly President Smith was right in reproving these brethren for their dereliction of duty in the respect named; for the right he claimed for the church authorities to be consulted under such circumstances, and by men holding such relationship to the organization as did the two candidates criticized, was reasonable. The dereliction of the two brethren undoubtedly arose, however, not through wanton disregard of their superior officers or disrespect for the church, but to the confusion which at the time prevailed in regard to what was to be the attitude of high ecclesiastics of the church respecting political office holding. At first, when statehood was imminent, it was thought best, and so decided, that brethren holding prominent positions in the church should not become candidates for public office; [^9] but afterwards it was seen that this would deprive the state of the services of many very capable men, and especially from among the "Mormon" people, and therefore it was decided to permit church officials to accept political preferment; and under this arrangement the two brethren named had both accepted nominations, and had been elected members of the state's constitutional convention, together with many other high church officials, both Republicans and Democrats—bishops, presidents of stakes and patriarchs. The president of the convention, Mr. John Henry Smith, was one of the twelve apostles of the church.

Political and Legal AffairsHCAfter the close of the constitutional convention, the election for state officers taking place in the autumn following, and under the apprehension that the last ruling in respect of high churchmen being permitted to accept nomination and election to office warranted such action, as the two brethren, Thatcher and Roberts, had taken in accepting nominations for the senate [^10] and house respectively, without further consultation had or arrangement made with their ecclesiastical superiors respecting the possible interruption of their official services to the church during a possible tenure of political office. [^11]

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE USE MADE OF THE ECCLESIASTICAL CENSURE OF THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe censure of these brethren was seized upon by the opposing party as indicating that they were out of favor with the church authorities and that their political defeat was desirable. [^12] Of course, as was pointed out at the time, whether or not this church rule would become a means of influencing and even controlling elections, and become an instrument of ecclesiastic interference in political affairs, depends wholly upon the integrity of the church authorities. It might be urged, and it was so urged during this controversy, that the church authorities could consent for one of their number to participate in political activities—if on the side they might be supposed to favor—and refuse it on the other, and thus control political results. Or the people of their church might interpret their willingness to excuse one officer from church duties to mean that they favored both his nomination and his election; or withholding consent from another to accept nomination, might be interpreted to mean that they were not only against his nomination but against the party cause for which he desired to stand, and thus bring ecclesiastical influence to bear upon the political affairs of the state. [^13] If, however, the rule is invoked to protect the efficiency of the church service, and has that only in view, nothing can be more reasonable or more necessary to preserve church efficiency and discipline among its general officers. And this is the purpose for which it was invoked in this year 1895, according to a signed statement by President Wilford Woodruff and Deseret News editorial comment. Referring to the meeting at which President Smith censured the brethren, referred to above, President Woodruff said:

Political and Legal AffairsHCPURPOSE OF THE POLITICAL RULE

Political and Legal AffairsHC"There was not, according to my recollection one word said about Democrats or politics. * * * When the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized, it was with the holy priesthood in its various orders and quorums. And when a man was appointed to the apostleship, or presidency, or in any office, as a teacher of the people, it placed on him a very grave responsibility; and no man was counted at liberty, from the organization of the church, to engage in any branch of business, politics, or anything else to take him entirely away from his calling, business, duty or responsibility for a length of time, without first counseling with the presidency of the church, or with his quorum, on its propriety, and getting permission to do so. This order has rested upon us all alike. This has been my position for sixty years of my life, and that, too, without interfering with my manhood. And this course does not require a man to give up his position in the Democratic party or in the Republican. Every man has his own free agency. He has the right to withdraw from his quorum, or the church, if he wishes. But while he remains in his quorum, or in the church, we think he should be subject to the same rules that we ourselves are. But that duty does not require any man to withdraw from the Democratic or Republican party, or give up his political principles.

Political and Legal AffairsHC333[Signed] "WILFORD WOODRUFF." [^14]

Political and Legal AffairsHCLater, after the canvass and the election were closed, and in order that there might be a perfect understanding in the matter, and uniformity of sentiment and action, the general authorities of the church [^15] formulated in writing and signed this rule of the church, usually referred to in both Latter-day Saint and anti-"Mormon" literature as "The Political Manifesto." The rule itself is preceded by a full explanation of the circumstances which called it forth. The salient points in the document, however, are in these excerpts:

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE POLITICAL RULE OF THE CHURCH

Political and Legal AffairsHCTo the Officers and Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in General Conference Assembled

Political and Legal AffairsHC334"We unanimously agree to, and promulgate as a rule, that should always be observed in the church and by every leading official thereof, that before accepting any position, political or otherwise, which would interfere with the proper and complete discharge of his ecclesiastical duties, and before accepting a nomination or entering into engagements to perform new duties, said official should apply to the proper authorities and learn from them whether he can, consistently with the obligations already entered into with the church upon assuming his office, take upon himself the added duties and labors and responsibilities of the new position. To maintain proper discipline and order in the church, we deem this absolutely necessary; and in asserting this rule, we do not consider that we are infringing in the least degree upon the individual rights of the citizen.

Political and Legal AffairsHC334We declare that in making these requirements of ourselves and our brethren in the ministry, we do not in the least desire to dictate to them concerning their duties as American citizens, or to interfere with the affairs of the state; neither do we consider that in the remotest degree we are seeking the union of church and state." [^16]

Political and Legal AffairsHCThis document signed by all the general authorities of the church excepting two of the apostles, was presented to the conference of the church on the 6th of April and sustained by vote as the rule and understanding of the church on the matters of which it treats. [^17] The two apostles who did not sign this manifesto were Anthon H. Lund, absent, presiding over the European Mission; and Moses Thatcher, who refused to sign it, on the ground that unless more strictly defined it would lead to ecclesiastical interference with the political affairs of the state, and nullify previous declarations of the general authorities as to the political independence and freedom of the individual, and the freedom of the state from ecclesiastical dominance. [^18]

CHURCH ACTION IN THE THATCHER CASE

For failing to join with the general authorities in signing this document, the name of Moses Thatcher was not presented at the April conference, 1896; nor again at the October conference of the same year. Elder Thatcher during this period was in poor health, and therefore no positive action was taken respecting his recalcitrance, except that at the October conference referred to each of his fellow apostles referred to his contumacy, and warned the saints not to be over-sympathetic with him pending a settlement of his case.

335Elder Thatcher was finally summoned before the council of the apostles for a settlement of his differences with them and the other general authorities of the church, and not appearing in answer to that summons he was, on the 19th of November, 1896, "severed from the council of the twelve apostles" and "deprived of his apostleship and other offices in the priesthood." [^19]

Within a year further action was determined upon, going to Mr. Thatcher's standing as a member of the church. Under date of July 30, 1897, three of the apostles made charges of unchristian-like conduct against him, covering largely these same difficulties arising from politics. The charges were investigated by the Salt Lake stake high council, and were sustained. The decision was that in order to "retain his standing and fellowship in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Moses Thatcher must publish a statement to the satisfaction and approval of the presidency of this stake of Zion, fully covering the following points, viz:

336"That in taking the position that the authorities of the church, by issuing the declaration of principles on April 6, 1896, acted in violation of pledges previously given and contrary to what they had published in the Deseret News and given to the Salt Lake Times, he was in error and in the dark.

336That he now sees there is no conflict between that declaration and their former utterances in reference to political affairs.

336That he was mistaken in conveying the idea that the church authorities desired and intended to unite church and state to exercise undue influence in political affairs."

336These conditions and others enumerated in the decision, but which are mere details and addenda of the above main propositions, Moses Thatcher accepted by endorsing the decision, saying:

336"Without qualification or mental reservation I accept this decision in full."—[Signed] "Moses Thatcher."

336This acceptance was accompanied by an explanatory note attached to the decision authorizing the publication of it as a settlement of his acceptance of, and compliance with, the decision of the high council. It was so accepted by the presidency of the stake in which the issue was tried. [^20]

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCPRESIDENT CLEVELAND'S PROCLAMATION—UTAH A STATE

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCReturning now to the matter of Utah becoming a state, from which the above items associated with the first state election were a digression, it is only necessary to say that President Grover Cleveland signed a proclamation to the effect that the several requirements of the enabling act had been complied with, a Constitution had been drafted and accepted by vote of the people, an election of officers for the state had been held and the results certified, the Constitution and government were Republican in form and not repugnant to the Constitution of the United States and the Declaration of Independence, and therefore by authority vested in him declared that the admission of Utah "into the Union on an equal footing with the original states is now an accomplished fact." The proclamation was signed on Saturday the 4th of January, 1896. [^21] The news of the event was received in Salt Lake City and throughout Utah with great enthusiasm. In Salt Lake City the fact of signing the proclamation was announced by the firing of guns, ringing of bells, blowing of whistles, and general jubilation.

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCTHE INSTALLATION OF THE STATE OFFICERS

Utah Achieves StatehoodHCTwo days later, Monday, January the 6th, the state officers were installed at a great public gathering in the "Mormon" tabernacle, preceded by a procession through the principal thoroughfares. Mr. Charles C. Richards, secretary of the late territory of Utah, acted as master of ceremonies in the absence of Governor West, the last of Utah's territorial governors. The opening prayer, as was most fitting, was prepared by the venerable Pioneer of Utah and president of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, Wilford Woodruff, but owing to his feebleness—he was eighty-nine years of age now—his prayer was read by George Q. Cannon. "I am thankful that I have lived to behold Utah a state government," was his simple journal entry on the day's proceedings. A chorus of a thousand voices sang "The Star Spangled Banner." Territorial ex-delegate to congress, Joseph L. Rawlins, after being greeted by tempestuous applause, read President Cleveland's Proclamation admitting Utah into the Union. After Mr. Rawlins concluded the reading of the proclamation he turned to Heber M. Wells, newly elected governor of the state and said: "And now I have the honor and the pleasure to present you, Heber M. Wells, the first governor of Utah, the pen which was used by the president of the United States, ten minutes before the hour of midnight on the 16th day of July, 1894, signing the bill under which Utah has become a state in the American Union. I present it to you, in order that it may be kept among the archives of the state of Utah."

Utah Achieves StatehoodHC338Acting governor of the territory, Hon. Charles C. Richards, arose and said to the assembly:

Utah Achieves StatehoodHC338"I now surrender to your favored servant [the governor of the state, Heber M. Wells] the executive office, upon his taking the oath prescribed by the Constitution."

Utah Achieves StatehoodHC338The oath was administered by Chief Justice Charles S. Zane. A cannon boomed on the instant from capitol hill, and so as each state official took the oath of office. The great chorus of a thousand voices sang Evan Stephens' new state song—"Utah, We Love Thee." Secretary of State Hammond read the governor's proclamation convening the state legislature at three o'clock p. m. that day—the proclamation had been previously published. The governor delivered his inaugural address devoted chiefly to the history of Utah's struggle for statehood. The chorus and audience united in singing "America," and the gathering was dismissed by a benediction offered by Rev. T. C. Iliff. [^22]

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE ELECTION OF UNITED STATES SENATORS FROM UTAH

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe new state legislature met first in special session on the 6th of January, and adjourned to meet some two weeks later in regular session. The major factor of interest before the legislature was the election of Utah's first United States senators. On this matter there was no little excitement and some intense feelings aroused. It had been and still was a strong desire of the California group of business men and politicians, lately so powerful in national republican politics, that Isaac Trumbo, of their group, and who had recently come to Salt Lake City, ostentatiously made his residence at the Gardo House, a somewhat palatial residence for Salt Lake City, built in his later years, but never occupied, by Brigham Young. Here Mr. Trumbo intensively interested himself both in Utah and in Washington, D. C., in promoting statehood for Utah, with no other intention or reason than becoming a United States senator from the new state. Public understanding, rightfully or not, usually coupled the name and interests of George Q. Cannon with those of Mr. Trumbo, and their names were commonly coupled together as prospective senators to be elected by the Republican legislature of Utah. Frank J. Cannon, however, had been Utah's delegate to congress when the territory had been admitted to statehood (albeit he had little to do in obtaining statehood, since the enabling act had been introduced by Mr. J. L. Rawlins, Mr. Cannon's predecessor, as delegate from Utah; it had been passed by a Democratic congress and signed by a Democratic president, and the state was finally admitted into the Union by proclamation of the same president, without Mr. Cannon so much as shaping the matter by the touch of his hand). However, there exists a political tradition that when territories were admitted as states the territorial delegate in office when the transition is made shall become one of the senators. Frank J. Cannon fell heir, however undeservedly, to this traditional honor, and it was claimed for him by his political friends. [^23] Also there had grown up in Utah, with the brighter prospect for statehood, a general understanding that there would be a division of the senatorships as between "Mormons" and non-"Mormons;" hence in this first election it was thought this understanding would prevail, and the Republican candidates were to be so aligned. So indeed were the Democratic candidates who had been nominated by their party conventions—Moses Thatcher, "Mormon;" J. L. Rawlins, non-"Mormon;" the same division obtained as to George Q. Cannon and Mr. Trumbo; and Mr. George Q. Cannon it should be remarked was rated by his friends and advocates as a non-partisan or an independent in politics.

Political and Legal AffairsHC340The non-"Mormon" aspirants for a senatorship among the regular Republicans were a Judge C. W. Bennett, a successful lawyer, and gentleman of high standing; Mr. Charles C. Goodwin, the brilliant editor of the Salt Lake Tribune, and Mr. Arthur Brown, a practicing attorney of Salt Lake City, and active in politics.

Political and Legal AffairsHC340"CHURCH INFLUENCE" IN SENATORIAL ELECTIONS

Political and Legal AffairsHCViolent protest was made against Mr. George Q. Cannon's candidacy, upon the supposition that he would represent the church rather than the state; that if elected, under the circumstances, it would be a manifestation of church influence that would be a reversion to old conditions alleged to have existed in pre-statehood days; it would show that in Utah "the church was again in the saddle," and so the contest was waged among these candidates for weeks, Mr. George Q. Cannon remaining in the contest at least as a receptive candidate—with his friends active, and some of them were influential men of the state—to the very eve of the Republican legislative caucus agreed upon by the party was convened to settle the choice for senators. It was not until then that Mr. Cannon issued a formal "card" through the press to the effect that he was "not a candidate for senator, and could not accept that office." He could not, "in the remotest degree, contribute to division (of the Republican party)," by allowing his name to "appear as a candidate for United States senator." This "card" was issued under date of January the 14th, the Republican caucus convened the evening of the same day. [^24] This action simplified matters; the way was cleared for Mr. Frank J. Cannon and when the caucus met on the evening of January the 14th he was chosen by acclamation, and Mr. Arthur Brown won on the first ballot taken by the caucus. [^25] Later the legislature ratified the action of the caucus and these men became the first senators from the state of Utah.

Political and Legal AffairsHC341The United States Constitution divides the senators into three classes, and when senators from new states are chosen they determine by lot which of them should serve in the class of the short term and which in the longer term. In such drawings, which took place in the senate chamber on the 27th of January, 1896, Mr. Cannon drew the longer term, Mr. Brown the short one. The latter term would expire on the 3rd of March, 1897, the former on the 3rd of March, 1899, about one and three years service respectively.

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE STATE UNFORTUNATE IN THE CHOICE OF HER FIRST SENATORS

Political and Legal AffairsHCNeither of these men were near ideal senators according to the standards that obtained in Utah for positions of public trust. True, Mr. Frank J. Cannon must be accorded mental brilliancy above the average men in public life, with facility of speech and writing, and what men call personal magnetism and charm of manners; but in real weight and solidity of character and dependability he was woefully lacking. And above all, as a representative of the Latter-day Saints in the unfortunate religious division respecting the senatorships that for a time prevailed in Utah, he by no means measured up to the standards of that people as was manifested by habitual deportment in Washington while senator, and still more after he failed of reelection. He it was who became the leader of a bitter anti-"Mormon" crusade in the municipal affairs of Salt Lake City, and for a time galvanized into temporary life the old anti-"Mormon" Liberal party, under the name and title of the "American party." Also when this movement collapsed he turned to professional anti-"Mormon" lecturing and publishing as his activity, in which he still abides. [^26]

Political and Legal AffairsHCMR. ARTHUR BROWN

Political and Legal AffairsHCMr. Arthur Brown no more fittingly represented the better class of non-"Mormon" Republicans in Utah than Mr. Frank J. Cannon met the standards of the Latter-day Saints of Utah. Rev. Thomas C. Iliff, a prominent sectarian mission minister of the Methodist Episcopal church, following the action of the caucus, wrote the Salt Lake Tribune in a protest of Mr. Brown's election:

Political and Legal AffairsHC342"'As a citizen, and always as a Republican up-to-date, I protest against the selection of Arthur Brown and his kind to represent Utah in the United States senate,' he wrote. While there might be a 'semblance of honor' in supporting the action of the caucus, yet there was 'a principle in ethics and in manhood, too,' that required the caucus action to be set aside. To persist in carrying it through would bring 'disgrace to the state, humiliation to decent people and defeat to the Republican party'." [^27]

Political and Legal AffairsHC342The matter was taken up by the sectarian Ministerial Association of Salt Lake City and discussed, but no formal action against Mr. Brown was taken though several of the ministers in published interviews expressed sympathy with the protest of Rev. Iliff. [^28] The Salt Lake Tribune, organ of the Republican party, commenting on the action of the caucus in nominating Mr. Brown, said:

Political and Legal AffairsHC"It was unexpected and will strike the people something in the nature of a trick and bad faith. Mr. Brown deserves nothing from the Republican party. He is not of the stuff that the ideal senator is made; he has none of the qualities that are looked for in the incumbent of that high and illustrious position, but many that one would suppose should forbid anyone thinking of him in that connection." [^29]

Political and Legal AffairsHC343In the next election Utah went Democratic, including the election of a Democratic legislature, which would elect a senator to succeed Mr. Brown; and as he could have no chance to be reelected to succeed himself, by such a legislature, his short term of a little more than one year closed his senatorial career. Ten years later he was shot to death in a Washington, D. C., hotel, by a discarded mistress.

Political and Legal AffairsHCSUBSEQUENT SENATORIAL ELECTIONS

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe contenders for the senatorship before the Democratic legislature elected in 1896, were Joseph L. Rawlins, the former delegate from Utah, who had to his credit the introduction into congress of Utah's enabling act, securing its passage, and acceptance with liberal public land grants for educational purposes in the new state; and had also introduced into the house of representatives—though himself a non-"Mormon"—and secured the passage of a bill which returned to the Latter-day Saint Church its government escheated personal church property amounting to nearly half a million dollars. Also he was a lawyer of recognized ability, of statesmanlike quality of mind and temperament and a man of temperate habits.

Political and Legal AffairsHCMoses Thatcher was by now deposed from the apostolate of the "Mormon" church in consequence of a disagreement with his fellow apostles on the subject of securing from his superiors leave of absence from ecclesiastical functions before accepting election or appointment to any political or business position that would interfere with his ecclesiastical duties. The contest was very close and long drawn out but was finally won by Mr. Rawlins by a vote of thirty-three as against Mr. Thatcher's twenty-nine. Mr. Thatcher is supposed to have lost some prestige in "Mormon" public sentiment owing to his attitude on the "political rule" adopted by his church, that cost him his standing as an apostle, and some attributed his defeat to that circumstance—the desire of the "Mormon" church leaders for his defeat.

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE SENATORIAL FIASCO OF 1899

Political and Legal AffairsHCUtah again went Democratic in the election of 1898 and the Democratic legislature was charged with the responsibility and the duty of choosing a senator to succeed Mr. Frank J. Cannon. Although Mr. Cannon was a Republican in politics and had been previously elected senator as such, he believed himself entitled to reelection, even by a Democratic legislature, for the reason that in the western interest of the free and unlimited coinage of silver at the ratio of sixteen of silver to one of gold, he had with other Republican delegates from Utah and other western states, bolted the national Republican convention of 1896 and formed the free silver wing of the Republican party; and as the free coinage of silver was the chief issue in politics in this contest, Mr. Cannon presented his claims for consideration before the Democratic legislature.

Political and Legal AffairsHCHis chief opponent was a Mr. Alfred W. McCune, a wealthy mining man of Utah and the west, though never very closely or intensively identified with Utah life and sentiment. He was not a "Mormon," though friendly to the church, and as Mr. Rawlins, a non-"Mormon," was now in the senate from Utah, the not very clearly defined understanding was that a "Mormon" should be elected. Mr. McCune early in the contest secured the support of a majority of the legislature, but could not get the required two-thirds majority necessary to election, nor could his following of a majority be reduced. As the term of the legislature drew near to its close and the prospect loomed large that no choice for senator would be made, Mr. George Q. Cannon, always a receptive candidate for the senate as an independent in politics, was presented as a candidate and his qualifications as an able man, perhaps the ablest and most experienced politician in the state, were urged before the legislature. This tended, however, but to the greater confusion of matters. As Mr. Cannon was a high church man, a member of the "Mormon" church first presidency, the cry of "Mormon" church influence was again raised in connection with his entrance into the contest, and the term of the legislature expired without the election of a senator.

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE SENATORIAL ELECTION OF 1901

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe legislature elected in Utah two years later was Republican and that body elected Thomas Kearns, a wealthy silver mining man closely identified with silver mining interests of Utah; and as the free coinage of silver was still a state and national political issue, of course Mr. Kearns was in favor of free coinage. It was charged, however, that Mr. Kearns, though a non "Mormon," was elected senator by the favor of the president of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, by then, President Lorenzo Snow. It was a case, it must be confessed, of a very wealthy man devoted to a single interest—"the free coinage of silver"—succeeding, though otherwise unsuited to the office of United States senator.

Political and Legal AffairsHCTHE THING TO BE REMEMBERED—UTAH A STATE

Political and Legal AffairsHCThe thing to be remembered, however, in closing this chapter, is that "Utah is now a state in the American Union, and upon an equal footing with the other states of that Union." Henceforth her destiny as a state will be in the hands of her own people.

Political and Legal AffairsHCHere also we reach an important epoch in the history of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. Up to the accomplished fact of statehood, in consequence of the Latter-day Saints as a civil community struggling for the right of local self-government, and at times for community existence itself, through the whole territorial period, the affairs of the church have been more or less inextricably associated with the affairs of the civil government. With statehood an accomplished fact; with the rights of self-government secured to the people; with church and state separated by constitutional provision, and by official declaration of the church many times and in many forms repeated,—the church from now on will have a well-defined and separate existence from political entanglements and struggles, such as have, no doubt, to some extent, hampered her free and full development as an ecclesiastical institution charged with a great mission to be accomplished in two great activities; viz:" (1) To make proclamation of, and to teach the truths deposited with her by the revelations of God, to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people; and (2) to perfect the lives of those who receive the truths she proclaims. It is the mission of the church to make men, leaving the men to make the state—the community.

Political and Legal AffairsHC346There will be debris to be cleared away in the immediately ensuing years—lingering wreckage from this past struggle; the formation of habits of speech and of action to conform to the new conditions imposed by this fact of statehood, and the formal separation of church interests from political strifes and struggles, but the complete separation is inevitable, the machinery is all provided for it, the necessity for it is imperative; and the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, for the full and free development of effective service for humanity, in teaching the absolute truth and the fulness thereof, and applying that truth to human life, has need to be free from the hampering contact of petty, political party strifes. Henceforth—from the inauguration of Utah statehood—the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in this matter will be free, and the more glorious for that freedom.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See discourse of Wilford Woodrufi, delivered at the April general conference of the church, 1894. Deseret News, weekly, of April 21st, 1894, pp. 541-4, George Q. Cannon, following also delivered a discourse on the same subject. (Ibid, pp. 544-5).
[^2] Deseret News, weekly, of November 14th, 1896. The inauguration of this custom of fasting as an economic measure to provide food for those who were destitute and the possibilities of it have already been considered in chapter xcix this History.
[^3] Deseret News, weekly, July 24th, 1897.
[^4] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry for Dec. 30th, 1896.
[^5] Woodruff's Journal, Ms., entry of April 7th, 1897.
[^6] Deseret News, vol. 57, p. 399. The Union Pacific Railroad and the Oregon Short Line officials likewise made a tender of any service they could give.
[^7] Ibid, impression of Sept. 10th, 1898.
[^8] State officers other than those named in the text were: Secretary of State, James T. Hammond; Attorney-general, A. C. Bishop; Auditor, Morgan Richards, Jr.; Treasurer, James Chipman; Supt. Public Instruction, Dr. John R. Park; Judges of the Supreme Court, Chas. S. Zane, Geo. C. Bartch, J. A. Miner. The vote for the Constitution stood 31,305 in favor of it; against it, 7,697. The vote for Governor Wells, Republican, 20,833; Caine, Democrat, 18,519 H. W. Lawrence, Populist, 12,051. For Representative in Congress: Allen, Republican, 20,563; Roberts, Democrat, 19,666. Allen's majority, 897. (New York World's election tables 1896—Utah, p. 440).
[^9] Indeed as early as October, 1892, it was decided that it would be best for certain high officers of the church not to actively engage in political campaign speaking, as will be seen from the following excerpt from President Wilford Woodruff's Journal, Ms., "Oct. 4th, (1892): . . . Met with the quorum of the twelve. Partook of the sacrament together. Talked over our political situation and expressed our feelings frankly. The general opinion was for none of the presidency, twelve, or the presidents of seventy to take the stump to make political speeches." Subsequently came the understanding respecting office-holding and political activity mentioned in the text.
[^10] The Democratic party in Utah favored election of United States senators by direct vote of the people, and in order to approach that method of choosing United States senators as nearly as possible, the party convention of 1895 nominated the men to be elected by the legislature should it be Democratic. Hence Mr. Thatcher went before the people in the campaign as the nominee of his party for United States senator. The other nominee for senator was Joseph L. Rawlins.
[^11] See statement of the case by Mr. Roberts in the Salt Lake Tribune of Oct. 14th, 1895; also Salt Lake Herald of same date. The statement is in the form of a signed interview. It will also be found in the Smoot Case Hearings, vol. i. pp. 751-760.
[^12] Testimony in the Smoot Hearing, vol. i, pp. 757-8; also pp. 813-816.
[^13] See interviews and discussion of these questions in the Salt Lake newspapers current at the time, Oct. and Nov., 1895; collected and published also in the Smoot Investigation before the senate committee on privileges and elections, and hence now government documents. (Proceedings in the Smoot Case, testimony of Judge O. W. Powers, vol. i, pp. 808-888).
[^14] Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 19th, 1895, p. 553. The editorial of the News referred to is to be found in the same issue and page.
[^15] Viz., the first presidency, the twelve apostles, the presiding patriarch of the church, the first council of the seventy, and the presiding bishopric.
[^16] Minutes of the General Conference of the Church, published in Deseret News, weekly, of April 11th, 1896, pp. 532-4. See also Smoot Case Hearings, vol. i, p. 168.
[^17] Ibid, pp. 531-2.
[^18] See Thatcher's testimony in the Smoot Case, vol. i, p. 1037. See also account of the Charges, Findings and Decisions in the Thatcher Trial before the Salt Lake Stake High Council, Ibid, pp. 563-573. The case of Moses Thatcher enters very fully into the record of the Smoot Hearings before the senate committee on privileges and elections, both in the form of his own testimony, vol. i, pp. 936 to 947; and from pp. 937 to 1036. This last citation is the Calvin Reasoner pamphlet, The Late Manifesto in Politics—Practical Working of Counsel in Relation to Civil and Religious Liberty in Utah. It covers 90 pages of the Smoot Record. Also "The Thatcher Episode," Ibid, pp. 247-286. This is a criticism of Mr. Thatcher's position by Professor N. L. Nelson of the Brigham Young University at Provo, and represents the church side of the controversy.
[^19] The document in full is published in Deseret News, weekly, of Nov. 28th, 1896, p. 742; a number of letters passing between Lorenzo Snow the president of the council, and the deposed apostle, is published in the News, of Dec. 5th, 1896, pp. 747-776. A fuller collection of letters and other documents will be found in the Calvin Reasoner pamphlet, in the Smoot Hearings, vol. i, pp. 960-967. At p. 967 of this record is the announced decision of the apostles in this case.
[^20] The case is reported at length in the Deseret News, daily, of Aug. 14th, 1897; also in Smoot Case Hearings, vol. i, pp. 564-573.
[^21] The president's signature was affixed to the proclamation at three minutes past ten a. m., eastern time, or three minutes past eight a. m., standard time in Salt Lake City. (Deseret News, editorial account of the signing of the proclamation, weekly, of January 11th, 1896.)
[^22] Proceedings in full will be found in the Salt Lake Herald and Tribune of the 7th of January, 1896; also in Deseret News, weekly, of Jan. 11th, pp. 113-120.
[^23] See Salt Lake Tribune, current for the period and now become the Republican party organ.
[^24] Salt Lake Tribune of January 15th and Deseret News, weekly, of January 18th, 1896.
[^25] Salt Lake Tribune, January 15th, 1896.
[^26] This, 1930.
[^27] Iliff's letter is published in Salt Lake Tribune of January 19th, 1896.
[^28] See Salt Lake Tribune of January 21st, 1896.
[^29] Salt Lake Tribune, editorial, impression of January 15th, 1896.
