B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

347CHAPTER CLXXV

347CLOSING EVENTS IN THE LIFE OF PRESIDENT WILFORD WOODRUFF

347LITTLE remains to be said of Wilford Woodruff's administration of church affairs. Two things were done, however, beside those already recorded that should be mentioned. These were, first, more definite instructions delivered respecting the temple sealing ordinances. It is to be remembered that in the ordinances of the temple, provision is made for the linking together of families, work that may be done for both the living and the dead. The sons of men now living being sealed and united to their fathers, and they to their fathers, back through the ages, as far as the genealogies may be traced. Under the revelations that shall be had, and under freer and larger communication between the heavens and the earth, the work will go on until there has been accomplished a complete uniting and welding together of all the families of the children of men, and their union effected with the great patriarchal head of the race—this the work in ultimate achievement. It had, however, up to the time here spoken of, April, 1894, been a custom in the church for men after getting the members of their own families, living and dead, sealed and united to themselves, to then have the group adopted into the family of some man whom they loved or admired, or for some reason or other trusted, but not of their own lineage. This custom President Woodruff condemned and delivered to the people the word of the Lord at the aforesaid April conference of the church, saying, with elaborate preparation and explanation—

EVERY MAN TO BE SEALED TO HIS OWN FATHER

"Let every man be adopted to his father. When a man receives the endowments, adopt him to his father, not to Wilford Woodruff, or any other man outside the lineage of his fathers. This is the will of God to this people." [^1]

348Of course the adoptions referred to could be made only to those who had themselves received the sealing ordinances while living, or if dead had received them by proxy at the hands of those whose right it was to minister in their behalf.

348This instruction was gladly received by the church and has been strictly followed since that time in all the ordinance work of the temples.

CHANGE IN THE DAY OF HOLDING THE CHURCH FAST

The second matter referred to was an administrative act and relates to the monthly fast day observed by the church. From the early days of the church in the territory the first Thursday in each month had been set apart as a day of fasting and prayer, the food that each family would have eaten—or its equivalent in money—had not the fast been observed, being given into the hands of the local bishops for the benefit of the poor. Recognizing the changed conditions that had come to the people since that first arrangement was made, many of the saints now being employed in such pursuits, and under such conditions that they could no longer drop their work on a mid-week day to attend to this religious duty, the presidency issued a formal letter of instruction directing that the first Sunday in each month be observed as the fast day, and that such readjustments be made throughout the church as might be necessary to conform to this new plan. Instructions were given also relative to the fast itself:

THE FAST PERIOD AND OFFERING

"In some places the custom has arisen to consider it a fast to omit eating breakfast. This is not in accordance with the views and practice of the past. When fasts were observed in the early days, it was the rule to not partake of food from the previous day until after the meeting in the afternoon of the fast day. In making donations to the poor also it has been the understanding that the food that would be necessary for the two meals should be donated to the poor, and as much more as those who are liberally inclined, and have the means, may feel disposed to give." [^2]

THE JUBILEE ANNIVERSARY OF PIONEER DAY

In 1897 occurred the fiftieth, or, according to the Israelitish order of things—and from which the New Dispensation receives some coloring—the "Jubilee anniversary of the arrival of the 'Mormon' Pioneers into Salt Lake valley," and as an "era of good feeling" now prevailed throughout Utah, preparations were made and carried into effect which made the event a very notable occasion, Gentile, Jew, and "Mormon" entering into a generous spirit of emulation to show honor to the life, labor, sacrifices and achievements of the Utah Pioneers. It was on this occasion that the Brigham Young and Pioneer Monument at the head of main street in Salt Lake City was dedicated. The celebration continued through four days, beginning on the 20th of July, on which day President Wilford Woodruff dedicated the Brigham Young and Pioneer Monument.

349The monument is of bronze and granite, and was designed by C. E. Dallin, of Boston, a sculptor of national fame, but Utah-born. The monument cost $25,000, exclusive of the pedestal which is of Utah granite, weighing 120 tons. [^3]

President Woodruff's prayer was written on this occasion, and read by Bishop Orson F. Whitney. These ceremonies were preceded by an imposing parade of Pioneers, and followed by a reception tendered to them in the great tabernacle; and on which occasion they were each decorated with a gold medal. The medal was of solid gold, with a medallion cast of President Brigham Young in the center; to the left a Pioneer wagon, to the right a locomotive, model of 1897; on the top a beehive and at the bottom a pony express rider. On the reverse side is inscribed the name of the Pioneer to whom the medal is presented, and the dates. The medal was the suggestion of Chairman Spencer Clawson, of the Jubilee Commission. Six hundred and fifty such medals were made and distributed.

350It was on this occasion that Judge Charles C. Goodwin, so long the editor of the Salt Lake Tribune, and hitherto a bitter anti-"Mormon," read a noted speech on the "Utah Pioneers," which at the time was, and since has been, widely quoted. It is a bit of western American literature of high class, a western classic in English in fact. Its closing paragraphs are accorded a place here:

THE UTAH PIONEERS

"Whatever the future holds in store for Utah, that story of toil and suffering and final triumph [of the Pioneers] should be held as sacred history to every man who honors devotion to duty in men, and self-sacrifice in women.

350It should be taught to the children in the schools, and one lesson that should be impressed upon the mind of every child is, that a wrong act on his or her part would be a reproach to the brave men and women who came here in the shadow of despair and by incessant toil and by life-long self-abnegation laid solidly here the foundations of a state.

350And out of the granite of these mountains should be hewed an imperishable monument, which should be set up in some conspicuous place, and upon it should be embossed words like these:

350'They wore out their lives in toil. They suffered without plaint. From nothing they created a glorified state. Honor and reverence and glory everlasting be theirs'."

350On the following three days there were elaborate parades illustrative of western life, of historic and industrial development of Utah and the intermountain west.

350

ENTRANCE OF THE UTAH PIONEERS INTO SALT LAKE VALLEY CLOSED

On the 21st there was a magnificent parade illustrative of Utah's advancement in fifty years. On the 22nd was the Sunday School children's parade, and in the evening the gorgeous illuminated parade of "Great Salt Lake, Real and Fanciful." Main street was a mass of moving light, while the electrical decorations were magnificent. The night crowd was considered the greatest ever witnessed in Salt Lake City. The Parade of the Counties was the distinguishing feature of the 23rd. All the counties of Utah were represented by floats, showing their resources. Parading reached its climax on the 24th. That parade included all the features of the four previous ones, besides the Pioneers being in the procession. United States troops and the entire National Guard of Utah completed the line. At 8 p. m. a great display of fire-works on capitol hill brought these features of the grand celebration to a close.

351There was a special celebration for the Pioneers in the Salt Lake tabernacle on the 24th of July—Saturday. Memorial services in honor of all deceased Pioneers were held on the following day—Sunday; and with that service the great Jubilee Anniversary of the entrance of the Utah Pioneers into Salt Lake valley ended.

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHCHEAVY BURDENS OF THE AGED PRESIDENT

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHCPresident Woodruff was now ninety years old—March 1st, 1897. The occasion had been celebrated by an elaborate public demonstration in the tabernacle. Following is his journal account of the event in his own peculiar handwriting:

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC351"March 1st, 1897: This is my 90th birthday, and my wife Emma's 59th anniversary of her birthday. We met some 12,000 people in the big tabernacle who have met to celebrate our birthday, which congregation is composed of all parties, creeds and denominations. I delivered the first address to the assembly followed by G. Q. Cannon, L. Snow and others. I was almost covered up with flowers and roses. At the close of the services myself and wife, Emma, took seats upon elevated chairs and shook hands with the congregation as they passed us, some 8,000 people. Of course our arms ached when we got through, but it was a great day. All the papers published our speeches and likenesses. It is very remarkable how my life has been preserved through so many years, considering what I have passed through in my day and generation."

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHCWith the burden of ninety years there had come also to President Woodruff the burden of financial responsibilities as "trustee-in-trust for the church." With the advent of statehood it was seen that new and much larger opportunities would come for developing Utah's resources, and there would be a general advancement it was hoped and believed along all the lines of material prosperity. In order to secure a full measure of this new hoped for prosperity, arising from the resources of the state and their development—the development of water power, and irrigating projects; the development of mining and milling properties; the projecting, and building of railroads; in manufacturing projects, among which was the production of sugar from the sugar beet—the most successful of all these undertakings—in all these lines and others, measures were taken as was believed by President Woodruff to be for the welfare of the people. But in these undertakings the trustee-in-trust and those associated with him in the administration of the affairs of the church became heavily involved by borrowing capital for these enterprises. "I don't sleep nights," President Woodruff writes in his journal of August 8th, 1894, "and am weary by day. As trustee-in-trust and the presidency of the church we have taken such a load upon us [that] it is difficult for us to carry it." And the next day he says, "There is a heavy load resting upon us in church affairs, our debts are very heavy." Two years later he writes, "The presidency of the church are so overwhelmed in financial matters it seems as though we shall never live to get through with it unless the Lord opens the way in a marvelous manner. It looks as though we shall never pay our debts." [^4] Four months later at a priesthood meeting he represents himself as saying: "I spoke of this financial condition of the church, explained the action of the government officials in starting our debts. I did not want to die until the church and myself as trustee-in-trust are out of debt." [^5]

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC353The frequently expressed desire was not realized. The president's health had been failing for several years. Asthma had seriously troubled him for some time. Occasional visits to the Pacific coast had brought temporary relief, but no permanent benefit. Seeking again such relief, in the autumn of 1898, he went to San Francisco, and on the 2nd of September, 1898, died there at the home of Mr. Isaac Trumbo. The remains were brought to Salt Lake City by a special train, tendered free by the Rio Grande Western Railroad. In making this courteous tender of train service, Mr. F. A. Wadleigh, the general passenger agent of the company said—and it feelingly expressed a very general opinion held in regard to President Woodruff: "In tendering this slight accommodation we express to the church officials our sympathy with them in the great loss to the church and the world at large of one who has so thoroughly commanded the respect and fidelity of those who were fortunate in knowing him." [^6]

Administration of Wilford WoodruffHC353His burial was attended by processional honors and a public service in the tabernacle, which was crowded by all classes of citizens; for the beautiful simplicity of his life and character endeared President Woodruff to all classes equally. "He possessed the confidence and esteem," remarked the Deseret News editorially, "not only of the Latter-day Saints, but of all classes of people who differed with him in faith, but who had become acquainted with his sterling honesty and integrity, simplicity of manners, unostentatious life and faithful adherence to his sincere convictions. He was one of the remarkable figures in the closing scenes of the most remarkable century in the history of the world." [^7]

THE LIFE OF WILFORD WOODRUFF

Beyond a brief biographical note it is not necessary to enlarge upon the account of President Woodruff's life as it has been identified with nearly all the principal events in the history of the church since he became identified with it in 1834.

354The Deseret News in announcing the death of the president, gave the following brief biographical sketch:

354"Wilford Woodruff was the fourth president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He was born at Farmington (now Avon), Hartford county, Connecticut, March 1, 1807. He was the third son of Aphek and Beulah Thompson Woodruff. From his early youth, and in the midst of a busy life, he meditated on religious subjects. On December 29, 1833, he first heard the gospel from the lips of Elders Zera Pulsipher and Elijah Cheney. To hear the truth was, with him, to believe it, and on January 1, 1834, he received baptism. The following April he went to Kirtland, and became acquainted with Joseph the Prophet."

354Since that time his life, travels, and labors and adventures were interwoven with the events of the church history. From his Journals he himself near the close of his life made a summary of the miles traveled, letters received and answered, discourses delivered, etc. From this summary we are able to present the following facts; "From the beginning of his ministry in 1834 and to the close of the year 1895, he had traveled 172,369 miles; held 7,655 meetings; preached 3,562 discourses; organized 51 branches of the church, and 77 preaching places. He traveled in England, Scotland, and Wales, and in 23 states and 5 territories in the Union."

354Brigham Young, Orson Pratt, Erastus Snow and Wilford Woodruff will stand out as the four greatest Pioneers of the intermountain west and of modern times.

THE PLACE OF PRESIDENT WOODRUFF'S JOURNALS IN THE CHURCH

As historian President Woodruff rendered a most important service to the church. His Journals regularly and methodically and neatly kept and strongly bound, extending as they do from 1834 to April 18th, 1897, (with some scattering notes through the remainder of 1897, and the year 1898—when he was in his ninety-second year)—a period of sixty-three years—constitute an original documentary historical treasure which is priceless. The church is indebted to these Journals for a reliable record of discourses and sayings of the Prophet of the New Dispensation—Joseph Smith—which but for him would have been lost forever. The same is true as to the discourses and sayings of Brigham Young, and other leading elders of the church; while for minutes of important council meetings, decisions, judgments, policies, and many official actions of a private nature, without which the writer of history may not be able to get right viewpoints on many things—in all these respects these Journals of President Woodruff are invaluable. Other men may found hospitals or temples or schools for the church, or endow special divisions or chairs of learning in them; or they may make consecrations of lands and other property to the church, but in point of important service, and in placing the church under permanent obligations, no one will surpass in excellence and permanence or largeness the service which Wilford Woodruff has given to the Church of Jesus Christ in the New Dispensation, by writing and preserving the beautiful and splendid Journals he kept through sixty-three eventful years—so far do the things of mind surpass material things.

355The Journals are now given a special and permanent place in the Church Historian's Office at Salt Lake City.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Editorial in Juvenile Instructor, Nov. 1st, 1901, p. 660.
[^2] The official announcement of these several actions was made by the secretary of the first presidency and published in Deseret News, weekly, of Sept. 17th, 1898, p. 425.
[^3] Ibid, and in connection therewith cf. Juvenile Instructor; editorial of Nov. 1st, 1901, p. 660; and also remarks of President Joseph F. Smith at a special conference of the church Nov. 10th, 1901, p. 787. Lorenzo Snow was appointed trustee-in-trust, even before the organization of the first presidency.
[^4] The following day, Oct. 10th, Elder Clawson was ordained to the apostleship by President Lorenzo Snow. The vote of the conference ratifying the action of the apostles in reorganizing the first presidency took place on the 9th of October. (See Minutes of the Conference in Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 15th, 1898).
[^5] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cxix.
[^6] Improvement Era, vol. ii, p. 795.
[^7] Improvement Era, vol. ii, p. 800. Deseret News, weekly, of Oct. 8th, 1892, pp. 484 and 489.
