B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

CHAPTER CLXXVI

THE ADMINISTRATION OF PRESIDENT LORENZO SNOW—FINANCIAL PROBLEMS—THE LAW OF TITHING

A SHORT time before his death President Woodruff announced to his immediate associates in the administration of church affairs, that "it was not the will of the Lord that in the future there should be a lengthy period elapse between the death of the president of the church and the reorganization of the first presidency. [^1] Accordingly, and having this instruction in mind, on the 13th of September, 1898—eleven days after the demise of President Woodruff—Lorenzo Snow, the president of the quorum of the apostles, was chosen president of the church, at a special meeting of the apostles. Present at the meeting, held in Salt Lake City, and participating in the event were the following brethren: Lorenzo Snow, Franklin D. Richards, George Q. Cannon, Joseph F. Smith, Brigham Young, Francis M. Lyman, John H. Smith, George Teasdale, Heber J. Grant, John W. Taylor, Marriner W. Merrill, Anthon H. Lund, Matthias F. Cowley and Abraham O. Woodruff. These comprised all the members of the apostles' quorum and the two counselors of the late president, who, as usual when the counselors have previously been members of the quorum of the twelve, took their places in that quorum, which brought the fourteen apostles present in the order given above. President Snow chose the two counselors of the late president to be his counselors—George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith. Franklin D. Richards, by virtue of seniority of standing in the council of the apostles, became the president of that council. In all that was done the brethren were unanimous. [^2] President Snow was also chosen trustee-in-trust of the church, and indeed the necessity of having a trustee-in-trust immediately appointed, in view of the unsettled financial affairs of the church, was a factor in hastening the reorganization of the first presidency as well as the announcement of the will of the Lord on the subject by President Woodruff. [^3]

THE ACTION OF THE TWELVE SUSTAINED BY THE CHURCH

The organization thus effected by the apostles in council was sustained by a general assembly of the several quorums of the priesthood at the October conference following, and by unanimous vote of the entire conference, representing the whole church. The one vacancy created in the council of the twelve by the selection of Lorenzo Snow for president, and George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith going in to the council of the first presidency, was filled by the selection of Rudger Clawson, president of Box Elder stake of Zion, and the companion, it will be remembered, of Joseph Standing in the martyrdom of that faithful elder in the state of Georgia, in 1879. [^4]

MEETING THE FINANCIAL PROBLEMS—BONDS

President Snow's administration fell heir to the financial perplexities and problems of the one that preceded it. He met the difficulties first by issuing short term bonds to the amount of $1,000,000, and bearing interest at the rate of 6 per centum per annum. And urged that the residents of Utah should purchase them. This was promptly done; all the bonds being sold within the year of issuance.

THE LAW OF TITHING

A number of the financial enterprises undertaken by the previous administration he abandoned, more especially some mining and milling ventures, and railroad enterprises. Concurrently with these movements, President Snow urged upon the church the law of tithing as given in 1838, in Far West, Missouri, requiring the payment of one-tenth of all the interest, or increase annually, of the membership of the church, to supply a revenue for the church to enable it to meet its obligations, and carry on its work. It was through observance of this law, President Snow urged, that Zion was to be redeemed, and it was to be "a standing law unto them (i. e. members of the church) forever."

358"Verily I say unto you, it shall come to pass, that all those who gather unto the land of Zion shall be tithed of their surplus properties, and shall observe this law, or they shall not be found worthy to abide among you.

358And I say unto you, if my people observe not this law, to keep it holy, and by this law sanctify the land of Zion unto me, that my statutes and my judgments may be kept thereon, that it may be most holy, behold, verily I say unto you, it shall not be a land of Zion unto you;

358And this shall be an example unto all the stakes of Zion. Even so. Amen." [^5]

358There had been for some time a great neglect of duty on the part of the saints in respect of this law of tithing, but President Snow, under the inspiration of the Lord, turned to it as the one means—after the abandonment of unwarranted financial schemes in which the church had been launched—for the financial deliverance of the church.

358

DEVELOPMENT OF THE REFORM

This reform he inaugurated in the spring of 1899, at St. George, while on a preaching tour with a large party accompanying him through southern Utah. As the journey was made northward from St. George, everywhere the subject of tithing was the theme. Arriving in Salt Lake City in the last days of May, the president found the Young Men's and Young Woman's Mutual Improvement Associations of the church engaged in holding their annual conference. This conference the president utilized for getting the subject of tithing before the young people of the church.

359At the officers' meeting of the Young Men's Associations, in the afternoon of the 30th of May, President Snow delivered an impressive discourse upon the subject which the young men, and there were representatives from nearly every stake in Zion, by resolution accepted as the word of the Lord to them, which they promised to accept and obey themselves, and would do all in their power to get the whole membership of the church to do likewise.

359The event was very impressive and dramatic. The minutes of the conference present it as follows:

359At the conclusion of President Snow's address the following resolution was presented [by a member of the general board, written while President Snow was delivering his address]:

359"Resolved: That we accept the doctrine of tithing, as now presented by President Snow, as the present word and will of the Lord unto us, and we do accept it with all our hearts; we will ourselves observe it, and we will do all in our power to get the Latter-day Saints to do likewise.

359The resolution was unanimously adopted by all present rising to their feet and shouting 'Aye.'

359Apostle Francis M. Lyman then arose and said: 'President Snow: I believe this body of men are about as clear upon this law and have about as faithfully met the obligations in regard to tithing as any body of men in the church. It is a splendid thing, brethren, for us to be always in shape to accept the will of the Lord when it comes.'

359Visibly affected, the president then arose and said: 'Brethren, the God of our fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob bless you. Every man who is here, who has made this promise, will be saved in the celestial kingdom. God bless you. Amen'." [^6]

Subsequently a great fast meeting and solemn assembly of the priesthood of the church was called in the Salt Lake temple, viz., on the 2nd of July. All the general authorities of the church—twenty-six in number—were present; all of the forty stakes, the number then in existence, 478 wards, and all of the auxiliary organizations were represented. The total number brought together and fasting, was 623. "Just such another gathering," said the chronicle of the event, "was never before held in the church." [^7] The subject of tithing was presented to the meeting much as it had been in the conference of the Young Men's Improvement Associations, and the resolution then passed was accepted by this solemn assembly as the word and will of the Lord, through President Snow to the church; and since those days the law of tithing has been reasonably well observed by the people. President Snow did not live long enough to see the full fruition of this movement he inaugurated, but he did live long enough to see that the church was on the way to its emancipation from the great amount of debt with which it had become burdened during the previous administration, for the reasons already given.

Publishing in UtahHCCHURCH RESUMES CONTROL OF THE DESERET NEWS

Publishing in UtahHCAnother important act of President Snow's administration was the resumption of the control of the Deseret News by the church, on the 1st of January, 1899. In October, 1892, in all its forms—daily, semi-weekly, and weekly—the News had been leased to George Q. Cannon Sons, who published it as the "Deseret News Publishing Company, Lessees." Though going into this private company's hands the News had continued to be "the church organ," that is to say, it was the medium through which the church administration—the first presidency—continued to disseminate the official communications to the church, the only sense in which there has ever been a periodical recognized as a church organ by the church or its authorities.

Publishing in UtahHCCHARLES W. PENROSE, EDITOR

Publishing in UtahHCIn resuming immediate control of the News by the church, the general business management of it was placed in the hands of Mr. Horace G. Whitney, a successful young business man of Salt Lake City, a descendant of the Whitney family of early church history fame. Under his management the Deseret News became financially successful beyond all precedent in its history. At the same time Elder Charles W. Penrose was reinstated as editor in chief. I say reinstated because when the News was leased by the Cannon Publishing Company, Elder Penrose retired from the editorship which he had long and uninterruptedly held—twelve years. [^8] Under the second appointment he served seven years; and undoubtedly his editorial ability arising both from natural endowment and ripe experience in journalism, contributed greatly to the permanent success of this greatest periodical published by the church. Here it is fitting that some word should be said of this man's work as a journalist. After being reinstated as editor in chief in 1899, Elder Penrose continued to hold the position until called to preside over the European Mission, in 1906—a period of seven years; which, with the twelve years of previous service added, make up nineteen years of service as editor in chief of the Deseret News.

Publishing in UtahHCEditorial work is of that impersonal character which practically precludes recognition of the editor's daily contributions to the literature of the period. He is no longer recognized as an individual in his work, his personality is submerged in that of his journal. "He" becomes the "We" of the editorial page. The period of Elder Penrose's editorial service, covers great epochal changes in the history of the church. Through those years he stood constantly on the firing line between the church and the world. Daily he was upon duty in advocacy of the truth for which the church stood—for the divinity of her origin and her mission; the holiness and effectiveness of her rites and ceremonies; the indwelling power of God in her doctrines and institutions; he instructed, warned, and corrected her membership; he kept the daily historical record straight; he defended the church against the assaults of the world, meeting all comers with the force of logic, with the truth of the scriptures. He contended with equal success for the rights of an American community to local self-government, under the Constitution of the United States, and yielded no ground to the opposition who sought to dispossess the citizens of Utah of their political heritage of freedom under the law. Blessed with a keen intuition of the truth of things, and a clear, direct, and forceful literary style, he made the editorial pages of the Deseret News pleasing as well as instructive in all the variety of subject matter of which they treated; while the intelligent advocacy of the truth, and the defense of both the faith and the saints, made the News through those eventful years a valuable source of intelligent commentary on the developing doctrines of the church, and upon the current events of the period. [^9]

CHARGE OF RECURRENCE TO POLYGAMY

During the first year of President Snow's administration occurred a very remarkable arousement of public sentiment against what was called a reversion to polygamy, and polygamous practices in the church in Utah. Early in the summer of 1898—May and June—there appeared a series of articles in The Kinsman, a sectarian sheet published in Salt Lake City, under the title "Polygamy and Inspired Lies," making these charges. The articles were written by Theodore Schroeder, [^10] a lawyer of leisure, in Salt Lake City. Utah correspondents to eastern papers also made the same charges; [^11] and the question began to be much discussed, together with the charge that the church had resumed political control of the "Mormon" people, and was interfering in the political affairs of the state. The discussion of the subject through the early summer months culminated in Utah in the presbytery of the Presbyterian church of the state in its semi-annual meeting, held in Manti on the 29th of August, formulating and sending broadcast through the country the charges referred to above, which was the beginning of a nation-wide discussion of alleged "Mormon perfidy."

THE ROBERTS' ELECTION CASE

In mid-September the Democratic state convention held in Salt Lake City nominated B. H. Roberts for representative to congress. It was matter of common knowledge, throughout Utah, that Mr. Roberts was involved in the "Mormon" church institution of plural marriage; for he had been forced into exile during the polygamy crusade of 1886-1888, when the segregation policy was in vogue, and had returned to Utah and served a term of imprisonment for the minor violation of the Edmunds law. Notwithstanding this he was elected, without objection, a member of the state constitutional convention in 1894, and at its close, also without objection, or the subject of his marital relations even being raised—became the Democratic party's nominee for congress in the election of 1895, and led all the Democratic candidates in the number of votes cast for Democrats. The candidate for governor, Hon. John T. Caine, was defeated by 2,300; Mr. Roberts by only 897 votes, leading his ticket on an average of about 1,400 votes.

In the canvass of 1898, however, Mr. Roberts' marital relations were made the point of bitter and continuous attack upon him by sectarian ministers and the Republican press, to which, however, he refused to make reply, deeming the constitutional convention settlement of that subject, then so recent and of common knowledge so sufficient that it did not even require restatement. [^12] Notwithstanding the bitterness of this attack upon him on account of being involved in the plural marriage institution of his church, Mr. Roberts was elected by a plurality of 5,665; and one of the peculiar and admitted things about the election is that—and without ulterior motives—his election was due to non-"Mormon" votes.

364In explanation of his second canvass and election by the people of Utah, in his second speech upon the floor of the house of representatives, and especially in explanation of his attitude in Utah upon the attack made upon him because of his plural marriage relations—Mr. Roberts said:

364"I made no answer, except that about twice or three times at most, I said to the people whom I addressed during the campaign: 'These charges are made against me, but you know me; you know the conditions that have prevailed here in Utah. You know all about the circumstances. I have been in public life before you for some twenty years. I am not driven to the necessity at this late day of undertaking to defend my moral character. I refer the question to you for an answer. You shall answer these charges.' And they answered them by a plurality of 5,665 votes for the member from Utah out of a total vote of 67,805." [^13]

364It was thought that the decisive victory at the polls in Utah for the Democratic candidate would close the opposition, and that acquiescence in the expressed will of the people of the state would follow. This was not the case. On the contrary a convention of Salt Lake sectarian ministers, twenty-four in number, met on the 6th of December, 1898, formulated and adopted an address making an appeal to the people of the United States to join them in a strong protest to congress against the admission of the member-elect from Utah, on the ground that his election had been in "violation of the covenant made between the Mormon leaders and the government when Utah was admitted to statehood." [^14]

365A denial of these charges was telegraphed to the New York World over the signature of President Snow, except as to cases of polygamous living, in relations that had been formed previous to the Manifesto of 1890. President Snow also denied that the church had any interest in the nomination, election, or seating of Mr. Roberts, that all this was a secular affair. "Non-'Mormons'," said President Snow, "participated in his nomination in the regular convention of his party. Non-'Mormons' also aided in his election. Many 'Mormons' not being of his party, voted for his opponent. He was not a church candidate in any sense of the word. The church had no candidate. He was elected as an American citizen by American citizens and the question of religion did not enter into the purely political contest." [^15]

365The church here and in subsequent utterances entirely (as was to be expected) divorced herself from responsibility for the election of the Democratic candidate, and of interest and of sympathy in his contest for his seat in the body to which he had been elected. And Mr. Tayler, of Ohio, was able to say on the floor of the house, commenting on the case—"The Mormon church has left it to us, and not to the Mormon church to say what shall be done with Mr. Roberts. Is the house of representatives to respond in any uncertain tone?" [^16]

365The agitation continued throughout the year between the election and the opening of the congress to which the representative was elected, with the result that when presenting himself to be sworn as a member, a petition with more than 7,000,000 signatures had reached the house of representatives, praying for his exclusion. [^17] The petition was formally presented to the house by Mr. Tayler, of Ohio.

365The following statement concerning the character of this "monster petition" was made by Mr. Roberts in his first speech upon the floor of the house in his own defense:

366"One word in relation to the petition of 7,000,000 people that has been rolled up here. I say to the gentleman from Ohio [Mr. Tayler] that it would be exceedingly interesting to know how many of these signatures were collected in the Sunday Schools.

366Mr. Fox: Will the gentleman yield to a question?

366The Speaker: Does the gentleman yield?

366Mr. Roberts of Utah: I decline to yield. [^18] It would be interesting to know, furthermore, how many of the signatures are repetitions, because I find this in an official letter of the 'National Anti-Polygamy League,' sent out throughout the country, from which I read—an official letter, signed by the secretary, Grace J. Cutler. The party to whom this letter is addressed is asked to secure the signatures of 2,000 people to the anti-Roberts petition:

366'Get the young people to sign, too, and aid you in securing signatures. It is not necessary that only adults have representation on the petition. A few young ladies could in a very short time secure the necessary 2,000 names if you would interest them in this great moral work. No matter if your friends have signed other Roberts petitions, request them to sign again, as it is absolutely necessary to have one monster national petition large enough to make the members of congress realize instantly the public demand that Roberts be cast out.'

366And yet, having collected such a petition as that, and by such methods, you come here and propose to stop a representative of a sovereign state from taking the oath of office! Do you think that will not establish a precedent that will bring chaos sometime on the floor of this house?" [^19]

366Mr. Robert W. Tayler, of Ohio, when the member from Utah was called to the bar of the house, rose in his place and on his own responsibility charged that the representative-elect from Utah was ineligible to a seat in the house of representatives, that ineligibility being evidenced, as the member from Ohio alleged, by public records, affidavits, and papers. He therefore moved—

"That the question of the prima facie right of Brigham H. Roberts to be sworn in as a representative from the state of Utah in the fifty-sixth congress, as well as of his final right to a seat therein as such representative, be referred to a special committee of nine members of the house, to be appointed by the speaker; and until such committee shall report upon, and the house decide such question and right, the said Brigham H. Roberts shall not be sworn in or be permitted to occupy a seat in this house; and said committee shall have power to send for persons and papers and examine witnesses on oath in relation to the subject matter of this resolution." [^20]

ACTION OF THE HOUSE ON THE QUESTION OF EXCLUSION

On this action the representative from Utah was not permitted to be sworn in; and the following day, after three hours debate the house voted to appoint the committee and follow the course of action outlined in Mr. Tayler's resolution. [^21] After exhaustive investigation and discussion of the subject through six weeks the matter was finally reported to the house. Seven of the committee reported in favor of excluding the member from Utah, which could be determined by a majority vote of the house; the other two, Mr. C. E. Littlefield of Maine, and Mr. David A. De Armond of Missouri, presented "Views of the Minority" which favored admission of the Utah member—on constitutional grounds—and then expulsion, which would require a two-thirds vote of the house to accomplish. For three days the question was debated, with the result that on a vote being taken 244 voted for exclusion, and 50 against it, 36 not voting.

367The question of the right of congress to take such summary and arbitrary action as this, was gravely doubted by many in congress, and by more outside of it; but consideration of the constitutional questions as to the rights of the house to so proceed are too involved to be considered here. [^22]

THE FALSE ISSUE IN THE CASE

As to the merits of the case, considered in themselves, the action was based upon a false issue. The case presented by the Ministerial Association of Salt Lake City, on which they made their appeal to "the people of the United States," was that by the election of one so related to the "Mormon" marriage system as was Mr. Roberts, there had been a violation of the "covenant" made between "Mormon" leaders and the government when Utah was admitted to statehood. [^23] And therefore to admit Mr. Roberts would be to put the seal of government approval upon this flagrant breach of faith and honor. On the latter phase of the proposition Mr. Roberts himself argued:

368"In the name of all that is consistent, I would like to know how the 'Mormon' people could hope to base a revival of the practice of plural marriage—even if they had the disposition to do so—on the fact of the representative from Utah taking and retaining his seat in the house! Does the house of representatives endorse the individual views of all the men it admits to membership? If Socialists should from some congressional district elect a congressman, would his admission to the house say to the world that the American congress indorsed socialism? Surely my enemies give the 'Mormon' people and even congress little credit for common sense when they trump up such a charge as this." [^24]

368Mr. C. E. Littlefield in discussing the "compact" or "understanding," alleged in the special committee's majority report and in the Ministerial Association's charge—the "compact" said to exist between the government of the United States and the territory of Utah about statehood, said:

"The ingenuity of the majority is not yet exhausted. They say: 'His election as a representative is an explicit and offensive violation of the understanding by which Utah was admitted as a state. I would like to inquire of the majority where they find the authority for the proposition that the United States government can go into the question of an 'understanding' that existed before a state was admitted into this Union, and then, having found it, exercise this domiciliary, supervisory, disciplinary power over the state. Where does it exist? What is it indicated by? Is it oral? They do not undertake to suggest it is the enabling act, although they refer to it. But is it an oral 'understanding' that exists between the states by reason of this 'general welfare' power? I assume that they invoke it under this 'general welfare' proposition. Think of it! An 'understanding' which is based on what? A compact or a contract? I had supposed it was too late at this stage of the history of the Republic, in these times of peace, to invoke the proposition of a contract, existing between the states and the general government.

369I knew that the theory of a 'contract' was the parent of the infamous heresy of secession, and I have believed that it was wiped out in blood from 1861 to 1865. More than 500,000 of the best, truest, most heroic, and bravest men that ever met on the field of battle—the blue and the gray, brethren all—rendered up their lives that that infamous proposition should be blotted out, and blotted out forever. Let the dead past bury its dead. I submit that under these circumstances it ill becomes this house to undertake, in the interest, if you please, of civilization, to invoke anew the proposition of a 'contract' existing between a state and the United States." [^25]

369To make the assertion good that there had been a violation of the alleged compact between the United States and Utah, warrant must be found for it in what the people of the United States through their representatives in congress demanded of the people of Utah as a condition precedent to statehood; and that requirement, and the only one in regard to polygamy, is stated in these terms:

369"And said convention shall provide, by ordinance irrevocable without the consent of the United States and the people of said state—

369First—To what extent polygamy is practiced or polygamous secured, and that no inhabitant of said state shall ever be molested in person or property on account of his or her mode of religious worship; provided, That polygamous or plural marriages are forever prohibited."

SENATOR RAWLINS ON UTAH'S COMPACT

It did not go to polygamous living growing out of relationships formed previous to the Woodruff Manifesto of 1890, or of statehood, nor did it require a pledge should be given that no polygamist should ever be elected or appointed to office. Commenting on the charge that Utah had broken faith with the United States, in the election of a polygamist to office, Mr. Joseph L. Rawlins, at the time United States senator from Utah, said at Washington, about the time of the opening of the congress—

370"It is claimed that the Mormon church by deceit and fraud brought about the admission of Utah into the Union, so that behind statehood lines polygamy might be practiced with impunity. I was delegate from Utah in the house at the time of her admission, introduced the bill under which she became a state, and spoke in the house in favor of its passage. * * *

370The Mormon church did not speak or act through me. * * *

370The compact between the state of Utah at the time of her admission and the United States that polygamous marriages should be forbidden was to be irrevocable, without the consent of the United States and the people of the state. Utah, both in her Constitution and statutes, has provided for the punishment of polygamy and all kindred offenses. No complaint has been made, or can truthfully be made that these laws are not enforced. * * *

370'During the past year the state has been raked in search of cases of polygamy with which to feed this new modern sensation, but no complaint has been presented against any man charging him with this offense.' Some cases of 'unlawful cohabitation' have been prosecuted and punished. So far Utah has sacredly kept the compact." [^26]

370Not only is it a fact that there was no agreement entered into between the church leaders and the government of the United States, respecting the non-election or non-appointment of polygamists to office, or upon any other question, but any such covenant or compact would have been out of all harmony with the relationship of the federal government to religious organizations—which it recognizes not at all, but deals solely with the people as citizens or with the states and territories.

370HAD "POLYGAMISTS" BEEN APPOINTED TO OFFICE IN UTAH BY THE FEDERAL ADMINISTRATION?

Senator Rawlins in a carefully prepared interview for the Washington Post of November the 29th, 1899, before the opening of the 56th congress, announced his intention to introduce into the senate of the United States the following resolution in respect to an inquiry into alleged polygamy in Utah and the appointment and election of polygamists to office in that state; for, he charged in his interview, that if the people of Utah had violated any "understanding" or "compact" respecting polygamy and the admission of Utah into the Union by the election of a polygamist to congress, then the federal administration had also violated said "understanding" and "compact" by appointing a number of polygamists to federal offices in Utah. Following is the resolution which he presented in the senate:

371"Be it resolved by the senate of the United States that the committee on judiciary is hereby instructed to inquire into and report to the senate:

371First—To what extent polygamy is practiced or polygamous marriages entered into in the United States or in places over which they have jurisdiction.

371Second—Have polygamists, or persons reputed to have more than one wife, been elected to office by the people of Utah, and if so, has such election been for the purpose of encouraging polygamy or in violation of any compact between said state and the United States.

371Third—Have polygamists, or persons reputed to have more than one wife, been appointed to office by the president, by and with the advice and consent of the senate, or in cases where the concurrence of the senate is not required, and if so have such appointments been made in aid of polygamy or in violation of the compact between the United States and the state of Utah with reference to that subject?

371Fourth—What, if any, steps should be taken or measures enacted for the prevention of polygamy in the United States and in places over which they have jurisdiction." [^27]

371Mr. Rawlins contended, of course, that there was no "compact" except the demand that the Utah Constitution should prohibit future polygamous marriages as already quoted from his interview in preceding pages. Then he proceeds:

"But it is charged that the people of Utah have elected polygamists, or persons in that status, to office. This is true in some instances and it is equally true that the United States, acting by the president with the consent of the senate has appointed polygamists to office and under such appointment for almost three years these polygamists have held and are now holding important federal offices in the state of Utah.

372If this be a violation of the 'compact,' both parties have violated it, the president on the one hand and the electors of the state on the other. No more have the people of Utah than the president sought to cram polygamy down the throat of the nation or the state. Such a motive cannot be justly ascribed to either.

372That polygamists should be disqualified to vote or to hold office was no part of the compact between the state of Utah and the United States. In territorial elections polygamists were so disqualified. But congress purposely and knowingly wiped away all such disqualifications as to the very first election to be held under the enabling act, namely, the election of delegates to the constitutional convention. If persons who happened to be in the status of polygamy have been elected by the people of Utah, or appointed by the president to office, it has been for other reasons, personal or political, and not to lend countenance or aid to that practice.

372Further accession to the ranks of polygamy being rigidly forbidden, and out of the question, it has not been thought necessary, or quite in the line of charity to keep a class otherwise reputable under perpetual civil or political disability."

372The charge that the Republican administration had appointed polygamists to office, with all the consequences stated above by Senator Rawlins, and one other—namely, that the administration had set the example in the matter—was dramatically challenged on the floor of the house by Mr. Grosvenor of Ohio; but notwithstanding the challenge of the fact it was true that the McKinley administration, with the consent of the United States senate, had made such appointments, and that, too, with the knowledge at least by the president and the senate committee on post offices and post roads, that proposed appointees were living in polygamous relations. In addition to the statement of Senator Rawlins, already quoted from his Washington Post interview, the senator wrote and handed to the representative from Utah the following autographed letter now in his possession:

372"UNITED STATES SENATE

372Washington, D. C., Dec. 15>, 1899.

372Hon. B. H. Roberts,

372Dear Sir: In relation to the appointments of John C. Graham as postmaster at Provo and Orson Smith as postmaster at Logan, I remember it was stated in the public press of Utah that protests against these men had been signed and forwarded to the president charging them with living in polygamy, that these men were generally reputed to be polygamists. That afterwards the names of these men were sent to the senate by the president. That while the matter of their confirmation was pending in the senate I was informed by my colleague, Senator Cannon, that affidavits charging them with living in polygamy had been presented to the president, and laid before the committee of the senate or post offices and post boards.

373Respectfully,

373[Signed] "J. L. RAWLINS." [^28]

373In addition to this evidence there was much more presented in the remarks of the Utah representative, and is to be found in his first speech in the house in his own defense. And was later further evidenced in the fact that several of the federal officeholders named in the discussion were removed from the federal positions to which they had been appointed, but unjustly so, because there was no pledge asked and none given that men in their status as to polygamous living would neither be appointed, nor elected to office; and as Senator Rawlins, the author of Utah's enabling act, explains and as already quoted:

373"That polygamists should be disqualified to vote or to hold office was no part of the compact between the state of Utah and the United States. In territorial elections polygamists were so disqualified. But congress purposely and knowingly wiped away all such disqualifications as to the very first election to be held under the enabling act, namely, the election of delegates to the constitutional convention."

Though not admitted to membership in the house, both on the proposition of denying to the member-elect the right to be sworn in on the prima facie evidence of the regularity of his election and the possession of the constitutional qualification for the office to which he had been elected; as well also upon the report of the special committee to the house denying his right to the seat to which he had been elected, the member-elect from Utah was accorded an opportunity to speak in his own behalf. The first opportunity came on the 5th of December, 1899, when he was accorded thirty minutes by the courtesy of and by the unanimous consent of the house, and this by further unanimous consent was extended by ten minutes. [^29]

374The second opportunity was given under like limited conditions on the 23rd of January. As in both cases the speaker could be stopped by any member, at any moment, withdrawing his consent, the limitations were not very conducive to freedom of debate on the questions at issue. Not that anything that the member-elect could have said with even unfettered opportunity of discussion would have changed the results of the action by the house. The questions discussed were ably presented on the floor of the house by members favorable to the member-elect from Utah, but the country, even more than the house, was drunk with anti "Mormon" prejudice and demanded the denial of the seat to the member-elect from Utah, and the house acted in harmony with the country's demand as already set forth by the vote recorded in this chapter.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See chapter lxxxviii, this History.
[^2] President Joseph F. Smith who succeeded President Snow quoted the above in an article in the Juvenile Instructor on the "Last Days of President Snow," vol. xxxvi, pp. 689-90.
[^3] "Last Days of President Snow," by President Joseph F. Smith, in Juvenile Instructor, vol. xxxvi, p. 690.
[^4] Ibid, p. 689.
[^5] Millennial Star, vol. lxiii, last discourse of President Lorenzo Snow, p. 690, et seq.
[^6] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. 107:33>>.
[^7] History of the Church, period i. vol. ii, p. 432.
[^8] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lviii:27-29.
[^9] See biographical note on George Q. Cannon, this History, ch. xcvi, footnote 23.
[^10] Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, by his sister, Eliza R. Snow Smith, ch. i.
[^11] Biography and Family Record of Lorenzo Snow, pp. 7, 8.
[^12] For the consideration of that settlement see chapter clxxiv this History.
[^13] Congressional Record, 24th of January, 1900.
[^14] The document complete will be found in Salt Lake Herald of Dec. 7th, 1898. A reply was written to the Ministerial Association's Address by Elder C. W. Penrose denying the charges made, and showing the deductions and conclusions to be absurd. (See Deseret News of Sept. 3rd, 1899).
[^15] New York World, of Dec. 30th, 1898.
[^16] Congressional Globe for 23rd Jan., 1900.
[^17] Congressional Record, house proceedings, Dec. 4th, 1899.
[^18] This refusal may seem ungracious on the part of the gentleman from Utah; but he was speaking only by courtesy of the house by unanimous consent, and that but for thirty minutes; and at any moment anyone of the members could cut off the speech by withdrawing his consent for the speaker to continue. Under such circumstances the speaker could not reasonably consent to interruption.
[^19] Congressional Record, house proceedings, Dec. 4th, 1899, p. 48.
[^20] Congressional Record, 56th Congress, house proceedings of Dec. 4th, 1899.
[^21] The committee consisted of the following gentlemen—Mr. Tayler, Ohio. chairman; Mr. Landis, Indiana; Mr. Morris, Minnesota; Mr. Freer, West Virginia; Mr. Littlefield, Maine; Mr. McPherson, Iowa; Mr. De Armond, Missouri; Mr. Lanham, Texas; Mr. Miers, Indiana. The vote on this question (i. e. of referring this matter to the special committee) was as follows: yeas, 304; nays 31; not voting, 19. (Congressional Record for Dec. 5th, 1899, p. 52).
[^22] See the very able and exhaustive paper prepared by Messrs. Littlefield and De Armond, of the special committee in the Roberts case in the committee's report under the caption "Views of the Minority," House Report 85, part 2, 1st Session, 56th Congress, pp. 53-77. Also speeches of Mr. Littlefield, Congressional Record of 23rd January, 1900; speech also of De Armond, Congressional Record of 25th January, 1900. Together with a great amount of commentary in the press of the country during the months through which the case was before congress—Dec. 4th, 1899 and January, 1900. The arguments and authorities of the committee's report will be found in Report 85, pt. i, 56th Congress, 1st Session; and in the speeches of Mr. Tayler, of Dec. 4th, and 5th, 1899, and Jan. 23rd and 25th, 1900. Also the speeches of Mr. Lanham, of Texas, Mr. Powers, of Vermont, Mr. McPherson, of Iowa, Mr. Miers, of Indiana and a number of others whose speeches were printed in the Congressional Record between the dates of 23rd, and the 30th of the same month, of 1900, and also editorials of the daily press and other periodicals throughout the country during December and January of 1899-1900.
[^23] Utah Ministerial Association Address, Salt Lake Herald, Dec. 7th, 1898.
[^24] New York Times of Nov. 19th, 1899. Also Smoot Hearings, vol. i, and Washington Post of Nov. 29th, 1899 where the argument is quoted.
[^25] Congressional Record, 56th Congress, Jan. 23rd, 1900.
[^26] Washington Post, interview of Nov. 29th, 1898.
[^27] The resolutions appear with the interview in the Washington Post of Nov. 29th, 1898. Senator Rawlins also introduced said resolution and had it read from the clerk's desk in the senate on the 6th of Dec., and it was referred to the senate committee on judiciary. (Congressional Record, 56th Congress, p. 98).
[^28] See also Rawlins' Washington Post interview, of Nov. 29th, 1898. Thirty-one of the 107 members of the Utah constitutional convention, were in the status of polygamy, and were elected and served without protest from any quarter. (See tabulation of the convention in respect to this matter in proceedings in the Smoot Case, vol. iv, pp. 136-7).
[^29] See Congressional Globe of that date, 1899.
