B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

375CHAPTER CLXXVII

375PRESIDENT SNOW'S WORLD-EMBRACING VIEW OF THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH—HIS DEATH

375WE MAY now revert to more churchly things in the remainder of President Snow's administration.

LARGENESS OF THE NEW DISPENSATION

In a previous chapter attention was called to Lorenzo Snow's world-embracing grasp of things with reference to the largeness and mightiness of the New Dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ, of which the Church of the Latter-day Saints is the manifestation and working power—when he was upon his mission as an apostle in Italy and Switzerland in 1849-1852. [^1] After the financial difficulties of the church were put in the way of adjustment his mind seemed to revert to this world-wide extension idea of the gospel, and he introduced the subject into the councils of the apostles. He doubted the propriety of the twelve apostles and their colaborers, the seventies, remaining so constantly at home attending to the organized stake and auxiliary association affairs in Zion—and which could so easily and more appropriately be attended to by others.

"For instance," said President Snow, when discussing this subject in a council meeting of the apostles, "here are the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations, and it is astonishing, when we come to think about it, that the apostles should be spending their time so largely among them. One would think that young men, properly instructed in a quorum [association] capacity, ought to be able to carry on this work with such aid as they might get in their different stakes. It seems to me the quorums of the priesthood will have to receive attention. The active work that is being done appears to be in the direction of Mutual Improvement, but the quorums are not doing much. [^2]

376President Snow especially deprecated this limited or localized activity of the apostles while so much of the world was uninstructed as to the New Dispensation message—so many nations and peoples that had not as yet heard the glad tidings of a restored gospel and a divine authority and commission given to teach it to the world.

THE MISSION TO JAPAN

It was this spirit operating upon the mind of President Snow that led to the organization of the mission to Japan. Elder Heber J. Grant, of the council of the apostles was appointed on the 14th of February, 1901, to open this mission. Subsequently Horace S. Ensign, Alma O. Taylor, and Louis A. Kelsch were associated with him, and together they started for Japan, July 24th, 1901, arriving at Yokohama on the 12th of August.

376Progress was slow and difficult in this mission, but finally a foothold was obtained. Articles were published in the periodicals of the country, announcing the mission and its purpose, tracts in explanation of the New Dispensation message were also published, and finally the Book of Mormon was translated and published, the work, chiefly, of Elder Alma O. Taylor. The first convert to the faith was baptized at Tokyo on the 8th of March, 1902; his name was Hajimi Nakazaha; he had been a Shinto priest. At one time as high as eleven missionaries from the stakes of Zion labored in Japan, and for some time a mission was maintained in that land.

PRESIDENT SNOW ON THE MISSION OF THE TWELVE AND THE SEVENTY

The opening of the work in Japan, however, President Snow regarded only as a beginning. He had in mind the empires of Russia and Austria, and the republics of South America. He referred to the experience of men as given in the Book of Mormon, "who went and labored among their bitterest enemies and accomplished a mighty work." "The Lord," said President Snow, "was obliged to help them as they were in the line of their duty, and this he did in miraculous ways."

377This was said in a council meeting of the apostles on the 28th of September. President Snow then remarked:

377"I want to say—I want to say, here are the apostles and the seventies, their business is to warn the nations of the earth and prepare the world for the coming of the Savior. They have been engaged in this more or less. Now we find ourselves in a compact, gathered condition, the church divided into stakes, and we come together from time to time in a council capacity to consider the interests of the cause generally and make appointments for brethren to visit the stakes when holding their conferences. It looks to me that our minds ought to extend somewhat, and we get out of the beaten track, and a little change be made. For instance, we have started in this direction by sending Brother Grant over to Japan, but this is only a start. Things seem to be going on favorably with him; but whether he will accomplish much or not matters not in one sense; it is for the apostles to show to the Lord that they are his witnesses to all the nations, and that they are doing the best they can." [^3]

President Snow named Austria and Russia, and said there were other countries where it seemed impossible to introduce the gospel, but still it had been done partly in Austria, and elders were making inroads into countries where they theretofore had been forbidden to preach. The president also said there were republics on the American continent which never had been visited by an apostle, and he did not know how far the Lord justified the apostles and seventies in waiting for things to become pleasant and agreeable before visiting such countries. He also said he did not know how far the Lord justified the apostles and the presiding seventies in permitting the missionary elders to do the work, evidently upon their own volition, of opening up new fields of labor in foreign lands. I now present this, he said, for the consideration of the brethren: "How far are the apostles justified in stopping at home? The priesthood, he said, was established for certain purposes, and there is a certain work that has to be done. The Lord seems to be in a hurry to have it done, and I think it is our duty to reflect seriously upon this and see how matters stand with us." [^4]

378As the October conference drew near, the theme seemed to take even stronger hold upon the mind of President Snow. He had been in feeble health for some time, and he announced his intention to reserve all his strength to the Sunday afternoon of the coming conference in order to present this subject of the work of the apostles to the church in conference assembled—October 6th. The president was feeble, but his mind was remarkably clear, and he stood erect under the weight of 87 years, and addressed the saints at some length on the subject that was increasingly burdening his mind. He said in part:

378"This church is now nearly seventy-two years of age, and we are not expected to do the work of the days of our youth, but do greater, larger, and more extensive work. The Lord is coming one of these days, and he is interested in the work that you ought to be doing, and anxious to be doing. You ought to be doing all that you possibly can, and leave everything in your business affairs that you wisely can do and attend to these matters."

THE WORK, JURISDICTION, AND RESPONSIBILITY OF PRESIDENTS OF STAKES AND BISHOPS

"The presidents of these fifty stakes should consider the people in their respective stakes, in their various dominions. They should regard them as their own family, as their sons and daughters; and take as deep an interest in them as they ought to take in their own wives and children. It should be their thought by day and by night, how and in what way they can be most serviceable to their respective charges. Oh! brethren, do remember these things that I am now talking about; do not forget them. You presidents, when you retire to your rest, you probably can spend half an hour before you go to sleep and let your thoughts run over your several jurisdictions. See wherein either physically, financially, or spiritually, you can help, and what can be done best in advancing the interests of your official family. These bishops, however wise and energetic they think themselves—and the most of them certainly are very wise and energetic—need to be looked after. It is not for the apostles to look after them. The apostles have a work that is in another direction altogether. I want the presidents of stakes hereafter to realize that it is their business, not the business of the apostles; it is the business of the high priests, the elders, the bishops, priests, teachers, and deacons, to look after these things [i. e. of a local character]. Do not lay this duty upon the shoulders of the apostles. It is not in their line, at least only occasionally."

THE PRIESTHOOD AND ITS MISSION

"There is a certain channel by and through which the Lord intends to exalt his sons and daughters, to remove wickedness from the earth and to establish righteousness, and that channel is the priesthood, which God has established and shown clearly the nature and character of the various offices and duties thereof. The apostles and the seventies—it is their business, by the appointment of the Almighty, to look after the interests of the world. The seventies and the twelve apostles are special witnesses unto the nations of the earth. The business of the high priests, the elders and the bishops, is to look after the interests of these various organizations that I have mentioned. You presiding officers of the various stakes of Zion, the time is coming when you will not have to call and depend so much upon the twelve apostles and upon the seventies.

379I wanted to say this, and to speak it with energy in a way that you will not forget it, that you cannot forget it. It is a wonderful responsibility, and the Lord expects it of you." [^5]

THE FIRST PROPHET ON THE SAME THEME

Of course the twelve apostles labor under the direction of the first presidency of the church, [^6] and it is but just to them to say that they have always held themselves ready to go wherever sent, and whenever called; and the purpose of the introduction of the foregoing question by President Snow was doubtless to prepare the minds of the twelve for a larger conception of their duties, previous to entering into broader fields of activity under the direction of the first presidency. But notwithstanding the twelve labor under the direction of the first presidency, in building up the kingdoms of Messiah, as designated in the revelations of God, yet to them is left something of initiative in their movements, and a voice in the matter of their travels and labors. The first Prophet of the New Dispensation, when giving instructions to the twelve and the seventy in the Kirtland temple—and it is to be noted that the same broad, and noble grasp of the largeness of the mission of the apostles is present in the instructions of the first Prophet as in the above instructions from President Snow—said:

380"The twelve are not to serve tables, but to bear the keys of the kingdom to all nations, and unlock the door of the gospel to them, and call upon the seventies to follow after them, and assist them. The twelve are at liberty to go where so ever they will, and if any one will say, I wish to go to such a place, let all the rest say, amen." [^7]

380The above instructions, then, of President Lorenzo Snow to the twelve, were really but a reversion to the earlier instructions of the Prophet Joseph; and doubtless rested upon that principle, still earlier announced in revelation from God, wherein the Lord said:

380"Verily I say, men should be anxiously engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness;

380For the power is in them, wherein they are agents unto themselves. And inasmuch as men do good they shall in nowise lose their reward.

380But he that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned." [^8]

DEATH OF PRESIDENT GEORGE Q. CANNON

On the 12th of April, 1901, President George Q. Cannon, first counselor in the first presidency, died at Monterey, California. [^9] It was in Liverpool that the Cannon family came in contact with the New Dispensation of the gospel under the ministry of Elder John Taylor, who had married a grand aunt of George Q. Cannon's, in Canada, whither she had gone some years before as companion to the wife of Mr. Mason, the private secretary of Lord Aylmer, governor-general of Canada. George Q. Cannon was but thirteen years of age at this first contact with the New Dispensation of the gospel, but he accepted it enthusiastically with the rest of his family; and three years later arrived in Nauvoo, Illinois, where he met the Prophet Joseph Smith and became an ardent admirer of him, and a firm believer in the divinity of his mission. Beyond this it is not necessary to detail the biography of George Q. Cannon, since the rest of the important events of his life are interwoven with the history of the church as set forth in this work.

381Of the last year or two of his life, of his death and of his character, however, O. F. Whitney in a biographical sketch of him in his volume of Biographies, published in his addenda to the History of Utah, says:

381"He made occasional visits to the Pacific coast, and one of the most delightful of these was continued on to the Sandwich Islands, where in the fall of 1900, he attended as the almost idolized guest of honor the Jubilee Anniversary of the opening of that mission fifty years before. With tears and every demonstration of affection, he was met, crowned with garlands, and escorted through the islands by some of those whom half a century before he had known and baptized. He was visited by the ex-queen and at her request he blessed her."

381This was Liliuokalini, the sister of the native King Kalakaua, and herself the last of the native rulers of the Hawaiian Islands, having been deposed by the revolution of 1893.

381"Elder Cannon returned to Utah in January of 1901, but his health, which for two years had been impaired, withstood but poorly the rigors of a Utah winter, as compared with the balmy gentleness of the Pacific Islands climate which he had just left, and in March he deemed it advisable to seek relief on the coast. The change did not afford benefit, and his illness almost immediately assumed a fatal form. In the early morning of the 12th of April, at the peaceful old town of Monterey, the end came. The remains were brought home for burial and after a public funeral in the presence of mourning thousands, were consigned to the family vault in the city cemetery."

CHARACTER OUTLINE

"President Cannon was a man of varied gifts and wide experience. A natural counselor, his eminence and influence as such were well warranted. As an orator he shone among the brightest, and almost equal to his powers as a speaker were his abilities as a writer. Among his literary remains are the Life of Joseph Smith and the Life of Nephi, the latter a Book of Mormon theme. He had begun a compilation of the History of the Church when death called him. Able and successful in business he prospered as publisher, merchant, mining man, and agriculturist. His forte, in secular affairs, was statecraft, and in the field of diplomacy, Utah * * * has not seen his equal."

THE FILLING OF VACANCIES

At the October conference of 1901, Joseph F. Smith was advanced from the position of second to first counselor in the first presidency, and Elder Rudger Clawson, of the council of the twelve, was chosen to be the second counselor. The presidency as thus constituted and sustained by the conference, however, did not long survive, as three days after the close of the conference, viz., October 10, 1901, President Lorenzo Snow died, at his official residence, the noted Beehive House, Salt Lake City.

382Elder Rudger Clawson had not been ordained to the position of second counselor in the first presidency before the death of President Snow, and hence his appointment to the position of second counselor in the first presidency was not completed; nor did President Snow live long enough to see his large views respecting the mission of the twelve and the seventy, and the priesthood generally, put into operation.

PRESIDENT LORENZO SNOW

It will not be necessary to give an extended biographical account of President Snow since the greater part of his earthly career has been identified with the leading events of the church over which, for the period of a little more than three years, he had the honor to preside, as prophet, seer, and revelator Already there have been noted in these pages his call to the apostleship; his great mission to Italy, which extended to Switzerland, Malta, and India; his mission to Hawaii; his industrial cooperative system inaugurated at Brigham City, and for so long a period successful; his mission to Palestine, in company with George A. Smith, counselor in the first presidency; his imprisonment for conscience sake through being involved in the plural marriage system of the church; his notable interview with Governor Caleb W. West while in prison, and his avowed willingness to suffer for his convictions; and lastly his administrative acts as president of the church.

383He was born at Mantua, Portage county, Ohio, April 3rd, 1814, of New England ancestry, his father, Oliver Snow, being from Massachusetts, and his mother, Rossetta L. Pettibone, from Connecticut. He was descended, as he, himself informs us, "from the genuine Puritan stock—those who fled from religious persecution in the old world, and landed on Plymouth Rock, of historic celebrity." [^10]

383President Snow's boyhood and young manhood were spent upon a farm, but throughout both periods he manifested a desire for learning and acquired more than an ordinary education, by attendance upon the public schools of his country, by private study, and by entering Oberlin College, from which, however, he did not graduate. In 1836 he went to Kirtland, Ohio, to visit his sister, Eliza R. Snow Smith, at the time living there. Here Lorenzo Snow came in contact with "Mormonism," and its founder, Joseph Smith, and was baptized by one of the twelve apostles of the New Dispensation, viz., John F. Boynton. He soon afterwards became conscious of the reality of his spiritual baptism, which brought to him the testimony of the truth of the gospel he had embraced; the convincing power of God to his soul of that truth which remained with him throughout his life. The event is thus described by himself:

THE SPIRITUAL EXPERIENCE OF LORENZO SNOW

"Some two or three weeks after I was baptized, one day while engaged in my studies, I began to reflect upon the fact that I had not obtained a knowledge of the truth of the work—that I had not realized the fulfillment of the promise, 'he that doeth my will shall know of the doctrine,' and I began to feel very uneasy. I laid aside my books, left the house, and wandered around through the fields under the oppressive influence of a gloomy, disconsolate spirit, while an indescribable cloud of darkness seemed to envelop me. I had been accustomed, at the close of the day, to retire for secret prayer, to a grove a short distance from my lodgings, but at this time I felt no inclination to do so. The spirit of prayer had departed, and the heavens seemed like brass over my head. At length, realizing that the usual time had come for secret prayer, I concluded I would not forego my evening service, and as a matter of formality, knelt as I was in the habit of doing, and in my accustomed retired place, but not feeling as I was wont to feel.

384I had no sooner opened my lips in an effort to pray, than I heard a sound, just above my head, like the rustling of silken robes, and immediately the Spirit of God descended upon me, completely enveloping my whole person, filling me, from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet, and O, the joy and happiness I felt! No language can describe the almost instantaneous transition from a dense cloud of mental and spiritual darkness into a refulgence of light and knowledge, as it was at that time imparted to my understanding. I then received a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and of the restoration of the holy priesthood, and the fulness of the gospel. It was a complete baptism—a tangible immersion in the heavenly principle or element, the Holy Ghost; and even more real and physical in its effects upon every part of my system than the immersion by water. * * * I was perfectly satisfied, as well I might be, for my expectations were more than realized, I think I may safely say in an infinite degree. [^11]

PERSONAL APPEARANCE AND CHARACTERISTICS OF PRESIDENT SNOW

In person President Snow was of spare build, but well formed, and in manners elegant, refined, and gentle; persuasive, but forceful; and it was said of him that he could say and do the hardest things in the gentlest, quietest manner possible to man. His appearance would indicate to the casual observer, a delicacy, if not weakness, of physical constitution; but in reality he was strong and robust, and no man among his frontier and pioneer associates could endure more physical hardships or sustain more prolonged and intense mental exertion than he could. He possessed keen business instinct, as well as a highly sensitive spiritual nature; in him indeed were combined the mind qualities that go to the making of the practical mystic; and had he come to his position of chief leadership of the church earlier in life, there is no question but that his administration would have been far more notable than it was under the limitations of three years, and under the handicap of extreme old age. But even as it was in his achievements as the prophet leader of modern Israel, he gave forth a larger vision of the work of the New Dispensation than had previously, for some time at least, obtained; and he set the church in the way of being delivered from the financial straits into which it had fallen; and had given an impetus to the mission and dignity to the priesthood.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See this History, chapter clxxvi.
[^2] Minutes of Special General Conference, 10th Nov., 1901, Millennial Star, vol. lxiii, p. 787.
[^3] Two chapters in the Women of Mormondom, Edward Tullidge, 1877, are devoted to the experiences of this noble woman, and what is there set down justifies all that is said above of her character.
[^4] Elaborate Minutes of the Conference will be found in Millennial Star, vol. lxiii, pp. 769-772 and 778-791. President Smith's important discourse at this conference will there be found complete, pp. 785-87 and 801-4.
[^5] Last Days of President Snow, Juvenile Instructor, vol. xxxvi, p. 690.
[^6] The names of the signers are as follows: W. M. Paden, P. L. Williams, E. B. Critchlow, E. W. Wilson, C. C. Goodwin, W. A. Nelden, Clarence T. Brown, Ezra Thompson, J. J. Corum, George R. Hancock, W. Mont Ferry, J. L. Leilich, Harry C. Hill, C. E. Allen, George M. Scott, S. H. Lewis, H. G. McMillan, Abel Leonard. The vocations and standing of these men in the community will be found in proceeding in the Smoot Case, vol. i, pp. 591-2.
[^7] Proceedings in the Smoot Case, vol. i, pp. 1-25.
[^8] His protest will be found in full in Smoot Case proceedings, vol. i, pp. 26-30.
[^9] Ibid, pp. 125-126.
[^10] See Congressional Record, 57th Congress, 1st Session, p. 388.
[^11] See Smoot Case, vol. i, pp. 238-9.
