B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

386CHAPTER CLXXVIII

386REORGANIZATION OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY—THE ELECTION OF REED SMOOT AS UNITED STATES SENATOR FROM UTAH

386FOLLOWING both the instructions of President Woodruff previously mentioned [^1] and the example in organizing the first presidency when Lorenzo Snow was chosen president, the council of the apostles, including the two counselors of the late president, took immediate action in the matter of reorganizing the first presidency. Seven days after the death of President Snow the organization was effected—October 17, 1901. Joseph F. Smith was chosen president and selected John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund for his counselors in the order named. John R. Winder at the time of being selected was second counselor in the presiding bishopric of the church, a high priest, therefore, and a man of large experience, much beloved by the brethren of the authorities, and by the people generally. Anthon H. Lund, was a member of the apostles' quorum and a faithful man, held in esteem everywhere and by all classes of the community.

JUSTIFICATION FOR PROMPT ORGANIZATION OF THE FIRST PRESIDENCY

President Smith in his discourse at the special general conference of the church assembled on the 10th of November following, to ratify and perfect the organization of the presidency as proposed, set forth the principle and instruction on which the church authorities and the church proceeded to organize so promptly the first presidency. He stated the matter in chronological order as follows: [^2]

"After the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the twelve apostles continued as the presiding quorum of the church for a number of years; but finally they were moved upon by the Holy Spirit to reorganize the first presidency of the church, with Brigham Young as president, and Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as his counselors. In reality this organization might have been effected within twenty-four hours after the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith, but their action was delayed, until they found by experience that the exercise of the functions of presidency and the government of the church by twelve men at the head was not only cumbersome, but was not fully perfect in the order of the holy priesthood as established by the Lord.

387On the death of President Brigham Young, President John Taylor followed in some measure the example of his predecessor, and it was some time before the presidency of the church was organized. * * * At the death of President Taylor, President Woodruff hesitated, and he allowed a little time to pass before the presidency was again organized. When at last he became convinced that it was his duty, and necessary in order to carry out the purposes of the Lord, he reorganized the presidency of the church.

387At that time he gave a solemn injunction to his fellow servants in relation to this. He desired it understood that in all future time, when the president of the church should die and thereby the first presidency become disorganized, it would be the duty of the proper authorities of the church to proceed at once without any unnecessary delay, to reorganize the first presidency.

387As soon as the news reached us of the death of President Woodruff, who was in California at the time, President Lorenzo Snow said to me, 'It will be our duty to proceed as soon as possible to reorganize the presidency of the church.' As you are aware, after the burial of the remains of President Woodruff, he proceeded at once to do this. In this connection I may tell you another thing. President Snow said to me, 'you will live to be president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and when that time comes you should proceed at once and reorganize the presidency of the church.' This was his counsel to me, and the same was given to the twelve apostles. In accordance with this principle and with the injunction of President Snow, within one week after his death the apostles proceeded to designate the new presidency of the church, and we did it strictly in accordance with the pattern that the Lord has established in his church, unanimously.

387

PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH

President Joseph F. Smith was a son of Hyrum Smith, brother of the Prophet, who shared martyrdom with that brother in Carthage Prison. His mother was Mary Fielding, born at Honidon, Bedfordshire, England. She was the eldest daughter of John and Rachel Fielding. The Fieldings were a family devoutly religious, and connected with the reform movements in the Wesleyan Methodist church, of which they were prominent members. In 1834, Mary Fielding left her native land and went to Toronto, Upper Canada, where she joined her youngest brother, Joseph Fielding, and a younger sister, Mercy Rachel Fielding. Here she came in contact with the New Dispensation of the gospel through the preaching of Elder Parley P. Pratt and accepted its message, in May, 1836. The Fieldings removed to Kirtland in the spring of 1837, and in the December following—24th—Mary Fielding was married to Hyrum Smith, brother of the Prophet Joseph. She proved to be a woman of rare Christian faith, and virtue, and patience, and was possessed of fine business and executive abilities as she proved to demonstration in the management of her family through all the trying experiences of her eventful life. She was a worthy wife of Hyrum Smith, the presiding patriarch to the church, and an equally worthy mother of the future president of the church, Joseph F. Smith; and her faith and virtues profoundly influenced the life of her son. [^3]

388It had long before been predicted that Joseph F. Smith would preside over the church; and this, with the sympathy that his family relationship elicited, together with the fact of his well known uprightness of life, and his love and devotion for the work of the New Dispensation of the gospel, combined to make his selection for president very acceptable to the church.

VACANCIES IN THE PRESIDING COUNCIL FILLED

Hyrum M. Smith, eldest son of President Smith, was a few days later—October 24th—chosen to fill the vacancy in the council of the twelve apostles made by the advancement of Elder Anthon H. Lund to the council of the first presidency. Orrin P. Miller, was chosen the same day to fill the vacancy in the presiding bishopric of the church, made by the advancement of John R. Winder to the council of the first presidency. These changes brought Brigham Young, son of the late President Brigham Young, to the position of president of the quorum of the twelve apostles.

389A special general conference of the church was called to meet on the 10th of November, to ratify the several steps that had been taken in organizing the first presidency and the changes effected in the council of the apostles and the presiding bishopric. Accordingly the conference convened and sustained all the general officers of the church, including all the new appointees. The priesthood was grouped in a general assembly of quorums, each order of officers by itself, and expressing, by its position, its relationship to the whole organization. The several nominations and motions were voted upon by each group severally, and then finally by the whole body of the priesthood and of the people. [^4]

ENDORSEMENT OF PRESIDENT SNOW'S DOCTRINE AND POLICY BY PRESIDENT SMITH

Early in his administration President Joseph F. Smith gave full and complete endorsement to the views upon the priesthood, its organization and purpose of mission and the policy of the church in relation thereto. This in a signed article by him in the Juvenile Instructor. The signed article appeared in this periodical named on the 15th of November, 1901, following within a month of his own installment as president of the church. The article was entitled "The Last Days of President Snow;" and the discourse of the late president, at the regular conference of October the sixth, was declared to be the "word of the Lord to us all." "By way of comment," remarks President Smith, after a full setting forth of what the late president had said in his discourse, "I may briefly add, that we accept what is contained therein on the duties of the twelve, and presiding priesthood, as the word of the Lord to us all. It is so plain and so convincing as to leave no room for doubt; and there remains but one thing for us to do, and that is to zealously and arduously labor to successfully accomplish all that is required at our hands."

390The doctrine of the late president on priesthood, then, thus so heartily endorsed by the newly elected president, and declared to be "the word of the Lord to us all," may be accepted as the policy of the church, viz., exalt the priesthood and make it to function in the church as designed in the revelations of God to the church of the New Dispensation of the gospel. [^5]

ELECTION OF REED SMOOT TO THE UNITED STATES SENATE—ANTI-"MORMON" PROTEST

Early in President Smith's administration, that is to say January 20th, 1903, the Republican legislature of Utah elected Reed Smoot to be United States senator from Utah. As he was a member of the quorum of the twelve apostles, having been chosen to that office at the general conference of the church in April, 1900, filling the vacancy occasioned by the death of Franklin D. Richards; and being an apostle, Reed Smoot, of course, had conformed to the church rule, and obtained "leave of absence" as to his church duties in order to be a candidate for the office he sought; and from that circumstance the cry was raised about "church intrusion into state and national politics," and loud protests were made against Mr. Smoot being seated in the United States senate. The matter finally took the form of a solemn protest against his admission to the senate by a group of eighteen men in Salt Lake City, in which sectarian ministers predominated, but there were among the names, mining and business men, lawyers and editors. E. B. Critchlow, member of a prominent law firm in Salt Lake City, and Wm. Paden, pastor of the First Presbyterian church of Salt Lake City, were the chief movers in the protest. The lawyer arranged the form of the protest, the pastor gathered the material. [^6] The protest followed closely after the senator's election, bearing date of January 26th, 1903. The grounds of the protest are stated in the following excerpts from the document itself, being the introductory paragraphs, and the main subordinate headings of the document:

GROUNDS OF THE ANTI-SMOOT PROTEST

"We, the undersigned, resident citizens and qualified electors of the state of Utah, do hereby most respectfully protest:

391That Apostle Reed Smoot, senator-elect from the state of Utah, to whom, on or about the 21st day of January, 1903, a certificate of election was issued in due form by the governor of said state, ought not to be permitted to qualify by the taking the oath of office or to sit as a member of the United States senate for reasons affecting the honor and dignity of the United States and their senators in congress.

391We protest as above upon the ground and for the reason that he is one of a self-perpetuating body of fifteen men who, constituting the ruling authorities of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or 'Mormon' church, claim, and by their followers are accorded the right to claim, supreme authority, divinely sanctioned, to shape the belief and control the conduct of those under them in all matters whatsoever, civil and religious, temporal and spiritual, and who thus, uniting in themselves authority in church and state, do so exercise the same as to inculcate and encourage a belief in polygamy and polygamous cohabitation, who countenance and connive at violations of the laws of the state prohibiting the same, regardless of pledges made for the purpose of obtaining statehood and of covenants made with the people of the United States, and who by all the means in their power protect and honor those who with themselves violate the laws of the land and are guilty of practices destructive of the family and the home.

391In support whereof we do further show as follows:

391I. The Mormon priesthood, according to the doctrine of that church, is vested with supreme authority in all things temporal and spiritual. * * *

391II. The first presidency and twelve apostles are supreme in the exercise and transmission of the mandates of this authority. * * *

391III. As this body of men has not abandoned the principles and practice of political dictation, so also it has not abandoned belief in polygamy and polygamous cohabitation. * * *

392IV. That this is the attitude of the first presidency and apostolate, even since the suspensory Manifesto of 1890, is evidenced by their teachings since then. * * *

392V. This body of officials, of whom Senator-elect Smoot is one, also practice or connive at and encourage the practice of polgamy and polygamous cohabitation, and those whom they have permitted to hold legislative office have, without protest or objection from them, sought to pass a law nullifying enactments against polygamous cohabitation.

392VI. The supreme authorities in the church of whom Senator-elect Reed Smoot is one, towit, the first presidency and twelve apostles, not only connive at violations of but protect and honor the violators of the laws against polygamy and polygamous cohabitation."

392Such the statement of alleged facts. The argument was that in consequence of this state of facts, and Mr. Smoot's official association with the body of men in the Church of the Latter-day Saints charged with being responsible for them, he ought not to be admitted as a member of the United States senate, for the reason that it would be—

ARGUMENTS ON THE PROTEST

"First, contrary to the public sentiment of the civilized world;

392Second, contrary to express pledges given in procuring amnesty [i. e. for polygamists];

392Third, contrary to express conditions upon which the escheated church property was returned;

392Fourth, contrary to pledges given by the representatives of the church and the territory in their plea for statehood;

392Fifth, contrary to the pledges required by the enabling act and given in the state Constitution.

392Sixth, contrary to a provision of the Constitution of the state which, in view of the conditions which have existed for more than fifty years, is peculiarly binding upon the leaders of the Mormon church viz. 'There shall be no union of church and state, nor shall any church dominate the state, or interfere with its functions.'

392Seventh, and contrary to law." [^7]

392Concluding the protestants say:

392"We your protestants do further say and do earnestly and solemnly declare that we are moved hereto by no malice or personal ill-will toward Apostle Smoot, nor toward the people whom he seeks to represent in this high position.

We wage no war against his religious belief as such. We do not to the slightest extent deny him the same freedom of thought, the same freedom of action, within the law, which we claim for ourselves.

393We accuse him of no offense cognizable by law, nor do we seek to put him in jeopardy of his liberty or his property. We ask that he be deprived of no natural right nor of any right which under the Constitution or laws of the land he is fitted to exercise. With watchful jealousy we claim for him, whether as a private citizen or as church official, as for ourselves, all the rights, privileges, and immunities safeguarded by the Constitution.

393What we do deny to him is the right either natural or political, to the high station of senator of the United States from which to wage war upon the home—the basic institution upon whose purity and perpetuity rests the very government itself."

REVEREND LEILICH'S SEPARATE PROTEST AND CHARGE

A separate protest was made to the senate by one of the signers of the foregoing alleging practically the same things as in the protest here considered, but stated in less judicious terms, and adding the charge that Reed Smoot was a polygamist. This was the Rev. J. L. Leilich. [^8] But as Mr. Smoot was not a polygamist and never had been, the charge had no force, and was early thrown out of consideration in the proceedings. [^9]

393The subject of the right of Reed Smoot to represent Utah in the United States senate was given a most thorough investigation by the senate committee on privileges and elections, of which J. C. Burrows of Michigan was chairman; and Mr. Robert W. Tayler of Ohio, who had been the chairman of the special house committee in the Roberts case, was employed as counsel to represent the protestants in the Smoot case proceedings.

THE SENATE COMMITTEE ON PRIVILEGES AND ELECTIONS

The hearings opened under such authorization by the senate on the 16th of January, 1904—Mr. Smoot in the meantime having been allowed to be sworn in as a member of the senate and exercising the functions thereof.

394The other members of the committee on privileges and elections who served on the Smoot case, through the years it ran, were:

394George F. Hoar, Massachusetts; Louis E. McComas, Williamsport, Md. Joseph B. Foraker, Cincinnati, Ohio; Chauncey M. Depew, New York; Albert J. Beveridge, Indianapolis, Indiana; William P. Dillingham, Montpelier, Vermont; Albert J. Hopkins, Illinois; Philander C. Knox, Pennsylvania; Edmund W. Pettus, Selma, Alabama; Fred T. Dubois, Idaho; Joseph W. Bailey, Texas; Lee S. Overman, Salisbury, N. C.; James P. Clarke, Arkansas. [^10]

394For nearly two years the question was before the senate committee and the press of the country sensationally published the testimony as fast as it was given—especially the parts of it detrimental to the Latter-day Saint Church in Utah, with editorial comment in the main extremely bitter and prejudicial to the moral standing of the church in public opinion.

A veritable "cloud of witnesses" appeared before the senate in Washington, D. C., from Utah and Idaho, including the president of the church, Joseph F. Smith, a number of the apostles and other leading officials of the church; also a number of prominent Gentiles both of Idaho and Utah. As in the wide range of questions asked, and the unexpected turns the investigation took, at times, as also the somewhat complexity of answers given by a great variety of witnesses, some prominent officials of the church, some lay members, some Gentiles, some good-willed and some malicious; some apostate Latter-day Saints, and some sectarian priests, anti-"Mormon" missionaries working in Utah, all this variety of witnesses, competent and incompetent, testifying confusedly as to very many things, historical, and doctrinal and ethical, it was therefore necessary to have the mass of somewhat confusing testimony carefully analyzed; and where found defective or contradictory, or imperfectly expressed or maliciously perverted, it was thought necessary, I say, that these matters be straightened out by corrections being made and the record completed, so far as the testimony of church officers and members was concerned. To this end a committee was appointed to make the analysis of the record and suggest the amendments to be made by an instructed witness placed on the stand in behalf of Senator Smoot and properly questioned by his attorneys to elicit the proper answers. This was done, Elder James E. Talmage of the council of the twelve apostles, being chosen and sent to Washington for that purpose, where he testified before the senate. Needless to say his testimony is necessary to the harmonization of the witnesses who speak in relation to the doctrine, history and ethical conceptions of the Church of the Latter-day Saints.

395Nor was the sympathy of the senate committee on privileges and elections wholly undivided and solidly anti-"Mormon," now and then indications appeared among the members of it that gave evidence of sympathy with the pro-Smoot side of the controversy. This will be seen in the spirit of the views of the minority finally presented to the senate and discussed on the floor of that chamber. At one point of the investigation also, when President Joseph F. Smith was testifying, and much confusion seemed to be arising in the minds of the committee respecting his testimony, Senator George F. Hoar, of Massachusetts, and a veteran statesman of his country, and though ultimately joining in the majority report adversely to the interests of the senator from Utah, came to the rescue of the situation by briefly but clearly setting forth for the committee in summary the points covered by the testimony of President Smith. [^11]

THE ATTITUDE OF PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT ON THE SMOOT CASE

In addition to the support of powerful members of the senate, it was quite generally understood that President Roosevelt threw the weight of the administration in favor of the senator from Utah; but President Roosevelt insisted that he gave only a moderate personal support, based upon his confidence in the Utah senator's report of his absolute freedom from all entangling associations with practical polygamy, and of all kinds of sex immorality.

396Of his connection with the Smoot case, and the part he took therein, ex-President Roosevelt in a letter to Mr. Isaac Russel, published in Colliers Weekly for April 15th, 1911, said:

396"As for the case of Senator Smoot himself, he came to me of his own accord, and not only assured me that he was not a polygamist, but, I may add, assured me that he had never had any relations with any woman excepting his own wife; and I may also add that it was the universal testimony of all who knew anything of his domestic life that it was exemplary in every way. He also assured me that he had always done everything he could to have the law about polygamy absolutely obeyed, and most strongly upheld the position that the church had taken in its public renunciation of polygamy and that he would act as quickly against any Mormon who nowadays made a plural marriage as against a Gentile who committed bigamy. I looked into the facts very thoroughly, became convinced that Senator Smoot had told me the truth, and treated him exactly as I did all other senators—that is, strictly on his-merits as a public servant. I did not interfere in any way as to his retention in the senate, save that where senators came up to speak to me on the subject, I spoke to them freely along the lines I have here outlined, taking the view which I believe is the only view that an American can consistently take, namely, that if Mr. Smoot or anyone else had disobeyed the law he should, of course, be turned out, but if he had obeyed the law and was an upright and reputable man in his public and private relations, it would be an outrage to turn him out because of his religious belief." [^12]

One thing, however, will stand somewhat against this claim of disinterestedness beyond what is expressed here by President Roosevelt, viz., the fact that at the time the Smoot case was at the height of its development, January, 1905, Judge Robert W. Tayler of Ohio, who was chairman of the special house committee dealing with the Roberts case, five years earlier, and now acting chief counsel for complainants in the Smoot senate case, and knowing the favorable attitude of President Roosevelt for the retention of Reed Smoot in the senate, was appointed by President Roosevelt to a life's judgeship for the federal district of Northern Ohio. The action, whether intended or not to weaken the force of the prosecution in the Smoot case before the senate committee on elections and privileges, threw the Smoot opposition into confusion, for they knew not whither to turn to find a man who could replace Judge Tayler. Both former Senators John G. Carlisle of Kentucky, and Judge Edmunds of Vermont, and known to be strongly anti-"Mormon," were considered, yet neither being regarded as available, Judge Tayler continued in the case to the close of it before the senate committee, though by doing so he came as dangerously near to being unethical in accepting the appointment as the president was in making it. [^13]

397The report of the committee of the senate on privileges and elections, made on the 11th of June, 1906, however, was adverse to the senator from Utah. In closing their review of the evidence they said:

REPORT OF THE SENATE COMMITTEE

"The more deliberately and carefully the testimony taken on the investigation is considered, the more irresistibly it leads to the conclusion that the facts stated in the protest are true; * * * that the said first presidency and twelve apostles do now control, and for a long time past have controlled, the political affairs of the state of Utah, and have thus brought about in said state a union of church and state, contrary to the Constitution of said state of Utah and contrary to the Constitution of the United States, and that said Reed Smoot comes here not as the accredited representative of the state of Utah in the senate of the United States, but as the choice of the hierarchy which controls the church and has usurped the functions of the state in said state of Utah.

397It follows, as a necessary conclusion from these facts, that Mr. Smoot is not entitled to a seat in the senate as a senator from the state of Utah, and your committee reports the following resolution:

397Resolved, That Reed Smoot is not entitled to a seat as a senator of the United States from the state of Utah.

397[Signed] "J. C. BURROWS." [^14]

VIEWS OF THE MINORITY OF THE SENATE COMMITTEE

A minority of the senate committee, however, presented views adverse to the findings of the majority. In closing their review of the testimony presented, the minority said:

398"The conditions existing in Utah since Reed Smoot became an official of the Mormon church in 1900 have been such that non-Mormons and Mormons alike have acquiesced in polygamous cohabitation on the part of those who married before the Manifesto of 1890, as an evil that could best be gotten rid of by simply tolerating it until in the natural course of events it shall have passed out of existence.

398With this disposition prevailing everywhere in the state of Utah among all classes—the Gentile or non-Mormon population as well as among the Mormons—the undersigned are of the opinion that there is no just ground for expelling Senator Smoot or for finding him disqualified to hold the seat he occupies because of the fact that he, in common with all the people of his state, has not made war upon, but has acquiesced in, a condition for which he had no original responsibility. In doing so he has only conformed to what non-Mormons, hostile to his church, as well as Mormons, have concluded is, under all the circumstances, not only the wisest course to pursue, but probably the only course that promises effective and satisfactory results.

398[Signed] "J. B. FORAKER,

398ALBERT J. BEVERIDGE,

398WM. P. DILLINGHAM,

398A. J. HOPKINS,

398P. O. KNOX." [^15]

THE COMMITTEE'S REPORT BEFORE THE SENATE

The case was called up in the senate on the 13th of December, 1906, when Senator Dubois, of Idaho, made an exhaustive speech supporting the resolution of the committee, viz: "that Reed Smoot was not entitled to a seat as a senator of the United States from the state of Utah." And from thence to the time that the vote was taken upon the resolution—20th of February, 1907—many senators made speeches upon the subject, and Utah affairs were fully discussed through all that time. The resolution reported from the committee of the senate on privileges and elections read:

398"Resolved: that Reed Smoot is not entitled to a seat as a senator of the United States from the state of Utah."

399Had the vote been taken in the senate upon this resolution in that form, a majority voting would have determined the question. But an amendment was offered by Senator Hopkins of Illinois, making the resolution to read: "Two-thirds of the senators present concurring therein," and on the resolution so amended the vote stood; yeas 28; nays 42; not voting 20. "So the resolution was rejected, two-thirds of the senators present not voting therefor," and Mr. Smoot retained his seat. [^16]

THE UTAH STATE CONSTITUTION SETTLEMENT OF POLYGAMY SUSTAINED

One thing was demonstrated by this Smoot investigation, viz: that the Utah constitutional convention settlement of the Mormon polygamy question was the one that was being adhered to in Utah, viz.: that there should be a cessation of polygamous marriages for the future; but that in polygamous families where the plural relations were established previous to the Woodruff Manifesto of 1890, they should not be disturbed by prosecutions under the law. That is to say, as to the latter part of the statement, and to quote the words of the minority members of the senate committee on privileges and election—

399"The conditions existing in Utah have been such that non-Mormons and Mormons alike have acquiesced in polygamous cohabitation on the part of those who married before the Manifesto of 1890, as an evil that could best be gotten rid of by simply tolerating it until in the natural course of events it shall have passed out of existence."

ATTEMPTED CIRCUMVENTION OF THE WOODRUFF MANIFESTO

One other thing also was disclosed by this investigation, viz: that as to new polygamous marriages, by which is meant such polygamous marriages as had been contracted since the Woodruff Manifesto of 1890, the injunction of said Manifesto had not been strictly adhered to even by some high officials of the Church of Latter-day Saints and people misled by them. Some gave such an interpretation to the Manifesto as to make it operative within the United States alone, and that plural marriages outside of that national jurisdiction, were not violations of the church inhibition of such marriages. "I have always believed," said Elder John W. Taylor in his letter of resignation as one of the twelve apostles of the church—

400"I have always believed that the government of the United States had jurisdiction only within its own boundaries, and that the term 'laws of the land,' in the Manifesto, meant merely the laws of the United States. I find now that this opinion is different to that expressed by the church authorities, who have declared that the prohibition against plural marriages extended to every place and to every part of the church. It is doubtless true that this view of the matter has been given by President Woodruff and others, but I have never taken that as binding upon me or the church, because it [such interpretation] was never presented for adoption by 'common consent' as was the Manifesto itself, and I have disputed its authority as a law or a rule of the church." [^17]

400Elder M. F. Cowley, who with Elder Taylor resigned from the apostolate because of this attitude, and for violation of the Woodruff Manifesto, made a similar statement in his letter of resignation. This erroneous view has already been considered and refuted in a previous chapter. [^18]

400The fact that there were numerous reports in circulation that plural marriages had been entered into contrary to the official declaration of President Woodruff, of 1890, led President Smith at the general conference of April, 1904, to take a stronger attitude upon this subject, declaring that if any officer or member should assume to solemnize or enter into any such marriage, they would be excommunicated from the church. [^19]

401The matter is important and therefore the record of the action is given; President Smith said, introducing the subject:

401PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH'S MANIFESTO AT APRIL ANNUAL CONFERENCE OF 1904

401"I am now going to present a matter to you that is unusual, and I do it because of a conviction which I feel that it is a proper thing for me to do. I have taken the liberty of having written down what I wish to present, in order that I may say to you the exact words which I would like to have conveyed to your ears, that I may not be misunderstood or misquoted. I present this to the conference for your action:

OFFICIAL STATEMENT

Inasmuch as there are numerous reports in circulation that plural marriages have been entered into contrary to the official declaration of President Woodruff, of September 26, 1890, commonly called the Manifesto, which was issued by President Woodruff and adopted by the church at its general conference, October 6, 1890, which forbade any marriages violative of the law of the land, I, Joseph F. Smith, president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, do hereby affirm and declare that no such marriages have been solemnized with the sanction, consent, or knowledge of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; and I hereby announce that all such marriages are prohibited, and if any officer or member of the church shall assume to solemnize or enter into any such marriage he will be deemed in transgression against the church, and will be liable to be dealt with according to the rules and regulations thereof and excommunicated therefrom.

401[Signed] "JOSEPH F. SMITH,"

401President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

401They charge us with being dishonest and untrue to our word. They charge the church with having violated a 'compact,' and all this sort of nonsense. I want to see today whether the Latter-day Saints representing the church in this solemn assembly will not seal these charges as false by their vote."

401President Francis M. Lyman, presented the following resolution, and moved its adoption:

RESOLUTION OF ENDORSEMENT

"Resolved, That we, the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, in general conference assembled, hereby approve and endorse the statement and declaration of President Joseph F. Smith just made to this conference concerning plural marriages, and will support the courts of the church in enforcements thereof. The resolution was seconded by a number of presidents of stakes and prominent elders. * * * The resolution was then adopted, by unanimous vote of the conference."

402This was followed by an agitation within the church which finally led to the resignation of the two apostles chiefly concerned in the matter of new marriages, Elder John W. Taylor and Matthias F. Cowley, 28th of October, 1905.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The speech will be found in full in Congressional Record for the 58th Congress, vol. 39, part iv, pp. 3608-3613. Also in Roberts' Defense of the Faith and the Saints, with an answer thereto, vol. i, pp. 172-248.
[^2] Vol. i, pp, 174-248. Here will be found both the senate speech of Mr. Kearns in full and the answer thereto in full. See also Essentials of Church History, by Joseph Fielding Smith, 1922, church historian and son of the late President Joseph F. Smith.
[^3] See the speech in answer to Senator Kearns published in full in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, 1905, vol. i, pp. 205-248 where the charge in the text is considered at length.
[^4] See Salt Lake Tribune, Nov. 8th, 1905.
[^5] Laws of Utah, 9th Regular Session of the State of Utah, 1911, chapter 125, p. 224, et seq.
[^6] The vote was unanimous in the senate and also in the house except for the votes by the two lone Democrats of the house who cast their votes for W. H. King, Democrat. (See Deseret News, of Jan. 20th, 1909. p. 5. Also see Utah Election Returns for 1909).
[^7] The address is published in full in the Improvement Era of June, 1911. pp. 719-724.
[^8] Colliers, weekly for April 15th, 1911. The article was reproduced in the Improvement Era for June, 1911.
[^9] Seventy-eighth Semi-Annual Conference, pamphlet, Oct. 4-6, 1907, pp. 5, 6.
[^10] Ibid.
[^11] See Smoot Case, vol. i, pp. 238-9.
[^12] The letter was copied from Colliers into Improvement Era, for June, 1911, pp. 712-718.
[^13] For the appointment of Tayler see announcement in Deseret News, of January 2nd, 1905.
[^14] Smoot Case, vol. iv, pp. 497-8. The testimony, arguments and final report of the committee make four large volumes of matter aggregating 3,429 pages.
[^15] Ibid, 505.
[^16] Congressional Record, vol. xli, part 3; for closing the debate and record of the vote see date of 20th Feb., 1907, pp. 3429-30.
[^17] See letter dated Oct. 28th, 1905, in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. ii, pp. 329-30. Also confirmed by telegram to Mr. Worthington, attorney for Senator Smoot from G. F. Gibbs, secretary of the presidency of the church, proceedings in the Smoot Case, vol. iv, p. 441.
[^18] See chapter clxviii.
[^19] See Official Report of the Conference published by the church for April 3, 4, and 6, 1904, p. 74.
