B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

403CHAPTER CLXXIX

403THREE UNITED THINGS: KEARNS ATTACK—THE AMERICAN PARTY—THE MAGAZINE CRUSADE

403RUNNING parallel with the Smoot case in Washington before the United States senate, are three other things which, to understand, should be considered together. These are (1) Senator Thomas Kearns' attack upon the Church of the Latter-day Saints, delivered in the senate of the United States; (2) the rise of the "American party" in Salt Lake City, its capture of the municipal government and the control of it through three city administrations in a bitter anti-"Mormon" spirit; (3) the waging of a nation-wide American magazine crusade against the Church of the Latter-day Saints, chiefly by personal attacks upon the administration and the character of President Joseph F. Smith. Two of these things—the capture and administration of Salt Lake City by the "American party;" and the magazine crusade against the Church of the Latter-day Saints, went beyond the continuance of the Smoot case in time, both projecting into the year 1911.

THE KEARNS ATTACK IN THE SENATE

The assault of Senator Thomas Kearns occurred on the 28th day of February, 1905; near the close of the four years' term of service for which he had been elected, following the Democratic fiasco of failure to elect a senator two years before his term began. Mr. Kearns' term as senator would end on the fourth of March, 1905, and therefore the speech was made but four days before his retirement from the senate, a sort of parting salvo from a retreating foe.

At the time of the delivery of the speech by Senator Kearns, the senate had pending before it a resolution introduced sometime before by Senator Dubois of Idaho, directing the senate committee on judiciary to prepare and report to the senate within "thirty days after the beginning of the next session of congress" a joint resolution of the two houses of congress proposing amendments to the Constitution of the United States for the prohibition and punishment of polygamous marriages and plural cohabitation, and requiring an expurgatory oath to be taken by all candidates for office under the Constitution and laws of the United States that they were not and would not be a member or adherent of any organization that would require him to disregard his duty to support and maintain the Constitution and laws of the United States and of the several states.

404This resolution, of course, was aimed at and proposed to meet alleged conditions existing in the state of Utah, induced and maintained there supposedly by the Church of the Latter-day Saints. This resolution Senator Kearns called up in the senate chamber, saying, "with hand on heart," that he could not permit the occasion to pass "without saying with brevity and such clearness as he could command, what it seemed to him "should be said by a senator, under these [his] circumstances, before leaving public life." "Something is due to the senate which has honored me," he said. From this viewpoint the senator launched an extended speech supposed to represent conditions in Utah as to the dominance of the industrial, commercial, and especially political life, in Utah by the Church of the Latter-day Saints; or more especially by what was usually called the "hierarchy," denominated by Senator Kearns the "church monarchy;" either term meaning the presiding authorities of the church. The propositions the senator discussed are thus summarized by him near the close of his speech:

404THE GENERAL SITUATION (FROM THE KEARNS VIEWPOINT)

404"Briefly reviewing the matters which I have offered here, and the logical deductions therefrom, I maintain the following propositions:

404We set aside the religion of the Mormon people as sacred from assault.

405Outside of religion the Mormons as a community are ruled by a special privileged class, constituting what I call the church monarchy.

405This monarchy pledged the country that there would be no more violations of law and no more defiance of the sentiment of the United States regarding polygamy and the plural marriage relation.

405This monarchy pledged the United States that it would refrain from controlling its subjects in secular affairs.

405Every member of this monarchy is responsible for the system of government and for the acts of the monarchy, since (as shown in the cases of the deposed apostles, Moses Thatcher, and others) the man who is not in accord with the system is dropped from the ruling class.

405This monarchy sets up a regal social order within this Republic.

405This monarchy monopolizes the business of one commonwealth and is rapidly reaching into others.

405This monarchy takes practically all the surplus product of the toil of its subjects for its own purpose, and makes no account to anyone on earth of its immense secret fund.

405This monarchy rules all politics in Utah, and is rapidly extending its dominion into other states and territories.

405This monarchy permits its favorites to enter into polygamy and to maintain polygamous relations, and it protects them from prosecution by its political power.

405Lately no effort has been made to punish any of these people by the local law. On the contrary, the ruling monarch (President Joseph F. Smith) has continued to grow in power, wealth and importance. He sits upon innumerable boards of directors, among others that of the Union Pacific Railway, where he joins upon terms of fraternity with the great financial and transportation magnates of the United States, who hold him in their councils because his power to benefit or to injure their possessions must be taken into account." [^1]

THE REMEDY

Concluding the speech the senator from Utah discussed "the remedy;" and this was it:

405"It is the duty of this great body—the senate of the United States—to serve notice on this church monarch [meaning President Joseph F. Smith] and his apostles that they must live within the law; that the nation is supreme; that the institutions of this country must prevail throughout the land; and that the compact upon which statehood was granted must be preserved inviolate."

THE SENATOR'S PRAYER

"May heaven grant that this may be effective and that the church monarchy in Utah may be taught that it must relinquish its grasp.

406If * * * the alien monarchy still proves defiant, it will be for others than myself to suggest a course of action consistent with the dignity of the country."

406It will be observed that the charges made by Senator Kearns were in large part, identical in substance and spirit with the charges made by the Smoot protestants then before the senate committee on privileges and elections, on which the senate two years later in effect pronounced an adverse judgment, to the contention of the senator from Utah.

NO ANSWER MADE IN THE SENATE TO THE KEARNS SPEECH

No answer was made to the speech of Senator Kearns in the senate, although both his position and he himself were so vulnerable to a counter attack, which would have been on that occasion the best defense, and would have met with entire success. In the course of his speech Senator Kearns claimed that the president of the Church of the Latter-day Saints dominated the election of men to political office; and conceded that his own election to the senate had been made possible by the friendliness of President Snow to his candidacy—albeit, of course, in his own case, the influence which had elected him was "unsought and unbought." And yet, in his speech, the senator affected to despise those means of procuring an election. At one place in that speech he remarked:

406"I say to you, my fellow senators, that this place of power is infinitely more magnificent than I dreamed when I first thought of occupying a seat here. But were it thrice as great as I now know it to be, and were I back in that old time of struggle in Utah, when I was seeking for this honor, I would not permit the volunteered friendship of President Snow to bestow upon me, even as an innocent recipient, one atom of the church monarch's favor."

THE AWKWARD POSITION OF SENATOR KEARNS

Yet for four years, by self-confession, Senator Kearns after knowing the means by which he was elected had held his high office by the alleged grace of the president of the Latter-day Saint Church, this "political monarch" who shamefully and dangerously ruled "all politics in Utah," and was rapidly "extending his dominion into other states and territories." This in all conscience was bad enough to say. But worse is yet to follow; for Senator Kearns is open to the inquiry: If you so despise and denounce the exercise of this "kingly" ecclesiastical power in Utah politics, after four years of office by reason of its favor in your behalf (as alleged) why did you both by means direct and indirect solicit the exercise of that same influence for your own reelection to another term as senator? That solicitation for such aid was made was openly charged with the full knowledge of President Joseph F. Smith and with his approval. This charge was made before an audience of two thousand five hundred people, on the 14th of March, 1905, at Provo, Utah, on the occasion of a formal answer being made to the senate speech of Mr. Kearns, verbatim reports of which answer were published in the Utah press, both "Mormon" and anti-"Mormon," and finally done permanently into a book under the title of Defense of the Faith and the Saints, [^2] This solicitation for the exercise of "church influence" by President Joseph F. Smith, for the reelection of Senator Thomas Kearns was made in the city of Washington, D. C., during the time that President Smith was in that city, before the senate committee on election and privileges to testify in the Smoot case. That would be in the month of March, 1904. Senator Kearns was told when making the solicitation, both when making it directly by himself and indirectly through another, that the president, Joseph F. Smith, "was not in politics." Whereupon, the case seems to be, that Senator Kearns resolved upon a revengeful effort to destroy what he could not use to his own advantage, the Church of the Latter-day Saints—hence the senate speech attack of a year later, just before leaving senatorial life.

AUTHORSHIP OF THE KEARNS SPEECH

Here it should be said that the senate speech of Senator Kearns was not his in fact, either in its conception or its polished composition. For bad as its revealments are, and in the main false, it is constructed by a devilish cunning, and made up of polished sentences and moving tropes—a literary style of which Senator Kearns, being ignorant and untrained in such matters, was utterly incapable. The speech was only his because he adopted it, accepted it from the brain and hand of another, and read it in the senate house. The speech was generally believed to be in conception and composition the work of ex-Senator Frank J. Cannon. [^3]

In the senatorial election of the Utah Republican legislature early in 1905, George Sutherland was chosen to succeed Senator Kearns. He was a gentleman of education, high character, and especially learned in the law, and later was appointed an associate justice on the bench of the supreme court of the United States, a position he still (1930) holds, and worthily holds.

THE RISE OF THE AMERICAN PARTY

In the general election of 1904, and chiefly under the direction of ex-senator, and by now of a long time thoroughly disgruntled, Frank J. Cannon, there had been galvanized into life the old anti-"Mormon" "Liberal" political party, though now named the "American party." It put a state ticket in the field, but was badly beaten in the tri-party state election, the other parties being the regular national parties of which the Republican party in both state and nation, was successful. Though unsuccessful in the state election of 1904, the American party was hopeful of carrying the municipal election of Salt Lake City in the ensuing year and thoroughly organized its forces to that end. Those forces were propitious to the end desired. There were, first, ex-Senator Frank J. Cannon, defeated in all his political hopes and "big business" aspirations, yet concededly brilliant both in cunning speech and writing. Ex-Senator Kearns was also disappointed in the closing out to him of all future of a high political career by refused reelection, though the party with which he had affiliated had been successful in the recent national and state election. Soon after his election as senator in 1901, he had purchased the Salt Lake Tribune of P. H. Lannan. This, doubtless, with the idea of making of it a personal organ of great influence in the state of Utah and perpetuating a long senatorial career. These hopes were thrown into the scrapheap of disappointments when Mr. Kearns failed of reelection to the senate. He was immensely wealthy, however, and a willing spender in the furtherance of those things he desired to attain, and just now he desired nothing so much as dominance in the political affairs of Utah. Hence his willingness to finance the new political party and wreck everything else political in the state. Frank J. Cannon was placed in editorial charge of the Salt Lake Tribune, which, because of its prestige already acquired as the most commanding and powerful newspaper of the intermountain west, was capable of influencing and molding the public opinion as to things anti-"Mormon."

409There was also as background to these forces the unfolding of alleged conditions in Utah brought to light by the Smoot investigation at Washington, then at its height which would drag on its slow length until February of 1907. It was the supposed disclosures of this investigation, with its alleged general recurrency to the practice of polygamy in Utah, and ecclesiastical interference in political affairs, that was pleaded as justification for calling into existence the American party.

The methods of the campaigning of this party were sensational and unscrupulous, and such was the state of public opinion in 1905 that at the municipal election in Salt Lake City, the party elected its candidate for mayor and a majority of the city council, but under a new name. Instead of assuming the old title "Liberal" it was to be called the "American party."

410The first steps in the matter of effecting an organization were taken on November 7th, 1904, at a time when taking testimony in the Smoot hearings was in full blast.

410The announcement of the municipal election victory of the American party the morning following that election was most extravagantly, not to say hysterically, jubilant. The announcement must have exhausted the type font of its organ, the Salt Lake Tribune, for display headings and spread-eagle cuts, as for example:

410"IN SALT LAKE—AMERICAN PARTY OWNS THE EARTH!" "IT IS A TRIUMPH OF RIGHT." "IT IS A VICTORY FOR THE AMERICAN HOME." "IT SOUNDS THE DEATH KNELL OF CHURCH DOMINATION IN SALT LAKE CITY." "IT MEANS THE RETIREMENT OF THE APOSTOLIC SENATOR, REED SMOOT, FROM THE SENATE OF THE UNITED STATES," etc., etc.; and this in the loudest type were only a few of the headings. A large, American spread-eagle cut across the front page, with scroll in its fierce beak and thunder bolts clutched in its talons, saying, "I go to spread glad tidings," was a feature, and indeed it did seem to bring back one echo, at least, of the message of victory. The National Congress of Mothers and National League of Woman's Organizations were at the time in session at the city of Washington, D. C., and on the 8th of November, through the chairman of the United Congress, Mrs. Frederick Schoff, in behalf of the organization wired the following to the Salt Lake Tribune:

"Thousands of women of America rejoice in the victory of the American party. May it hold its banner aloft until it gathers into its ranks every local law-abiding citizen that Utah may be redeemed from the conditions which have aroused the horror and indignation of millions of American citizens. On behalf of womanhood and childhood, for love of home and freedom and our country, we rejoice in your victory." [^4]

411ANTI-CLIMAX OF THE AMERICAN PARTY FLURRY

All this, it will be remembered, was early in November, 1905. The investigation of Utah affairs—more especially Latter-day Saint Church affairs, not only in Utah, but throughout the intermountain west—had been going on in the Smoot case, before the United States senate committee on privileges and elections for a year, and after two years more of most searching and skillful investigation, then the elaborate report of the findings of the investigating committee was disposed of by action of the United States senate on the 20th of February, 1907. The senate rejected the report of its committee "that Reed Smoot was not entitled to a seat as a senator of the United States from Utah;" and voted that he should retain his seat. As this action of the United States senate was based upon a thorough-going three years investigation of the same state of alleged facts, and conditions on which the American party had based its campaigns, and claims to preferment against opposing parties for control of Salt Lake City and the state of Utah—this United States senate action makes the hysteria and extravagant verbiage over the American party proclaimed victory seem cheap and tawdry; for if the senate's thorough investigation over those parallel years and dealing with the same subject matter in which the American party arose and flourished in political control of Salt Lake City, if the senate found no just warrant for rejecting Reed Smoot on the state of facts presented, neither was there anything in the same state of alleged facts that gave warrant for the resurrection of the anti-"Mormon" political party to capture Salt Lake City, menace Utah with a threat of anti-"Mormon" control, and agitate the whole nation into angry mood and misunderstanding of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

TRIUMPH OF GOOD SENSE CITIZENS VICTORY

The American party, however, continued in political control of Salt Lake City through three administrations, from 1905 to 1911, the mayors being Ezra Thompson for the first term, and John S. Bransford for two terms following. In the election for 1911, after a strenuous effort to retain its hold, the American party was overthrown by the "citizens ticket," and at the same election Salt Lake went under the commission system of municipal government, with Samuel G. Park as mayor.

412One of the contributing causes of the downfall of the American party control of the city was the announced policy and an effort in its last term of administration to establish a segregated, but strictly regulated, licensed vice district, contemptuously called the "Stockade," in the political campaign in which the American party was overthrown. A large section of the Gentile and Hebrew population of the city, as well as the Latter-day Saints strongly resented this European policy of vice segregation district, and the effort to install it doomed the American party to defeat.

The commission form of government inaugurated with this political victory, consisted of an abandonment of the old form of municipal government by the election of a mayor at large and a city council of aldermen from aldermanic wards or districts, and in lieu thereof the election of commissioners at large among whom are divided the administrative functions of the municipality, tending to a business basis rather than to a political basis of administration. [^5] The adoption of this form of government and the election of Mr. Park, a non-"Mormon," but a thorough business man of high integrity, put an end to anti-"Mormon" political agitation, of which all classes of Salt Lake citizens had become heartily tired.

413THE ANTI-CHURCH MAGAZINE ASSAULT

413Without any good reason appearing for it, there was waged a bitter American and seemingly systematic magazine warfare against the Church of the Latter-day Saints and more especially against President Joseph F. Smith, and on this same old question of polygamy and polygamous living, and Latter-day Saint Church domination of politics in Salt Lake City and Utah and in the intermountain states.

413It could not have been launched in any hope of defeating the reelection of Senator Reed Smoot, though by the opening of this magazine crusade in the later months of 1910 it was clear that he would become a candidate to succeed himself; but the question of the right of a "Mormon" of his status to a seat in the senate of the United States had been so strongly affirmed in the contest over his first term, that no hope could be entertained of unseating him should he be again elected. Besides the magazine crusade was continued long after the nearly unanimous election of Reed Smoot as United States senator from Utah, viz., until April, 1911, and Senator Smoot had been almost unanimously elected by the legislature of January, 1911. [^6]

413Pearsons led off with three articles, September, October and November, 1910, by Richard Barry, and the editor, Frank J. Cannon, former senator from Utah, and son of the late George Q. Cannon, so long counselor in the first presidency, came next. His first article appeared in Everybody's Magazine for December, 1910, and continued through eight numbers of the publication. The article was written in collaboration with Harvey J. O. Higgins. Next came McClure's, with two articles, January and February, 1911, by Burton J. Hendricks, and comments by the editor. The Cosmopolitan had two articles, March and April, 1911, by Alfred Henry Lewis. So personal and bitter were these Cosmopolitan articles and so viciously illustrated, that the writer defeated his own ends, for they brought the author and the publishers more censure than praise. These magazine articles were the occasion of widespread and generally unfriendly and denunciatory editorials in the daily press of the country, and the church suffered much in her reputation because of this unreasonable crusade.

REACTION OF THE CHURCH TO THE MAGAZINE CRUSADE

To counteract this old warfare in its new phase, the first presidency of the church issued a signed "Address to the Officers and Members of the Church" in general conference assembled, on the 9th of April, 1911, taking note of these magazine articles, denying their statements and deductions, and setting forth the truth in respect of such things as were alleged. The address was adopted and endorsed by unanimous vote of the general conference and given out to the press of the country. [^7]

414EX-PRESIDENT ROOSEVELT'S DEFENSE OF THE SAINTS

About the same time a letter from ex-President Roosevelt to Mr. Isaac Russel, appeared in Colliers (15th of April, 1911), in which the ex-president of the United States gives, without designing to do so, a refutation to many of the charges made against the church both as to new cases of polygamy and alleged political deals with the "Mormon" church leaders. The first he refutes by citing investigations of the government's secret service, during his incumbency of the office of president of the United States; and the second by denying the existence of any political deals between himself and the "Mormon" church authorities. Incidentally, too, he bears strong testimony to the virtues of the "Mormon" people. [^8]

415On the subject of his investigation conducted at that time Mr. Roosevelt said:

415"On one occasion a number of charges were made to the administration while I was president about these polygamous marriages in Idaho and Wyoming as well as Utah, it being asserted that a number of our federal officials had been polygamously married. A very thorough and careful investigation was made by the best men in the service into these charges, and they were proved to be without so much as the smallest basis in fact."

415Then of the people:

415"I have known monogamous 'Mormons' whose standard of domestic life and morality and whose attitude toward the relations of men and women was as high as that of the best citizens of any other creed; indeed, among these 'Mormons' the standard of sexual morality was unusually high. Their children were numerous, healthy, and well brought up; their young men, were less apt than their neighbors to indulge in that course of vicious sexual dissipation so degrading to manhood and so brutal in the degradation it inflicts on women, and they were free from that vice, more destructive to civilization than any other can possibly be, the artificial restriction of families, the practice of sterile marriage; and which ultimately means destruction of the nation."

415This magazine crusade of 1910-1911 failed of its purpose, if that purpose was to change the public policy either of the state of Utah or of the "Mormon" church with reference to polygamous living respecting those who had entered that order of marriage previous to the Woodruff Manifesto of 1890. As previously remarked that was a condition rapidly passing into extinction from natural causes—whence now (1930) it has arrived.

It will be observed that throughout all this bitter warfare of the Smoot investigation, the attack of Mr. Kearns in the senate, in the rise and temporary rule of the American party and the American magazine crusade, all the vituperation and venom of the attack was aimed at President Joseph F. Smith as the earthly head of the ecclesiastical institution known as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—the church of the New Dispensation. This, one of the penalties of leadership. He bore himself splendidly under the ordeal of attack, saying and doing nothing unseemly or in retaliation, no answering railing with railing or accusation with counter charges; no thought of resorting to violence to stay insult or avenge outrageous misrepresentation. In opening the general conference of the church for October, 1907, he made the following remarks when the assaults were breaking upon him in all their force and fury from all quarters. [^9]

416"I feel in my heart to forgive all men in the broad sense that God requires of me to forgive all men, and I desire to love my neighbor as myself; and to this extent I bear no malice toward any of the children of my Father. But there are enemies of the work of the Lord, as there were enemies to the Son of God. There are those who speak only evil of the Latter-day Saints. There are those—and they abound largely in our midst, who will shut their eyes to every virtue and to every good thing connected with this latter-day work, and will pour out floods of falsehood and misrepresentation against the people of God. I forgive them for this."

416And yet there was no maudling sentimentality in his attitude; it was no affectation of extreme piety or play-acting at Christian mushy charity. There was a fine reserve of manliness in his gesture. Continuing from where the quotation above ends, he says:

"I leave them in the hands of the just judge. Let him deal with them as seemeth him good, but they are not and cannot become my bosom companions. I cannot condescend to that. While I would not harm a hair of their head, while I would not throw a straw in their path, to hinder them from turning from the error of their way to the light of truth; I would as soon think of taking a centipede or a scorpion or any poisonous reptile and putting it into my bosom, as I would think of becoming a companion or an associate of such a man. These are my sentiments, and I believe that they are correct." [^10]

Footnotes

For account of the rise of the American party see Salt Lake Tribune of December 31st, 1905; also Salt Lake Tribune of February 22nd, 1908; also speech by Mr. Joseph Lippman at Salt Lake City in the campaign of 1908, Salt Lake Tribune, of October 11th, 1908.

---
Notas:
[^1] See speech of Kearns of February 28th, 1905, in the senate chamber; also the speeches of many senators passim in the senate debate in the Smoot Case, the articles of the American magazine crusade, Under the Prophet in Utah, by Frank J. Cannon and Harvey J. O'Higgins, and nearly all anti-"Mormon" writers.
[^2] Data supplied from the presidency's office, Mr. Arthur Winter, secretary, Salt Lake City, January 29th, 1930.
[^3] Remarks of President Joseph F. Smith at the general annual conference of the church, April 5th, 1907, Report of Conference Proceedings, pamphlet, pp. 5-6.
[^4] Major Young afterwards entered the service of the United States in the World War, being appointed by the governor of the state of Utah, colonel of the 145th Field Artillery (1st Utah), which regiment went to France. Colonel Young (a graduate of West Point, by the way) was advanced to the office of brigadier general, 65th brigade, of the 40th division.
[^5] Minutes of the Meeting of the First Presidency, of March 6th, 1902.
[^6] An account of the origin and development of the Bureau of Information is given in the Improvement Era for December, 1921, by Edward H. Anderson, editor of the Era at that time, pp. 131-139.
[^7] The names of the officers and members who went from Utah to attend the unveiling and dedication service are given in Jenson's Church Chronology, under date of 23rd of December, 1905, p. 25.
[^8] For full account of the dedicatory services and description of the Monument, see Deseret News of June 28th, 1918; and the August number of the Improvement Era, 1918.
[^9] See History of the Church, Period i, vol. iii, chapter xxii.
[^10] See article in Improvement Era, for May, 1928 by S. O. Bennion, president of the mission, pp. 563-566.
