B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

418CHAPTER CLXXX

418AN ERA OF CHURCH PROSPERITY—FREED FROM DEBT—SECURING HISTORIC LANDMARKS

418NOTWITHSTANDING the fierce opposition the church experienced during the administration of President Joseph F. Smith, the period was marked by signal progress, and especially material progress.

PRESIDENT SMITH AND FINANCES

This progress was made to the astonishment of many, for President Smith hitherto had not been a man given to the personal accumulation of wealth or even marked interest in community financing. His pursuits had been spiritual; the exposition of the law of personal and community righteousness; his interest had seemed to center in mission expansion and the faithful teaching of the gospel in the organized wards and stakes of Zion. Such material success as had come to him in the rearing of his large family, had come by the practice of rigid economy, the careful avoidance of debt, and the limitation, not to say the suppression, of extravagant notions in his family of costly apparel, rich and too plenteous food supplies, palatial dwellings, gorgeous furnishings, servants, equipage, anything like "station" or worldly grandeur—nothing of all this. The family was mutually helpful to each other at need, and above all, self-helpful.

Thus lived the patriarchal family of this president of the church. So general was this manner of life among the presidents of the church and her leading officials that it may be said to be characteristic of the class; but it was especially so of President Joseph F. Smith and his family. Theirs the simple life preeminently, the misleading and misrepresenting phraseology of Senators Frank J. Cannon, Thomas Kearns, Fred T. Dubois, Senator Burrows et al, and their anti-"Mormon" copyists of the daily press, magazine writers and cheap sensational book compilers, all these to the contrary notwithstanding; and their assigning to President Smith of "kingly, autocratic power," "Mormon monarch," "princely income," extending into millions annually, wrenching from the lowly as well as from the rich of the communities and indirectly from the Gentiles as well as from the saints, their hard earnings, etc., etc., was reckless accusation and misrepresentation. [^1]

419It is true, however, that President Smith through his long years of service as counselor in the first presidency, through the administrations of Presidents John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff and Lorenzo Snow, had been in close contact with the necessarily large financial community affairs and schooled—albeit unnoticed and perhaps unconsciously to himself—in community financiering. At any rate the church prospered materially beyond expectation during his administration.

THE POLICY

In the first place, he maintained the urge especially began in President Snow's administration of the faithful payment of tithing; and the proceeds from this urge were faithfully applied on the payment of the indebtedness of the church and the strengthening of her financial standing generally.

It has already been stated that in the administration of President Lorenzo Snow, as part of his plan to relieve the church from the financial difficulties in which he found it, there was issued and sold—chiefly to her own members—$1,000,000.00 in bonds. The bond issue provided for a sinking fund each year from the date of issue until sufficient should be accumulated for its redemption. The payments to this fund were religiously observed, $50,000.00 being paid into it the first year following the sale—1900; and in the second year $100,000. This gave good earnest that the bond issue, from the first a matter of deep concern, as a new venture in church financiering, would be met on schedule time. The full record of the bond issue, including payments into the sinking fund was as follows:

MEMORANDA RELATIVE CHURCH BOND ISSUE

Bonds were issued January 1, 1899: (Class A and B.)

420Amount of bonds $1,000,000.00.

420All bonds were sold during 1899.

420$500,000 were redeemed December 31, 1903.

420$500,000 were redeemed December 31, 1906.

420Payments by the church to the sinking fund were as follows:

4201900 ———————————$ 50,000

4201901 ——————————— 100,000

4201902 ——————————— 100,000

4201903 ——————————— 350,000

4201904 ——————————— 50,000

4201905 ——————————— 143,000

4201906 ——————————— 207,000

420 —————

420 $1,000,000 [^2]

THE LAW OF TITHING—ITS SUFFICIENCY

Meantime the membership of the church continuing to respond to the impetus of more faithful payment of their tithing, imparted to the church by the word of the Lord through President Snow on that subject, and the years immediately following being prosperous years, not only was the bonded indebtedness cleared up on schedule time but other church obligations were met. The increasing expenditures in the building program of the church in the matter of church schools, church stake houses and ward chapels and mission headquarters buildings; and these not only in the stakes of Zion, but also in the various missions of the United States and in foreign lands. Also enlarged expenditures in missionary work were met, payment of the homeward fare of returning missionaries from their respective fields of labor—now became a fixed policy of the church; and the care of the enlarging number of the worthy poor in the church was continued. Notwithstanding this payment of the bond issue, and meeting the constantly enlarging expenditures of the church, President Joseph F. Smith was able in his opening speech at the April general conference of the church in 1907, to say:

421"Today the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints owes not a dollar that it cannot pay at once. At last we are in a position to pay as we go. We do not have to borrow any more, and we won't have to if the Latter-day Saints continue to live their religion and observe the law of tithing. It is the law of revenue of the church. Furthermore, I want to say to you, we may not be able to reach it right away, but we expect to see the day when we will not have to ask you for a single dollar of donation for any purpose except that which you volunteer to give of your own accord, because we will have sufficient in the storehouse of the Lord to pay everything that is needful for the advancement of the kingdom of God. That is the true policy, the true purpose of the Lord in the management of the affairs of his church." [^3]

421That is to say, the tithing of the church, when faithfully paid by the church membership is intended and will be sufficient to meet every financial requirement of the organization in its legitimate work.

THE VISIT OF PRESIDENT SMITH TO THE EUROPEAN MISSIONS

The previous year to this favorable report of the financial status of the church (1906) President Smith in company with his personal friend, Charles W. Nibley, presiding bishop of the church, made a tour of a great part of Europe, during which he visited all the missions of the church in that land and met publicly with the saints and elders of those missions, making them happy by his presence, and by his doctrinal and admonitory teaching. It was the first time that a president of the church had ever visited Europe in this capacity as the president of the whole church of God, and it could not be otherwise than that his presence would be a benediction to the saints and his ministrations a joy long to be cherished by those who received them. At one of the meetings at Rotterdam, a lad, John Roethoff by name, eleven years of age, and who was blind, received his sight through the administration of President Smith.

THE MISFORTUNE OF MISREPRESENTATION

For many years the Church of the Latter-day Saints suffered from vicious misrepresentations from those into whose hands the tourist traffic of the city and of the territory fell. These, of course, were chiefly the drivers of the hotel hacks of the city. Salt Lake City being the headquarters of the so-called "Mormon church" and the center of all the lurid tales that had accumulated with the passing years concerning the strange people and their stranger faith, meeting the tourist traffic of the city was a fine opportunity to regale the visitors with those stories that would strike and hold their attention, and make their sojourn in the city and territory thrill with excitement. And where the tame and unemotional facts were not sufficient to achieve this end, the cheap inventive imagination of irresponsible hack drivers supplied the deficiency, and tourists of pre-Temple Square Bureau of Information days went away literally loaded with misinformation that deepened their prejudices and clouded their judgments against a people already and greatly misunderstood. To correct this evil of injustice, the Temple Square Bureau of Information was established. Its general purpose was expressed in the motto adopted from the slogan of Elder John Taylor carried at the head of his The Mormon, published in New York, 1855-7, as noted in previous pages, viz.,

422To Correct Mis-Representation, We Adopt Self-Representation

422Hence the Temple Square Bureau of Information now developed into the Temple Square Mission of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

FOUNDING OF THE BUREAU OF INFORMATION

The original idea of this movement and its development came about in the following manner: Though the matter of meeting this evil of misrepresentation of the Church of the Latter-day Saints to tourist visitors to Salt Lake City, and that some sort of an organization to that end be effected was agitated in the closing months of President Snow's administration, no really effective steps were taken in the movement until early in the administration of President Joseph F. Smith, March 6, 1902. On that date the first presidency considered the question in their regular meeting and had read the several communications that had accumulated from the general board of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations and from the first council of seventy, both organizations having interested themselves in consideration of the matter, and making reports and recommendations to the first presidency on the subject. From the far away Philippine Islands there came a voice upon this subject, in the form of a letter from Major Richard W. Young of the Utah Batteries, serving after the close of the Spanish-American War, as one of the judges of the superior court of the Philippine Islands, urging that a mission and Bureau of Information be established in Salt Lake City to give information to tourists. [^4] This letter, bearing date of the 26th of February, 1902, had been addressed to the first council of seventy, Elder Young himself at the time being a seventy. This letter was sent to the first presidency and was acted upon by them at their meeting on the date above given, March 6, 1902, by first counselor, John R. Winder, moving that Elder Young's letter be "referred back to the seventies with the request that they look into the matter and act upon the suggestion themselves, as they may deem advisable; also that they consider the matter of organizing a Bureau of Information for the purpose of imparting correct information to tourists. The motion was seconded and carried." [^5]

THE FIRST BUREAU OF INFORMATION BUILDING

So commissioned the first council of the seventy proceeded to arrange through a committee appointed from its own number to secure the erection on the Temple Square grounds of a small octagonal building, twenty feet across and placed directly opposite the south gates. All this, of course, with full cooperation of all those who had previously manifested interest in the undertaking, the Young Men's General Board, with committees from the quorum of the twelve apostles, and individuals, with frequent reference of their work to the first presidency and the latter's approval of it as it progressively developed. When completed the first humble building of this really great undertaking cost less than $600.00. The first council appointed the following committee to take immediate charge of the work proposed, Elders Benjamin Goddard, Thomas Hull, Arnold Schulthess and Josiah Burrows, and the Bureau of Information began its career. [^6] It has performed a noble mission for the church, and has been raised in its title and its work to the dignity of one of the most important missions of the church in the United States. At present it is presided over by Elder Levi Edgar Young of the first council of the seventy, and a great grandson of Joseph Young, brother of Brigham Young, Utah's great Pioneer. Elder Young is a graduate of Harvard and connected also with the teaching faculty of Utah University.

424

THE VOLUME OF WORK ACHIEVED

The work accomplished by this so happily conceived Bureau and Mission since it was founded twenty-eight years ago, the literature distributed amounts to millions of tracts and books setting forth the history, doctrines, purposes and achievements of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; while its own missionaries, called into the unselfish service of the church on Temple Square have come into personal contact with many hundreds of thousands of tourists and others visiting Salt Lake City, who have received at first hand, through the Bureau, information and enlightenment from authoritatively appointed representatives of the church. The value of this work on Temple Square as a means of presenting the message of the New Dispensation to the world, especially when the character of the people to whom it is delivered is considered, is beyond measurement. The truth of all this and the volume of the work done will be apparent from a recent report of the president of the Bureau and Temple Square Mission, covering the year 1929:

425"During the past five years, the number of visitors has been at least 200,000 annually, and during the year 1929, the number was possibly or nearer 250,000. People come from all over the world. In one party of seventy one day in August last, nine nations were represented, and fourteen distinct religious sects. The visitors always manifest a great interest in the buildings and the great organ; and listen attentively to the words of the missionary guides. The tabernacle square is a place of beauty, for the flower garden and lawns are always well kept; and the trees of many varieties add to the beauty of the grounds. The buildings and monuments are of the greatest interest however. The gull monument—and there is hardly a visitor but what has heard about the story of how the gulls saved the crops in the spring of 1848. The mathematical proportions of the tabernacle and the classical style of the temple are noticed, and Dallin's Angel Moroni is the subject of many questions. There are the life-sized monuments of Joseph and Hyrum Smith by Mahonri Young; and near them the monument to the three witnesses of the Book of Mormon, a creation of Avard Fairbanks.

The church museum is open to the visitors daily, and recently, many of the rare specimens were described in a lengthy report of one of the officials of the British museum. Hardly a day passes but what some distinguished character visits the mission. For example, within the past year the mission has entertained Dr. F. Murai, head of the school of foreign languages of Tokyo, Japan; Dr. Edwin Deller of the University of London; Dr. Oscar Hartmann of the University of Berlin; Dr. Alva Silva of Rio Janeiro who is head of the National Museum of Brazil; Edouard Champion, celebrated French scholar and author; Dr. Herbert Szamatolski, correspondent of the Buenos Aires Herald; Jean C. de Strelecki, Central European Press Syndicate, Paris; Dr. Victor Madsen, director of Denmark's Geological Survey; Ann Tizia Leitich, correspondent of the Neue Frei Presse, Vienna; Dr. Alfred B. Rendle of the British museum; Mr. Eric Swene of the Swenska Dagebladt, Stockholm; Captain Gilbert Frankau of London, celebrated British author; Sir Henry J. Wood of London; Dr. Hugo Paltsits, chief of Manuscripts, New York Public Library; Mme Grace Wistler, Prima Donna, Metropolitan Opera House. These are just a few of the many notable people who have visited the Bureau of Information during the past few months.

426Many letters come from all over the world to the Bureau asking for information and articles on 'Mormonism' and Utah."

426It will be remembered that part of this Temple Square Mission is the daily organ recital at 12 noon in the great tabernacle; and also the tourist half-hour preaching service united with the recital every first Sunday in the month, the universal fast day of the church.

THE PURCHASE OF OLD HISTORIC LANDMARKS

Early in his administration President Smith's mind seemed to turn in the direction of having the church acquire ownership of some of the old landmarks connected with the early historical events of the church.

CARTHAGE JAIL

The first of these places to be purchased was Carthage Jail, Carthage, Illinois, the scene of the martyrdom of his own father, Hyrum Smith, and his uncle, the Prophet Joseph Smith. This purchase was made by President Smith's direction on November 5, 1903. The purchase included two acres of ground and the purchase price was $4,000.00. The old jail building, while all its parts remain, has been slightly remodeled exteriorly, to conform to the appearance of a cottage dwelling. It is in the custody of a church caretaker.

THE SMITH FARM NEAR PALMYRA

The old Smith Farm of one hundred acres in Manchester township, but near Palmyra, New York, which constituted the homestead of the Smith family during the period in which the Prophet of the New Dispensation received his first vision, also the visitations of the Angel Moroni, which led to the bringing forth and publishing of the Book of Mormon, and the organization of the church (albeit the earlier log house when these first visions occurred has been replaced by the present neat farm house), was purchased for the church from W. A. Chapman and wife, June 10, 1907, through George A. Smith, and title conveyed by himself and wife to the presiding bishop of the church December 7, 1916. The farm is kept up and cultivated by a caretaker for the church.

JOSEPH SMITH MEMORIAL IN VERMONT

By four separate conveyances of land, purchased under the direction of President Joseph F. Smith, the first made the 21st of May, 1905, and the last made in August, 1907, the Mack homestead in Sharon township, Windsor county, Vermont, and some adjoining lands were purchased for the church, amounting in all to 283 acres. Thus was secured to the church the homestead and some adjoining parcels of land of the maternal progenitors of the Prophet of the New Dispensation, the site of the humble farm house in which the Prophet was born. On this site a neat modern Memorial Cottage has been built, and very near by to it on a crowning hilltop has been erected an imposing Memorial Monument to the Prophet Joseph Smith, of Vermont polished granite, a steel engraving of which, with accompanying descriptive matter is published in this chapter.

The Cottage and Memorial shaft occupy a low rise of ground in the center of a somewhat irregular circular basin in the hill country of beautiful Vermont, removed a small distance northward from the valley of the White river, famous for the ever changing beauty of its windings. Seen from any one of the commanding heights of the rise of hills, which form the rim of the basin, Memorial Cottage and Monument erected to the sacred memory of the great Prophet of the New Dispensation, takes on the appearance of a proper jewel in a fitting environment of hills everlasting.

428The conception and worked-out idea of Memorial Cottage and Monument, under the direction of President Joseph F. Smith, of course, is the work of Elder Junius F. Wells, son of Daniel H. Wells, close Nauvoo friend of the Prophet Joseph Smith, even before he became a member of the New Dispensation church.

428Memorial Cottage and Monument were completed by December, 1905, and preparation was made for the dedication of the Monument on the one hundredth anniversary of the Prophet's birth, December 23, 1905. Accordingly a company of twenty-five prominent church officials and members went from Salt Lake City by special car, making the winter journey to be present at the simple yet impressive ceremonies of dedication, as to be directed by President Joseph F. Smith. On that occasion, and to which there was a fairly good attendance of the people from the countryside, no effort whatever was made to exploit the unveiling of the Monument as a publicity event to the advantage of the church. [^7]

428

HYRUM SMITH'S MONUMENT

Some years later, viz., 1918, the church through the presiding authorities, erected also a fitting Monument to the memory of Hyrum Smith, brother and fellow martyr with the Prophet of the New Dispensation, and the second presiding Patriarch to the church. This Monument also was built under the immediate supervision of Elder Junius F. Wells. The Monument to the memory of the Patriarch in its general lines follows the base blocks and polished shaft of the Prophet's Memorial, the height, however, being but one-half that of the Prophet's, and it is but one-fourth the weight and bulk of the Vermont Monument.

429The facts in the life and character of the Patriarch are elaborately set forth on the monument—too elaborately to be restated here, but on the north side of the monument is the inscription die on which is the following:

429"Hyrum Smith from 1820 was among the first converts of his brother, Joseph, the prophet.

429He was one of the Eight Witnesses of the Book of Mormon; one of the six members to organize the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, April sixth, 1830; one of the first to proclaim and practice all its principles. * * *

429He was the constant companion and confidant of his brother Joseph in joy and sorrow, throughout their lives. They suffered martyrdom together, sealing their testimony with their blood, and their bodies were buried side by side at Nauvoo.

429In life they were united, in death they were not parted."

429The Monument, which is of dark Barre, Vermont granite shipped to Utah, stands in the west part of the Salt Lake City Cemetery, on the burial lot of President Joseph F. Smith, his son; and the ceremony of unveiling under the direction of the presiding bishopric of the church, took place precisely at the hour of the anniversary of the martyrdom, 5:20 p. m., June 27, 1918, seventy-four years after that sad event. The ceremonies were held chiefly in the presence of the leading general authorities of the church and the numerous descendants of the Patriarch who numbered about six hundred at that time. His son, Joseph Fielding Smith, though in feeble health, was present and mustered the strength to make a brief address chiefly of appreciation of what had been done to perpetuate the memory of his father with that of the Prophet of the New Dispensation. [^8]

PURCHASE OF LAND AT INDEPENDENCE, MISSOURI—ZION

In this period of acquisition of old landmarks a purchase of land was made in Independence, Jackson county, Missouri, the center place of "Zion," so prominent in the thought of the early decades of the century of the New Dispensation. This purchase was made by the direction of President Joseph F. Smith on April 14, 1904. The tract consists of twenty-five acres, being a portion of the original sixty-three acres acquired for the church by Bishop Edward Partridge in 1831, and of which the Temple Lot, dedicated by the Prophet Joseph Smith on the 3rd of August, 1831, as a site for the temple of the Lord in "Zion," in these last days, was part. The twenty-five acres purchased in 1904 lies adjacent to this temple lot. The tract was bought of Mrs. Maggie Swope. This was followed by more land purchases later, nine more, during President Smith's administration, at a total cost of all ten purchases of $64,450.00. Three purchases have been made since at a total cost of $11,474.53. A purchase of land by the church was also made in 1909 at Far West, Missouri, which includes the temple site at that place dedicated by a number of the twelve apostles—seven all told, a majority—on the 26th of April, 1839, agreeably to an appointment made for them by the Lord previous to their departure upon a mission to foreign lands. [^9]

In 1907, by direction of President Smith the headquarters of the Central States Mission (a group of states previously known as the Southwestern States Mission) moved its headquarters from St. Louis to Independence, then and now (1930) presided over by Elder Samuel O. Bennion. In 1914 a mission chapel was erected in Independence, and in 1917 a suitable mission home was built as a place of residence for the president of the mission. Church buildings have also been purchased or built in Kansas City and St. Louis. A printing plant and publishing company was founded at Independence under the name of "Zion's Printing and Publishing Company," which church publishing house has printed and sent out through the various missions of the United States (nine missions in all, the Canadian and Mexican missions not counted) millions of copies of tracts, pamphlets and books. It is reported by the president of the Central States Mission, also in charge and in the management of this publishing establishment, that within the last ten years a quarter of a million of the missionary edition of the Book of Mormon (retailed at the price of fifty cents per copy) have been printed and sold from this publishing house. [^10] All this respecting the activities of the church in "Zion," the center place thereof, for "Zion" has not been removed out of her place, neither will be, [^11] all which activities may represent preliminary steps to the final redemption of this center place of the empire of the Christ in the New World, the Zion of God, the New Jerusalem of the Book of Mormon prophecies. [^12]

GENERAL STATUS OF THE CHURCH AFTER FOURTEEN YEARS OF PRESIDENT SMITH'S ADMINISTRATION

These items and activities of the church and her leaders represent the development and prosperity of the church in what may be considered one of the stormy periods through which she passed, by reason of the vicious assaults made upon her by her enemies. After fourteen years of his administration, President Smith could say, and did say, in his opening address at the general conference of the church, in April, 1915:

STATISTICS

"There never has been a time, at least within my remembrance, when the church was in a better condition, spiritually and temporally than it is today. I do not believe that there has ever been a time when the organizations of the various quorums of the priesthood were more nearly perfect or more diligent than they are at present; or when the stakes of Zion were more properly guarded, and their interests watched, by those who are presiding over them, than they are today. I believe that our general and auxiliary organizations of the church, also the standard organizations of the priesthood are performing their duty quite as well now, and I think somewhat better, that at any previous period of the church's history. Not only does this apply to those members who are called to act in responsible positions, but it applies to those who may be termed 'lay members;' if we may use such a term with reference to members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

432There has been a net increase in the membership of the church in the stakes of Zion from the year 1901 to 1914 of 129,493 souls. Of the membership of the church residing in the stakes of Zion, 319,000 were born in the United States.

432There are 74,432 families in the organized stakes of Zion. Our record shows that 73 per cent of all the Latter-day Saint families, residing in all the stakes of Zion, own their own homes. I am sorry that this figure is not as large as it has been in the past, but we have become more numerous than we were when 95 per cent of the people of the church owned their own little homes and owed nothing to anybody for them.

432There are now 739 wards and 33 independent branches.

432There are 68 stakes of Zion and 21 missions.

432During the year 1914, 21 new stakes of Zion were organized.

432The birth rate of the church was 39.5 to the thousand.

432The death rate was 8.3 to the thousand.

432The marriage rate was 17 to the thousand.

432During the year there were 14,717 children blessed.

432There were 1,316 elders and 115 women laboring in the missions as missionaries.

432The work in the temples has been the largest on record. There have been performed in the temples during the year 166,909 baptisms for the living and dead, and 72,952 endowments for the living and dead. Altogether 326>,264 ordinances have been performed in the four temples. This is a very considerable increase over any previous year."

TYPICAL DISTRIBUTION OF CHURCH TITHING

The following part of the president's report will show how the tithing of the church for the year 1914 was disbursed and the general manner in which it had always been disbursed—i. e. typical of all other years:

432For the erection and maintenance of stake tabernacles,

432 ward meeting houses, amusement halls and other

432 stake and ward expenses ———————————————-$730,960.00

432For the maintenance of church schools—————————— 330,984.00

432For the maintenance of our temples———————————- 64,508.00

433For the erection of mission houses and general mission

433 activities, and return fares of missionaries———— 227,900.00

433For the maintenance of church buildings and church insti-

433 tutions, including the Temple Block and the Presiding

433 Bishop's Office —————————————————— 99,293.00

433For the completion and maintenance of the Latter-day

433 Saints Hospital (Salt Lake City) —————————- 136,727.00

433For the erection of the Cardston (Canada) temple ———— 52,647.00

433For the erection of the new Church Office Building ——— 128,663.00

433Paid to the worthy poor out of the tithing funds————- 116,238.00

433 ——————

433 Total——————————————————-$1,887,920.00

433This is the entire tithing of the church in all the world for the year 1914.

433The expenses of the general authorities and the maintenance of the office of the first presidency are paid out of revenues derived from investments, and not out of the tithes of the church.

433DISBURSEMENTS TO THE POOR FOR 1914—FROM FEMALE RELIEF SOCIETIES AND FAST OFFERINGS

433In addition to the amount paid out of the tithes to the

433 poor ————————————————————————$116,238.00

433There has been collected and paid to the poor by the

433 Relief Society ——————————————————— 74,290.00

433And there has been paid to the poor by the bishops from

433 the fast offerings and other ward charity funds——— 76,000.00

433 —————-

433Making a total paid to the poor of ———————————-$266,528.00

433There has been collected for the war sufferers, which is

433 being expended under the direction of President

433 Hyrum M. Smith, of the European Mission———————$33,000.00 [^13]

433This statement for that year, and the distribution of the tithes for that year, since the methods of distribution and the items on which the expenditures are placed are but typical of other years that preceded and followed it, constitute a complete refutation of the false charges that have been recklessly made that the tithes of the church are gathered by the president of the church and expended to minister to his personal advantage, maintain him in luxury, and personal gratified splendor.

TEMPLE SITES DEDICATED

During President Smith's administration he dedicated two temple sites, both of which were outside of the United States. The first of these was dedicated at Cardston, province of Alberta, Canada, July 27, 1913. The other at Laie, on the beautiful island of Oahu, a northern island of the Hawaiian group, which group was the scene of the early missionary experiences of President Smith. A plantation at Laie, thirty-two miles north of Honolulu, originally consisting of 6,500 acres, had been purchased for the church by Elder Francis A. Hammond, in 1865, and ever since has been the headquarters of the Hawaiian Mission and the gathering place for the native Latter-day Saints of the Hawaiian group of islands. It was a site chosen at Laie that President Smith dedicated for a temple (since built) on the 1st of June, 1915. One can scarcely repress regrets that President Smith's life was not preserved to bring the capstone of these temples to their place with rejoicing, and witness the dedication of them, and especially this one at his beloved Hawaii—"Pearls of the Pacific," where as a youth—not yet out of his teens—he first preached the gospel as an elder in the New Dispensation.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The Address will be found complete in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. ii, pp. 237-254.
[^2] The document will be found complete in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. ii, pp. 237-254, and in the April Conference Minutes of that year.
[^3] The full announcement of the Review and the Review itself will be found in Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. ii, pp. 257-288; and in Salt Lake Tribune of the 4th of June, 1907.
[^4] Improvement Era for July, 1907, pp. 743-4, where the correspondence is given in full.
[^5] Defense of the Faith and the Saints, vol. ii, pp. 229-363.
[^6] II Corinthians xiii:8.
[^7] The names of the officers and members who went from Utah to attend the unveiling and dedication service are given in Jenson's Church Chronology, under date of 23rd of December, 1905, p. 25.
[^8] For full account of the dedicatory services and description of the Monument, see Deseret News of June 28th, 1918; and the August number of the Improvement Era, 1918.
[^9] See History of the Church, Period i, vol. iii, chapter xxii.
[^10] See article in Improvement Era, for May, 1928 by S. O. Bennion, president of the mission, pp. 563-566.
[^11] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xc:37 and Ibid, sec. ci:17.
[^12] Book of Mormon, Ether, chapter xiii.
[^13] See Minutes of the Conference published in Deseret News, April 4th, 1915.
