B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

435CHAPTER CLXXXI

435"THE ADDRESS OF THE CHURCH TO THE WORLD"

435AT the general conference of the church following the settlement of the Smoot case by favorable action of the senate, Feb. 20th, 1907, the church issued an "Address to the World," submitted to the conference by the presidency, and adopted by unanimous vote on the 5th of April, 1907, in which were discussed the whole mission and attitude of the church, and especially its attitude with reference to the questions at issue in the recent period of agitation,—1903-1907—viz., polygamy, church dominance of the state, and ecclesiastical dictation in political matters. Relative to the first the Address declared that the Latter-day Saints had bowed in respectful submission to the laws and constitutional provisions affecting plural marriages. "If it be urged," said the Address, that there have been "instances of the violation of the anti-polygamy laws, and that some persons within the church have sought to evade the rule adopted by her prohibiting plural marriages, the plain answer is that in every state and nation there are individuals who violate law in spite of all the vigilance that can be exercised; but it does not follow that the integrity of a community or of a state is destroyed because of such individual transgressions. * * * When all the circumstances are weighed, the wonder is, not that there have been sporadic cases of plural marriages, but that such cases have been so few. It should be remembered that a religious conviction existed among the people holding this order of marriage to be divinely sanctioned. Little wonder then that there should appear, in a community as large as that of the Latter-day Saints, and as sincere, a few overzealous individuals who refused to submit even to the action of the church in such a matter, or that these few should find others who sympathized with their views; the number, however, is small.

436"Those who refer to 'Mormon polygamy' as a menace to the American home, or as a serious factor in American problems, make themselves ridiculous. So far as plural marriage is concerned, the question is settled. The problem of polygamous living among our people is rapidly solving itself. It is a matter of record that in 1890, when the Manifesto was issued, there were 2,451 plural families; in nine years this number had been reduced to 1,543. Four years later the number was 897; and many of these have since passed away." [^1]

POLITICAL ATTITUDE OF THE CHURCH

With reference to the subject of church dominance of the state, and of ecclesiastical interference with the affairs of the state, the Address said:

436"The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints holds to the doctrine of the separation of church and state; the non-interference of church authority in political matters; and the absolute freedom and independence of the individual in the performance of his political duties. If, at any time, there has been conduct at variance with this doctrine, it has been in violation of the well settled principles and policy of the church.

436We declare that from principle and policy, we favor:

436The absolute separation of church and state;

436No domination of the state by the church;

436No state interference with the functions of the church; or with the free exercise of religion:

436The absolute freedom of the individual from the domination of ecclesiastical authority in political affairs;

436The equality of all churches before the law.

436The reaffirmation of this doctrine and policy, however, is predicated upon the express understanding that politics in the states where our people reside, shall be conducted as in other parts of the Union; that there shall be no interference by the state with the church, nor with the free exercise of religion."

THE SPIRIT OF THE "ADDRESS TO THE WORLD"

The Address was conceived and written in a conciliatory spirit, and was intended to form the basis of a right understanding of the attitude of the Church of the Latter-day Saints with reference to her whole mission and message to the world, and especially with reference to the questions that had been immediately at issue in the recent controversy.

437"In the hope of correcting misrepresentation," the Address began, "and of establishing a more perfect understanding respecting ourselves and our religion, we the officers and members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in general conference assembled, issue this declaration."

437"Such an action," the Address continued, "seems imperative. Never were our principles or our purposes more widely misrepresented, more seriously misunderstood. Our doctrines are distorted, the sacred ordinances of our religion ridiculed, our Christianity questioned, our history falsified, our character traduced, and our course of conduct as a people reprobated and condemned.

437In answer to the charges made against us, for ourselves and for those who, under divine direction, founded our religion and our church; for our posterity, to whom we shall transmit the faith, and into whose keeping we shall give the church of Christ; and before mankind, whose opinions we respect, we solemnly declare the truth to be:"

437Then follows a full statement in respect of all these matters, concluding with—"Our motives are not selfish or earth bound; we contemplate the human race, past, present and to come as immortal beings, for whose salvation it is our mission to labor, and to this work, broad as eternity, and deep as the love of God, we devote ourselves, now and forever, Amen."

437The Address was signed by the first presidency and adopted unanimously by the church in conference assembled, in Salt Lake City, on the 5th day of April, 1907. [^2]

SALT LAKE MINISTERIAL ASSOCIATION'S REVIEW OF THE ADDRESS

And now the manner in which that Address was received by the Ministerial Association of Salt Lake City of which there were thirty-three members, "and by which the Review of it was adopted as a unit." The Review appeared in the Salt Lake Tribune of June 4, 1907; and was preceded by a flourishing announcement of its appearing and substance and approval.

438Dealing with the manner of the construction of the document, the announcement of its said:

438"Within a few days after the publishing of the Mormon Address to the World, a movement was started in the association [Ministerial] looking to a reply to the so-called Address. Among the ministers the document put forth by the Mormon church was considered in the light of a suppression rather than a confession of Mormon faith, and so most misleading. With the end in view of a reply to the falsified, juggled and deceiving Address, a number of papers were prepared and submitted to the association by several different members. These papers were placed into the hands of the committee, selected by the association for that purpose, which threw them into the form of a report. The report was discussed thoroughly at several different meetings of the association and every member was given an opportunity of suggesting changes, presenting his ideas on the subject for incorporation in the reply, or registering an objection to it. As before stated, there was not a dissenting voice or vote against the reply, the adoption being unanimous."

438Then follows, in the announcement of the Review, the enumeration of all the churches whose pastors had been prominent in the creation of it. In included all the churches of the city and their pastors, excepting the Roman Catholic church, which, in harmony with its general policy in such matters, stood aloof in the controversy. Not only did the Tribune give prominence to a fulsome heralding of the Review, but accorded to it hearty editorial approval.

438"This Review is calm, deliberate, and temperate in tone; but it is irresistible in force, in logic, and in conclusion. It will, of course, be warmly welcomed and approved by the loyal citizenship of Utah, while to the country at large it will be a good deal in the nature of a revelation.

438* * * The evasions, the publicity, the hypocrisy, the dishonesty, of the conference declaration [L. D. S.] are completely shown in masterly style. The repeated but half-hearted efforts of the church leaders to make the world believe in their patriotism, their piety, their unselfishness, their benevolence, their purity, when they do not believe these things of themselves, knowing their own corruption, treason, blasphemy and corroding selfishness, avarice, lusts of power, and of the flesh, are fitly dealt with in this admirable Review, which we cannot too highly commend for its spirit and its substance."

439Such the thundering in the index of the Review,—as this introduction to it may be regarded—and the Review itself in the matter of its distrust of the motives and sincerity of the Latter-day Saint leaders and people, if not in its vituperative epithets, lives up to this editorial characterization of it.

439The closing member of its labored closing sentences is:

439"Until the practices of the present leaders of the Mormon church are radically changed there can be no peace between them and pure Christianity; and that until the doctrines of the church are radically modified it can never establish a claim to be even a part of the Church of Jesus Christ." [^3]

439Five days after the publication of the Review, namely, on the 9th of June, the annual conference of the Mutual Improvement Associations of the Latter-day Saint Church came on—a conference of all the young people from every section of the church territory, and second only in importance to the general annual and semi-annual conferences of the church itself. It afforded a most suitable opportunity for taking note of this Ministerial Review of the church's "Address to the World;" and accordingly arrangements were made for an "Answer" to be made to it before this young people's conference. Two entire sessions of the conference, one on the Sunday afternoon and the other in the evening. The speaker making the answer at both meetings was Elder B. H. Roberts. In concluding the printed "Answer" to the "Review" the speaker said:

439"I know that the people of Utah know, that this agitation (by the Ministerial Association in their 'Review') is unjust; conceived in spite and vengeance; brought forth by malice, and nurtured by hate. No conditions existing in Utah justify it. The specters that are conjured up from the vasty deep to give warrant to this unseeming agitation are but foul creations of diseased minds, phantoms of disordered imaginations."

The address reviewing the reviewers was immediately published and steps taken for as wide a circulation of it as possible. It was decided to publish it in full in the organ of the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations, the Improvement Era, since the answer had been made at the Improvement Association Conference. Before publishing the answer, however, the Era publishers wrote the Ministerial Association a polite note informing them of the intention of the Era and saying that a number of gentlemen of Salt Lake City had asked the magazine to publish in full the Answer of Mr. Roberts, and that the publishers had agreed to do so if the said gentlemen would guarantee one-half the cost of publication. This the gentlemen agreed to do. And now in a spirit of fairness the Era editors submitted to the Ministerial Association the offer also to publish in the same number of the magazine the Ministerial Association's "Review of the Latter-day Saint Church's Address to the World," if they would pay one-half the cost of publishing it ($250.00); their Review to immediately precede Elder Roberts' "Answer." The editor's letter to the association pointed to the fact that the Era had over 10,000 subscribers, therefore 70,000 readers; that it would reach "every settlement in the intermountain country, from Canada to Mexico;" that it was placed in some of the prominent libraries of the United States and Europe, and in addition to all this 1,700 free copies were sent to "various parts of the world wherever the Church of the Latter-day Saints had missionaries laboring." The offer was declined, as the association had "arranged already for a wider circulation than your offer contemplates," wrote the president of the association, Rev. Sal A. Hayworth. And the association was expecting the Deseret News, organ of the "Mormon" church, to publish their Review, which would, of course, give it local circulation. On this the Era editors remarked:

"Whatever may be the real expectation of the Ministerial Association as to their 'Review' being published by the News, we believe the gentlemen composing that organization have missed a very fine opportunity for securing the circulation of their document, in refusing the proposition of the Era. The terms were certainly fair, * * * it is a matter for astonishment that it [the proposition] was not accepted." [^4]

441This much is revealed by the tender of this proposition to the Ministerial Association to publish their "Review" in connection with the "Answer" to the same; viz., the church had no dread of the circulation of the "Review" among their own people, the "Answer" going with it.

441The "Answer" was published in the July Era; and later the author in his second volume of the Defense of the Faith and the Saints, published together the church's "Address to the World," the "Ministerial Review" of that "Address," and his own "Answer" to the "Review." [^5]

441What became of the "Review," what use the Ministerial Association made of it, after the "Answer" was made to it, is not known. It was not heard of, and certainly it had no influence in effecting any change in the affairs of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. As usual the church thrived on opposition to it. It still remains true: men "can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth." [^6]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] WAR CASUALTIES OF ALL THE NATIONS IN THE WORLD WAR See this History, chapter xxiv. It should be observed that both here, and in the previous chapter referred to, the statement of casualties given as numbering nearly 17,000,000 refers to deaths only—military and civilian—not to the wounded or missing casualties. A tabulated report of all casualties of the World's War and a proper classification of them, as nearly official as may be had will be found in Note 1 end of this chapter.
[^2] UTAH MILITARY UNITS ALL LINKED IN UNBROKEN CONTINUITY WITH THE MORMON BATTALION AND THE NAUVOO LEGION BY OFFICIAL ORDER OF THE UNITED STATES WAR DEPARTMENT "Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he revealeth his secrets unto his servants the prophets. * * * The Lord hath spoken, who can but prophesy?" (Amos iii:7-8).
[^3] This Preface was written November, 1831.
[^4] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. i:ii-15.
[^5] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xxxviii:29-30.
[^6] Ibid, sec. xiv:63.
