B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

442CHAPTER CLXXXII

442THE WORLD WAR AND THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS AS CITIZENS OF THE UNITED STATES

442IT WAS in 1914 that the World's War threw its awful shadows athwart the world's peace. The outburst of it was sudden; and yet the nations of Europe had long been in actual preparation for it. When the fateful hour struck in those hectic days of the last of July and early August, 1914, which marked its beginning, it found all Europe an armed camp, needing only that "red battle stamp his foot," for nations to feel the shock of war. That signal was given and the nations rushed to war—thirty-one of them, in the final reckoning of all that directly participated in it; and all nations were affected by it.

NOT THE PLACE FOR A WAR TREATISE

This is not the place for anything like a treatise of that war, its causes, the responsibility for it, the awful results of it—the still lingering evil effects of it as time with its slow pace withdraws the nations from its torn and far-flung battlefields and wrecked empires. A very limited summary respecting the number of nations entering into the war, the number in the armies that confronted each other—fifty-nine millions of men mobilized—together with the awful casualties, directly and indirectly that resulted from it—nearly seventeen millions of deaths in all!—have already been stated in a previous chapter when considering the "war to be poured out upon all nations" prophetically, and those items need not be repeated here. [^1] At a few points, however, the church of the New Dispensation touches this World War, and these must be noted.

THE RELATION OF PROPHECY TO THE WAR EVENT

It is written in scripture that God will do nothing but he revealeth his secrets to his servants, the prophets, [^2] and the question arises, could a calamity so large as to affect all nations so tremendously as this World War did, and the secret of it not be made known to God's prophets? I take it that this thought of the Hebrew prophet has in mind the things God permits in his economy, as well as those things of which he is the direct cause. It may be repulsive to one to regard God as the direct cause and author of this World War; but there can be no doubt but that he permitted it, let the cause of it lie where it may; as also he permits many events to come to pass among men, calamitous events, too; but can it be that such events are permitted in God's economy of things, and especially such tremendous events as this World War, and God give no warning of them through his servants the prophets? Well, we have seen in the previous brief treatise on this subject that the Lord was mindful to warn the world of the coming wars through his servant, the Prophet of this age, Joseph Smith. This Prophet sounded a note of warning in general on the subject of coming wars by saying in a preface [^3] that was to accompany the first edition of The Covenants and Commandments of God with his church in this New Dispensation, and which has since been published in all editions of the Doctrine and Covenants as God's preface to his Book of Commandments; and on the subject of war, this preface said: [^4]

443"Wherefore the voice of the Lord is unto the ends of the earth, that all that will hear may hear;

443Prepare ye, prepare ye for that which is to come, for the Lord is nigh;

443And the anger of the Lord is kindled, and his sword is bathed in heaven, and it shall fall upon the inhabitants of the earth.

444And the arm of the Lord shall be revealed; and the day cometh that they who will not hear the voice of the Lord, neither the voice of his servants, neither give heed to the words of the prophets and apostles, shall be cut off from among the people;

444For they have strayed from mine ordinances, and have broken mine everlasting covenant."

444Previous to this, however, the Lord had said to the Prophet, January 2, 1831:

444"Ye hear of wars in far countries, and ye say that there will soon be great wars in far countries, but ye know not the hearts of men in your own land;

444I tell you these things because of your prayers; wherefore, treasure up wisdom in your bosoms, lest the wickedness of men reveal these things unto you by their wickedness, in a manner which shall speak in your ears with a voice louder than that which shall shake the earth; but if ye are prepared ye shall not fear."

444And shortly afterwards, March 7, 1831, the Lord said to his Prophet: [^5]

444"Ye hear of wars in foreign lands; but, behold, I say unto you, they are nigh, even at your doors, and not many years hence ye shall hear of wars in your own lands." [^6]

444Then came the revelation on war of December 25, 1832, with its details of the war between the states of the north and of the south, with its prediction that it would "terminate in the death and misery of many souls," and including also the prediction that when Great Britain should call upon other nations, in order to defend herself against other nations, then war would be "poured out upon all nations."

444"And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consummation decreed hath made a full end of all nations;

That the cry of the saints, and of the blood of the saints, shall cease to come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, from the earth, to be avenged of their enemies." [^7]

WAR TREND PREDICTION

This was a very bold prediction to make concerning "war to be poured out upon all nations;" and quite at variance with the views of many of the "learned" and "wise-men" of the world, and "would-be-prophets" as the hour drew near for the commencement, at least, of the fulfillment of these predictions of the Prophet of the New Dispensation. Previous to the outbreak of the World War, and for sometime previous to that, the trend of modern war forecast, if not war prophecy, was against the idea of the occurrence of international war.

TENNYSON ON WAR

Tennyson had written eloquently in his early manhood [^8] on a coming world-crash of war. In his vision he heard the heavens filled with shouting from the nations' air navies "grappling in the central blue;" saw the standards of the peoples plunging through the thunderstorm; then saw the time come "when the war drums throbbed no longer, and the battle flags were furled in the parliament of men, in a federation of the world." Where the common sense of most nations would hold a restless realm in awe, and "the kindly earth should slumber lapt in universal law." But sixty years later when the poet was eighty, he somewhat doubted this hopeful view of the ultimate peace of the world. "Earth at last a warless world!" He exclaims at eighty—

445"Warless? When her tens are thousands, and her thousands millions, then—

445All her harvest all too narrow-who can fancy warless men?

445Warless? War will die out late then? Will it ever? Late or soon? Can it, till this outworn earth be dead as yon dead world the moon?"

446A little earlier in the poem Tennyson had said—referring to his earlier state of mind—

446"'Forward,' rang the voices then, and of the many mine was one, Let us hush this cry of 'Forward' till ten thousand years have gone."

446Since he speaks on both sides, Tennyson may be accounted one of the equivocal prophets, and counts neither way; though we may hope that his younger vision may become some statesman's realization.

EUROPE'S CONFIDENCE OF PEACE

As far back as the great London International Exposition, 1859, such was supposed to be the benign effects of this international, friendly emulation and peaceful rivalry of the nations, that the war spirit of the world would be destroyed by it. Of such claims made for it at the time our own General Hugh L. Scott, chief of the American army staff in 1914, speaking when the world war was under way, declared himself a witness of such expressed hopes in 1859.

446Again in 1868 when the crowned heads of Europe were gathered in celebration of the Paris International Exposition, the American civil war recently closed, and the Prussian-Austrian struggle just then finished, on all sides it was heard that European nations had seen their last great war. Carayon-la-Tour often related that his father, a French general, strongly advised him in 1868 not to enter the army, as the army would no longer offer a career. Carayon-la-Tour did not follow this advise, and distinguished himself in the Franco-German War of 1871.

DAVID STARR JORDAN ON PEACE

Only two or three years before the outbreak of the World War, Dr. David Starr Jordan of the University of California, in his work War and Waste ventured this as prophecy:

"What shall we say of the 'Great War of Europe,' ever threatening, ever impending, and which never comes? We shall say it never will come. Humanly speaking, it is impossible. * * * All Europe cherishes is ready for the burning, yet Europe recoils and will recoil, even in the dread stress of spoil division of the Balkan War." [^9]

JOSEPH SMITH ON WORLD WAR

Against this direct prediction of peace and abolishment of international war, against this whole pre-World War trend of prophecy, I place for contrast the solemn prophecy of World War expressly uttered by the Prophet of the New Dispensation and ask judgment:

447"And thus, with the sword and by bloodshed the inhabitants of the earth shall mourn; and with famine, and plague, and earthquake, and the thunder of heaven, and the fierce and vivid lightning also, shall the inhabitants of the earth be made to feel the wrath, and indignation, and chastening hand of an Almighty God, until the consumption decreed hath made a full end of all nations;

447That the cry of the saints, and of the blood of the saints, shall cease to come up into the ears of the Lord of Sabaoth, from the earth, to be avenged of their enemies." [^10]

447And now, in the light of the tremendous and awful events of the World War, who spoke the truth, these learned prophets of the world who cried "peace, peace," when there was no peace? or the Prophet of the New Dispensation who warned the world with the coming of dreadful wars previous to the glorious coming of the Son of Man? And the end may not even now have been reached; for the Son of Man, the resurrected Christ, has not yet come.

SUCCESSIVE FULFILLMENT OF WAR PROPHECY

The "wars in their own lands," spoken of to the disciples of Joseph Smith in his revelations, began, of course, first in the war with Mexico of 1846-8; and, second, in the war between the states of the American Union, or Civil War, 1861-1865, treated somewhat at length in Volume I, Chapter xxiv, this History, and need not detain us here. Then the "war in foreign lands," noted in these revelations, began with the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71; and other petty wars, followed by the World War in 1914, with the general results well known to the public mind of the present generation. Whether this World War marks the end of that "great World War period which makes an end of all nations" as they were, and has brought in a new period of national and international life, wherein permanent international peace and good will shall abide, which is our hope, and will in God's good time usher in the promised reign of "peace on earth good will to man"—one may not say. The prophecy here under consideration holds forth that this "war to be poured out upon all nations," is to be the final settling of accounts with a world guilty of offenses against the righteousness of God, and the injustice done to his people in latter ages. The purpose of this predicted universal war is expressed in the terms of it as being that the "cry of the saints and that the blood of the saints shall cease to come up into the ears of the God of Sabaoth, from the earth, to be avenged of their enemies." Whether or not the account of the world has found full settlement in this awful war of four years durance, 1914-1918, or whether there is yet further world penalty to be paid for a world's injustice toward God's righteousness and his righteous people through the ages—his saints and his prophets, belongs not to my province to say; but in the item of international war, let us hope that the end has come, and that nation will not again lift up sword against nation, neither learn war any more. [^11]

PRESIDENT ABRAHAM LINCOLN ON THE JUDGMENT OF WAR

It is a very fine conception of, and a very fine working out in thought of a principle involving some of the same elements to those that enter into the question proposed here that President Abraham Lincoln gave to his countrymen in his second Inaugural Address on the 4th of March, 1865. Referring to the Union army's progress in the war, upon which then all depended; concerning which, however, though entertaining high hope for the future, President Lincoln would venture no prediction, then he said:

449"Both [i. e. parties to the Civil War dispute] read the same Bible and pray to the same God, and each invokes his aid against the other. It may seem strange that any man should dare to ask a just God's assistance in wringing their bread from the sweat of other men's faces; but let us judge not, that we be not judged. The prayers of both could not be answered. That of neither has been answered fully. The Almighty has his own purposes. * * * 'It must needs be that offenses come, but woe to that man by whom the offense cometh.'

449If we shall suppose that American slavery is one of those offenses which, in the providence of God, must needs come, but which having continued through his appointed time, he now wills to remove, and that he gives to both North and South this terrible war, as the 'woe' due to those by whom the offense came, shall we discern therein any departure from those Divine attributes which the believers in a living God always ascribed to him? Fondly do we hope, fervently do we pray, that this mighty scourge of war may speedily pass away.

449Yet if God wills that it continue until all the wealth piled up by the bondsman's two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk, and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another drawn with the sword, as was said three thousand years ago, so still it must be said that 'the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether'." [^12]

So in this issue forced upon us by contemplation of the World's War, and whether or not it has been sufficient for that particular "woe" of war that has come upon the nations for the world's injustice practiced towards God's saints from the days of Messiah's crucifixion to the last martyr—whether it is sufficient, so that "the cry of the saints and the blood of the saints shall cease to come up into the ears of the God of Sabaoth to be avenged of their enemies"—on that I venture no prediction. Or whether the World's War with its dreadful results was a sufficient "woe" to completely and finally consecrate the nations to an universal adherence to the principle of liberty, so that indeed the world shall be "safe for democracy," in which liberty alone the world can finally rest in peace; whether the World War has been sufficient to create that state of mind among the nations, so that they will practice international justice, and lead to the beating of their swords into plow shares and their spears into pruning hooks—or lead to the reduction of their armies and navies—and the nations learn war no more—on all that I shall venture no prediction. The Almighty has his own purposes to achieve and he will attain them. In the spirit of Mr. Lincoln's thought let us fondly hope and fervently pray that the mighty "woe" and scourge of international war has forever passed away, and that the dawn of international justice and peace has come to the world. But if God wills that war shall be repeated until all the injustice and cruelty practiced upon his saints and prophets in derogation of their rights and liberties during all the ages from the times of the Christ until now, and unrequited by any just retribution—so it must be until the lesson is sufficiently taught, and unrequited justice satisfied. If it could be said by the Christ to the generation of men among whom he wrought—and it was, as witness the following—

450"Fill ye up then the measure of your fathers,

450Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers, how can ye escape the damnation of hell?

450Wherefore, behold, I send unto you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill and crucify; and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and persecute them from city to city;

450That upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel unto the blood of Zacharias son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the temple and the altar—

450Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this generation." [^13]

THE WORLD MUST LEARN ITS LESSON IN THE "WOE" OF WAR

If this represents the announcement of a Divine decree, and the accumulated "woe" that must come upon some generation when the account is to be settled, then it may be that not even the World's War with all its horrors has settled in full the accumulated account of the world's injustice towards the righteous; and it may be that God will still permit the possibility of war to continue, and the recurrence of it to happen, until it is apparent beyond all doubt that the world's debt to justice for cruel and unnecessary employment of scaffolds and racks and gibbets and dungeons and martyrdoms and religious wars has been wholly paid.

451And also if the world has not yet learned the full value of liberty, and the necessity of founding civil governments upon the basis of the right of the people to self-government, and has not yet learned the inherent and also the God-given right of men to live, to be free, to pursue happiness, and that to this end governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed,—then it must be that the necessary employment of war-force, involving even the using of fleets and armies and villainous saltpeter, in all its forms, must continue until men shall know the value of liberty, and peacefully submit to her principles and give all hail to her unrestrained righteous reign. Nor shall men because of the continuance of those things until the attainment of the high purposes in the mind of God—the establishment of perfect justice and liberty for men, and the vindication of the ways of God to man, say other of God than that "the judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether." [^14]

The church of the New Dispensation, then, and its first great Prophet. Joseph Smith, have a relationship to this World War; the relationship of prophecy to the event; and if that war is not the winding up scene to international wars, and the full end of nations founded upon the old basis, and brought over to the new foundations of liberty for men and for national life, then it is for the people of God's church to do what they are admonished to do in the revelation on war—

452"Stand ye in holy places and be not moved, until the day of the Lord come; for behold it cometh quickly, saith the Lord." [^15]

THE COURSE OF GERMANY TOWARDS NEUTRAL NATIONS

The membership of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints also have another relationship to the World War; the relationship of citizens of one of the nations finally involved in the war, the United States of America.

452On the outbreak of the war in Europe, 1914, the president of the United States issued a proclamation of strict, not to say severe, neutrality; and throughout sought to maintain it, notwithstanding many provocative actions on the part of Germany that threatened to disrupt it. President Wilson, however, persisted in the policy of strict neutrality, and when the presidential election of 1916 came on, the chief slogan that made appeal to the American people was "He kept us out of the war." And Mr. Wilson's party won the election.

The election over, however, it began to be more apparent that the United States would be compelled to enter the war against imperial Germany, and the president who had stood so stoutly for the maintenance of strict neutrality, must lead his people into a state of preparedness for war. This he did, notwithstanding his desire for the non-participation of the United States in the constantly expanding world conflict. The chief offense—not by any means the only one—of the imperial German empire against the United States was its frightful pursuit of its submarine warfare, which leveled its efforts at non-combatant ships, neutral shipping, of all classes; as well passenger ships as goods-carrying vessels. This led to the destruction of American lives while the people killed were in the peaceful and lawful pursuit of business and pleasure; and denied to the United States the commercial rights of a free and neutral nation.

453Of this particular offense on the part of imperial Germany, President Wilson in his war address to the congress of the United States (2nd April, 1917) respecting the new policy Germany had announced after a brief and what proved to be a temporary suspension of some of the most atrocious features of submarine warfare, said:

453"The new policy has swept every restriction aside. Vessels of every kind, whatever their flag, their character, their cargo, their destination, their errand, have been ruthlessly sent to the bottom without warning and without thought of help or mercy for those on board, the vessels of friendly neutrals along with those of belligerents."

453A declaration of the existence of a state of war between the United States and imperial Germany under such circumstances, and the entrance of the United States into the World War on the side of the allies against Germany was inevitable, and it came; the United States, through the president and congress, declared a state of war to exist between the United States and imperial Germany, the declaration bearing date of April 6, 1917.

THE SAINTS' RELATIONSHIP OF SERVICE IN THE WAR

This brought to the membe rship of the Church of the Latter-day Saints the relationship of service in the World War; and being chiefly gathered into one of the states of the Union, and constituting the large majority of the population of that state, Utah, it made their participation in, and their relationship of service in the war, unique.

453Fortunately, the high plane on which the United States entered the war made it easy for even the saints to sustain the relationship of service to it without violence to their consciences. This high plane was indicated by President Wilson in his address to congress on the war:

THE ISSUES AND PURPOSES OF THE UNITED STATES ENTRANCE INTO THE WAR—WILSON

"We are now about to accept the gauge of battle with this natural foe to liberty; and shall, if necessary, spend the whole force of the nation to check and nullify its pretensions and its power. We are glad, now that we see the facts with no veil of false pretense about them, to fight thus for the ultimate peace of the world and for the liberation of its peoples, the German peoples included; for the rights of nations great and small and the privilege of men everywhere to choose their way of life and of obedience. The world must be made safe for democracy. Its policy must be planted upon the trusted foundations of political liberty.

454We have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion. We seek no indemnities for ourselves, no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make. We are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind. We shall be satisfied when those rights have been made as secure as the faith and the freedom of the nations can make them. * * *

454It is a distressing and oppressive duty, gentlemen of the congress, which I have performed in thus addressing you. There are, it may be, many months of fiery trial and sacrifice ahead of us. It is a fearful thing to lead this great peaceful country into war, into the most terrible and disastrous of all wars, civilization itself seeming to be in the balance. But the right is more precious than peace, and we shall fight for the things which we have always carried nearest our hearts—for democracy, for the right of those who submit to authority to have a voice in their own governments, for the rights and liberties of small nations, for a universal dominion of right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations and make the world itself at last free." [^16]

454Entering the war under these circumstances, in such spirit, and for such purposes, could not be other than discharging a patriotic duty: and therefore the relationship of service to the World War, now that the United States had by her constituted authorities declared it, could be no other than acceptable to the membership of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, as citizens of the United States, and heartily they responded to their duty.

454THE UNIQUE POSITION OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS AND THEIR CHURCH TO THE WAR

As before stated, the position of the Latter-day Saints, constituting as they did the large majority of the population of the state of Utah, gave them a unique position in respect of their reactions to the war proclamation of the United States government, since what the state of Utah did, and the spirit in which she did it, would, in a large way, reflect their spirit revealed in their action. Had Utah as a state acted reluctantly, or had she failed in any respect to proceed as the other states of the Union and as the whole nation did, the reluctance and failure would have been chargeable to the Latter-day Saints. [^17] Per contra, Utah's promptness in action and the spirit in which she did her part would reflect the patriotism, the intensity of the Americanism of the same people.

455Here let it be understood that Latter-day Saints may not claim superiority over the non-members of their church in Utah or elsewhere in the expression of patriotism in the relationship of service to this World War; their non-"Mormon" fellow citizens in Utah and elsewhere in no respect fell behind the Latter-day Saints in patriotism, and therefore share in full measure in the glory which is Utah's in her World War record. I state above, however, what is the simple fact, that had Utah failed as a state in filling up the full measure of her duty, the people with the solidarity of church membership possessed by the Latter-day Saints considered, and being so largely in the majority, would have been held—and justly—responsible for any delinquency in duty of the state. If, on the other hand, the state reacts to duty faithfully and well, it reflects the patriotism of her people carrying such responsibility; but this without disparagement to the patriotism and full measure of credit due to the non-membership of that dominant church.

UTAH'S RECORD IN THE WORLD WAR

And what is Utah's record in the war, carrying with it the implications as to the spirit of her people as manifested in that record? It will appear in the following condensed report of her war responses:

MAN POWER ENLISTMENT

Army: Quota asked for ————————————————- 746 men

456 Furnished ———————————————————-2,344 men

456Marines: Quota asked for ————————————————- 126 men

456 Furnished ———————————————————- 346 men

456Navy: No quota: Utah and Southern Idaho (latter largely

456 L. D. S. population) —————————————— 641 men

456Utah also furnished one regiment of field artillery and one field

456 hospital company ——————————————————————1,500 men

456The above was the record for 1917. Utah's total

456 enlistment for the war was:

456 Army ———————————————————-20,872

456 Navy ———————————————————- 3,510

456 ————

456 Total —————————————————24,382

456This out of a total population of less than 500,000 people, 449,446 to be exact. Of this enlisted number 544 paid the supreme sacrifice; 489 in the army and 55 in the navy.

456Two Utah men held distinguished positions at the headquarters of the American Army in France throughout the war. These were General Briant H. Wells, and General Frank T. Hines. Briant H. Wells was of the regular army, graduate of West Point and son of Daniel H. Wells of "Utah Echo Canon War" fame. He was chiefly stationed at General Pershing's headquarters in France, and was the liason officer between General Bliss of the American chief of staff, General Pershing, and the commander of all the allied forces, General Foch. Since the close of the war, through the promotions observed in the regular army, Brigadier General Wells has risen to the rank of Major General.

456The second Utah man prominent at the American headquarters of the expeditionary forces, General Frank T. Hines, was connected with the transportation of troops to France, and now holds the rank of brigadier general, and since the war has served acceptably for seven years as director of the Veterans Bureau.

UTAH PROVIDING SINEWS OF WAR—RED CROSS AND LIBERTY LOAN APPORTIONMENTS AND RESPONSES

Red Cross—apportionment ——————————————————-$ 350,000

457 Raised —————————————————————————- 520,000

457First Liberty Loan—apportionment —————————————— 6,500,000

457 Amount subscribed ———————————————————— 9,400,000

457Second Liberty Loan—minimum apportionment —————————- 10,000,000

457 Amount subscribed ———————————————————— 16,200,000

457Soldiers' Welfare Fund, including Y. M. C. A. and Training Camp:

457Recreation Fund—apportionment ———————————————- 100,000

457 Amount raised —————————————————————— 105,000

457Red Cross Membership Campaign:

457Allotment —————————————————————————60,000 members

457 Subscribers ——————————————————————66,000 members

457 Asked ——————————————————————————-$17,100,000

457 Given ———————————————————————————26,291,000

457The Third Liberty Loan drive in 1918 was equally successful,

457as the following figures will show:

457Third Liberty Loan—apportionment ——————————————-$10,315,000

457 Raised ——————————————————————————-12,553,000

457Utah was the fifth state in the United States to complete its allotment, and the amount raised represented 78,000 subscribers, or one bond for every five men, women and children in Utah.

457UTAH'S MILITARY UNIT IN THE WAR—145TH FIELD ARTILLERY, (1ST UTAH)

457Another state incident contributed to the completeness of Utah's full measure of duty in the World's War—which she would not have done all in this war that some of the other states did had she neglected to do the thing here referred to—namely, the raising of a volunteer military unit to bear the name of the state throughout the war. This, however, her people did not neglect, but raised a volunteer artillery regiment, the 145th Field Artillery (1st Utah), such its official United States Army designation. It was made part of the 65th brigade of the 40th division of the United States Army overseas.

The nucleus of this regiment of volunteers was found in the fragments of pre-existing military state organizations, inspired by the spirit that came with the recollection of their high service to their country. When the Spanish-American War broke out in 1898, the Utah Batteries, A and B, volunteer units, were organized for service in the Philippines, and also a company of cavalry for the same service, though this company of cavalry never reached the Philippines, it went into service on the American Pacific coast. The two batteries, however, went to the Philippine Islands where they rendered invaluable aid to the country and brought high honors to the state from which they were enlisted, and made up largely of members of the "Mormon" church. The Utah United States senator, Reed Smoot, upon the floor of the senate chamber, in 1927, was able to say of these batteries:

RECORD OF THE UTAH BATTERIES

"The reports of the commanding general have an oft-repeated expression:

458As usual, the Utah battery did most excellent service.

458A high meed of praise has been given to all those army organizations which fought successfully through the Philippine campaign, and it was well deserved. Like the organizations from other states, the Utah Light Artillery had its losses. The frequent official report was:

458These casualities occurred while serving their guns."

458All Utah was proud of the record of the Utah Batteries. Judge C. C. Goodwin, long time editor of the Salt Lake Tribune, non-"Mormon," and often anti-"Mormon," wrote of these batteries:

458"The necessities of the war made them ubiquitous; they were everywhere, on river, on land; and when a stronghold was to be stormed, their guns first cleared the way, until, in an army where all were heroes, the men of Utah made for themselves a conspicuous name. They earned it, for they never retreated, never lost a battle or a flag, never started for the foe that they did not scatter it as the wind scatters the chaff from the threshing floor. When their terms of enlistment expired they fought on, week after week, until their places could be supplied. The record of the volunteers is nowhere dimmed. They went away boys; they returned men. They made for themselves great names, and by their deeds exalted the name of their state. They have won for themselves an appreciative people's gratitude, a nation's praise."

UTAH'S MEXICAN BORDER CAVALRY TROOPS

During the Mexican border troubles of 1916, Utah sent other military volunteers into the United States Army service; these consisted of 1 and 2 squads of cavalry entering the service on the 4th and 9th of July, respectively, 1916. These did effective patrol service along the Mexican border in the vicinity of Nogales, on the Arizona and Mexican line. These cavalry squads were mustered out of service, one on November 10, 1916, the other on the 8th of March, 1917; both returned to Utah where they disbanded.

459It was the fragments of these Utah military units—from the Utah batteries of Philippine Island fame, and these Mexican border cavalry squads that formed the nucleus of the Utah military unit of the 145th F. A. (1st Utah), which bore the name of the state of Utah throughout the World War, and made it possible for the "Mormon" state of Utah to be conscious of the fact, and to be proud of it, that the state of Utah did everything that any other state of the Union did in military activity, and in all other activities that contributed to the war movements of the United States in the World War; and which could not have been the case had this volunteer unit not been organized, for other states sent such volunteer units into the war.

UTAH'S MILITARY UNITS IN WARS OFFICIALLY CONNECTED

The 145th F. A. (1st Utah), organized under the authority of the National Guard laws of Utah, was completed early in August, 1917, as a state unit and taken over into the United States Army for service in the World War on the 5th of August, 1917; and later, viz., on the 10th of October, 1917, the regiment left Camp Douglas, Utah, for Camp Kearney, California, where it was made part of the 40th Division of the United States Army, Major General F. S. Strong commanding, and went into intensive training for overseas service.

In June, 1918, six hundred of the membership of the regiment were taken as replacement troops and sent to France to be stationed along the battle front in other military units. These were replaced in the 145th by men of the selected draft, from Camp Lewis, Washington, chiefly, however, by men from Idaho and Colorado.

460One unique thing about this Utah regiment was that it was so nearly recruited from one religious body that of its varying membership ranging at different times—officers and men—from thirteen hundred to fifteen hundred, the overwhelming majority were members of the Church of the Latter-day Saints. And notwithstanding the six hundred members of the organization taken for replacement troops in June and sent to France, and these replaced by troops from Camp Lewis, the "Mormon" membership of the regiment remained practically constant throughout the war at about one thousand, so that the 145th F. A., (1st Utah) came nearly to being a "Mormon" regiment.

460After what seemed to the regiment a long delay, the unit was ordered to France with the 40th division. The regiment did not reach the immediate battle front, but was under orders to move to the front when the Armistice was signed on the 11th of November, 1918. The regiment returned to America in a body, under its own Utah officers, and was mustered out of service at Logan, Utah, 21st to the 28th of January, 1919. It was thence reorganized as units 1 in 1919-1921; redesignated 145th F. A., remaining now (1930) a state military unit, bearing the World War title. The war department of the United States by official order has linked together all these military units of the state of Utah with the Mormon Battalion furnished from the moving camps of the Latter-day Saints en route for the Great Basin, in 1846, and this with the pre-existing Nauvoo Legion (though not "definitely established") organized at Nauvoo, Illinois, 1841, under the act of Illinois legislature. A certified copy of this war department order, with a list and description of the insignia granted the respective units will be found in Note 2, end of chapter.

461DESCENDANTS OF THE MORMON BATTALION IN THE 145TH FIELD ARTILLERY (1ST UTAH)

461It is an item worthy of note that this Utah military unit, bearing the name of the state and now linked up by order of the war department with the Mormon Battalion and Nauvoo Legion, had in its membership while in training at Camp Kearney, twenty-three direct descendants—grandsons and great grandsons—of members of the Mormon Battalion. Seventeen of these descendants the chaplain of the regiment marched from Camp Kearney, with the consent of the colonel, to the camp ground of their sires at Old San Diego, where Colonel Fremont had raised the first United States flag in southern California, and units of the Mormon Battalion performed garrison duty, in 1847. En route of the march from Camp Kearney to Old San Diego the company was met by General LeRoy S. Lyon, commanding the 65th brigade, of which the 145th F. A. (1st Utah) was part. At the approach of the general's automobile the descendants of the Mormon Battalion were drawn up at attention by the wayside and after an explanation of their pilgrimage, General Lyon thus addressed them:

ADDRESS OF GENERAL LYON TO DESCENDANTS OF MORMON BATTALION

"Men: I cannot allow you to proceed on your pilgrimage commemorating the great march of your ancestors without a word of greeting.

461I have learned to know well the Utah men since I became your commander, and I am sure such men will make good on our great mission to Europe.

461I congratulate you men on the ancestors back of you, and feel confident that you will assist greatly in our march to Berlin, which is to be our mission to Europe.

461I wish you a pleasant trip today, and am very happy to have met you on the road." [^18]

462On arriving at Old San Diego, the camp site of their fathers and grandfathers, the company was met by a large gathering of the citizens. Here also they were joined by the regimental band, under the guidance of its leader, Lieutenant Clarence Hawkins, that enlivened the occasion with patriotic airs. From a platform reared for the occasion the mayor of San Diego delivered a speech of welcome. The colonel of their regiment, Colonel R. W. Young; also met them here and in a speech reviewed the historic march of their fathers.

462Fergus Ferguson, a grandson of one of its members, James Ferguson, prominent as we have seen in military and legal affairs of early Utah, also in the Mormon Battalion, a member of Colonel P. St. George Cooke's staff, read Colonel Cooke's official bulletin "on the arrival of the Mormon Battalion, on the Pacific coast." The "pilgrimage" ended by a banquet at one of the principal hotels of San Diego.

NOTES

BY Walter Littlefield

462(The figures of military losses in this article are all from official data, or, where these were not obtainable, are from official estimates)

462Thirty-three Million Men on Casualty Lists Out of a Grand Total of Nearly Sixty Millions Mobilized

462This is an attempt to reveal the war's cost measured in terms of human life, with special reference to the millions diverted from the productive industries of peace to the annihilating vocation of mortal combat—to other millions who today are dead, suffering, or helpless because of the war.

462Sixteen established nations and three new ones, which the war brought forth, assembled their human powers for the great conflict—fifteen on one side and four on the other. Against one or more of the four, twelve other nations also declared war, but did not actively indulge in it. Of the remaining fifty more or less independent nations of the world, five also severed relations with one or more of the four original aggressors. All were seriously affected.

It has been estimated that the Polish combatants with the Allies numbered 150,000; that the Czechoslovak armies in Siberia, France and Italy, included 180,000 nationals; that the King of Hedjaz fought the Turks with 250,000 Arabs. These three new nations therefore, employed a combatant force of 580,000 men, which was joined to the Allies' 39,676,864 against the Central Powers' 19,500,000.

463Nearly 60,000,000 men at war! Of this huge number over 7,000,000 are dead and nearly 6,000,000 (30 per cent of the wounded) are permanent human wrecks.

463But this only refers to the soldiers who died or were irreparably maimed. Civilians were even greater sufferers, not only by engines of war but by famine, disease, and massacre. There were those who were killed by direct military causes; those who died from indirect causes.

463In the first category we have:

463 692 Americans slain on the high seas.

46320,620 British subjects slain on the high seas.

463 1,270 English men, women, and children the victims of air raids

463 and bombardment.

46330,000 Belgians butchered or deprived of life in various ways.

46340,000 French butchered or deprived of life in various ways.

463 7,500 Neutrals slain by the U-boats.

463————

463100,082

463In the second category we have:

4634,000,000 Armenians, Syrians, Jews and Greeks massacred or starved

463 by the Turks.

4634,000,000 Deaths beyond the normal mortality of influenza and

463 pneumonia induced by the war.

4631,085,441 Servian dead through disease or massacre.

463————-

4639,085,441

463All this gives a military and civilian mortality, directly or indirectly the product of the war, of:

463 Military deaths ——————— 7,781,806

463 Civilian deaths ——————— 9,185,523

463 —————

463 Total ————————-16,967,329

463American civilian lives lost by U-boat, mines, etc., include all from the one lost on the British ship Falaba, March 28, 1915, till the four lost on the American steamer Lucia, Oct. 17, 1918. British lives lost in the same way include 6,500 members of the mercantile marine not listed as naval casualties. The 7,500 neutral lives also lost are led by those of Norway's death list of 5,120 seamen.

463The total of 4,000,000 Armenians, Greeks, Jews and Syrians massacred by the Turks is the latest official estimate of the American Committee for Armenian and Syrian Relief.

The number of Armenians massacred has been variously estimated at from one to three million. This is probably an exaggeration. An estimate of 300,000 is based on the following facts, published in the Horizon of Tiflis and the Artzakank Parisi, (Paris) still the natural increase in population in the unaffected region might tend to increase this total. When the war began there were fewer than three million Armenians in all Turkey, Transylvania, and Galicia. In Transcaucasia the Armenian population increased from 1,000,000 to 1,207,000; in Ciscaucasia, from 30,000 to 80,000; in European Turkey, from 400,000 to 500,000 and in Transylvania and Galicia, from 15,000 to 25,000. Supposing that this increase were entirely due to refugees, we have 367,000. Now for the region affected by massacre: First comes Turkish Armenia, with its predominant Kurd population, where before the war, there were 650,000 Armenians, and today there are 32,000, a decrease of 618,000; Northern Persia had 100,000 and today has 51,000, a decrease of 49,000, showing a total decrease in two regions of 667,000, and a grand total decrease of 300,000 (667,000 minus 367,000).

464And this is not all. Who can even estimate the millions of human beings whose bones whiten the roads of Poland or fill the charnel houses of the Bolsheviki?

464The table printed below on this page gives the authentic figures regarding the man power employed and the casualties suffered by the sixteen nations which were officially mobilized for the war and took active part in it. There is as yet no record available concerning the casualties suffered by the three new nations which came into being through the war, or by little San Marino, which sent a gallant 300 to help Italy beat their common enemy. The rest, however, is upon record.

464MOBILIZED STRENGTH AND CASUALTY LOSSES OF THE BELLIGERENTS

464

(Letter to the Author of this History)

465The State of Utah

465Military Department

465Office of the Adjutant General

465P. O. Box 2187

465Salt Lake City

465October

465Tenth

4651929

465Hon. B. H. Roberts,

465Church Office Building,

465Salt Lake City, Utah.

465Dear Mr. Roberts:

465I am forwarding you inclosed a copy of the data furnished by the war department in reference to the colors allotted the 145th Field Artillery.

465You will note in this that while they tentatively go back to the Nauvoo Legion it is stated that such service "has not been definitely established," yet it is made part of the citation for these colors.

465Trust that this is the information desired by you and if we can be of any further service to you we will be very glad to do so.

465I am

465Yours very truly,

465[Signed] "W. G. WILLIAMS,"

465The Adjutant General.

465145TH FIELD ARTILLERY

Organized as 1 and 2 Sqs. Cav. in 1916 from new Cav. and existing Sig. C and Inf. units organized 1894 and subsequently which claim descent from "Nauvoo Legion" but which has not been definitely established. The "Nauvoo Legion" was organized at Nauvoo, Ill. in 1841 under act of Ill. Legislature. During overland march to Utah it furnished "Mormon Battalion" for Mexican War which marched from Iowa to San Diego, Calif. via Ft. Leavenworth, Kan. and Santa Fe, N. M. Claimed to be "the longest infantry march on record." Reorganized in Utah as "Nauvoo Legion" in 1848 and disbanded in 1887 by operation of act of congress. (F- (Mexican border) 4 and 9 July 16 respectively; stationed at Nogales, Ariz.; mustered out 10 Nov. 16 and 8 Mar. 17 respectively). Consolidated with 1 Btry. FA and redesignated 1 FA 2 Aug. 17: 1 Btry. FA organized as Light Btry. A FA 26 Mar. 94. (F- (Spanish War and Philippine Insurrection) 9 May 98; divided and redesignated Btrys. A and B Utah Vols.; served in PI 17 July 98—1 July 99; mustered out at San Francisco, Calif. 16 Aug. 99). Reorganized as Co. G 1 Inf. 20 Aug. 00; redesignated 1 Btry. FA 17 Sept. 00 (F- (Mexican Border) 26 June 16; stationed at Nogales, Ariz; mustered out 22 Dec. 16). Merged in 1 FA 2 Aug. 17. (F- (World War) 5 Aug. 17; redesignated 145 FA 40 Div.; served with 40 Div. in France; not in combat; mustered out 21-28 Jan. 19). Reorganized as units 1 FA 1919-21; redesignated 145 FA 11 Oct. 21.

Streamers Authorized: Spanish War Philippine Insurrection

466Manila Manila

466World War Malolos

466Without inscription San Isidro

466Coat of arms: Approved 13 Mar. 29.

466Shield: Gules, a fleur-de-lis or; on a canton of the first a castle of the second in front of a palm tree proper within a dovetailed bordure of the fourth.

466Crest: That for regiments of Utah NG. Wreath: Or and gules.

466Motto: Pro Deo, Pro Patria (For God, For Country).

466Description: The shield is red for arty, the gold fleur-de-lis commemorating service of the 145 FA in France during the World War. The canton depicts the history of the 1 FA and 1 Cav., Utah NG, the ancestors of the 145 FA. The castle and the palm tree on the red background represent the service of the 1 Btry. FA Utah NG in the Spanish War and Philippine Insurrection respectively, and the yellow (gold) dovetailed border symbolizes the service of the 1 Cav., Utah NG, on the Mexican border, the canton denoting the 145 FA as a descendent of these units.

466Distinctive insignia: Approved 13 Mar. 29.

466Shield and motto of the coat of arms.

466Certified A True Copy:

466W. G. Williams

466The Adjutant General

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Congressional Globe for June 7th, 1918.
[^2] Letter from the Presiding Bishop's Office under date of February 27th, 1930.
[^3] See Proceedings of Eighty-seventh Annual Conference, pamphlet, for April 6-8, 1917, pp. 2-23.
[^4] Articles of Faith, No. 12, Doctrine and Covenants.
[^5] Salt Lake Tribune of June 11th, 1917.
[^6] Full report of the speeches and of the conference proceedings will be found in the Improvement Era for July, 1917.
[^7] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxvii and this History, ch. xxiv. And Note 1 at the end of this chapter.
[^8] Locksley Hall, from which Tennyson's Vision is condensed.
[^9] War and Waste; also for most of the above see an article in the New York Sun of December 10th, 1914, when the World War had been in progress four months.
[^10] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxvii, given December 25th, 1832.
[^11] For a somewhat technical treatment of the matter of this verse, see ante this History, chapter xxiv.
[^12] Messages and Papers of the Presidents, vol. vi, p. 277.
[^13] Matt. xxiii:32-36.
[^14] "The law of the Lord is perfect. * * * The statutes of the Lord are right * * * The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether." (Psalms xix).
[^15] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxvii.
[^16] War Message of President Wilson to Congress, of April 2nd, 1917.
[^17] The population of Utah at this time was more than two-thirds Latter-day Saints. (See Second Report of the State Bureau of Immigration, Labor and Statistics, 1914).
[^18] A Mr. George Austin Charnock, of the Y. M. C. A. at Camp Kearney, making the march with the group, took down the speech in shorthand on the spot, hence the verbatim report of it. The names of the battalion descendants making this pilgrimage were: Thatcher Willey, Harold G. Walbeck, Merl E. Brown, J. C. Murdock, Fergus Ferguson, Price Willey, Wilford E. Shurtliff, Pierce Simmons, Parnell Green, Clyde Bone, Sergeant L. H. Duffin, Ralph A. Brown, C. H. Oliphant, LaMar Barlow, James P. Paul, Kingsley Clawson, Lieutenant Erwin Clawson.
