B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

467CHAPTER CLXXXIII

467THE CHURCH OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS AS AN ORGANIZATION—A FACTOR IN THE WORLD WAR

467IN addition to the activities of Latter-day Saints in the World War as citizens of the state in which they chiefly lived, the state of Utah, the church itself, as an organization under the leadership of President Joseph F. Smith, rendered direct assistance to the government in the World War by the purchase of government bonds, thus supplying the sinews of war.

WAR BOND PURCHASES BY THE CHURCH

President Smith, preeminently a man of peace, was slow at first to recognize that the hour had struck for the United States to drop the neutral attitude and enter the World War on the side of the allies and fight to forward the ultimate peace of the world and the liberation of its peoples. Hence in the first drive in the United States to raise funds to aid in the war, there is no record of the church, as an organization, purchasing Liberty Bonds to aid the government. But after the first Liberty Bond drive the church purchased United States war bonds as follows:

4671917—Second drive—————$150,000.00

4671918—Third drive ————— 250,000.00

467 Fourth drive ————- 250,000.00

4671919—Fifth drive ————— 200,000.00

467 ——————

467 Total——————$850,000.00

467In addition to the above the church purchased of its members and received on tithing enough government bonds to swell the amount it held to a million and twenty-five thousand dollars.

467Following the example of the main church organization, the auxiliary organizations also purchased government bonds as follows:

468The Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association bought

468 ——————————————————————-$17,500.00

468 Thrift stamps ————————————- 1,000.00

468The Young Ladies' M. I. A. bought———————— 6,250.00

468 Thrift stamps ———————————— 166.00

468The National Female Relief Society Organization

468styled "National" because of its affiliation

468withthe Women's Benevolent Club Organizations

468of thecountry, but strictly a Latter-day Saint

468organization for charitable and self-cultural

468purposes—this organization through its branch

468associations purchased government bonds in the

468fourdrives, extending, through the years

4681917, 1918, 1919, to the amount of——-$592,057.00

468In addition to these bond purchases by the Relief Societies of the church, they had a membership in the Red Cross organization through the years from 1917-1919 of 47,398. This out of a total membership of about fifty thousand. In articles made and supplied for the Red Cross, for hospital supplies, for Belgian relief, for all activities in which the Red Cross functioned, the Female Relief Society of the Church, of the Latter-day Saints was as active as the women of any other American community organization; and in one other respect of helpfulness I shall venture to say, they were unique.

THE STORING OF GRAIN POLICY OF THE CHURCH

In early Utah days, owing to occasional and excessive droughts; and to the occasional plagues of crickets and grasshoppers, there was at times crop failure in Utah valleys; then, sometimes, even in years of plentiful crops the influx of transient emigrants east and west would be so great that to supply them with needed food created great shortage of grain in Utah because of the increased demand upon it. To meet this recurring scarcity President Young urged upon those having a surplus of grain in any year to adopt the policy of storing it against a time of need, rather than disposing of it all annually. All who found it posisble were urged to store up at least sufficient grain to supply their families for a year in advance; and, of course, beyond that in larger quantities where possible. The inconvenience and other difficulties attendant upon this private enterprise as a personal policy did not meet with very large success, for men learn slowly the lesson of sacrificing today that provision may be made for tomorrow. It is the same story in a slightly different form as the world's accumulation of its capital, it is a slow and sometimes painful process. Seeing partial failure in this effort of individuals, President Young turned to the Female Relief Societies and charged them with the responsibility of "storing up grain against a time of community need." And this they adopted as one of their association activities and continuing policies. The size of the Latter-day Saint community considered, this gathering of grain through the years amounted to considerable; and from time to time they came to community relief from the store of grain.

469The war presented an opportunity for such service, especially in the matter of food supplies for the European allies of the United States. Hence the tender of 200,000 or more bushels of wheat was made to the government from their stored-up supplies for such purposes. The generous tender was received and acknowledged by a personal letter from Mr. Herbert Hoover, then administrator of the food program among the United States' Allies, now president of the United States. He wrote to the presidency of the church as follows:

MR. HOOVER'S LETTER

"Washington, D. C.,

469June 3rd, 1918.

469Joseph F. Smith, Anthon H. Lund, C. W. Penrose,

469First Presidency,

469Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,

469Salt Lake City, Utah.

469Dear Sirs:

469From various sources, my attention has been called to the fact that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has freely and voluntarily contributed wheat and flour to the government for war use.

It is my understanding that your church Relief Societies have been the medium through which this service has been performed. We who are charged with the very difficult task of administering the food program, gather new courage from this generous and patriotic act. It assures us that our reliance on the voluntary sacrifices of our citizens to meet, out of their bounty, the pressing and critical needs of our Allies, has not been misplaced.

470With renewed appreciation of the interest and sacrifice which this action by your church typifies, I am,

470Yours, faithfully,

470[Signed] "HERBERT HOOVER."

470Mr. Hoover wrote a letter of the same date and of similar import to Utah's representative in the lower house of congress, Mr. Milton H. Welling, who read it to the house on the 7th of June, 1918, amidst applause. The government, of course, paid for this gathered wheat supply tendered to it, at the rate of $1.20 per bushel. The exact amount of wheat delivered to the government cannot be learned, as the transaction in gathering up wheat extended over a period of time. The Presiding Bishop's Office, through which the transaction was chiefly managed, reports "about 200,000 bushels;" Mr. Milton H. Welling, upon the floor of the house of representatives, puts the amount at "205,518 bushels; or 12,331,080 lbs. of wheat." [^1]

470The money received from this sale of wheat was invested as a trust fund en bloc, the interest made available for charitable purposes for the poor of the church, administered by the respective branch Relief Societies from which the wheat was purchased by the government. This trust fund, known as the "Wheat Fund" now (1930) with some accrued interest, amounts to $403,767. [^2]

470Thus the Church of the Latter-day Saints, in supplying material aid in strengthening the hands of the government in the war, as also in giving aid as citizens of the state of Utah, where the great body of the church membership constituted such a large majority of the population as to make that membership responsible for the policy of the state in this World War period, measured up to something more than to the full heighth of patriotic duty to their country.

THE SPIRIT GIVETH LIFE

All the foregoing things mentioned here and in the preceding chapter, may be regarded as material assistance which the Latter-day Saints as citizens of the state in which they chiefly lived rendered to their country; and as material aid which their church as an organization directly gave to the country in support of its war measures; but all this is as nothing compared with the spirit in which the membership of the church were admonished by the earthly head of the church to perform the war service which was their war duty. This began to take form in the general annual conference of the church of April, 1917, about the time the United States made the official declaration that a state of war existed between the imperial government of Germany and the United States of America. This spirit in which the war duty of the Latter-day Saints was to be undertaken was voiced by President Joseph F. Smith in his opening address of the conference named.

PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH ON THE SPIRIT OF THE WAR

"Speaking of the possibility of conflict, of war, I exhort my friends, the people of our country, especially in this intermountain region, to maintain above all other things the spirit of humanity, of love, and of peace-making, that even though they may be called into action they will not demolish, override and destroy the principles which we believe in, which we have tried to inculcate, and which we are exhorted to maintain; peace and good will toward all mankind, though we may be brought into action with the enemy. I want to say to the Latter-day Saints who may enlist, and whose services the country may require, that when they become soldiers of the state and of the nation that they will not forget that they are also soldiers of the cross, that they are ministers of life and not of death, and when they go forth, they may go forth in the spirit of defending the liberties of mankind rather than for the purpose of destroying the enemy. * * *

471Forget Not Righteousness: It is abominable that men who engage in the great and grand and necessary duty of protecting and guarding our nation from the encroachments of wicked enemies, cruel and destructive foes, should not maintain among themselves lives of honor, virtue, purity and of immunity from sin and crime of every kind. It is a disgraceful thought that a man to become a soldier should become a rake and abandon himself to crime and wickedness. Let the soldiers that go out from Utah be and remain men of honor. And when they are called obey the call, and manfully meet the duty, the dangers, or the labor, that may be required of them, or that they may be set to do; but do it with an eye single to the accomplishment of the good that is aimed to be accomplished, and not with the blood-thirsty desire to kill and to destroy."

THE GERMAN SAINTS AND THE WAR

President Smith made reference to the difficulties which beset the German people within the church, in Utah and in the United States, and the trial it would be for them—this American war upon their fatherland. He called attention to the fact that the Church of Jesus Christ of the New Dispensation knew no nationalities; now, as of old, there was neither "Jew nor Greek," neither "bond nor free," in the fellowship of the saints, but all were one in Christ Jesus; and he sympathetically said of the Germans and the trying situation in which they were placed by this war declared to be existing between the United States and their fatherland:

472No Nationalities in the Church: "It is nothing but natural that people who are born in a land, though they may have emigrated from it, who have left their kindred there, many of them, that they will naturally have a tender feeling toward their fatherland. But the Latter-day Saints who have come from England and from France and from Germany and Scandinavia and Holland, into this country, no matter what their country may be involved in, it is not our business to distinguish them in any way by criticism or by complaint toward them, or by condemnation, because of the place where they were born. They could not help where they were born, and they have come here to be Latter-day Saints, not to be Germans, nor to be Scandinavians, nor to be English or French, nor to belong to any other country in the world. They have come here to be members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and good and true citizens of the United States, and of the several states in which they live, and other places throughout the world, where Latter-day Saints are building homes for themselves.

472Distinction Between the German Government and the German People: You must not condemn the people, however much you may judge and condemn their leaders, who place their people in jeopardy, and demand their life blood for their maintenance in positions of prominence and power. Their leaders are to blame, not the people. The people that embrace the gospel are innocent of these things, and they ought to be respected by Latter-day Saints everywhere. * * * They are our brethren and our sisters, our neighbors, and they are helping to build up this great country of ours, and we must respect them and uphold them in the purest kindness, love and compassion, and with sorrow that their native countries are in the terrible plight that they are, for which they [the saints] are not responsible."

THE GERMAN PEOPLE DISTINCT FROM THEIR GOVERNMENT

At this point in his remarks, President Smith made the same distinction between the German people and the imperial German government as that which President Wilson had made in his war speech to congress. The latter then said:

473"We have no quarrel with the German people. We have no feeling towards them but one of sympathy and friendship. It was not upon their impulse that their government acted in entering this war. It was not with their previous knowledge and approval. It was a war determined upon as wars used to be determined on in the old, unhappy days when peoples were nowhere consulted by their rulers, and wars were provoked and waged in the interest of dynasties or of little groups of ambitious men who were accustomed to use their fellowmen as pawns and tools."

473The counselors of President Smith, Elders Anthon H. Lund and Charles W. Penrose followed him in the same line of thought and admonition as to the war duties of the members of the church. [^3]

473It will not be necessary to remark upon the excellence of the spirit here invoked in which the war service was to be rendered by the Latter-day Saints. One need not discuss the obvious.

THE GERMAN SAINTS IN GERMANY

There was the further perplexing thing underlying this war situation, but not discussed at this conference, nor elsewhere, as far as I know; and yet it may not be passed in silence here viz: What shall be the attitude of the Latter-day Saints in Germany as to this World War? Assuming as we do, that the World War was, on the part of the United States, at least, a war against autocracy, and for the founding of world freedom and the preservation of the rights of all nations, small and great; and that the imperial government of Germany was in the wrong; what shall the Latter-day Saints in Germany do? What shall be their mental attitude, and their action? This situation for them can only be deplored, of course; but practically, by stern necessity of inexorable German law, the German saints will be compelled to enter the war on the side of their country. And however unfortunate it may be accounted, Latter-day Saints believe "in being subject to kings, presidents, rulers and magistrates, in obeying, honoring and sustaining the law." [^4] This must mean, of course, upholding and obeying the law and upholding the government in the respective countries in which the Latter-day Saints live; and if conditions arise, as in this case under consideration, where one's country goes wrong, and one's government becomes perverse, such conditions can but be deplored and the false attitude endured until the results are worked out, and there comes a readjustment of affairs more in keeping with right and justice. All this but reveals the necessity of earnest prayer being uttered that God's kingdom shall come, his rule of righteousness and truth be established, that such perplexities and conflicting duties shall not arise to plague the people of any land.

A CONFERENCE OF THE AUXILIARY ASSOCIATIONS OF THE CHURCH

The principle set forth as outlining the duties of the Latter-day Saints at the annual conference of the church might well be taken as sufficient for the guidance of the church membership; but these duties were more boldly set forth and emphasized at the June, 1917, conference of the conjoint associations of the Young Men and Young Women held in Salt Lake City, the first presidency of the church being the principal speakers in relation to the subject of the war, the main theme of the conference. The Salt Lake Tribune, which, as we have seen, during long years had been so strongly and at times so bitterly anti-"Mormon," announced as the subheading of its report of that conference the following:

474First Presidency of Mormon Church Urges Young Men to go to Defense of Nation and Truth and Liberty

475"With earnestness, and with the religious thought uppermost in the minds and utterances of the speakers, the three members of the first presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints yesterday afternoon, in the great tabernacle, urged the young men of the organization to enlist in defense of liberty and the principles emblemized in the Stars and Stripes.

475It is significant that the religio-military propaganda was put forth before an audience of about 8,000, composed principally of young men and young women, the occasion being the chief meeting of the June conference of the Mutual Improvement and Primary auxiliary organizations.

475President Charles W. Penrose led in the enlistment advocacy and he was followed by President Anthon H. Lund. It was when President Joseph F. Smith made the closing address of the meeting that emphasis was laid upon the whole question—

475Regarded generally by the people of the 'Mormon' faith as a call to arms coming from the Almighty through the mouths of his servants, the utterances of the first presidency of the church took on an impressiveness which seemed to make itself felt deeply throughout the vast assemblage." [^5]

475Then follow excerpts from all three of the speeches by the first presidency.

WAR DUTY OF THE CHURCH MEMBERS REAFFIRMED

It will be sufficient to say here that the principles to govern the saints in their direct war service announced in the April general conference of the church were adhered to, but emphasized in this conference of the auxiliary organizations. President Smith expressed the thought that this war had been brought about by the folly and ambition of men and some nations and was not chargeable to God.

475God Not Responsible For The War: "Would the nations of the earth that are at war with each other be at war as they are, if the Spirit of God Almighty had pervaded their souls and moved and actuated them in their designs? No; not at all. Worldly ambition, pride, and the love of power, determination on the part of rulers to prevail over their competitors in the national games of life, wickedness at heart, desire for power, for worldly greatness, have led the nations of the earth to quarrel with each other and have brought them to war and self-destruction. I presume there is not a nation in the world today that is not tainted with this evil more or less." * * *

476Will those men who go out from Utah, from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, forget their prayers? Will they forget God? Will they forget the teachings that they have received from their parents at home? Will they forget the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the covenants that they have made in the waters of baptism, and in sacred places? Or will they go out as men, in every sense—pure men, high-minded men, honest men, virtuous men, men of God? That is what I am anxious about. [^6]

476So throughout what may be called the war conference of the Young Men and Young Women's Associations of the church, there was a plain setting forth of the manner in which their war duty should be performed.

476Six of President Smith's sons enlisted in the United States Army for the World War, one of the number, Calvin S. Smith, entered the service as chaplain, at large, and by promotion rose to the rank of captain chaplain. He served in the training camps in the United States, but in June, 1918, went overseas, where he saw active service on the French-German front in various organizations, and was twice wounded. He did not fail, I think, to meet the expectations of his honored prophet-father in adherence to the spirit in which that father would have the war for the security of human freedom prosecuted. Happily Chaplain Smith returned home, but not to "meet that father," who had passed on before the war closed.

476In every way Latter-day Saints individually as citizens of their country, and the church as an organization, did their patriotic duty in the great cause of humanity—in the World War.

476* * *

President Joseph F. Smith just lived long enough, perhaps, to realize that the World War had come to its triumphant conclusion by the victory of the allied nations and the United States; for he lived eight days after the signing of the Armistice.

477Throughout his life President Smith had been well preserved in health, but in the spring of 1918 he began to fail seriously in health, and during much of the summer following he was practically confined to his home by increasing illness. He was able to attend the general semi-annual October conference of the church, however, and presided over all its sessions, but it was with manifestly increasing physical weakness. In mid-November he was attacked by pleurisy from which he suffered greatly. This rapidly developed into pleuro-pneumonia and on the 19th of November, six days after the anniversary of his 80th birthday, he passed on.

477Utah with the rest of the United States and practically the world was suffering from a world wide epidemic of influenza, so that no public funeral service could be held in honor of the almost universally beloved president of the church; but as the private cortege of the funeral procession passed along the streets en route for the city's cemetery, thousands of the citizens of Salt Lake City paid silent homage to the upright man who passed on to his rest.

477During the later years of his life, and notwithstanding the fierce attacks made upon him but a few years before his death by foes in Utah, and throughout the United States and by the press generally, and especially through many monthly magazines of the country, a great change had been wrought towards him. Always beloved by his own people, for his known sincerity and integrity, he lived to see his virtues and character appreciated by non-"Mormons" as well as by Latter-day Saints. This mental attitude toward him is perhaps best and typically expressed by Judge Charles C. Goodwin in Goodwin's Weekly (Salt Lake City), for April 8, 1916, consequently a little more than two years before President Smith's death. This one-time inveterate foeman of President Smith and of "Mormonism," said of him:

"A more kindly and benevolent man has seldom held an exalted ecclesiastical position in these latter days than President Joseph F. Smith of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Passing down the seventy-seventh year of the highway of life, and living with broad tolerance of the affairs of men, he stands a commanding influence in his state. To his people he is the great spiritual leader. To men at large he is a man of wide sympathies, great business acumen and a born leader of the great institution of which he is the head.

478One, who has known him for two generations, says of him: 'Once stern and unrelenting, he has mellowed as the years go on, until he sees but the good in humanity and forgives men their trespasses.'

478His early life was of great hardship, surviving as he did many adventures and many soul-rending experiences that try the hearts of men.

478He is the son of Hyrum Smith, second patriarch of the church and brother of the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was born November 13, 1838, at Far West, Missouri. He came into the world at the beginning of the early troubles of his people. His mother fled with him from Nauvoo, Illinois.

478At the age of eight years he drove an ox team across the desert. He reached Salt Lake with his mother September 23, 1848. From that time until this his service to the Mormon church has been a record of large achievements.

478His life all these years has been lived with great simplicity, constant labor and great personal frugality.

478He stands today a patriarch ruling with a gentle hand over a people blessed with such prosperity as few religious bodies have ever known."

478Such were the views quite generally held of him—but increasingly so—during the two years more through which his life was prolonged. Life for him was a victory.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cvii:64-67; also verses 22, and 91-92: Ibid, sec. lxxxi:2.
[^2] Letters to the New York Herald (Grant-signed Letters), 1852; done into a pamphlet and included in the collection of L. D. S. Controversial Works, vol. 1.
[^3] History of the Church, Period I, vol. i, ch. xiii.
[^4] St. James, chapters i and ii.
[^5] The speech was reported by Elder Rudger Clawson, president of the apostles' quorum at the time, and appears in the Honolulu Star Bulletin, impression of December 6th, 1919, where also the prayer of dedication of the temple is published in full.
[^6] Mich., vi:8.
