B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

479CHAPTER CLXXXIV

479THE OPENING OF PRESIDENT HEBER J. GRANT'S ADMINISTRATION

479IN harmony with the recent policy followed by the church of promptly organizing the first presidency at the demise of a president of the high priesthood of the church, who is also and always the president of the church, the quorum of the twelve apostles met in the temple on the 23rd day of November, 1918, and Heber J. Grant was nominated to be, and was set apart as president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. With that ordinance, of course, he became the prophet, seer, translator and revelator of the church, "holding all the keys, powers and authority" heretofore held by his predecessors. To have, in fact, "all the gifts of God which he bestows upon the head of the church." [^1]

THE SPECIAL CONFERENCE FOR RATIFICATION

The prevalence of the epidemic of influenza which prevented a public burial service being held for the late President Joseph F. Smith, prevented also the assembling of a general conference for ratifying the selection of the new president; also the convening of the annual April conference of the church. But a special general conference was appointed for the first of June, at which time there was a general assembly of the priesthood arranged in which each quorum votes, first separately, and in the order of their standing; then the whole conference, including the assembled and arranged quorums, and the members of the church voting en mass on the several questions before the conference.

This special conference in June unanimously sustained the action of the twelve in nominating and setting apart Heber J. Grant as president of the church; and also the new president's action in continuing the counselors of the late President Smith as his counselors. These were Anthon H. Lund and Charles W. Penrose. Also the conference voted to sustain Elder Melvin J. Ballard, who had been chosen and ordained an apostle on January, 17, 1919, to fill the vacancy created in the apostles' quorum by choosing Heber J. Grant to be the president of the church.

480At this special conference memorial services were held for President Joseph F. Smith, and fitting tributes paid to the life and character of the lately departed leader.

PRESIDENT HEBER J. GRANT

President Heber J. Grant was born in Salt Lake City on the 22nd of November, 1856, and therefore was sixty-two years of age when entering upon the high office of president of the church. He is the son of Jedediah Morgan Grant and Rachel Ridgway Ivins Grant. The Grants were from New York and the New England states, running back for several generations, and extending beyond that into Scotland, but of the family in that country little is known. Jedediah M. Grant's own summarization of his paternal ancestry is: "My father's paternal grandfather * * * was from Scotland; but the rest of my ancestors were New Englanders of the oldest stocks. Two of them fought for independence in the Revolution." [^2]

JEDEDIAH M. GRANT

The New Dispensation of the gospel found the father of President Grant early in life—he was baptized at seventeen, in 1833, when the church had been organized but three years. Of a sanguine, earnest temperament, Jedediah M. Grant entered with zeal into all the activities of the church in that early period. The year following his baptism he became a member of Zion's camp and made the wonderful journey under the leadership of the Prophet Joseph Smith in the march of Missouri and the return to Kirtland. On completion of that return he was ordained an elder in the priesthood, and soon afterwards was ordained one of the seventy in the first quorum [^3] of that organization, and from that time on was prominent in the missionary activities of the church in the eastern states, but afterwards, in the south, North Carolina and Virginia more especially. In the latter state he came in contact in those early years with Mr. John B. Floyd, afterwards so conspicuous in Utah affairs as secretary of state in the Buchanan administration and during the "Utah Expedition" episode.

481Jedediah M. Grant passed through the trying period of Missouri experiences and of Nauvoo's rise and fall, with its martyrdoms, and the exodus from it; the trek across the plains and over the mountains in 1847; bringing into the Salt Lake valley the last train of the migrating saints of that year. He participated in all the pioneering activities of the saints through the early Utah years; and when Salt Lake City was incorporated under the act of the legislature of the provisional "State of Deseret," he became its first mayor, and remained in that office uninterruptedly to the time of his death. He had risen in the priesthood to the office of a president in the first council of the seventy, 1845, and later was chosen to be counselor to President Brigham Young in the first presidency of the church.

He it was, it will be remembered, who became the leader of that extraordinary movement in the church of 1856, known as the "Reformation," the movement depending for much of its enthusiasm upon the personality of Jedediah M. Grant. That personality as a factor of the movement must have been tremendous, for there seems to have been but little else on which to build what became so strenuous an experience for the church, extending even into the foreign missions. The text on which the fiery preaching was founded seemed to be merely a casual remark of President Young's at a conference held at Kaysville in Davis county:

"Latter-day Saints, Do Your Duty."

482This commonplace utterance was seized upon by President Jedediah M. Grant and became the slogan around which was built the sermons of the "Reformation." The use of the text became a fine illustration of the truism of philosophy that an idea is of little moment until it passes through a personality and becomes identified with it. Then it becomes dynamic. It was so with this utterance of Brigham Young:

482"Latter-day Saints, Do Your Duty."

482This much is here sketched out concerning the father of President Heber J. Grant, not so much as a biographical note, but merely to remind the reader that upon the paternal side, the president of the church today, with whom the first century of organized existence of the church closes, and with whom, as president also, the second century begins, was one early and earnestly, and effectively and honorably identified with the commencement of the great Latter-day work; and that it still holds, in the experiences of men, that "a good name" is more "precious than great riches," hence this brief notice of President Grant's father, who bequeathed to his son a good and honorable name.

RACHEL R. GRANT

President Heber J. Grant's mother was a native of Hornerstown, New Jersey; born on March 7, 1821. Her father was Caleb Ivins and her mother Edith Ridgway. Both paternal and maternal branches of her family were highly respectable, and somewhat distinguished people, extending back into the noted Shreve family of England.

Early experiences of Rachel R. Ivins in the church greatly affect the position of President Grant, and hence are briefly referred to here. Rachel R. Ivins lost both of her parents in her childhood; her father when she was six years old, and her mother when she was nine. After this she made her home with one of her cousins, Joshua Wright of Trenton, New Jersey, a family of means and good standing in the community. While visiting the Ivins relatives in Hornerstown, Sister Rachel heard the elders of the New Dispensation preach, and while at first thinking that going to hear them preach on the Sabbath day was sinful—the family she lived with were of the Quaker persuasion—yet she persisted in attendance upon the meetings until conviction of the truth of what she heard followed, and despite some family opposition she was baptized and confirmed into membership of the church.

483With some of her Ivins cousins, who had also joined the church at Hornerstown, she went to Nauvoo, where the Ivins family built a home, and here made the acquaintance of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and became identified with the life of the city and its people, until after the martyrdom of the Prophet when most of the group returned to New Jersey.

The subject uppermost for discussion at the time of the arrival of the Ivins' at Nauvoo and during their sojourn in the city was, albeit subrosa, the new marriage system being introduced, marriage for eternity and also under very guarded circumstances allowing of a plurality of wives. This system of marriage was presented to Rachel R. Ivins with an intimation made that she become the wife of the Prophet. This proposition she rejected; and it is said with some spirit. After the Prophet's martyrdom at Carthage, and the settling of the question of the presidency of the church by the sustaining of the twelve apostles as such presidency, Brigham Young at their head, a number of the Ivins family, Sister Rachel accompanying them, returned to New Jersey. Later, however, in 1853, she accompanied her cousin, Dr. Israel Ivins—who had married her sister, Anna Lowrie Ivins—and his family to Salt Lake valley. With time for reflection and the operation of the spirit upon her mind, and agitated by the soul-stirring experiences through which the church was then passing, Rachel R. Ivins began to think more kindly of the proposition of marriage made to her in the interest of the Prophet at Nauvoo; so that by the time the family became settled in the Salt Lake valley, she was sealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith as his wife for eternity; but was married "for time" to Jedediah M. Grant, who had long been a friend to her family and the means of bringing some of them into the church. One year later her son, Heber J. Grant, was born; and nine days after his birth the father died.

484Under the principles of this new marriage system "for time and eternity," the offspring of these "for time" marriages are recognized as members of the families of those to whom the mothers are married eternally. Hence, though President Heber J. Grant as a fact, and by the "for time" marriage is the son of Jedediah M. Grant, in reality, now and eternally, he is and will be a member of the family of Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the New Dispensation, his son! And such he is now. So it comes to pass that with the close of the first century of organized existence of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and at the beginning of the second century of that existence, the church has a president who is the son of the Prophet of God who was the first president of the church one hundred years ago.

PRESIDENT GRANT'S ADMINISTRATION

President Grant's administration began under auspicious circumstances. The church had moved far along the line of her development. Her right and power of community existence had been settled in her favor. No one, humanly speaking, would ever again question her right to exist; nor again attempt to destroy her by physical violence. The church would not again be driven into a wilderness. There was no probability of further contest as to the civil and political rights of her membership, under the Constitution and laws of the United States, in which country her community existence and activities will chiefly center and obtain. The doctrine and general policy of the church was largely determined. The doctrines relating to the application of the gospel to the dead, was settled; and four temples had been erected in the mountains in which ordinance work for the dead was in progress, and two others were in course of construction. The membership of the church was sufficiently large and so placed and instructed as not only to give security of existence, but to give reasonable assurance, through its settled tithing system, of a revenue sufficient in volume and regularity of payment to do things, and somewhat in a large way. Her financial credit was unquestioned. All church indebtedness had been cancelled.

PRACTICAL TEMPERAMENT

Involuntarily, under these circumstances, the question arises, what will likely be the chief line of procedure in the administration of President Grant? Undoubtedly this will be determined not only by the status of the development of the church and her mission in the world, but somewhat also by the temperament and mind qualities of President Grant himself. It is no disparagement to say that President Grant is not a highly imaginative person; intellectually speculative, or a constructive theorist, or largely a doctrinaire. He is not likely to come to his people with such raphsodic visions as an Isaiah would bring: "Hear O heavens, and give ear O earth; for the Lord hath spoken! * * * I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. About it stood the seraphims—each one had six wings—and one cried to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory." Not so; but rather after the type of St. James, President Grant would likely say, and reason it out in this fashion: "What doth it profit, my brethren, though a man say he hath faith and have not works, can faith save him? If a brother or sister be naked, and destitute of daily food and one of you say unto them, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled, notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful to the body; what doth it profit? Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead being alone. * * * A man may say, thou hast faith and I have works. Show me thy faith without thy works, and I will show you my faith by my works. * * * Know, O vain man, that faith without works is dead."

486In defining religion, President Grant would likely say: "Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this: To visit the fatherless and widows in affliction, and keep himself unspotted from the world."

486"THREE WORD POLICY"—KEEP THE COMMANDMENTS

486Also, "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves." [^4]

486In a word, President Grant's message to his people and to his times, judged by the temperament of him, and the sternly practical nature of him, is emphatically and is likely to continue to be, practical; and will be reflected by his oft repeated admonition:

486"Latter-day Saints, keep the commandments of God." Or as officially and sacredly put in his notable discourse at the dedication of the Hawaiian temple (1919) and frequently repeated by him—

486"It is not the miraculous testimonies we may have, but it is keeping of the commandments of God, and living lives of absolute purity, not only in act, but in thought, that will count with the Lord." [^5]

486That thunderbolt utterance of his, of course, is all inclusive. What exists outside of it as duty of man or requirement of God? It takes on all the hue of—

486"What doth the Lord require of thee, but to deal justly and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God." [^6]

487Also "Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God and keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man." [^7]

487Also it is in strict harmony with the doctrine of the Master Lord, who, when closing his matchless sermon on the mount, said:

487"Whosoever heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them"—is to be counted a wise man, who buildeth his house upon a rock.

487"And everyone that heareth these sayings of mine and doeth them not," is to be accounted a foolish man who buildeth his house upon the sand. [^8]

487Also "If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments." [^9]

487Again: "If ye love me, keep my commandments." [^10]

487It is all of one piece, this. It is all climatic; and all inclusive, this inspired teaching of the servants of God. In the practice of essential things for eternal life, for justification of man before God. Who hath this, hath all; who hath it not, hath nothing.

487And is not this: "Keep the commandments of God," the one thing that the world needs? Is not the world tired of mouthings on formal and fine-spun ethics, and philosophical moral systems that "sever and divide a hair twixt north and northwest side?" In great spiritual and moral reforms and world movements have not men been moved thereto by terse and condensed thunderbolt utterances more than by quibbling refinements of thought and hesitating, long-delayed deduction until the force of realities disappears?

Of course, what is here contemplated is the keeping of the whole law of God, and the law of God wholly: The ten commandments; these as expounded by the Christ, and generalized by him into love of God and love of man, as the two great commandments; [^11] which include all else. Also the Sermon on the Mount, as embodying the moral and spiritual law of the gospel. No laying of undue emphasis upon one part of the law to the neglect of the other; no paying of tithes on mint and anise and cummin, and omitting the weightier matters of the law, "judgment, mercy and faith:" for these ought to be done, though not leaving the other undone. Neither is there to be straining at gnats and swallowing camels. [^12] The whole law of God is included in—"Keep the commandments." Not "which," [^13] but all; those written in the scriptures, and those yet to come.

THE CRUSADES

Peter the hermit depicted the sufferings of Christian pilgrims in the Holy Land at the hands of the Mohammedan Turks; Pope Urban II with fervent eloquence, pleaded the same cause, but not until the people found their thought and their emotion was expressed by the cry: "God wills it," was Europe shaken, and the crusades of the middle ages got started. And though after centuries of war between east and west the Holy Land was not permanently and fully won by the Christian hosts—and such was the purpose of the crusades at the first—still Europe was awakened and moved, and it is the testimony of all history that by that awakening and movement Europe made mighty strides towards a necessary enlargement of liberty, and for the people and the world—progress.

THE MOHAMMEDANS

On the part of Europe's antagonist in the issue—Mohammedans of western Asia—they, too, were moved by a rallying cry no less inspiring to them than the Christians' "God wills it." This their great thought of the unity of God, expressed for them in their formula:

488"There is but one God, and Mohammed is his prophet."

489This cardinal doctrine thus expressed carried them through the conquest of Arabia, all of North Africa and far into southern Europe. It gave to the Arabian prophet as large a following, well-nigh, as the followers of the Nazarene could boast; and during the invasion of Asia Minor by the successive Christian crusades, so strengthened their resistence that they made of that invasion a drawn contest between Christian west and Mohammedan east—between "cross and crescent."

THE PROTESTANT REVOLUTION

The Protestant formula of the 16th century—

489"By faith ye are saved; it is the gift of God;" though but expressing half a truth, led Europe to break the power of papal Rome, and mightily advanced the cause of freedom and of progress in the world.

489Other illustrations will occur to the reader; among them the crystallized determination of the American colonists in their resistence to British oppression—

489"No taxation without representation;" and later, as resistance intensified:

489"These colonies are and of right ought to be free and independent states."

489These formulas fired and united the souls of the colonists and gave to America and to the world the United States of America, the mightiest republic-empire of the world, and the foremost progressive nation of modern national life.

489The formula of the "Reformation" in the Church of Latter-day Saints for 1856 recurs:

489"Latter-day Saints, Do Your Duty."

The almost personification of this simple thought in the fiery nature of Jedediah M. Grant, made of it an impressive power, a moral force leading to an awakening of conscience, followed by confession of sins and an abandonment of them, a real reformation. If he, Jedediah M. Grant, by passing the lightening of that simple phrase, "Latter-day Saints, do your duty," through his soul, so vitalized it that forever after it became a living principle for the church, may it not be that his son, the prophet of God with whom the first century of the organized existence for the church closes and with which the second century begins—may it not be that he has found a simple formula—"Latter-day Saints, keep the commandments of God"—that is the need of the hour and of the period to which the church of the New Dispensation has arrived? and that if vitalized by the lightening of it passing through the intensified, inspired soul of a prophet of God, it will become the very power of God to our times, and to all times succeeding, increasing in splendor as ages pass, until it shall accomplish all the purposes of God in the salvation of man and the redemption of the world—the choicest gift of the first century of organized existence of the church to the second century and to all future times? Such things are possible out of these forces that seem so intangible at times. Speaking of the first Prophet of the New Dispensation, God said of him:

490"God ministered unto him—and gave unto him commandments which inspired him? [^14] And if the first Prophet of the New Dispensation was inspired by commandments of God to do his great work may not the church's present prophet and prophets be likewise inspired by this commandment—this all-embracing of commandments: "Keep ye the commandments of God."

THE PLEDGE OF LEADERSHIP

No better characterization of President Grant's policy of administration can be given than what may be regarded as his pledges to the church at the commencement of that administration. It is found in his address delivered at the special conference called and held for the ratification of his nomination to the office of president of the church by the apostles. This June 1st, 1919. At that time he said:

491"I shall do the best I can to fulfill every obligation that shall rest upon me as president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, to the full extent of my ability.

491I will ask no man to be more liberal with his means than I am with mine in proportion to what he possesses, for the advancement of God's kingdom.

491I will ask no man to observe the word of wisdom any more closely than I will observe it.

491I will ask no man to be more conscientious and prompt in the payment of his tithes and his offerings than I will be.

491I will ask no man to be more ready and willing to come early and to go late and to labor with full power of mind and body than I will labor, always in humility."

491All this has to do directly with "Keep the commandments of God," and the whole church is witness to the fact that such has been and is the course of President Grant; and no one doubts but it will be so to the end of his course. Here is true leadership: If thou wouldst have men do the things that ought to be done, then do thou the things thou wouldst have them to do. Under such leadership the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints should go far.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Quite full proceedings of the first day's service were published, including a verbatim report of the dedicatory prayer, in the Honolulu Star Bulletin of December, 6, 1919, accompanied by newspaper cuts of the leading visitors.
[^2] The exact cost of the Canadian temple—sometimes called the Alberta temple, was precisely $997,000. The cost of each of the seven temples erected by the church is given in Note at end of this chapter.
[^3] Reported by President Ivins, Deseret News, December 1, 1921.
[^4] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lxxxiv.
[^5] See this History, chapter xliii and xliv.
[^6] Malachi, iii:5 and Pearl of Great Price, writings of Joseph Smith, ii:36-39.
[^7] Ibid.
[^8] See Doctrine and Covenants, sec. cx:13-16.
[^9] For explanation of stakes of Zion see chapter lxii.
[^10] Chapters xviii, xix, xx, xxi.
[^11] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xcvii.
[^12] Doctrine and Covenants, sec. lviii:44, and context.
[^13] The Minutes of the April Conference at Nauvoo are published in Times and Seasons: also in the History of the Church, Period I, vol. vi. pp. 318-19.
[^14] Chapter lxix, this History.
