B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

492CHAPTER CLXXXV

492DEVELOPMENTS UNDER PRESIDENT GRANT'S ADMINISTRATION—DEDICATION OF TEMPLES—THE WHOLE OF AMERICA ZION

492ONE of the early events under the administration of President Heber J. Grant was the dedication of three temples.

THE HAWAIIAN TEMPLE

The first was the Hawaiian temple, dedicated 27th of November, 1919. In the company that went with President Grant to Hawaii were his first counselor, Anthon H. Lund; Rudger Clawson, president of the quorum of the twelve apostles, and Elder Stephen L. Richards of the membership of that quorum; C. W. Nibley, then presiding bishop of the church and Arthur Winter, secretary in the president's office. Sister Sarah J. Cannon, wife of the late President George Q. Cannon, was the honored guest of the Salt Lake party, and of the Hawaiian people. This to represent and do honor to the memory of President Cannon, who had been one of the group of elders who had visited the islands in 1850, and assisted in founding the mission that all through the years since then has been steadily maintained. The dedicatory prayer was read by President Grant at each of the five services held, and the dedication as many times repeated, President Grant each time reading the prayer, in order that the 1,239 people in attendance at the conference, chiefly natives of course, might all participate in the dedication. [^1]

THE TEMPLE IN CANADA

Four years later viz., August 26, 1923, President Grant dedicated the temple at Cardston, province of Alberta, in western Canada, amidst the great rejoicing of the people. An invitation to the non-members of the church in the vicinity to visit and pass through all parts of the temple previous to its dedication, enhanced the good feeling that had long prevailed among the people of the province of Alberta and the Latter-day Saints. Indeed, the same may be said as to the good feeling obtaining in the whole Dominion of Canada. The Cardston temple was erected at a cost of $3,000 less than $1,000,000; [^2] and is generally regarded as the most pretentious and the finest building in western Canada. Much of its grandeur is due to its commanding location, overlooking St. Mary's valley and surrounding country. The massive solidity of the structure is a witness in hewn stone of the permanence and solidity of the faith of the people who erected it.

TEMPLE SITE DEDICATED AT MESA, ARIZONA

On Monday, the 28th of November, 1921, the site of a temple to be erected at Mesa, Arizona, near the capital of the state, Phoenix, was selected and dedicated by Presidents Heber J. Grant, Anthony W. Ivins, and Elder Rudger Clawson of the council of the twelve. [^3]

A FREE TEMPLE SITE TENDERED BY CALIFORNIA

It was probably the news of this action in Arizona that prompted a company of real estate men in California, on the 15th of this same month to offer to the church a free temple site, provided the structure would be of a character to cost $500,000. The council of the twelve apostles at Salt Lake declined the tender of the free site on account of financial conditions then obtaining in the church as the reason for such action. It might also have been said that temples are not built to further real estate schemes or enterprises; temple locations and temple buildings stand apart from all such considerations. However, California will doubtless have her temple. While on the Pioneer journey at a campfire talk, President Young once said, discussing the development of the church in the west, he would not be surprised if in time some of the older brethren would come up from California, and petition the church leaders for a temple to be erected in that land.

DEDICATION OF THE ARIZONA TEMPLE

The temple at Mesa, Arizona, was completed in three years from the time its site was chosen and dedicated. Four days were required to complete the dedication services, so great were the crowds in attendance. President Grant, as was fitting, on each day read the dedicatory prayer, and from the large attendance of the general authorities of the church from Utah and leading brethren from Arizona and California, speakers were chosen who cheered and instructed the saints. The occasion was one of very great enjoyment for the saints occupying the south part of the church territory in the western United States. A temple in Arizona! It scarcely seemed credible! It was not yet eighty years since the Mormon Battalion made its march through this same desert-wilderness of Arizona, a little to the south of the temple site, en route to the Pacific, as ragamuffin a group of men, toil-worn and haggard, as ever made up a military unit of an army. Now a Latter-day Saint community, in a sovereign state of the Union, of 14,223, located in 46 towns and villages, grouped into four stakes of Zion, with common and high school buildings, church buildings, every-where society organized, a happy and contented people; and now also a completed and dedicated temple, in this same desert land, costing a million dollars—in the land through which the battalion marched less than eighty years ago! No, modern men! I address you; miracles have not ceased; they are only different.

TEMPLE LOCATIONS

The Arizona temple brought the full number of these sacred structures up to seven: Canada, Logan, Salt Lake City, Manti, St. George, Mesa, Arizona, and Hawaii—these are the temple places. It will doubtless be of interest to the reader-student to know something of the volume of work done in these buildings appointed of God for his people to erect, and chiefly for the performance of the ordinances necessary to the salvation of the dead; for without these ordinances the dead who have not received them, no more than the living, may be made perfect; for therein, that is to say, through the ordinances of the gospel, administered by the priesthood in these temples, "the power of godliness is manifest;" and without the ordinances thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, "the power of godliness is not manifested unto men in the flesh." [^4] This has been set forth somewhat in a previous chapter, [^5] and needs no further elaboration here.

NUMBER OF TEMPLE ORDINANCES, CENTURY I

A statement is herewith submitted setting forth the amount of work done in all the temples from the beginning until the opening of 1930, including the Nauvoo temple. The statement is furnished through the courtesy of Elder George F. Richards of the council of the apostles, and president of the Salt Lake temple, and Duncan M. McAllister, custodian of the temple records.

495"Totals of Temple Ordinances performed from the beginning, 1842, to the 31st of December, 1929, in all temples of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints:

495 Living Dead

495Baptisms —————————————— 6,973,367

495Endowments ————————————— 239,022 4,449,670

495Ordinations, Elders ————————- 3,310 1,822,119

495Sealing, Wives to Husbands ————— 119,263 640,977

495Children Sealed ——————————- 98,899 1,009,038

495Adoptions —————————————- 2,507 14,693

495Special Ordinances ————————— 14,771 6,205

495 ————— ——————

495 477,772 14,916,069

495(Lacking December, 1929, reports from three temples).

495Certified by Duncan M. McAllister,

495Records Custodian."

MINISTRY OF THE MAN OF TWO WORLDS

It will be noted from this report that the volume of ordinance work for the dead far exceeds the volume of work done for the living, not only as presented here as being done in the temples for the living, but I mean more than all that has been done for the living both inside and outside the temples from first to last. In round numbers fifteen millions of ordinances performed vicariously for the dead, looking to the completeness of their salvation; of which ordinances nearly seven millions are baptisms for the dead, the beautiful sign and token of acceptance of the Christ and of salvation through him.

When the keys of the priesthood were restored by the hand of Elijah, as predicted by Malachi and explained by Moroni to Joseph Smith in his early visions, [^6] it is said that the mission of this man who was translated from earth to heaven, without tasting death, and made competent to minister freely in both heaven and in earth—belonging to both—that when he should come his work would plant in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children would be turned to their fathers; and "if it were not so, the whole earth should be wasted at his [the Lord's] coming." [^7] Elijah came to the temple at Kirtland in 1836 to perform this part of his mission, to restore the keys of the priesthood that would have this turning effect of hearts of the children to the fathers, and hearts of the fathers to the children. [^8] And behold the beginning of the results of that mission in the statement of the work herewith submitted. Truly the hearts of the children have been turned to the fathers to assist in their salvation; and undoubtedly the hearts of the fathers have been equally turned in grateful appreciation of the work done for them by their children. If it had not been so, if there could be a world so lost to sympathy that having such an opportunity as is afforded by this doctrine and power to apply the same, restored by Elijah, to work for the salvation of the dead—it would be a world worthy to be wasted at the coming of an indignant Lord. But thanks to heaven, and the grace of God that still abides with man, the evidence is here supplied that there are those to be found in the earth who are responsive to the strong yet tender sympathy which unites the present generation with all past generations to bring to pass their salvation.

CHURCH EXPANSION: THE MISSIONS

Closely connected with this multiplication and dedication of temples in the recent years of the church has been the spreading abroad of the saints from the old centers of population in Utah and other regions of the Great Basin, the organization of new wards and stakes of Zion beyond these old limits; and the increase in the number of missions, the multiplication of chapels and stake houses, and the erection of permanent places of worship, chapels and churches in the missions. All this represents a church expansion that is truly marvelous. The church of the New Dispensation can no longer be thought upon as being limited by the boundary lines of Utah. The church in popular thought must now mean more than Utah. It is no longer "Utah and the Mormons" that used to be sung about as identical, but a larger and still expanding "Mormonism" that challenges our own admiration, and the attention of the world. At the present time the church has grown to the status of an empire-like mission in Europe, comprising eleven separate national missions. These are: the British Mission—England, Ireland, Scotland and Wales, considered as one; Swiss-German, Austrian-German, French, Norwegian, Danish, Swedish, Netherlands, Belgium, Czecho-Slovak, and South African Missions. Several of these missions are the results of reorganization or adjustment of their boundary lines during the administration of President Grant. The British Mission, for instance, was separated from being identical in title with the European Mission, so that now it is given a separate organization, and is known as the "British Mission," one of the missions grouped under the larger title of the European Mission. This change of organization was effected in the later months of 1928, Elder William A. Lund—son of the late President Anthon H. Lund—being made the president, and now (April, 1930) holds that position.

MISSIONS IN THE UNITED STATES

In the United States and Canada and Mexico, are eleven missions, not federated, however, as yet; but each existing separately, presided over by a president respectively, unified, however, in their work, these missions, by more or less frequent—at least annual—visits by members of the apostles' quorum, a custom instituted within President Grant's administration. In the Pacific Islands there are six missions; and in South America one—twenty-nine in all.

THE STAKES OF ZION

The stakes of Zion outside of Utah are—three in Canada, one in the republic of Mexico, two in California, one in Colorado, four in Arizona, five in Idaho, the rest of the 104 stakes are in Utah. [^9]

CHAPEL AND CHURCH BUILDING POLICY

In these stakes of Zion and in the respective ecclesiastical wards and branches comprising them, and in the missions, there have been multiplied, and more especially in late years, commodious churches and chapels and permanent mission headquarters, for the most part community houses providing sacred places for worship of Almighty God, and also for departmental educational work in the auxiliary organizations of the church; with halls and other quarters provided for the innocent amusements of the people of God. Combination or worship and religious educational instruction, have always characterized the church buildings of the Latter-day Saints. It was so in the first church building (1835) erected by the saints—the Kirtland temple—it is still standing, though not in possession of the church. From then until now the religious structures have been community houses, making provision for worship and religious education, and latterly provision also for the proper indoor amusements and recreations of the people.

WHAT MAY COME OF THIS EXPANSION

The multiplication of these chapels and churches—community centers of worship, spiritual education, and recreation, in all parts of the territory occupied by the church, may be regarded as especially characteristic of President Grant's administration, and very frequently he attends and personally dedicates these structures. Never before in the history of the church has such an extensive and far-flung church and chapel building program prevailed. Never before, of course, has the church been so numerically great and so scattered over an area so large as to require so many places of worship, and spiritual education, and recreation as now; and never before has the church been financially able to inaugurate and maintain such a church and chapel building program.

499The saints—the church, officers and members—may well rejoice in this multiplication of chapels and churches in the wards and stakes of Zion, and in the missions; for it is a growth-development unmistakable and substantial, worthy of all praise. Every chapel erected, however humble; every church builded, witnesses that a sacred altar is dedicated to the true and living God; a spiritual center created where the people may seek and find the truth as restored in the New Dispensation of the gospel of the Lord Jesus, and participate in the salvation that God offers anew to the world. Out of this spreading abroad and building program may grow some very important and far-reaching effects.

ZION: THE FOUNDING OF IT

Early in this first century of the organized existence of the church, the elders constituting the ministry were called upon to seek for and find and proclaim the place for the building of the city of Zion—a city of future glory, the "New Jerusalem" of the western world, America. Such a city is the subject of prophecy in the Book of Mormon, as we have seen and treated at length in Volume I of this History. [^10] These early elders of the church were directed to the place of the city of Zion in the western borders of the state of Missouri; purchased lands there designated, and consecrated the site for the future temple, and everywhere they went, and ever since they have proclaimed the place of the temple, and of the city of Zion, the habitat to be of "the pure in heart;" for "this is Zion," said the Lord in those early days of our first century of organized existence as a church—"this is Zion, the pure in heart." [^11] This that the world might know that "Zion" was a state of mind, a status of righteousness of her people, as well as a place—a city of holiness. All efforts to found Zion in those early days, as we have seen in previous chapters of this History, seem to have ended in failures. Enough importance in those early movements was not attached to the fact of obtaining a knowledge of the location of the city and temple that was to be the center of the future spiritual empire of the Christ in the western world; and it seems to have been largely overlooked that God in the midst of these revelations, designating the place of Zion, and directing his servants in relation thereto, had said concerning the "residue of the elders of my church," having reference to the elders not then immediately upon the sacred gathering place—"the time has not yet come for many years for them to receive their inheritance in this land." [^12]

EXILES FROM ZION

When, in the course of the troublous events almost immediately following upon those days, the saints were forcibly driven from the place designated as the center place of Zion, great sorrow prevailed; and the saints so driven felt that they were exiles from Zion. The efforts to "redeem Zion" by the gathering of more people from the eastern branches of the church, and joining with those already there, and moving into the land in sufficient force to regain the lands already theirs, and purchase more and hold them under the law against all the efforts of their enemies to dislodge them, this effort also ended in failure, and a few years later all the saints were driven from Missouri, the designated land of Zion; and they took refuge in Nauvoo—exiles from "Zion," and apparently far removed from it. It was at this point in the development of affairs, however, and but shortly before his death, that the Prophet lifted the veil and enlarged the view of the saints respecting "Zion."

501"THE WHOLE OF AMERICA ZION"

501Jackson county, Missouri, while the center place and will remain so forever, yet it was not the whole of Zion; there were the "stakes of Zion" also; the outlying portions and approaches to the center place; and these constituted parts of the Zion conception—Zion, the city; and the stakes of Zion contributary thereto. "The whole of America is Zion," proclaimed the prophet.

501"The whole of America is Zion itself, from north to south. * * * I have received instructions from the Lord that from henceforth whereever the elders of Israel shall build up churches and branches unto the Lord; throughout the states there shall be stakes of Zion. In the great cities, as Boston, New York, etc., there shall be stakes. It is a glorious proclamation, and I reserve it to the last, and designed it to be understood that this work shall commence after the washings, anointings, and endowments have been performed here [i.e. in Nauvoo]. * * * I shall leave my brethren to enlarge on this subject: it is my duty to teach the doctrine." [^13]

502The church received this declaration of their Prophet with great manifestations of joy. It put them at ease respecting Zion and her redemption. The center place was known, and would not be moved; but meantime, anywhere throughout America, north or south, and, of course, east or west, no matter where in America, "stakes of Zion" might be organized, and they would be within the land of Zion and part of the Zion scheme of development.

BRIGHAM YOUNG'S VIEW

Brigham Young was especially happy in his grasp of the idea of the Prophet:

502"It was a perfect sweep stakes [said he in his public discourse at this conference] when the Prophet called North and South America Zion. Let us go to and build the temple [i. e. at Nauvoo and then building] with all our might, that we may build up the kingdom when established and her cords lengthened. It is a perfect knockdown to the devil's kingdom. There is not a faithful elder (and I may say member), who cannot if he is humble and diligent, build up the church."

502Such the vision of the Prophet Joseph in relation to Zion and his instruction to the church less than three months previous to his death. Then came his martyrdom in June following, and the two years of struggle with untoward circumstances that developed in western Illinois, in the midst of which, however, the temple was completed and dedicated, and the contemplated endowments given to many of the elders and saints, previous to the evacuation of Nauvoo and the departure of the church for the west.

THE FORCED FLIGHT OF THE CHURCH TO THE WEST

It should be noted, however, and as we have previously seen in this History, [^14] that before leaving Illinois a letter was addressed to each of the governors of the respective states asking for asylum for the church now compelled to leave Illinois; and that to this appeal not even a reply was received except in the case of the governor of Arkansas, and in his case he urged removal to the west, where the church would be free from interference from neighbors, as the solution of their problems. There was nothing else left for the expatriated exiles to do, hence their trek to the west and settlement within the territory of a neighboring republic, Mexico. The district in which they had settled, however, soon became United States territory and again the fortunes of the Church of the Latter-day Saints became definitely connected with the fortunes of the great republic of the western world, if, indeed, it could be said that the ties which bound them together had ever been absolutely severed, notwithstanding the act of expatriation which sent the church of God into the wilderness. That wilderness, however, which became the habitat of the exiled saints, was still within the land of Zion, and therefore within the territory where the Prophet had declared it would be in accordance with the will of God for stakes of Zion to be established; and therefore with commendable zeal the saints gathered to this only place, under the circumstances, to which they could gather; and here they builded stakes of Zion, held the people together in community life, worked out their problems, raised an ensign to all the nations, sent out the message of God to them, built their temples, seven of them now, and contemplate building more, until the land of America shall be studded with them.

STAKE EXPANSION

And now, from this western center from which they have worked for three score years, an expansion is noted. Stakes of Zion, more than a hundred of them, have been established, in Canada, in Mexico, in California as well as in the states of the intermountain west. It requires no great stretch of vision to see also that stakes of Zion will soon be founded in the great central and southern valleys of the United States, where the missions of the church in those valleys are multiplying, converts increasing and chapels building. Chapels! So many altars to God—to the worship of the true and newly revealed God!

504Along the Atlantic seaboard, too, the mission expansion of the church is taking place; and the time must come when the vision of the first Prophet of the New Dispensation shall be realized of stakes of Zion being founded in New York, Boston and other centers of the east; for the Atlantic ocean washes the shores of Zion as well as the Pacific; and the lands bordering the eastern sea are as legitimate places for stakes of Zion as the lands bordering the Pacific.

504Meantime, under the present expansion policy of multiplying wards and branches of the church and building chapels and churches and temples everywhere, in all parts of the land of Zion, without regard to boundary lines of states or even of countries, and the multiplying of stakes—Zion is growing! "Though unobserved" the kingdom of the Christ has grown, until now the possibilities of it begin to appear in outline. Zion's cords are lengthening; her stakes are being strengthened. It is not difficult to foresee how and ere long from such a growing, and instructed a people as are being trained in these multiplying stakes of Zion, there will be those who will be available, when the time shall have fully come, to arise and redeem Zion under the terms of and in fulfillment of the righteous law of God.

NOTE

THE COST OF TEMPLES

The following information concerning the cost of the respective temples is supplied by the courtesy of the Presiding Bishop's Office:

504Salt Lake Temple: Many years ago an estimate was

504 made of the construction cost of the Salt Lake

504 temple which extended over a period of 50 years.

504 The cost of this building was then estimated at —— $4,000,000.00

504St. George Temple: The telegram from the

504 St. George temple says that in the opinion of the

504 brethren there the present replacement cost,

504 including grounds, water system, etc.,

504 would be approximately ——————————————- 1,000,000.00

504Logan Temple: The telegram from President Joseph R.

505 Shepherd, says that in his opinion, in the absence

505 of definite records, the cost was not less than——- 770,000.00

505Manti Temple: The telegram from President Lewis

505 Anderson says the building cost approximately———- 1,000,000.00

505Hawaiian Temple: The estimated cost of the Hawaiian

505 temple, part of which was paid out of sugar plan-

505 tation income is—————————————————— 256,000.00

505Alberta Temple: The expenditures connected with

505 the construction of the Alberta temple, as passed

505 through the Presiding Bishop's Office, show the

505 cost of the building to be ————————————- 997,000.00

505Arizona Temple: Payments on this temple were made

505through the Office of the Presiding Bishopric. The

505 records show that it cost ————————————— 767,000.00

505 ———————-

505 Total cost of temples —————————————- $8,790,000.00

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See this History, chapter lxxi.
[^2] This History, chapter lxix.
[^3] This History, chapter lxxxiv and footnote 12.
[^4] The subject is discussed in this History, chapter lxxxiv. Chapter lxix. Utah Educational Review, Professor Levi Edgar Young, etc., also in this History, chapter xci. Also Frontier Guardian, June 12, 1850.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, p. 25.
[^6] The epistle bears date of April 12, 1850, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 244.
[^7] See Educational Review for June, 1913, published under the auspices of The University of Utah. Also Deseret News of June 2, 1913, editorial.
[^8] See Report of Chancellor of the University (by now George Q. Cannon) and Board of Regents for 1884-5, page 6.
[^9] Dr. Park's Report to Chancellor and the Board of Regents, copied into and made part of the Report of the Chancellor and Regents to the Utah legislature, 1882-3, p. 14.
[^10] See this History, chapter clvii.
[^11] See the Enabling Act, published in proceedings Constitutional Convention (Utah), 1895, vol. i. pp. 4-8.
[^12] State School Superintendent's Biennial Report for 1898-1900.
[^13] pp. 256-286.
[^14] pp. 279-293.
