B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

506CHAPTER CLXXXVI

506EDUCATION IN UTAH, STATE AND CHURCH

506RECURRENCE to the departure of the church from Illinois to the west will bring into full view the interest of the Latter-day Saints in, and the preparations made for, the education of the youth of the people in the new home. From the first the Illinois-the United States-exiles were mindful of and made preparations for that. When the ship Brooklyn was made ready for her voyage from New York harbor to the western coast of Zion, San Francisco Bay, school books in large quantities were taken along, spelling books, histories, books on arithmetic, astronomy, grammar, geography, Hebrew grammars, charts, slates, are named as being in the collection for "the education of the youth;" while a gift of 179 volumes of Harper's Family Library was made to the colony by Mr. J. M. Van Cott, and was brought to the Pacific coast as a choice possession. [^1]

PREPARATIONS FOR EDUCATION IN THE NEW HOME

At Nauvoo it was part of the instruction of the council of the twelve apostles in making preparations for the great movement to the west that W. W. Phelps, an enthusiast on education, provide books to be taken to the new location for the education of the youth. [^2]

506In the "General Epistle" issued by the twelve in December, 1847, from Winter Quarters "to the Latter-day Saints throughout the earth-greeting," it was said on the subject of education:

"It is very desirable that all the saints should improve every opportunity of securing at least a copy of every valuable treatise on education—every book, map, chart, or diagram that may contain interesting, useful and attractive matter, to gain the attention of children and cause them to love to learn to read; and also every historical, mathematical, philosophical, geographical, geological, astronomical, scientific, practical, and all other variety of useful and interesting writings, maps, etc., to present to the general church recorder, when they shall arrive at their destination, from which important and interesting matter may be gleaned to compile the most valuable works on every science and subject, for the benefit of the rising generations." [^3]

507These suggestions were followed by the migrating saints, with the result that from the books, charts and maps hauled across the plains and over mountains by ox wagons, within the two years following, a free public library was opened in Salt Lake, in 1850.

Education HCSALT LAKE CITY'S FIRST SCHOOL

Education HCBefore the end of October, 1847, a school for children was begun within the fort at Salt Lake, newly built, taught by Mary Dilworth. In the General Epistle issued from Salt Lake City by the first presidency in the spring of 1849, they said: "There has been a large number of schools the past winter, in which the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, French, German, Tahitian and English languages have been taught successfully." What may be called the evident "penchant" of this Pioneer community for the classical languages (and the Tahitian) arose, as it did in their temple schools at Kirtland, from their preparations to teach the truths of their New Dispensation in all the world. For such was their mission to be, notwithstanding their present isolation from the world.

Education HCTHE UNIVERSITY OF DESERET

Education HCOne of the early acts by the legislature of the "State of Deseret," made up exclusively of Latter-day Saints, was an act for the creation of the "University of Deseret," the precursor of the present State University of Utah. This in February, 1850. That was "before Utah was Utah," as the act of congress creating the territory of Utah did not become a law until September of that year. This first institution of higher education was given a chancellor and a board of twelve regents. [^4] Orson Spencer, a graduate of the Theological Seminary at Hamilton, state of New York, was made chancellor. The chancellor and regents held their first meeting on the 13th of March, 1850, at which a committee of three was appointed, in connection with the governor, to select a site for a university building, and also location for buildings for primary schools. [^5] In reporting this action of the legislature the third general epistle of the presidency of the church from Salt Lake City (1850) said:

Education HC508"The general assembly of 'Deseret' have held an adjourned session, at intervals, through the winter, and transacted much important business. * * * They have also chartered a state university on the most liberal principles, to be located at Great Salt Lake City, with branches throughout the state, if wanted; and appropriated for its benefit $5,000 per annum for twenty years out of the public treasury, all of which will be under the supervision, direction and control of a chancellor, twelve regents, secretary and treasurer who will no doubt publish their intention with this mail." [^6]

Education HC508It is recognized, of course, that these early efforts at the establishment of an institution of higher education but represented the aspirations of the part of the community that could appreciate that sort of thing, the college people among them, of whom there was an unusual number for a frontier community.

Education HC508Professor Levi Edgar Young, of the department of history at the University of Utah enumerates as among the men of high culture and early arrivals in Salt Lake valley:—

Education HC"Willard Richards, who was a physician, a theologian and a journalist; Dr. John M. Bernhisel, a graduate of the University of Pennsylvania; Orson Pratt, who in the estimation of Redfield Proctor, was one of the four great astronomers of his time. He was a mathematician and a scholar of the classic languages. Orson Spencer, the first chancellor of the University of Deseret, was graduated from the Theological Seminiary at Hamilton, New York, having prepared himself for his higher degree at Lenox Academy and Union College, in the state of New York; Jesse W. Fox, educated at the Jefferson County Seminary, New York, made mathematics his major, and in the settlement of Utah, surveyed the sites of Salt Lake City, Provo, Ogden, Manti, Fillmore, and Logan. Albert Carrington was an assistant on the United States Exploration and Survey, under the direction of Howard Stansbury, captain of the Corps of Topographical Engineers, United States Army, in 1850-52. Hosea Stout, Zerubbabel Snow, W. W. Phelps, James Ferguson, Daniel H. Wells, William Clayton, John Taylor, * * * Aaron Farr, Samuel W. Richards, Julian Moses, were all professional men, and took a leading part in building the schools and seminaries of Utah in its early days." [^7]

Education HC509But the founding of a University among so small a people, in the midst of pioneer conditions, with all the problems of maintaining individual and community existence, pressing upon them, rendered impracticable, for a long time, the realization of those aspirations however praiseworthy it was for the community to entertain them. Primary education, however, was their first community need rather than the unattainable higher educational institution; and this their experience soon taught them.

Education HC509On the second Monday in November, 1850, the University was for the first time opened for the reception of students, Dr. Cyrus Collins was placed in charge as instructor, but within the year he was succeeded by Professor Orson Spencer, and he by W. W. Phelps. "Owing, however, to the immature condition of its finances, as well as to its limited patronage," says the chancellor and board of regents for the year 1884-5, "notwithstanding it had been made a free school institution, the department of instruction was soon discontinued, the university continuing for many years in abeyance and having but a nominal existence, until 1867." Then a department of instruction was organized under the name of the "University" but was conducted chiefly as a commercial college under the supervision of Mr. D. O. Calder. It so continued for two years, 1869.

Education HCTHE COMING OF DOCTOR PARK

Education HCThen came Dr. John Park, when the university in name only until then was more fully organized "as an institution for scientific normal and classic instruction." [^8] Dr. Park's clear conception of the needs of the institution now placed under his charge may be learned from his report to the chancellor and board of regents made on conditions existing in 1882-3.

Education HC510"No institution that contemplates such a broad field of instruction and usefulness as a university can be successfully carried on without ample and permanent means of support. Such an institution should be placed beyond the inimical influence of personal whim, popular gossip, and the uncertainty of fickle, or temporary patronage. The university needs a sure support, and its patronage should be well established. Both of these conditions are essential to its purpose and prosperity. No hand to mouth existence will ever create confidence in the institution or enable it to carry out successfully any plans for thorough instruction." [^9]

Education HC510Undoubtedly it was Dr. John R. Park who breathed into the mere name, and a mere community aspiration for a university, the breath of its life.

Education HCLIMITATIONS OF UTAH'S EARLY SCHOOL SYSTEM

Education HCThe school system of early Utah, of course, suffered from the limitations of pioneer conditions which obtained. From the isolation of the respective communities imposed by the long distances separating them both from each other and also from the more populous centers of east and west; from the imperfect means of communication and slow methods of travel; from the imperfect territorial system of government enforced upon the people of Utah far beyond any reasonable time for its continuance—forty years at least beyond such time; for there can be no question but that Utah, by 1856, was prepared for and deserved statehood by reason of her population, wealth, real and potential, and by her heroism in making conquest of a desert wilderness and proved ability for self-government. But statehood was withheld until 1896! Those "forty years" represented a journey in the wilderness truly. Not a wilderness alone of desert wastes and comparative isolation from more favored sections of the great republic, but a wilderness of injustice and unfair treatment of a community worthy of, and capable of, the management of their own affairs. Meantime, there was forced upon them an un-American system of government by which political adventurers not of the local community, and without either sympathy or interest with it, were given the chief offices of the local government, provoking conflicts which hindered progress, including progress in the educational interests of the "Mormon" state by which, however, is meant no more than the state which for the period mentioned happened to be the habitat of the Latter-day Saints, who formed the overwhelming majority of the state's population.

Education HCTHE HALTING OF HIGHER EDUCATION

Education HCIn this connection, perhaps, the reader will recall the account of the controversy between the federal-appointed governor of Utah, Eli H. Murray, and the people-elected legislature of Utah over the appropriation for completing the University Building upon Union Square granted by the corporation of Salt Lake City for that purpose; and how the governor appointed from Kentucky held up the appropriation of the people-elected legislature appropriating money of the people, paid in taxes, by refusing to sign the appropriation bill that provided money for the building; hoping thereby to enforce his claimed right to make the appointment of the chancellor and board of regents, instead of accepting the appointment of these officers as provided by the local territorial law, by the legislature; and how the situation was cleared up for the university building by private "Mormon" citizens contributing the necessary funds to proceed with the work of the building. [^10]

Education HC512True, as stated in the citation given below, the legal right of the governor to make the appointment of officers in question was finally sustained by the supreme court of the United States, yet that does not square the action of the federal-appointed governor from Kentucky with the development of education in Utah; and only emphasizes the infamy of the territorial system of government when prolonged beyond the very primitive conditions of a community's life.

Education HC512During that territorial period the public lands usually granted to states for educational purposes were not made available in Utah and not until statehood was achieved was the general government's bounty for educational purposes in public land grants, realized in Utah. [^11]

Education HCPROGRESS DESPITE HANDICAPS

Education HCNotwithstanding these handicaps, however, Utah through the interest of her people in education, and the liberal appropriations of her legislatures, all through the territorial period and since, statehood, and all the while with a majority of "Mormon" members in those legislatures, and therefore Latter-day Saint responsibility for the legislation enacted, good or bad, there has been developed in Utah a system of free, compulsory, secular state education, from kindergarten through grade schools, junior high schools, high schools and the state university, of which Utah may be justly proud, and which with conditions of population and wealth considered, ranks high with the foremost states of the American Union.

Education HCAll this, of course, has been by means of slow development from most primitive conditions of independent communities of small means, lacking competent professional teachers, served sometimes, in fact, by those who were but little in advance of those whom they taught, and this sometimes in schools intermittently held and for but a few months of the year. The means relied upon for support at first was tuitions. There was nothing which gave unity to educational effort. The coming of state taxation for school support was slowly developed. The merging of small districts into larger units and to county units was slower still. Yet those who scoff at the early efforts and slow development of Utah's educational interests, and especially those who assume that practically nothing worth while was done in this direction until the favorable legislation and the forward movement because of it in 1890, do Utah's people previous to that time a great injustice. On this head Professor William Roylance of the University of Utah, and at the time—1898-1900—writing as the assistant state superintendent of public instruction, said:

Education HC513"The remark is often heard that our present school system—or free school system—was organized in 1890. It is even said, and, apparently quite widely believed, that Utah had no schools to speak of until 1890. No remark could be more unjust to the brave, hardy and progressive men and women who settled and built this state. Our schools began when Utah began, and they have grown as Utah has grown. Many of the ablest men and women of today received their education in the public schools, before 1890, and their words and deeds alone are sufficient to indicate the kind of training that was given them. 1890 was, it is true, an important epoch in the history of education in Utah; but no one at all acquainted with the previous history of Utah could take this data as that of their beginning. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine how education in Utah could have begun at that time. It would be like a plant bursting at once into full bloom, without having passed through the natural states of growth. From the facts given above—and many others might be presented—it is plain that education in Utah has been no exception to the universal laws of growth; that it has passed through all the natural stages, and is therefore not hothouse exotic, and that we are indebted to the early settlers of the country for the greater part of the excellent educational advantages which we now enjoy." [^12]

Education HC513Professor Roylance was not a "Mormon."

Education HCLet it be said in connection with this Utah progress in educational development, that the stable non-"Mormon" population of the state of Utah are entitled to credit for a full proportionate share of it, since the taxation of their wealth with the taxation of the "Mormon" wealth has made this development possible. And, moreover, coming into the state through the years from time to time and from older settled parts of the republic and larger centers of population and more highly developed systems of education, at the time, their voiced contrasts and complaints against the less developed educational system of the newer and less favored state, led to stimulation of effort among the people until the present desirable and praisworthy conditions of state education has obtained in Utah.

Education HC514In support of all this the reader may find complete authorization in the state published Second Report of the State Bureau of Immigration, Labor and Statistics, 1913-1914. [^13] Also in the same report for 1917. [^14] The first report is the most complete and gives authorization for all the claimed interest that the people of Utah—largely a Latter-day Saint community—have manifested in the development of a splendid system of state education. In the matter of high school development in the second state document quoted above, Professor Mosiah Hall—state high school inspector (1917)—says for instance of the growth of high schools in the state:

Education HC514"In a little more than a decade the high schools have increased from five small schools, with a total enrollment of 1,000 to 45 flourishing institutions, with an enrollment of approximately 10,000 students. There are four counties only in the state where public high schools are not yet established, and in three of these secondary education is therefore not hot house exotic, and that we are indebted to the early school education is available. Probably no other state in the Union can show during the same time a greater ratio of growth. It seems to indicate that the people of this state are abreast of the times, and in common with the people in other states believe in high school movement."

Education HCTHE CHURCH AND EDUCATION

Education HCIt is, however, with education as it is related to the church that I am here most concerned, and as it affects the church, without respect of particular state or country boundary lines.

Education HC515It has always been an ideal of the Latter-day Saint leaders and the church members themselves, instructed by those leaders, that education should include daily religious training as well as intellectual, physical and industrial training. But also there has been a recognition of the extreme difficulty of introducing into state-supported schools religious instruction, lest it become sectarian in its character, a thing utterly undesirable in a community or state or nation where all religions have equal standing before the law, where sectarian variations are so complex a thing as in the United States, and where people are so sensitive respecting particular forms of creed and worship. The only solution that presents itself under such circumstances is to provide purely secularized systems of education for state-supported schools—schools supported by taxation of all the people—leaving religious instruction to be imparted by other agencies. These may be provided by the churches establishing separate schools from those of the state, sustained each by its respective denomination; others may regard the churches and their agencies of Sunday Schools, special prayer meetings, or other religious meetings, and especially the home, as a center of religious, moral, and spiritual influence and life, as being all-sufficient for religious instruction.

Education HC515With some earnest religionists, however, this does not provide all the opportunity for religious instruction for the youth that is desirable. Running parallel with secular, intellectual, physical, and industrial education should also be, in their view, daily religious instruction, religious training; and hence church schools in the land supported by religious denominations respectively establishing them.

Education HCCHURCH SCHOOLS

Education HCSuch is the intensity of religious conviction with the Latter-day Saints and such their desire to have daily religious instruction run parallel with secular instruction that they assumed the added burden of financially sustaining church schools under their own church leadership, which would bring to them the desired advantage of religious instruction and training with secular education. This led to a more or less elaborate church school system—combining religious and secular instruction within the territory occupied largely by the church. To create and supervise this educational system there was appointed a General Church Board of Education, having jurisdiction over the whole movement; also in each stake of Zion is appointed a Stake Board of Education to supervise the interests of church education in the respective stakes.

Education HCTHE CHURCH ACADEMIES

Education HCIt was apparent from the first by those at all familiar with the expense and other difficulties of maintaining an educational system, that the church could not assume the full responsibility of maintaining a complete secular educational system through kindergarten work, primary or grammar schools, high schools and university; and hence the Latter-day Saints did not attempt such an undertaking. What they strove to do, however, was to use such auxiliary organizations as met on the week days, the primary associations and religion classes of the church, to so adjust their work as to coordinate it—as to time—with the common schools that each day would bring to Latter-day Saint pupils, who desired it, or whose parents desired it, religious exercises constituting suitable religious training. In all this, it should be said, nothing was compulsory. In a very few cases where teachers in the grade schools were Latter-day Saints, and entirely willing and agreeable to the undertaking, after the dismissal of the school for the day, the pupils willing to stay for it, received thirty minutes of religious instruction. But as this procedure in some instances met with criticism and objection, it was abandoned and all religious classes and exercises were conducted separate from the grade schools and their teachers; and the church so far as it aimed at establishing church schools, confined its efforts to the founding of schools of the high school grade under the title of "stake academies."

Education HCTEACHER TRAINING SCHOOLS

Education HCThe matter of especially trained teachers for the work contemplated in the church school system was a matter of capital importance; and one which was carefully provided for by the church leaders in educational affairs. As early as 1875 President Brigham Young founded the Brigham Young Academy, since and now (1930), the Brigham Young University, at Provo, Utah; and two years later the Brigham Young College in Logan, viz., in 1877. The institutions, of course, by their deeds of trust reflected the great Pioneer's ideas of education. Provision was made, we may say, of course, for the usual intellectual and cultural subjects of such institutions; and also for courses in industrial work and an elaborate course of instruction in religion. These two institutions more especially became the training schools for teachers of the church schools which were to follow.

Education HC517It should be said in this connection that the courses offered for this purpose in these institutions were worthy of all praise. In the first, the Brigham Young University, provided a four years course leading to a degree of Bachelor of Arts and was designed to prepare teachers for high school work.

Education HC517A two years normal course was also given by the Brigham Young University and also by the Brigham Young College at Logan, designed for teachers of elementary schools.

Education HCThe church activities in the founding of schools called academies, but doing chiefly work of high school grade, and a number of seminaries doing elementary work was intense in all the intermountain territory, extending from Alberta, Canada, through its Idaho, Utah and Arizona settlements to several points in northern Mexico. In all, nineteen acadamies and eight seminaries and the three institutions, Brigham Young University at Provo, the Brigham Young College at Logan and the L. D. S. University at Salt Lake City, though the last, notwithstanding its name, never rose above the commercial college, and junior college grade. This was the status of the church school system according to the report of it in June, 1913, when the system had reached its highest development. [^15]

Education HCDEVELOPMENT OF HIGH SCHOOLS

Education HCMeantime, however, high schools in the states where this church system had arisen, rapidly increased in number and developed without regard to the existence of the church acadamies; and since the church schools—academies—or junior colleges, necessarily had to be sustained, in part at least by payment of tuitions and personal bequests from favorably disposed patrons, and church appropriations, and the state high schools were sustained by the same communities by taxation, the burdens of the people for high school education were very great. As secular education in the church academies filled the larger volume of the activities therein, there was much duplication; and as the church had never assumed the responsibility for secular education, though it had established many schools in which such education was given, it was recognized on the other hand that the state was definitely responsible for secular education; and therefore in this matter of duplication, if the people were to be relieved of the burden, then it must be the church schools that must vacate the field since the state could not vacate it. It was wisely determined that the church would retire from the field of secular education and transfer the church academies to the public school system, charging only nominal prices for their school buildings.

THE CHURCH SEMINARY SYSTEM OF RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION

There was to be no abandonment, however, on the part of the church, in providing daily religious instruction in connection with secular education. A system of schools, teaching religious subjects exclusively, were to take the place of the acadamies and to be known chiefly as seminaries, and under the supervision of the same general church and stake boards of education. This transfer from academies to seminaries, however, is being accomplished gradually. The first seminary to be founded and this in the nature of an experiment, was at the Granite Stake High School in the vicinity of Salt Lake City. Of course, the state school board and other authorities in the Granite district were favorable to the establishment of such an institution. The building was erected near the Granite High School for convenience of pupil attendance, and its doors opened in September, 1912. From the first it proved successful and out of this experience came the founding of other seminaries that were generally so successful that the conviction became-established that the wiser plan for getting religious instruction imparted in connection with daily secular education would be by providing for such week-day religious instruction solely through seminaries, rather than by multiplying church academies, with their duplication of secular high school courses.

519The necessary corollary to this conclusion was the abandonment of the academies already founded by transferring them to high school districts. This process of transfer is now going on; and where the academies are not transformed into state high schools, they are raised in grade to junior colleges; and these in time, under the present policy, will doubtless become state schools.

The first church academy transferred to the state was the Summit Academy (Utah) in 1913; and the last the Big Horn Academy (Wyoming) in 1924. The idea follows of closing even the junior colleges of the church and establishing seminaries adjacent to the state institutions. The first junior church college closed was the Brigham Young College at Logan, and the former week-day religious instruction given there is transferred to seminaries stationed at the Logan High School, and the Utah Agricultural College. Undoubtedly such transfers will continue to go on until the church seminary system will entirely supplant the church academy and junior college system, with all its duplication of secular education. Indeed, such may now (1930) be regarded as the settled policy of the church, that is to say, the church will as rapidly as possible withdraw from the field of secular education and devote the means the church can afford to the department of education to the development of the seminary system with the idea that eventually a seminary will be established at every high school, college and university where the young people of the church attend in sufficiently large numbers to warrant the founding of such institutions for imparting week-day religious instruction, accompanying secular education.

PRESENT OUTLINE POLICY OF THE CHURCH FOR THE RELIGIOUS EDUCATION OF ITS YOUTH

As matters now stand with the church respecting this effort to provide religious instruction and training in connection with the daily secular education, the plan is: First, the primary organization, long established as a church auxiliary organization meeting from the first on a week day for the religious instruction and training of children, to be used for religious instruction for elementary state school children of Latter-day Saint parentage from the kindergarten through all the grades to the sixth. Then, second, provide for religious instruction, through junior and senior seminaries, taking all the grades beginning with the seventh, through all the junior and senior high schools; continuing into the colleges and universities, through the institutes. [^16]

INSTITUTES

The institutes, of course, are but "seminaries" of higher grade. Already institutes have been inaugurated at Moscow, University of Idaho (the first to be established); at Logan, to serve the Utah Agricultural College students; at the southern branch of the University of Idaho at Pocatello. President Heber J. Grant dedicated the building in which the institute is housed on the 27th of October, 1929. A lot on which to erect an institute building has been purchased at the Arizona State Teachers College, at Flagstaff. Invitations to establish institutes have come from the University of Wyoming, at Laramie, and from the University of Arizona, at Tucson.

521The institutes are the latest development of the Latter-day Saint church system of religious education, designed to couple religious influence and religious knowledge and training with secular education.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] William C. Bryant.
[^2] The Rochester (N. Y.) Herald, September 22, 1923.
[^3] This whole subject is considered at length in the Deseret News, of January 31st, 1928, in an article issued from the Historian's Office of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints; see also the Quincy Herald-Whig, of Jan. 22, 1928, where a somewhat sensational writeup is given of the alleged "discovery."
[^4] The subject is discussed in this History, chapter lxxxiv. Chapter lxix. Utah Educational Review, Professor Levi Edgar Young, etc., also in this History, chapter xci. Also Frontier Guardian, June 12, 1850.
[^5] History of Brigham Young, Ms., 1850, p. 25.
[^6] The epistle bears date of April 12, 1850, Millennial Star, vol. xii, p. 244.
[^7] See Educational Review for June, 1913, published under the auspices of The University of Utah. Also Deseret News of June 2, 1913, editorial.
[^8] See Report of Chancellor of the University (by now George Q. Cannon) and Board of Regents for 1884-5, page 6.
[^9] Dr. Park's Report to Chancellor and the Board of Regents, copied into and made part of the Report of the Chancellor and Regents to the Utah legislature, 1882-3, p. 14.
[^10] See this History, chapter clvii.
[^11] See the Enabling Act, published in proceedings Constitutional Convention (Utah), 1895, vol. i. pp. 4-8.
[^12] State School Superintendent's Biennial Report for 1898-1900.
[^13] pp. 256-286.
[^14] pp. 279-293.
[^15] See article in Deseret News, of June 5th, 1913.
[^16] Letter from commissioner of education (L. D. S. Church) to the author, date of Dec. 30>, 1929.
