B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

522CHAPTER CLXXXVII

522OTHER INCIDENTS IN PRESIDENT GRANT'S ADMINISTRATION

522OTHER incidents in President Grant's administration have to do with anniversaries.

I. THE VISION

Among these is the rather notable celebration of the one hundredth anniversary of Joseph Smith's First Vision. This was made the feature of the April conference of 1920, and the event was celebrated by special services at Salt Lake City and throughout the church. Evan Stephens' cantata "The Vision," especially prepared for the occasion, was rendered in a crowded tabernacle at Salt Lake City. Throughout there was a general time of rejoicing had in the stakes of Zion and in the missions of the world.

II. REVEALED EXISTENCE OF THE BOOK OF MORMON

On the centennial anniversary of the revealed existence of the plates of the Book of Mormon by the Angel Moroni, a celebration by the Eastern States Mission was held at the Joseph Smith farm near Palmyra, New York, and at the Hill Cumorah, continuing through three days, from and including September 21st to the 23rd, 1923. President and Sister Grant honored the occasion by their presence; as did Elder Rudger Clawson, president of the apostles' quorum, and Elders Joseph Fielding Smith and James E. Talmage, members of the same quorum. President John H. Taylor of the Northern States Mission and wife (eldest daughter of President Grant) were also present. The exercises throughout the conference were largely reminiscent of the events which revealed the existence of the Book of Mormon. All that happened in those events was worked up into brief written epochs and read by missionaries appointed from various parts of the mission. After which these epochs were the subjects talked to by those addressing the meeting in which such respective epochs were introduced. Three meetings were held each day; those held in the morning and afternoon alternating between the Hill Cumorah and the Sacred Grove; the evening meetings being held in a large assembly tent set up adjacent to the Smith Farm Home. The third day of the celebration fell upon Sunday. The forenoon meeting was held Sunday morning in the Sacred Grove, where the holy sacrament was administered to the large assembly of saints and elders of the mission. It was an unusual meeting and the Spirit of God was richly poured out upon the people in this "First God's Temple" of the New Dispensation, where Joseph Smith received his first great vision of God the Father and the Son! Fittingly was it written on the programs of the services—

523"The groves were God's first temples. Ere man learned To hew the shaft and lay the architrave, And spread the roof above them—ere he framed The lofty vault together and rolled back The sound of anthems; in the darkling wood, Amidst the cool and silence, he knelt down And offered to the Mightiest, solemn thanks And supplication." [^1]

523Referring to Joseph Smith's coming to this one of "God's First Temples," "the Sacred Grove," the present writer ventured to say on that same program:

523And now came one to this grove, as to a solemn temple, To submit his mind and his will to God— Man's highest act of worship—self-surrender.

The afternoon session that day was held on the crowning summit of Cumorah; and in the evening in the tent. Throughout it was a successful and long to be remembered event by those in attendance. Several of the great New York daily papers had expressed the intention to the president of the Eastern States Mission to send staff reporters and photographers to write up illustrated articles of the proceedings, but unfortunately that was the week during which the employees of the respective great daily papers of the metropolis went on a strike and no papers were published by them except in small four page numbers; hence the Cumorah gathering failed of this anticipated publicity. The local papers in the surrounding counties, however, for the most part, gave fair and rather full representations of the proceedings. The editor of the Rochester (New York) Herald, who himself was at the conference, wrote up a graphic account of several of the meetings in the course of which at one point he said:

AN UNFOLDING GRAPHIC PANORAMA

"Unfolding like some graphic panorama of the past, epic in implications and dramatic in content, the story of an ancient civilization that peopled the plains and hills in this vicinity was the chief topic of discussion before the Centennial Conference of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints today. Reaching so far back into the dim yesterdays of history, back to days more than 2,500 years ago, this story came with a strange emphasis in the very places where its climaxes and denouements are supposed to have been reached. The narrative is the very basis of Mormon theology and belief and leads directly up to the revelation given through Joseph Smith of the foundations of the Mormon church."

524Again:

THE SIMPLICITY OF A NORSE SAGA

"The speakers at the conference told the story with the simplicity and directness of a Norse Saga. As point after point of the drama of the lost tribes, of their rise to a great civilization and of their final downfall in the bitterness of war was related, those not conversant with the tale were gripped and fascinated by the strangeness of the recital, and when a speaker dramatically pointed to the earth and mentioned that upon the very spot where he stood some of the epic events might have taken place, there was a decided thrill to being there." [^2]

It was estimated that during the conference from two to three thousand people were in attendance from first to last, beside the one hundred and fifty or one hundred and sixty missionaries who attended. These missionaries had come from all parts of the mission then comprising twelve states; all the six New England states and from all parts of New York, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland and West Virginia. The elders had come on foot through these states preaching by the way. They had carried in full and prominent view a blue pennant on which was inscribed in white letters the word Cumorah, announcing the objective of their march, advertising their presence and message as they journeyed through the respective states. The lady missionaries of course came to the conference by train or with their friends in automobiles.

III. DELIVERANCE OF THE GOLD PLATES TO JOSEPH SMITH

Four years later, President Grant and part of the Eastern States missionaries with their mission president, Judge Henry H. Rolapp, Charles H. Hart, president of the Canadian Mission, and other leading brethren and sisters of the church, attended the one hundredth anniversary of the deliverance of the gold plates of the Book of Mormon to Joseph Smith for translation. Again meetings were held at Cumorah and at the Sacred Grove, and again with great rejoicing, in the advent of this anniversary of so important an incident in the New Dispensation movements.

CHURCH LAND PURCHASES IN THE VICINITY OF CUMORAH

In connection with these celebration in the Palmyra vicinity, in the Sacred Grove at the Smith Farm and on the crowned heights of Cumorah, it is proper to mention the purchase of the several parcels of land under the administration of President Grant, which gave to the church possession of the Hill Cumorah and a large acreage immediately surrounding it. These were first, the purchase of the Inglis farm of ninety-six acres lying on both sides of the Canadaigua-Palmyral road, running along the western edge and extending about one-third the distance up the hill Cumorah; a second purchase of land adjoining this, made on the 17th of February, 1928, from the heirs of Pliny T. Sexton, known as the Mormon Hill Farm, brought into the possession of the church the whole of the Hill Cumorah, and a surounding acreage (including the Inglis purchase) of 283 acres.

526Sometime previous to this, namely, on September 26, 1926, the church purchased of Joseph H. Manges and wife what was known as the "Peter Whitmer Farm," the old homestead of the Whitmers, Fayette, Seneca county, N. Y., where the "Church of Christ in these last days" was "regularly organized—in the fourth month, and on the sixth day of the month which is called April," 1830. On the farm so purchased stands a substantial and large farm house, which if not the very house in which the church was organized, is at least a house of about that period, and as such is an object of great interest. The question of identity, however, has not yet been fully determined.

EARLY LANDMARKS NOW OWNED BY THE CHURCH

These several late purchases brought into the possession of the church all the old landmarks of the early days of the church in the eastern states, where that church was cradled. These comprise:

526The old Mack Farm in the state of Vermont, the birthplace of the Prophet of the New Dispensation;

526The Smith Farm near Palmyra, being the old homestead of the Smith family, cleared by them from the primeval forest, and the scenes of Joseph Smith's early experiences in visions and revelations;

526The Hill Cumorah, place of concealment of the Nephite Record, the sacred gold plates of the Book of Mormon, and the place of the four annual visits of the Prophet and the Angel Moroni, for the instruction of the Prophet relative to the work to be brought forth in the last days;

527The Peter Whitmer Farm where the church was organized—cradle place of the church of the New Dispensation.

527

A SACRILEGIOUS ACT

Somewhat connected with this idea of Latter-day Saint sacred places, or shrines, was perpetrated a sacrilege, no less, by the leaders of what is known as the "Reorganized Church of Latter-day Saints," or "Josephite church;" and more especially by Mr. Fred M. Smith, president of the aforesaid "church," and grandson of the Prophet Joseph Smith. This in the month of January, 1928, and by an alleged "inspired search" through six days with the aid of "surveyors and engineers," which led to an alleged "discovery" of the burial place of his grandfather, Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and his grand uncle, Hyrum Smith. Fred M. Smith was announced in the press reports to the St. Louis Post Dispatch, making known his "discovery," as saying: "That this sets at rest forever those many rumors we have heard about the spiriting away of these remains." Or as another paper (The Quincy Herald Whig) states the matter, "The officials of the Reorganized Church say they have found it necessary to repudiate statements emanating from the Utah branch of the church that the bodies were in Utah."

527The burial of the Prophets, Joseph and Hyrum Smith, and the removal of their bodies to the banks of the Mississippi where they rested in peace until "discovered" and sacrilegiously disturbed by Mr. Fred M. Smith, in January, 1928, is briefly chronicled in this History, Chapter lviii and footnote 12, where a full account of the burial is promised, and is here given:

THE ACCOUNT OF THE BURIAL OF JOSEPH AND HYRUM SMITH

(The time is Thursday, June 29th, 1844): "At 8 a. m. the room was thrown open for the saints to view the bodies of their martyred Prophet and Patriarch, * * * from 8 a. m. to 5 p. m., at which hour a request was made that the Mansion should be cleared, so that the families could take their farewell look at the remains.

528The coffins were then taken out of the boxes into the little bedroom in the northeast corner of the Mansion, and there concealed and the door locked. Bags of sand were then placed in each end of the boxes, which were then nailed up, and a mock funeral took place, the boxes being put into a hearse and driven to the graveyard by William D. Huntington, and there deposited in a grave with the usual ceremonies.

528This was done to prevent the enemies of the martyred Prophet and Patriarch getting possession of the bodies, as they had threatened they would do. * * *

528About midnight the coffins containing the bodies were taken from the Mansion by Dimick B. Huntington, Edward Hunter, William D. Huntington, William Marks, Jonathan H. Holmes, Gilbert Goldsmith, Alpheus Cutler, Lorenzo D. Wasson and Phillip B. Lewis, preceded by James Emmett as guard, with his musket.

528They went through the garden round by the pump, and were conveyed to the Nauvoo House, which was then built to the first joists of the basement and buried in the basement story. * * *

528The bodies remained in the cellar of the Nauvoo House, where they were buried, until the fall, when they were removed by Dimick B. Huntington, William D. Huntington, Jonathan H. Holmes and Gilbert Goldsmith, at Emmma's request, to near the Mansion and buried side by side, and the Bee House then moved and placed over their graves."

528The above is from the Deseret News of November 25, 1857, published in Salt Lake City. The same historical statement verbatim is found in the Millennial Star of August 9, 1862, which was republishing at the time this history from the Deseret News.

528This historical narrative of the burial of Joseph and Hyrum Smith from the two preceding periodicals was published in book form under the title of the History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Period I, vol. vi, chapter xxxiv, and includes the above excerpt from the Deseret News and Millennial Star. This has been the continuous history of the burial and burial place of the two martyrs before the people of Utah and all the world.

528SELF-STULTIFICATION OF MR. FRED M. SMITH

But the strangest thing about this Fred M. Smith sensational "discovery" of the burial place and bodies of the Prophets is the attitude of Mr. Fred M. Smith. The press dispatch announcing this "discovery" represents that Joseph Smith the III, oldest son of the Prophet, some years before the "discovery" took this same Fred M. Smith to Nauvoo where he was told by that father that Joseph Smith the Prophet, and Hyrum Smith, his brother, were buried "under the spring house, at the old Smith homestead." The "spring house," however, "had fallen into decay and no trace of it remained;" but the father remarked to the son—Mr. Fred M. Smith—"when the time has come you will find the bodies without any trouble." And of course, why not? At that time the location of the graves was designated as being where the "spring house" had stood, so that Mr. Fred M. Smith has known during those years at least, since his father gave him that information, the place where the bodies were buried.

529Stranger yet: William A. Linn, whose work, The Story of the Mormons, was published in 1902, gives the body of a letter from Fred M. Smith respecting the burial place of the Prophets in which Mr. Fred M. Smith says:

529"I have been on the ground [i. e., burial place of the Prophets] with my father when I knew I was standing within a few feet of where the remains were lying, and it is known to many about where the spot is. It is a short distance from the Nauvoo House on the banks of the Mississippi. The lot is still owned by the family, the title being in my father's name."

529Yet notwithstanding this very definite knowledge by Mr. Fred M. Smith possessed in 1902, in January, 1928, in his "search" for that grave he must needs be guided by "inspiration" and aided by "surveyors" and "engineers!"

In view of all information above set forth, representing continuous knowledge by the church authorities in Utah as to the whereabouts of the burial place of the brothers, Joseph and Hyrum Smith, it will appear to reasonable minds that the effort of sensational "finding" of the skeletons of these men, and the claim of the Utah church authorities being overthrown by such alleged "discovery," is ridiculous; and a cheap effort at sensationalism, and bolstering up of a cheaper claim of "inspirational guidance" in finding them, when all along the "Reorganized Church" branch of the Smith family have known of the location of these bodies as well as the Utah branch of the Smith family has known of it.

530In plain terms, the whole procedure of Mr. Fred M. Smith and those associated with him in this business is unwarranted, a cheap bid for a sensation, and for the reputation of being guided by "inspiration" to find the remains of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, when there was no occasion for such "guidance," the location of the bodies being positively known already by Mr. Fred M. Smith, according to his own statement relative to the instruction which his father had given him as to the place where the two brothers were buried, before his "engineers and surveyors" began the alleged search by "inspired guidance." In the second place this whole procedure was in direct violation of the interests of the descendants of Hyrum Smith who are equally concerned in any handling or removal of the remains of the Prophets; and to take up the skeletons of these men and separate the skulls from the rest of them for the purpose of photographing them, as was done, was a sacrilegious act, entirely unwarranted as to Hyrum Smith, without consultation and consideration of his family, the descendants of whom are members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and chiefly residents of Utah. [^3]

THE MORMON BATTALION MONUMENT

An event which occurred in the closing years of this Century I of the organized existence of the church was the completion of and dedication of a monument to the Mormon Battalion. It was the work of Gilbert Riswold of Chicago, sculptor, and his collaborating architects, Frank Chase Walker and James R. M. Morrison. The erection of the monument is the dream come true of the Daughters of the Battalion, who through the years kept the campfires of their fathers burning until the state of Utah and her people took notice and built the monument as it stands upon the southeast corner of the capitol grounds, facing westward, the direction of the battalion's celebrated march. The state legislature appropriate $100,000 of the funds for the monument contingent upon the people of the state duplicating the amount by popular subscription. To the surprise of many the amount of the popular subscription was raised, and after meeting many obstacles and overcoming them the monument was finished and unveiled on the annual Decoration Day (May 30) 1927.

531The monument is triangular in form, rising to a height of 39 feet. On the three sides of the monument are four scenes, in high relief tablets:

531Northwest side—The Enlistment.

531Southwest Side—The March.

531On the east side of the triangle is a double scene:

531At the right—The Discovery of Gold, California;

531At the left—Entrance of the Pueblo Detachment into Salt Lake Valley, July 29, 1847, five days after Brigham Young's company of Utah Pioneers.

There are three figures besides the tablets to make up the monument. These are the typical Battalion Man, in bronze—ten feet high. On the east side above the double tablet hewn into the rock is the figure of the Young Indian Mother with the babe slung on her back, representing the Vanishing Race as departing from the scenes of activities depicted on the monument. At the top of the monument, also hewn into the rock headland, supposed to be overlooking the Pacific, is the figure of a noble woman—head and bust and arms, with hair wind-blown into the headland as she makes her way westward. She may be called Spirit of the West; or Columbia Pressing Westward, or Spirit of Progress. However called she dominates all the groups indicated and suggests a unity to all of them and the direction of their movements. The best idea of the monument, aside from the monument itself, its majesty and beauty, will be found in the fine engraving of it accompanying this chapter.

532At the unveiling of the monument there were present on the capitol grounds thousands of people, among them many descendants of the battalion; the chief officers of the state and of the Church of the Latter-day Saints, including President Grant, and his counselors, and a number of the apostles' quorum and presidents of stakes. Governor Dern was present to receive the completed monument from the state commission when unveiled.

532

THE HISTORICAL MORMON BATTALION ADDRESS

The historical address delivered by the president of the state's commission dealt with the whole theme of the battalion in harmony with the treatment of that subject in this History, chapters lxxiii, lxxiv, lxxv, viz., the action of the national administration in calling upon the Latter-day Saints for a battalion of men was not an unfriendly gesture intending to bring to pass the destruction of the Latter-day Saints; but a response to the petitions of that people to the government of the United States, through its especially accredited representative, Jesse C. Little, at Washington, asking for government service to aid them in their movement westward. It was an act of benevolence on the part of the government; and an act of loyalty on the part of the Latter-day Saints. Out of this came the battalion, with its wonderful march and achievements, that identify the Church of the Latter-day Saints with that general westward movement of the American people which fulfilled "the manifest destiny" of the American republic to occupy the Pacific coast to an equal extent with that of the Atlantic coast of the land of Zion.

INTERDENOMINATIONAL PROTEST AGAINST SOVIET RUSSIA'S WARFARE ON RELIGION

An action of importance in which the presidency of the church participated—and hence the church—was the nationwide interdenominational protest of religious bodies in the United States against the reported intolerance of Soviet Russia against all religion, and its efforts to destroy religion by a universal destruction of churches and synagogues and a destruction of all authoritative books on religion, attended by a denial of religious toleration in that country. Practically all nations were aroused against Soviet Russia's alleged warfare upon religion. In the United States a nation-wide protest had been staged for Sunday, March 24, 1930, in which all churches had been invited to participate. The interdenominational services to be held in Salt Lake City on that day set to make this protest were arranged to take place in the great tabernacle. The ministers participating therein were Rabbi J. E. Krikstein, of the Congregation Monte Fiore; Rt. Rev. Arthur W. Moulton, Bishop of the Episcopal diocese of Utah; the Rev. Arthur L. Rice, president of the Salt Lake Ministerial Association (therefore representative of the ministers comprising the association), and Pastor of Pillips' Congregational church; the Very Rev. Monsignor Duane G. Hunt, Vicar General of the Salt Lake diocese of the Catholic church and vice rector of the Cathedral of the Madeleine; and the first presidency of the Latter-day Saint Church, Heber J. Grant, president, Anthony W. Ivins and Charles W. Nibley counselors. President Grant presided at the meeting and presented the speakers. He also addressed the meeting as one of the speakers. The invocation was offered by President Charles W. Nibley and the benediction by President Anthony W. Ivins. Rabbi Krikstein, who was the first speaker, presented statistics showing that thousands of churches and synagogues in Russia had been turned into "labor camps," and that countless numbers of theological documents had been destroyed by the Russian government. "It is almost impossible," said he, "to buy a Bible anywhere in Russia now, and Russian children are being systematically taught not to be non-religious but to be anti-religious."

534Bishop Moulton of the Episcopal church looked upon it as a high privilege to join his church with others in this protest. "If Russia," said he, "closes her churches, their government will perish. No government can take away from its people their birthright of freedom to worship as they please."

534Rev. Arthur L. Rice struck a somewhat discordant note when he declared that reports from Russia "are not trustworthy; and that facts are not sufficient to warrant a formal protest of this nation"—the United States. This led President Grant to say: "If the reports are not true, we are not protesting; but if they are true they violate the beliefs of the church," meaning the church he represented.

534The Very Rev. Monsignor Hunt of the Catholic church said there was no question about conditions in Russia. The Monsignor identified religion with the rights of man; "When religion is attacked, so likewise are the rights of man," he said. "When the rights of man are attacked, so likewise is religion—the two stand or fall together; for they are part and parcel of the same thing." The Soviet regime was crushing civilization in Russia. "Can you and I," the Monsignor eloquently asked the great audience of three thousand people, "can you and I be complacent in the face of all this?"

534President Grant was the closing speaker. He read the eleventh article of faith from the summary of those declarations bearing that title, as setting forth the attitude of the Church of the Latter-day Saints with reference to religious freedom:

534"We claim the privilege of worshiping Almighty God according to the dictates of our own conscience, and allow all men the same privilege, let them worship how, where or what they may."

535This was supplemented by reference to Doctrine and Covenants, section cxxxiv, which limits the punitive power of religious societies to dealing with the fellowship of its members, the reliance on the civil governments for redress of grievances for personal abuse, or where the rights of property or character are infringed, with the right of self-defense reserved in cases of emergency, "where immediate appeal cannot be made to the laws and relief afforded."

535These were the principles of religious freedom believed in by the church for which he spoke. "Reports are that Soviet Russia is not permitting these human rights," said the speaker, "and where that is the case we make solemn protest against any and all nations who fail to do so."

535In closing the great congregation sang "America."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] The convening of the regular annual, and in this case the Centennial, conference of the church, on the 6th of April, which in this year would fall upon Sunday. The forenoon meeting to be a priesthood meeting of the whole church through representatives, arranged as a general assembly of the priesthood, the several quorums to be placed in the order of their standing; and each to vote separately on supporting the respective officers of the priesthood and the church, and then the whole assembly voting en mass, to be followed by the joyful and sacred shout of "Hosanna," accompanied with the waving of white handkerchiefs, the shout and the waving to be thrice repeated. Doctrine and Covenants, sec. xx:1.
[^2] It is to be found at the end of this volume.
[^3] In support of the "belief" expressed by President Nibley may be cited in Doctrine and Covenants, section xx:1, where the Lord says of the organization of the church on the sixth of April, 1830, "being one thousand eight hundred and thirty years since the coming of our Lord and Savior in the flesh." Since this is the declaration of God, it may be insisted upon that this declaration better than any other evidence fixes the date of Messiah's birth.
