B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

536CHAPTER CLXXXVIII

536THE CENTENNIAL CONFERENCE OF THE CHURCH OF THE NEW DISPENSATION

536THE time of the end of the first century of organized existence of the church of the New Dispensation approaches. The annual conference to be held "in the fourth month and on the sixth day of the month which is called April," being one thousand nine hundred and thirty years "since the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in the flesh." [^1]

PROGRAM FOR THE CONFERENCE OUTLINED

About a year previously a special committee had been appointed to take under advisement the nature of the celebration to be held on the one hundredth anniversary of the organization of the church. This committee was called the "Centennial Celebration Committee," the members of which were: George Albert Smith, Chairman; David O. McKay, Joseph Felding Smith, Melvin J. Ballard, all members of the apostles quorum; B. H. Roberts, Rulon S. Wells, of the first council of the seventy, and Sylvester Q. Cannon, presiding bishop of the church. Leroi C. Snow acted as secretary. The committee met at intervals to study the subject submitted to them, and out of the numerous things suggested as appropriate for the occasion, the presidency of the church decided upon the following:

537Privilege of attendance upon this general priesthood assembly was to be equitably distributed among the respective stakes, as nearly as possible, since it was clear that all could not find place in the tabernacle. Admission was to be by card. At the afternoon session as at all other sessions of the conference, admission was to be general, as usual.

EXECUTION OF THE PROGRAM

This program was strictly and successfully carried out, to the joy of Latter-day Israel's assembled tens of thousands, in Salt Lake City, and her hundreds of thousands who attended by radio throughout, by the broadcast of KSL at Salt Lake City.

ILLUMINATION OF THE SALT LAKE TEMPLE

The official flood lighting of the temple in Salt Lake City occurred on Saturday night, April the 5th, with the following effect:

538Rays totalling 52,000 candlepower were turned on the famous building. Lights were placed at vantage points on the tabernacle and bishop's building. A feature of the occasion was the use of the 25,000 candlepower, 10,000 watt globe presented to the church by the Westinghouse Lamp Company. This was placed on the grounds to the south of the temple and lighted up the entire side of the building and its six noble towers. The illumination rendered the building an object of marvelous light and shadow effects of exceeding great beauty.

THE CONFERENCE: SUNDAY MORNING—PRESIDENT GRANT'S ADDRESS

Exactly at 10 a. m. the conference opened by the great audience singing the familiar hymn: "We Thank Thee, O God, For a Prophet." Prayer was offered by the presiding patriarch, Hyrum G. Smith. The second hymn, "An Angel From On High, the Long, Long Silence Broke." Duet and chorus; in the latter the choir and the great congregation joined and sang with spirit.

538After greetings to the assembled priesthood, and expressions of gratitude for the blessings of God upon the church, President Grant, in clear, resonant voice read the "Message of the First Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." The reading occupied a little more than thirty minutes and was listened to with profound interest and silence throughout. [^2]

538Following the address, the choir rendered the anthem—written for the occasion by the veteran church musician, Evan Stephens—"Hosanna and Hallelujah."

PRESIDENT IVINS' DISCOURSE

Anthony W. Ivins, first counselor in the first presidency, addressed the conference. His discourse was an historical review of the great epochs through which God unfolded his purposes, and especially in developing the mission of his chosen people Israel, both in ancient and in modern times. "God's Purposes Unfolding in History" could well be the title of President Ivins' discourse. "In all this," the historical review he had given, "God's purpose is plain to those who will study with the spirit and with understanding," exclaimed President Ivins.

539The congregation, led by the choir, sang two verses of America. Apart from the "Message from the Presidency," the feature of this first session of the Centennial Conference was the impressive sustaining of the several officers of the priesthood and of the church, first by separate vote of the respective quorums and then by the whole assembly of the priesthood. The vote was taken by each quorum in its order rising to its feet and raising the right hand in solemn token of acceptance and support of the presiding authorities of the priesthood and of the church. The voting was unanimous in the affirmative.

539The officers thus sustained were as follows:

GENERAL AUTHORITIES OF THE CHURCH AT THE CLOSE OF THE FIRST CENTURY OF THE EXISTENCE OF THE CHURCH OF THE NEW DISPENSATION

First Presidency: Heber J. Grant, prophet, seer and revelator, and president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

539Anthony W. Ivins, first counselor in the first presidency.

539Charles W. Nibley, second counselor in the first presidency.

539The Twelve Apostles: President of the council of twelve apostles, Rudger Clawson.

Members of the council of the twelve apostles: Rudger Clawson, Reed Smoot, George Albert Smith, George F. Richards, Orson F. Whitney, David O. McKay, Joseph Fielding Smith, James E. Talmage, Stephen L. Richards, Richard R. Lyman, Melvin J. Ballard, John A. Widtsoe.

The Presiding Patriarch: Hyrum G. Smith.

The First Council of the Seventy: B. H. Roberts, Jonathan G. Kimball, Rulon S. Wells, Joseph W. McMurrin, Charles H. Hart, Levi Edgar Young, Rey L. Pratt.

The Presiding Bishopric: Sylvester Q. Cannon, David A. Smith, first counselor; John Wells, second counselor.

Trustee-in-Trust: Heber J. Grant, trustee-in-trust for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

ISRAEL'S SACRED "HOSANNA" SHOUT

After the vote to sustain the general authorities of the priesthood and the church, came Israel's shout of joy:

540"HOSANNA! HOSANNA! HOSANNA! TO GOD AND THE LAMB, AMEN! AMEN! AND AMEN!"

540This, led by President Grant, three times repeated, and attended by the rythmic waving of white handkerchiefs by every member of the great congregation with each separate utterance, made a very impressive sight; and it seemed, as the mighty shout was given, to vibrate waves of emotion which were sustained by the choir's rendition, at this point, of Handel's ever glorious and joyous chorus, "Hallelujah," from "The Messiah."

PRESIDENT GRANT'S BLESSING ON THE WORLD

If there had been any doubt in the world by those assembled respecting the greatness and universal spirit of "Peace on earth, good will to man," or of "Glory to God in the highest," it would have been dispelled by hearing the blessing of President Heber J. Grant upon the world in the closing minutes of the morning session of the great conference. It may not be particularized here, it will be sufficient to say that it was a universal blessing, that included reference to the past and honored servants of God who had preceded him in the high office to which, in the providences of God, he himself had risen; and then he blessed the present officers of the priesthood and of the church; he blessed the United States of America, and the liberty-loving nation of Great Britain, and the nations of all the world; he especially remembered "the mothers of men" and every interest of humanity. This he did in the authority of a servant and prophet of God. His blessing was worthy of one occupying his position as God's vicegerent on earth. It was truly a world-wide benediction of God through his prophet. The clear high-pitched but full and resonant voice gave evidence at times of the emotion which shook his frame, but it was held in fine control and ended without a break. The deep silence that pervaded the great assembly during the delivery of this official blessing of God upon the world was a fitting accompaniment of the blessing. There are times when nothing is so fitting, or so eloquent as silence. This was one of the occasions.

541The benediction on the conference meeting was pronounced by Joseph R. Shepherd, president of the Logan temple.

541As the assembly broke up to leave the tabernacle the people from the outside began crowding in for the afternoon session.

541It was noted by one newspaper report of the conference that:

541"Occupying seats on the stand were a number of prominent citizens as guests of the church on the unusual occasion; among them George H. Dern, governor of Utah; Milton H. Welling, secretary of state; and Dr. George Thomas, president of the University of Utah.

541The great temporary stage, built for the pageant, gave a new atmosphere to the tabernacle, with its drapes and hangings from the lofty ceiling, entirely covering the permanent stand and the great organ.

541The stage was filled with the members of the choir in the rear, members of general boards, mission presidents, invited guests, the general authorities of the church and others.

541The decorations were effective and in keeping with the great event. At the conclusion of the service, the congregation remained seated while a flashlight picture was taken."

542SUNDAY AFTERNOON SESSION OF THE CENTENNIAL CONFERENCE, 2 P. M.

542In the afternoon session of the conference the great tabernacle was as crowded as it was in the morning; and an equal number thronged the Temple Square grounds. President Heber J. Grant presided. The opening hymn was W. W. Phelps' "Praise to the Man Who Communed With Jehovah," the joyous triumphant hymn which celebrates the memory of Joseph Smith, Prophet of the New Dispensation, and how his enemies have fought him in vain. It was sung with mighty fervor on this occasion.

542Opening prayer was by Edward J. Wood, president of the Alberta, Canada, stake of Zion.

PRESIDENT C. W. NIBLEY

Charles W. Nibley, second counselor in the first presidency was the first speaker. He emphasized the importance of the sixth day of April in history, because of the great events which had occurred upon that day. These were: The organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, one hundred years ago. According to his belief, though without attempting to give historical evidence of it, he belived that the springtime of the year more likely to be the time than December, when the Savior was born; since the shepherds were watching their flocks by night, and the 6th of April might well have been the time of the annunciation. President Nibley, however, suggested no change in the date for celebrating the birth of the Messiah. [^3]

542On this date, too, sixth of April, George Washington was declared to be the first president of the United States.

542On this date the United States entered the World War, 1917.

543The speaker also believed that the "early spring" of 1820, fixed as the time of Joseph Smith's first vision might have fallen upon this same day of days in April.

543President Nibley exalted the gathering of Israel in these last days as a manifest blessing to the poor among men, and rejoiced in the prosperity of the people. But God had wrought this. Let not the Latter-day Saints forget that. Paraphrasing the words of the Lord to ancient Israel he said: It is God who has made this people, and not they themselves.

543The saints must be willing to sacrifice for the blessings of the gospel. It is sacrifice that brings forth the blessings of heaven.

RUDGER CLAWSON

Rudger Clawson, president of the council of the apostles, followed President Nibley as the speaker. Since this conference was an historic occasion, his mind had been influenced to consider historic events as depicted in the prophecies of the Lord and the fulfillment of them as affecting the work of God.

543He then detailed the prophetic dream of King Nebuchadnezzar and the Prophet Daniel's interpretation thereof. The stone cut out of the mountain without hands of the dream, in the speaker's interpretation of it, was but the symbolic figure of the gospel of Jesus Christ, "the kingdom of heaven," which would fill the earth and endure forever.

543"High on the Mountain Tops, a Banner is Unfurled,' was sung by the choir.

ELDER ORSON F. WHITNEY

Elder Orson F. Whitney, of the council of the twelve, and the recognized reigning master poet of the church at this time, was called upon to read an original poem he had prepared for the occasion. It bore the title, "The Lifted Ensign," and dealt in dialogue form with that event; Elias, Ephraim and Judah constituting the speaking characters. The theme was lofty and the treatment worthy of its high aim, the final recognition and effectiveness of God's work, symbolized in the Raising of an Ensign that but heralded the triumph of the gospel of the Christ.

A COMPREHENSIVE HISTORY OF THE CHURCH REPORTED

The senior president of the first council of the seventy reported to the conference the completion of five volumes of the six-volumed Comprehensive History of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Century I, which the presidency of the church had directed to be published as one of the features of this Centennial Conference. The sixth volume would soon be completed, the speaker assured the conference. He brought this work as to an altar, and in the presence of the great audience dedicated it to the church and to God.

544The closing hymn was: "I Have Seen My Maker Face to Face," a composition by B. Cecil Gates, grandson of President Brigham Young, Utah's great Pioneer, and sang by Rilla Wilson, Cannon Lund, and the choir.

544The closing prayer was offered by President Henry H. Blood of the North Davis stake of Zion.

544Thus closed the regular conference meetings of the sixth day of April, 1830, but the final curtain was not rung down upon this Centennial Anniversary of the day on which the church of the New Dispensation was organized, until its great story was set forth in pageantry, at the evening session of the conference, at the tabernacle, which constituted an important feature of the general conference on this centennial day.

SUNDAY EVENING SESSION—"THE MESSAGE OF THE AGES"

The pageant representing "The Message of the Ages" was especially successful. A spacious stage was constructed in the west end of the tabernacle, fronting the great organ, divisible by magnificent curtains of chaste color schemes, into the necessary subdivisions required by the incidents of the great unfolding theme. Never was there more magnificent demonstration of Tennyson's line:

"I doubt not through the ages, one increasing purpose runs."

545The committee who conceived and constructed this magnificent pageant were:

545George D. Pyper, Chairman Tracy Y. Cannon

545W. O. Robinson Lester Hinchcliff

545Junius F. Wells Leroy Robertson

545Elbert H. Eastmond Bertha A. Kleinman

545Charlotte Stewart Frank W. Asper

545Irma Felt Bitner Anthony C. Lund

545Ann Nebeker A Hamer Reiser, Secretary

OUTLINE OF THE PAGEANT THEME

The following explanatory note accompanies the official text of the printed pageant:

545"The MESSAGE OF THE AGES is a presentation of the outstanding features of the Lord's dealings with man in this world existence.

545Be it known that the gospel planned in the councils of heaven, was known to the ancients, preached by Christ in the Meridian of Time, and after a 'Great Falling Away', that this same gospel was again revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith and restored in these last days, a century ago, and that through the martyrdom of the Prophet and faith and patience and heroic toil of his people, the Lord hath brought again Zion, and established her among the hills, and that by walking in his ways, the children of men may find peace and happiness and the 'more abundant life.'"

545The pageant is divided into a prologue and three periods, viz.:

THE ANCIENT DISPENSATIONS

THE MESSIANIC DISPENSATION

THE DISPENSATION OF THE FULNESS OF TIMES

The story is told in narrative, tableau and processional, with organ, orchestral, and choral music." [^4]

MUSIC OF THE PAGEANT

The unfolding theme of the ages with its introductions and interludes and climaxes was accompanied by appropriate music upon the great organ, supplemented by the McCune School of Music Orchestra, and vocal renditions of solos and choruses by the tabernacle choir, under the general leadership of Anthony C. Lund, director, with Tracy Y, Cannon, organist for the pageant, and Frank W. Asper conductor of the orchestra. Indeed the very fine musical contribution, so appropriate to the several parts of the unfolding theme, and the orchestration throughout, was not only in harmony with the theme, but did much to create its mighty spirit.

546The whole pageant was fittingly dedicated to:

546Heber J. Grant, president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

546Admission was free, yet by tickets. One of the pleasing features of the pageantry was the admission of non-"Mormons" on practically the same terms with church members, which brought thousands of non-church members to see and likewise to appreciate and praise the pageant. It scored a great success. Features of it were also filmed from the steps of the state capitol, to be used by the movie film companies securing them.

546It was thought at first that if this production carried on through the conference week it would be sufficient to meet the demands of the members of the church and their friends who would wish to see it. But such was the spontaneous success of the pageant and the fame of it, and such the overwhelming and widespread request for tickets that one extension of time after another was made until it was decided to continue its presentation until the 5th of May, which was done.

546Century one of the History of the Church of the New Dispensation came to its close with this evening's pageantry in a blaze of glory. [^5]

546

A COMPARISON

April 6th, 1830: The obscure home of "Father Peter Whitmer," in Fayette, Seneca county, state of New York, United States of America. Six young men, and a few of their friends, both men and women, present. These six young men, viz., Joseph Smith, Jun., Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer, Jun., Samuel H. Smith and David Whitmer. Three others had been baptized [^6] but these six effected the organization by consenting to the organization being made, and accepting Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery as the first and second elder respectively of the church. After which Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery ordained each other to the position to which they had been chosen. The sacrament of the Lord's supper was administered to those who had been previously baptized and now confirmed members of the church, "and received the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands. Some enjoyed the gift of prophecy and all rejoiced exceedingly."

547Four other persons were baptized after the organization was effected, two of them the father and mother of the Prophet.

547The origin of the church was obscure, only being known in the immediate vicinity of the Whitmer farm home.

547April 6th, 1930: The conference on the 6th day of April, 1930, is held in the Salt Lake tabernacle, on Temple Square, Salt Lake City, Utah, capable of seating eight thousand people, and it was filled to capacity by representatives of the priesthood of the church alone. Thousands thronged the beautiful Temple Square grounds outside, unable to get into the tabernacle, but heard the proceedings with the aid of "loud speakers" on the grounds and in surrounding buildings; hundreds of thousands heard the proceedings of the conference in all parts of the intermountain west, for thousands of miles in extent; and by provision of a national radio "hook up," for the next afternoon (April 7) seven to ten millions heard the great "Mormon" tabernacle organ and choir render some of the hymns and anthems of the New Dispensation. And the press throughout the land—throughout the world, in every land, carried telegraphic reports and editorial comments upon the proceedings of this day's conference.

STATISTICS

It was reported at this conference that the church had a present living membership of 700,000 souls.

548To this, in order to account for the whole membership of the church of the New Dispensation must be added all who have died in the faith, through one hundred years. The number is not known, but perhaps enough to make the baptized membership of the church approach one million souls. Seven millions of baptisms have been performed for the dead from first to last in the temples, from the Nauvoo period until now (1930); eight such ordinance temples have been erected, seven now standing and daily continuing the work. Fifteen million saving ordinances (including the baptisms for the dead before mentioned) have been administered for the dead. During the conference President Grant reported:

548"We have at the present time: Stakes of Zion, 104; Wards, 930; Independent branches, 75; Dependent branches, 27; Total wards and branches in the stakes of Zion, from Canada to Mexico, 1032; Missions, 29; Mission branches, 800."

548President Grant's report for the year 1929—last year of the first century—set forth that:

548"There were children blessed and entered on the records of the

548church last year——————————————————————-19,071

548Children baptized [eight years old and upwards] in stakes

548and missions————————————————————————-15,468

548Converts baptized and entered on the records of the stakes

548and missions————————————————————————- 6,511

548Total baptisms ———————————————————————21,979

548Number of long-term missionaries [average service of two

548years] from Zion —————————————————————— 2,068

548Number of short-term missionaries [six months]——————— 59

548Number of local missionaries [in stakes of Zion]—————— 99

549Total missionaries on foreign missions ——————————— 2,226

549Number engaged in missionary work in the stakes ——————- 903

549Total missionaries ————————————————————— 3,129

549Number of missionaries who received training at the Mission

549Home [Salt Lake City] during the past year ————————— 942

549Persons recommended to the temples (stakes and missions)——-68,573

549Birth rate, 29 per thousand.

549Marriage rate, 14.5 per thousand.

549Death rate, 7.8 per thousand.

549Families owning their own homes, 70 per cent.

549Last year the church expended from the tithes of the people for education more than $918,000.00." [^7]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Isaiah, xli:23, 24.
[^2] II Peter, i:21.
[^3] This critic is Wm. Oeschger, secretary of the Nebraska Christian churches; State Journal, Nebraska, Nov. 24, 1918.
[^4] American Mercury, for January, 1930. The writer is Bernard Devoto.
[^5] The conference proceedings for the remaining days will be found in the Conference Pamphlet of April 6th, 1930.
[^6] See this History, ch. xvi, note 12.
[^7] From statistics read by President Heber J. Grant during the present Centennial Conference.
