B. H. Roberts, Comprehensive History of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, vol. 6 ( 1930)

550CHAPTER CLXXXIX

550REFLECTIONS

550"SHOW the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods; yea, do good or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together.

550Behold ye are of nothing, and your work of naught; an abomination is he that chooseth you." [^1]

550Such the challenge of God to those who questioned the things that he had done in Israel in ancient times; that doubted that he had made Israel; and now, looking into the future, doubted if God would bring forth Israel's deliverer, the Messiah. God was saying to these: Produce your cause, let us reason together; "show us things that are to come, that we may know that ye are gods." God's challenge to their unbelief, makes it clear that the future, the knowledge of it, belongs to God alone, and to his servants to whom he reveals it; not to those who question his work, or challenge his power. "Prophecy" or power to penetrate into the future, is not given to satan or to his emissaries. For them that veil will not part. "For prophecy came not in olden time by the will of man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." [^2] So now, prophecy, knowledge of the future, is of God, and of his servants to whom he reveals it. Prophecy, in a way, is history reversed. Prophecy is a fore-telling of that which shall be; History, an after-telling, events that have been.

It is not my intention to depart from my humble role of historian. I am not one who may undertake the role of prophet. I claim no right to assume it. The future is a sealed book to me, except as I believe what God, through his servants in the scriptures, has revealed of it. And yet standing here at the close of this, that I may—and I trust without trespassing upon good taste—regard as a monumental work—how may one refrain from thoughts of its future? And especially as there are those of the opposed who do not hesitate to predict its failure, or who prescribe very narrow limits for it should it survive. For instance:

551A few years ago, a critic of some standing in the Christian world—he was secretary of a large group of so-called Christian churches—conceded that "the Mormon church is possessed of elements of great power." These elements "are founded in its principles of centralized power, and in its social program." He conceded that there is no real menace in the "Mormon" church to American political institutions, dangers along that line were past. And then:

551"Mormonism has reached the zenith of its supernatural visions, is receding, gradually fading in the Mormon consciousness itself. The time spirit will cure it of its abnormalities. It will die amid its own worshippers." [^3]

551"The way to oppose Mormonism," he said, "is not to throw mud upon it. A campaign of detraction only helps it to grow. The thing to do is to treat it with candor and fairness. * * * It must fall of its own weight, if it is to fall at all." Then he treats us to this reflection with its implications. It is somewhat time-worn, but it is made to do service:

551"Our little systems have their day,

551They have their day and cease to be;

551They are but broken lights of Thee,

551And thou, O Lord, art more than they."

551At a public meeting in Reading, Pennsylvania, a lady submitted the following to the writer:

551"In view of the fact that the drift of the world's thought is away from acceptance of the miraculous, what is to be the future of Mormonism?"

The question is a thoughtful one. It is a fact that the trend of the world's thought is away from acceptance of the miraculous. It is also true that "Mormonism" had its origin in what men call miracles; in such miracles as tax the credulity of the mind of man to accept, and of modern man in particular. In view of these premises, then, what is to be the future of the faith of the Latter-day Saints? The future of "Mormonism?" Is it to be the case of an inflowing tide at a time of storm that has carried a ship far ashore, and that now, the tide ebbing, leaves the ship beached on the shore to become a helpless derelict, that in time must perish?

552Another suggestion: A recent writer, as late as January, 1930, discusses what to him are the necessary limitations of "Mormonism." This writer concedes that of the whole group of religious movements in America that arose about the same time that "Mormonism" had its origin, "Mormonism" alone has survived; that is, in any way worth while, and that is today a really "going" concern. Then he asks that if this be so, "Why, then, has not God's kingdom [which 'Mormonism' claims to be] overspread the republic?" His answer is: "Simply because it is self-limited." And he argues out that matter of self-limitation of "Mormonism" in this way:

552"The quest for the perfect American Religion could be successful only on the lowest level of intelligence. Piety and business could only be completely fused by means of a creed too ridiculous for any widespread acceptance. * * * The doctrines of Mormonism are indispensable to its system."

The critic is right on that point. "The doctrines of Mormonism are indispensable to its system." "Mormonism" is absolute in this: it must be wholly accepted or wholly rejected. Its doctrines, and the whole-hearted acceptance of them is indispensable to membership in its system. The miraculous visions of Joseph Smith, the miraculous visitation of Moroni and the miraculous translation of the Book of Mormon—the fact of direct and continuous revelation from God—all must be accepted or "Mormonism" can have no standing; nor can any one have a standing in "Mormonism" without acceptance of these doctrines. Then our author proceeds:

553"If they [meaning the doctrines] are altered or rejected in any particular, the system must collapse!"

553Nothing more true has ever been said of "Mormonism" than that, if the remark is limited to the fundamentals of it. Then our writer launches his thunderbolt:

553"And they [the doctrines of 'Mormonism'] compose a body of belief almost incredibly absurd. Mormonism made a formidable effort to include all the imbecile dreams that were contemporary with its rise. It was and it remains, at once, millennial restorationist and perfectionist. Fossilized in its canons is nearly every metaphysical theological and litturgical insanity of the American pentecost. It epitomizes the religious nonsense of a full half century. It was too fundamentally a reaction, as creeds of restoration must necessarily be, so that it retains notions long since discarded by its competitors? A body of beliefs as absurd and grotesque may exist on a small scale here and there, in Los Angeles or Zion City, but none so grotesque is accepted by any number comparable to the Mormons." [^4]

553And these "absurd" and "grotesque" miraculous doctrines, it is argued, will constitute the limitations of "Mormonism," and confine its acceptance to a few. That is to say, according to this view, "Mormonism" may become a tolerated, minor sect, but never will be a world movement—God's kingdom, overspreading the republic and the world. To recur to the Reading, Pennsylvania, lady's question—for involved in that, by implication, is the same argument and conclusion as in this American Mercury writer's discussion. "In view of the trend of modern thought away from acceptance of the miraculous, what is to be the future of Mormonism?"

Which is it to be, I venture to ponder, a limited but tolerated sect, or a world movement? A beeched ship on the shore—derelict of the receding world thought-tides, or the kingdom of God overspreading the nations? Which? What is the answer to these criticisms and this prediction based upon alleged self-limitations, which are relied upon as marking the defeat of "Mormonism" as a world movement? Again, what is the answer? My answer is that the history of one hundred years will be the vindication of the church; will effectively prove its claims to the world movement character of both religion and church. Not a sect, but the universal religion founded upon Jesus Christ—his gospel and the New Dispensation of it, and the complement and fulfillment of all that has gone before, and prophecy of that which shall be hereafter. In that case, however, the history must be so full and frank and fair that truth and the spirit of it, will be what sunlight is to the atmosphere, so permeating it as to be in and through it, an everywhere present spirit of truth as the spirit of God is everywhere present through his creations. Such a presence that can no more be separated from that history than sunlight can be plucked from the atmosphere. Such a statement of, and such a treatment of the great truths brought forth in Century I of the organized existence of the church of the New Dispensation, and so related to what must be the grand purposes of an All-wise and All-loving and Just and Merciful and Righteous Heavenly Father, that the truth will stand vindicated and self-evident to the minds of the men of good will; and largely enough accepted to make it the dominant kingdom of truth.

Here a doctrine of our first Prophet, Joseph Smith, helps: "Every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God has such an influence over the mind that it is convincing without other testimony. Faith cometh by hearing." That is to say, truth has a native power of its own, and if stated clearly and fully it will be its own witness. "No," said Joseph Smith, so sure was he of this principle—"No, I don't want anyone to tell I am a Prophet or attempt to prove my word." He was confident of the self-evident truth of the spoken word. This being true, his cause would suffer little from the threat of self-limitations, and the menace of unbelief because of the doctrines being "absurd" or "grotesque;" since the truth of them may be established by a clear and effective statement of them; the truth being its own witness. Then tell your story! Let it stand as its own witness.

555As to whether "Mormonism" will be merely a tolerated sect, or a world movement, the veritable kingdom of God to spread over all nations, it but remains for those who are the members of the church which God has founded, who constitute its priesthood and its membership—it only remains for them to keep the "vision splendid" before them with which this work began, and I predict a world movement, not a sect, will be its character.

555God, who at sundry times and divers manners made known his plans and purposes with reference to man's earth-life, such revelations being known as dispensations of his gospel, has in these last days made known that these successive dispensations have come through the ages as an intermittent stream flows through a valley, fed at times from side streams coming in from right and left. Sometimes the river bed may become wholly dry; then the river springs up again to flow for a time copiously, with life-giving force, only to sink again from view. But finally, God, fulfilling his purposes designed from the first, opens the heavens and gives such floods of rain that so start the stream from all its sources, that it shall never again run dry or spread out and be lost in desert sands. It will constantly widen and ultimately merge with the ocean, which is its home. So God's dispensations shall be gathered and flow into one, the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. Your dispensation and mine, meaning the one in which we work; God's dispensation, really, in the which he will gather together in one "all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are in earth, even in him."

This, then, is the message of our church voiced from Century I of our organized existence to the world—the incoming of the final dispensation of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

556"Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, for God hath spoken!" The veil between heaven and earth has been rent from top to bottom. Heaven's pavilion is taken up, and God the Father and Jesus Christ his Son are revealed anew.

556God's plans and purposes in all the dispensations are made known, there has been a unifying of the truth of all the dispensations of God to menward.

556The everlasting covenant, of which the blood of the Christ is both sign and seal, has been renewed.

556A true priesthood, which is God's power and authority given to man; which becomes God working through men, has been conferred on men in this age in regular order of succession from those who previously held it.

556The Church of Jesus Christ, and for the last time, has been set up again and made the depository of God's truth and the fulness of it; and has been given the commission of proclaiming that truth and the fulness of it to every nation and kindred and tongue and people. Also to this church has been given the high mission of perfecting the lives of those who receive its truth.

556The gathering of all Israel has been proclaimed, and the restoration of Judah to Jerusalem and to Palestine, with commandment to resume his national life.

556Joseph, son of Jacob, his place as prince in Israel has been made known, and to him has been given the gathering of the tribes, to receive their blessings at the hands of Ephraim, preparatory to going to their own and final lands of inheritance.

556The record of Joseph in the hands of Ephraim, the Book of Mormon, has been revealed and translated by the power of God, and supplies the world with a New Witness for the Christ, and the truth of and the fulness of the gospel.

The Zion of God, the capital of the empire of the Christ in the new world, the place of it is revealed, and for many years proclaimed and will not be moved out of its place.

557Elias who held the keys of God's church in the days of Abraham and blessed him, has restored the patriarchal powers and graces of the priesthood, to link together the families of men in patriarchal order, from now to the time of the end.

557Elijah, translated to heaven without tasting death, and therefore made the man of two worlds, heaven and earth, and by that token capable of working in both; he has restored the keys of the long promised priesthood that turns the hearts of children to the fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the children.

557Stakes of Zion are multiplied in the land of Zion, in Canada, in Mexico, in the midst of the Rocky Mountains and also along the Pacific slope; and soon as our first Prophet declared, and but three months before his death, on the Atlantic seaboard likewise will stakes of Zion be organized. The Atlantic Ocean but washes the shores of Zionland on the east, as the Pacific Ocean washes the shores of Zionland on the west; and the great interior valleys of the Mississippi and his mighty tributaries, will also be places for stakes of Zion, and the gulf slopes as well—the southland.

557Zion is lengthening her cords and is strengthening her stakes, and multiplying her altars to the true God by the erection of temples, stake houses, and chapels throughout the land. It seems to me that the chief activity of our president, Heber J. Grant, in late years, has become the dedicating of places of worship throughout the land of Zion.

And these things will increase more and more. And while, as the prophets of the Book of Mormon foresaw, the possession of the saints would be few and scattered upon all the face of the promised land, yet will they be multiplied until they shall become a mighty people and from among them will arise those who shall be able to move in upon and redeem Zion, the center place thereof, and fulfill God's word, and purposes as to the mission of the capital city of the Christ's spiritual empire in America.

558May men truthfully call this a work of narrow limitations? The business and work of a merely tolerated sect—one of the broken lights of God? Or is it the beginning of a world movement for the decreed fulfillment of all the purposes of God? A world movement, I say, for the completion of God's purposes with reference to the establishment of Zion, the salvation of men, the redemption of the earth and the fulfillment of all the words of the holy prophets since the world began—ending in the glorious coming and reign of the Christ, with its Peace on Earth, Good Will to Men.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Isaiah, xli:23, 24.
[^2] II Peter, i:21.
[^3] This critic is Wm. Oeschger, secretary of the Nebraska Christian churches; State Journal, Nebraska, Nov. 24, 1918.
[^4] American Mercury, for January, 1930. The writer is Bernard Devoto.
