Who are you? Do you know? You know your name, and you know you belong to a family here on earth. Your parents and family love you. You are special to them. You are also special to Heavenly Father. He is the father of your spirit. You lived with Him in heaven before you came to earth. Everyone born on the earth is a child of Heavenly Father.

You do not remember living with Heavenly Father, but you are His child. The scriptures teach us that “all of [us] are children of the most High” (Ps. 82:6). “The most High” means Heavenly Father.

Do you have the same color eyes as your mother? Is the color of your hair like your father’s? Children often are very much like their parents. The Bible teaches us that “God created man in his own image” (Gen. 1:27). To be created in His image means that you look like your Heavenly Father. It also means you can become like Him.

Prophets testify that you are a child of God and that He knows and loves you. Each time you sing “I Am a Child of God” (Children’s Songbook, 2–3), you also testify that you know who you are. Your Heavenly Father loves you. He will answer your prayers and help you to become like Him. You are His child, and He wants you to return to live with Him again someday.

Carefully remove page F13, and mount it on heavy paper. Cut around the solid black line. Fold on the dotted lines to make a box. Glue the end flaps. Fold the top end flap to close the box, but don’t glue it shut. Draw or glue a picture of yourself inside the blank frame. Read the scripture reference on each side of the box.

Cut out the scripture reference strips, and place them in the box. Each day choose a reference, and mark it in your scriptures. The scriptures will remind you who you are. Share the box during family home evening.

I am a child of God (see Ps. 82:6; D&C 76:24).
I was created in the image of God (see Moses 2:27).
Heavenly Father blessed me with a physical body. My body is a temple (see 1 Cor. 3:16–17).
Heavenly Father sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to earth to help me return to Him (see D&C 49:5).
Heavenly Father gave me an earthly family to help me and to guide me (see D&C 68:25–28).
Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ want me to be happy (see 2 Ne. 2:25).
Heavenly Father loves me and gives me certain talents (see D&C 46:11).
Heavenly Father gave me the scriptures so I can learn about Him (see D&C 33:16).
Heavenly Father listens to and answers my prayers (see D&C 112:10).
I can return to live with Heavenly Father someday (see D&C 78:7).
Because of His love for me, Heavenly Father—through Jesus Christ—created this beautiful world for me (see D&C 14:9).
I can show my love for Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ by keeping the commandments (see John 14:15).
Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ will help me obey the commandments (see 1 Ne. 3:7).
I am trying to remember and follow Jesus Christ so I can live with Him someday (see John 14:3).
Heavenly Father has given me an earthly family (see D&C 68:25–28).
I lived in heaven with Heavenly Father (see D&C 93:29).
I am a child of God; my Heavenly Father loves me (see Ps. 82:6).
I live in a beautiful world created for me (see D&C 14:9).
Heavenly Father listens to and answers my prayers (see D&C 112:10).
Heavenly Father sent His Son, Jesus Christ, to help me (see John 3:16).

1.  Show the children a picture of a baby, or invite a new mother to tell about the preparations for her baby’s birth (for example, family members were excited, got clothes ready, knew they would love the baby). Liken this to how Heavenly Father feels about us. He prepared this world for us to live in. He rejoices as we grow, learn, and make right choices. Prepare case studies (see Teaching No Greater Call [1999], 161–62) demonstrating that because I am a child of God I will choose and act accordingly. Make cutouts of children from red, yellow, and blue paper. As the children sing “I Am a Child of God,” let them pass the cutouts around. When the music stops, if they are holding a red child, have them name one way they know Heavenly Father loves them; if holding a yellow child, have them name one way they can show their love for Heavenly Father; and if holding a blue child, have them resolve a case study. Have each child write one way they know they are a child of God.

2.  Ask the children to stand up whenever you make a statement that describes them. Use statements that demonstrate the similarities and differences among the children, such as everyone with a nose or everyone wearing blue. Explain that we all have characteristics similar to our Heavenly Father because we are His children. We can grow spiritually to be like our Heavenly Father. On one side of the chalkboard write, “Heavenly Father is,” and on the other side write, “I can be.” Have the children list some of Heavenly Father’s characteristics (loving, kind, generous, and so on). Then have them list some of those qualities that they have or would like to develop.
