The fourth article of faith talks about four important principles and ordinances of the gospel you need to follow so you can live with Heavenly Father again.

First, you need to have faith in Jesus Christ. To have faith in Jesus Christ is to believe that He lives, that He is the Savior, and that He loves you, even though you have never seen Him. When you have faith in Christ, you will want to do what He has asked you to do, such as pray, attend church, be kind, and keep the commandments.

One important thing Jesus has asked you to do is be baptized when you are eight years old (or older). You will be baptized by immersion—as Jesus was. That means your whole body will go under the water. Your baptism will be done by someone who has the priesthood authority to baptize. When you are baptized, you also make a promise with Heavenly Father. You promise that you will keep the commandments, and if you do, He promises that you will have the companionship of the Holy Ghost.

After you are baptized, you will receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. Someone who holds the priesthood will put his hands on your head to give you the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost will guide, teach, and comfort you and will testify of Jesus Christ.

From the day you were born until age eight, you are clean and innocent because of the Atonement of Jesus Christ. After you turn eight and are baptized, you need to repent of anything you do wrong. To repent is to feel sorry and to ask for forgiveness from Heavenly Father and from anyone you may have hurt. After you have repented, you need to try hard not to make the same mistake again and to be more obedient to the commandments. The Atonement makes it possible for you to become clean again if you repent.

Having faith in Jesus Christ, repenting, being baptized by immersion, and receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost are important because they will help you return to live with your family forever and with Heavenly Father and Jesus Christ.

You can make this springing mobile as a reminder of the first principles and ordinances of the gospel. Glue page 63 on heavy paper. Cut out the five signs; then cut out the mobile on the solid lines. Cut or punch where indicated. Hang the signs from the mobile with string or ribbon.
