Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 12

Old Testament Prophets Knew Much about Christ

The Testimony of Jesus Is the Spirit of Prophecy

When an angel appeared to John the Revelator on the Isle of Patmos, John fell at his feet to worship him. The angel stopped him with these words:

"See thou do it not: I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus: worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy" (Rev. 19:10).

The Prophet Joseph Smith stated that this angel was an earlier prophet who had lived upon the earth and was now a translated or resurrected being. [^1] The identity of the angel is also specified in his words to John, "I am thy fellowservant, and of thy brethren." Equally important is the declaration that he had "the testimony of Jesus [which] is the spirit of prophecy."

From the foregoing we conclude that true prophets of God have a knowledge and testimony of Jesus Christ, even if they lived thousands of years before Jesus came to earth in the flesh. The purpose of this treatise is to present in a cogent manner a number of evidences from scripture and from the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith on this important subject.

Before citing particular evidences that the ancient prophets knew of and testified of Jesus, however, it seems necessary to explain why there is a question on this subject that has created a need for an article such as this to be written.

Current Old Testament Records Lack Gospel Clarity

Because so much has been lost from all copies of the Old Testament available today, it is a common assumption by traditional Christian theologians that Old Testament prophets did not clearly understand the gospel of Christ nor did they engage in gospel ordinances, such as baptism, laying on of hands for the Holy Ghost, ordination, and the like. The above concept is arrived at because the current Old Testament does not contain a straightforward account of such things being practiced. It is sometimes admitted that Moses and Isaiah anticipated the coming of the Messiah but that they were exceptions to the general order of the Old Testament.

Using latter-day revelation as the standard, it appears that a large amount of historical and doctrinal information has been systematically and carefully removed from the Old Testament record, with the result that even those truths that remain are often not seen in doctrinal context and thus are not really understood. What is presented in this chapter are passages and texts from latter-day revelation that cast a greater light on the ancient prophets than anyone could obtain from the Old Testament alone. This brighter light is a doctrinal contribution of the Restoration through the Prophet Joseph Smith, who clarified the past as much as he forecast the future.

Adam and His Family Knew Christ

Latter-day revelation informs us that the fulness of the gospel was first made known to Adam. He was taught by revelation from God, by angels, and by the Holy Ghost. The Lord commanded him to offer the firstlings of his flocks as a sacrifice, and he obeyed. Subsequently, an angel from God explained to him that animal sacrifice was a symbolic representation of Jesus Christ:

"And after many days an angel of the Lord appeared unto Adam, saying: Why dost thou offer sacrifices unto the Lord? And Adam said unto him: I know not, save the Lord commanded me.

"And then the angel spake, saying: This thing is a similitude of the sacrifice of the Only Begotten of the Father, which is full of grace and truth.

"Wherefore, thou shalt do all that thou doest in the name of the Son, and thou shalt repent and call upon God in the name of the Son forevermore" (Moses 5:6-8).

Later, Adam was baptized in water and received the Holy Ghost, which testifies of the Father and the Son (see Moses 6:64-68).

Three years before Adam's death he and a large segment of his posterity were blessed with a personal visit from the Lord (see D&C 107:53-57). There is no reason to suppose that this was the first time Adam had seen Christ.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said that Adam was the first to know Christ and that through Adam, Christ has been revealed throughout the history of mankind. That is, as the patriarch of the human family Adam presides and manages an orderly system of the ministry of angels and spirits in the promulgation of the gospel on earth. [^2]

Jesus Christ Is the Only Name Given for Salvation at Any Time

Adam was told by God that only through Christ could salvation be obtained for himself and his posterity (see Moses 6:50-52). This same precise doctrine has been taught through the ages by many prophets. For example, by Enoch (see Moses 6:43-52), Nephi (see 2 Ne. 25:20; 31:21), Benjamin (see Mosiah 3:17; 4:8; 5:8), Abinadi (see Mosiah 16:13), Alma (see Alma 38:9), Helaman (see Hel. 5:9), and Peter (see Acts 4:12). Jesus also declared this very doctrine when he said: "I am the way. . . . No man cometh unto the Father, but by me" (John 14:6). The doctrine is also found in the Doctrine and Covenants (see 18:23; 109:4; 132:12-14).

Perhaps the most comprehensive statement we have on record is from King Benjamin about 124 b.c.: "And moreover, I say unto you, that there shall be no other name given nor any other way nor means whereby salvation can come unto the children of men, only in and through the name of Christ, the Lord Omnipotent" (Mosiah 3:17).

Also, salvation comes to man only "through the atonement which was prepared from the foundation of the world for all mankind, which ever were since the fall of Adam, or who are, or who ever shall be, even unto the end of the world.

"And this is the means whereby salvation cometh. And there is none other salvation save this which hath been spoken of; neither are there any conditions whereby man can be saved except the conditions which I have told you" (Mosiah 4:7-8).

It is to be noted that nearly all of the foregoing utterances were by prophets who lived before Christ came in the flesh, showing that it always was the plan that salvation would be available only through Jesus Christ.

All the Prophets Testified of Christ

The plain truth taught by the Book of Mormon is that all true prophets as far back as the beginning of man on this earth testified of Jesus as the only source of man's salvation. It is clear that the statements did not mean only Book of Mormon prophets, but all prophets. For example, Jacob, one of the earliest of the Book of Mormon prophets, told the anti-Christ Sherem that the scriptures testify of Christ. The record of Jacob states:

"And I said unto him: Believest thou the scriptures? And he said, Yea.

"And I said unto him: Then ye do not understand them; for they truly testify of Christ. Behold, I say unto you that none of the prophets have written, nor prophesied, save they have spoken concerning this Christ" (Jacob 7:10-11).

The "scriptures" referred to by Jacob have to be the plates of brass that cover the time period from Adam to 600 b.c.

The prophet Abinadi at about 150 b.c. also taught that all the prophets testified of Christ:

"For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem his people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began have they not spoken more or less concerning these things?

"Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth?

"Yea, and have they not said also that he should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that he, himself, should be oppressed and afflicted?" (Mosiah 13:33-35).

In like manner Alma cited the words of Zenoch, Zenos, and Moses, all early prophets of Israel, who testified that mercy comes to man because of the Son of God (see Alma 33:3-22).

The prophet Nephi (23 b.c.) used the words of Moses, Isaiah, Abraham, Zenoch, Ezias, and Jeremiah to prove that these ancient prophets testified that Christ the Son of God would come (see Hel. 8:11, 13-20). To emphasize that testifying of Christ was the work of all the prophets, Nephi said that there were many "before the days of Abraham" and also many "since the days of Abraham" who so testified.

This teaching is further supported by the words of Jesus to the unbelieving Jewish rulers:

"Do not think that I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust.

"For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me: for he wrote of me.

"But if ye believe not his writings, how shall ye believe my words?" (John 5:45-47).

Jesus also told the Pharisees: "I am the door of the sheepfold. All that ever came before me who testified not of me are thieves and robbers" (JST, John 10:7-8; emphasis added).

And Peter, speaking of Jesus Christ, said, "To him give all the prophets witness" (Acts 10:43; see also 1 Pet. 1:8-11).

Gospel Ordinances Have Always Been the Same

It was noted earlier that Adam was baptized by immersion in water as a requirement for salvation. Baptism in water in the name of Jesus Christ has always been necessary for salvation, as explained by the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"In the former ages of the world, before the Savior came in the flesh, 'the saints' were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ to come, because there never was any other name whereby men could be saved; and after he came in the flesh and was crucified, then the saints were baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, crucified, risen from the dead and ascended into heaven, that they might be buried in baptism like him, and be raised in glory like him, that as there was but one Lord, one faith, one baptism, and one God and father of us all, even so there was but one door to the mansions of bliss." [^3]

The Prophet also declared that the ancient prophets were baptized:

"The gospel has always been the same, and the officers to officiate, the same; the ordinances to fulfill its requirements, the same, and the signs and fruits resulting from the promises, the same: therefore, as Noah was a preacher of righteousness he must have been baptized and ordained to the priesthood by the laying on of the hands, etc. . . .

[[Since] no man can be saved without baptism, it will be seen and acknowledged that if there was sin among men, repentance was as necessary at one time or age of the world as another." [^4]

Consistent with the Prophet's reasoning, it follows that not only Noah but all true prophets were baptized and ordained to the priesthood.

That the requirements for salvation are centered in Christ and have always been the same is declared in D&C 20:25-27:

"That as many as would believe and be baptized in his holy name, and endure in faith to the end, should be saved

"Not only those who believed after he came in the meridian of time, in the flesh, but all those from the beginning, even as many as were before he came, who believed in the words of the holy prophets, who spake as they were inspired by the gift of the Holy Ghost, who truly testified of him in all things, should have eternal life,

"As well as those who should come after, who should believe in the gifts and callings of God by the Holy Ghost, which beareth record of the Father and of the Son."

It is from the Prophet Joseph Smith that we get the clearest insight as to the ordinances and doctrines of the gospel being the same in every dispensation. Speaking of the dispensation of the fulness of times, he said "that all things pertaining to that dispensation should be conducted precisely in accordance with the preceding dispensations." [^5] Further:

"God purposed in Himself that there should not be an eternal fullness until every dispensation should be fulfilled and gathered together in one, and that all things whatsoever, that should be gathered together in one in those dispensations unto the same fullness and eternal glory, should be in Christ Jesus; therefore He set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them. . . .

"These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord." [^6]

The Prophet declared summarily: "All must be saved on the same principles." [^7]

When Alma's son Corianton, who lived some eighty years b.c., wondered why the gospel of Christ should be preached and the ordinances performed so long before Christ's coming in the flesh, Alma explained:

"Behold, you marvel why these things should be known so long beforehand. Behold, I say unto you, is not a soul at this time as precious unto God as a soul will be at the time of his coming?

"Is it not as necessary that the plan of redemption should be made known unto this people as well as unto their children?

"Is it not as easy at this time for the Lord to send his angel to declare these glad tidings unto us as unto our children, or as after the time of his coming?" (Alma 39:17-19).

Priesthood: The Holy Order of the Son of God

From latter-day revelation we learn that the priesthood was first given to Adam and was conferred by the laying on of hands from Adam to his posterity for many generations (D&C 84:6-18; 107:40).

Unfortunately, the Bible in its present content does not preserve the priesthood record of the prophets and patriarchs. Nor does it show that any of the ancients from Adam to Moses held any priesthood or that they even knew each other. One of the great historical and doctrinal clarifications and restorations of latter-day scripture is that it gives the credentials of the prophets and shows a continuity, an association, and a perpetuation of the priesthood from Adam to Moses. This is shown not only in the references from the Doctrine and Covenants cited above, but also in the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (see Moses 6:7-23; JST Gen. 9:15, 17; 13:13).

Particular significance to the topic of the ancient prophets knowing of Christ, being his representatives, and practicing the gospel ordinances is seen in the original name of the priesthood, which was: "The Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God" (D&C 107:3). No one could hold the priesthood without at least having heard something about Christ, the Son of God. That the very nature of the priesthood is designed to bear witness of Christ as the Son of God is described in detail by Alma. Following are excerpts from Alma's discourse on priesthood from Alma 13. He was speaking of a period much earlier than his own time:

"I would that ye should remember that the Lord God ordained priests, after his holy order, which was after the order of his Son, to teach these things unto the people.

"And those priests were ordained after the order of his Son, in a manner that thereby the people might know in what manner to look forward to his Son for redemption. . . .

"This high priesthood being after the order of his Son, which order was from the foundation of the world. . . .

"Thus they become high priests forever, after the order of the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father, who is without beginning of days or end of years, who is full of grace, equity, and truth. . . .

"Now these ordinances were given after this manner, that thereby the people might look forward on the Son of God, it being a type of his order, or it being his order, and this that they might look forward to him for a remission of their sins, that they might enter into the rest of the Lord" (vv. 1-2, 7, 9, 16).

When we observe the multitude of evidences and the intelligence of the plan of God, we can see that every dispensation has been a gospel dispensation and every prophet a representative of Jesus Christ.

Other citations could be given to further support the purpose of this treatise, but the foregoing seem sufficient. In addition to certifying that the ancient prophets knew of Christ's gospel and participated in the ordinances, these evidences also illustrate most clearly how little of the true history of the prophets, and how little of the doctrine, has been preserved in our present Bible. Magnificent though the Bible is, it is a mere shadow of its once great treasury of divine truth and testimony of Jesus Christ.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

We now turn our attention to point four. The most extensive statement in all of the scriptures about the history of the Bible is found in chapter 13 of 1 Nephi. It was given to Nephi in vision, with the assistance of an angel as an interpreter—sort of a guided tour accompanying a panoramic view of the Bible through the centuries. This vision, given to Nephi about 600 b.c., shows him what would happen to the biblical text. By heavenly vision Nephi was made aware of the facts before they occurred. A vision or inspired prophecy can be more accurate than reading about the matter after the fact. Prophecy is history in reverse. When a prophecy is inspired of the Lord, things made known by that prophecy can give a more accurate view than would a historical record written by researchers and scholars who might not write by the Spirit.

Today we are able to ascertain by historical search most of the things of Nephi's prophecy, but not all. That there was tampering with the Bible text in the second and third centuries a.d. is evident to many biblical scholars. Marcion and others are known to have done this. But modern textual critics do not realize how extensive the changes really were. It is my belief and faith that with time and by historical research, every detail of Nephi's prophecy and vision concerning the history of the Bible text will be proven and verified. Research will someday provide the details of persons, time, and place. If we believe this account in the Book of Mormon, however, we do not have to wait for that future time in order to know the general outline and to understand just what the Bible is and exactly what has happened to the Bible text. We can know it now as surely and accurately as we know anything from the scriptures. And we know it because of our faith and confidence in the Book of Mormon. Later discoveries will only confirm what we already knew and were told in the revelations.

The words to which I refer are found in 1 Ne. 13:13-42. Nephi beheld that a people whom he identifies as Gentiles established a government in this land of America and that through the power of God they became politically free and independent of all other nations. We recognize them as the early European colonists in America. He beheld that these Gentiles carried a book with them which they had brought from the nations of Europe (1 Ne. 13:13-20).

"And the angel said unto me: Knowest thou the meaning of the book?

"And I said unto him: I know not.

"And he said: Behold it proceedeth out of the mouth of a Jew. And I, Nephi, beheld it; and he said unto me: The book that thou beholdest is a record of the Jews, which contains the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; and it also containeth many of the prophecies of the holy prophets; and it is a record like unto the engravings which are upon the plates of brass, save there are not so many; nevertheless, they contain the covenants of the Lord, which he hath made unto the house of Israel; wherefore, they are of great worth unto the Gentiles" (1 Ne. 13:21-23).

We note that the early settlers of America, including the Puritans, or Pilgrims, and also early Catholic settlers, brought with them the Bible—the record of the Jews. Those on the Mayflower brought a Geneva Bible, and there is today in the Harvard University library a copy of a Geneva Bible that made its way to America on the Mayflower. This was the same translation that was used by Shakespeare and came before the King James Version was in wide circulation. These were Protestant Bibles. Many of the Catholic immigrants to America brought the English version of the Vulgate, known as the Rheims-Douai version, which was translated into English in 1582, a few years before the King James Version and at about the same time as the other Protestant Bibles were coming into being.

In Nephi's vision the angel described the Bible as a record of the Jews, noting that it contains (1) the covenants of the Lord to the house of Israel, (2) many of the prophecies of the holy prophets, that (3) it is a record similar to the plates of brass, only smaller, and also (4) is a record of the gospel of the Lord as taught by the Twelve Apostles (1 Ne. 13:23-24).

After establishing beyond question with Nephi that the early American settlers of the seventeenth century had a Bible, the angel then proceeded to explain to him that the Bible he saw in their hands was not the same as when it was originally written by the Jews. The words of the angel are given thus:

"And the angel of the Lord said unto me: Thou hast beheld that the book proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew; and when it proceeded forth from the mouth of a Jew it contained the fulness of the gospel of the Lord, of whom the twelve apostles bear record; and they bear record according to the truth which is in the Lamb of God.

"Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in God.

"And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the formation of that great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away" (1 Ne. 13:24-26; italics added).

The angel's words are plain and to the point: When the biblical records were originally written by the Jewish prophets and apostles, they contained the fulness of the gospel. When these records went to the Gentiles, some valuable plain and precious things were taken out of them. That this reduction was deliberate and not simply caused by carelessness or by the difficulties encountered by transcription and translation is further emphasized by the angel:

"And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men.

"Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone forth through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God" (1 Ne. 13:27-28).

If the foregoing words say anything, they say that the alteration of the text was deliberate and intentional and extensive and for unholy and wicked purposes. It is plain also that the corruption of the text was not simply a matter of interpretation or an awkward rendering of a few passages. It was not simply "lost in the translation." The words of the angel specify that "there are many plain and precious things taken away" from and "out of" the "book of the Lamb of God" (1 Ne. 13:28-29; italics added; see also vv. 32, 34). He also said that "many covenants of the Lord have they taken away" (v. 26). This explanation gives us to understand why the Bible in its reduced form—the Protestant and Catholic versions of the seventeenth century—is smaller than the plates of brass, as noted in verse 23. This comparative expression by the angel gives us a clue as to just how much has been taken away and lost from our present Bible. The plates of brass contained a record beginning with the five books of Moses down to Jeremiah—only a portion of the time period of the Old Testament and none of the New—yet the reduced version of the whole Bible—the Bible with which we are acquainted, containing both the Old and New Testaments—is "not so many" as the record on the plates of brass.

The angel then explained to Nephi the history of the Bible. After many plain and precious things were taken out of the Bible, it then—in its reduced form—went throughout the nations of the Gentiles (evidently Europe) and eventually to America and then to the Lamanites. Here are the exact words of the prophecy:

"And after these plain and precious things were taken away it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles; and after it goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles, yea, even across the many waters which thou hast seen with the Gentiles which have gone forth out of captivity, thou seest—because of the many plain and precious things which have been taken out of the book, which were plain unto the understanding of the children of men, according to the plainness which is in the Lamb of God—because of these things which are taken away out of the Gospel of the Lamb, an exceedingly great many do stumble, yea, insomuch that Satan hath great power over them" (1 Ne. 13:29; italics added).

The changes and losses made the Bible not so easy to understand, and thus there are many interpretations and disputations about what is required for salvation.

According to the sequence and the declaration of this prophecy, speaking of things to me as though they had already happened, it is seen that the nations of the Gentiles—the Roman Empire, the Mediterranean world of the early centuries after Christ—never did have a complete Bible, for it was reduced and altered before it was distributed among them. Unfortunately there are no original copies of the Bible manuscripts available today for comparison. The earliest known manuscripts of the New Testament are dated two centuries or more after the time of the Apostles, except for very small fragments. The persecutions against Christianity in the first and second centuries seem to have helped destroy the manuscripts of that time. It appears self-evident from this remarkable vision given to Nephi that the earliest complete New Testament texts available today—among which are the Vaticanus, the Alexandrinus, and Sinaiticus (all fourth century a.d.)—are of such a date that they represent the text in its reduced and altered form, not in its original state. When Constantine made Christianity the state religion of the empire at about a.d. 313, he ordered Eusebius to prepare fifty copies of the New Testament. The great uncials—Vaticanus, Sinaiticus, and such—are possibly survivors of this order.

Alteration to the Text Was Early

In order for an alteration to have widespread effect, the text would have to be tampered with early enough that multiple copies were not already extant. In other words, the alteration had to be early and by a person or persons having access to very early records and first-generation copies. This is what we today would call an "inside job." We should not be too surprised that this could happen, for in our own dispensation and with our own scripture, we have had a similar thing. We have suffered the loss of 116 pages of translation from the gold plates—what would have been the book of Lehi in the Book of Mormon. We also lost the earliest official history of the Church from 1830 to 1838 through the perfidy of the then Church historian, John Whitmer. Having such a parallel in our own history, Latter-day Saints should be able to visualize the kinds of things that can happen to a sacred record, and what 1 Ne. 13 says did happen to the Bible centuries ago. The Book of Mormon was written for our day. It is written for our learning and understanding. Does it not seem apparent that Nephi's vision has been preserved by the Lord because he wants us to know these very things and have these views about the Bible? The vision was not for Nephi alone, but for us also.

Lack of an Adequate Manuscript

That the problem with the text of the Bible is much larger than translation of language or the misplacement of a few words was repeatedly taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith. We are dealing with a matter of transmission (which includes copying, translating, revising, editing, interpreting, adding to, and taking from) and not simply translation of language alone. Note several statements from the Prophet Joseph:

"From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of men, had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled" (1832). [^8]

"I am now going to take exceptions to the present translation of the Bible in relation to these matters [the books of Daniel and Revelation]. Our latitude and longitude can be determined in the original Hebrew with far greater accuracy than in the English version. There is a grand distinction between the actual meaning of the prophets and the present translation" (1843-44). [^9]

"There are many things in the Bible which do not, as they now stand, accord with the revelations of the Holy Ghost to me" (1843-44). [^10]

"I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors" (1843-44). [^11]

These and other statements by the Prophet show that he regarded problems in the present text of the Bible to be the result not only of translation of language but also a loss of actual text, and a willful changing and editing of the text in ancient times. As Moroni asked: "Why have ye transfigured the holy word of God . . . ?" (Morm. 8:33). These expressions give us a broader understanding of what is meant by the eighth Article of Faith: "We believe the Bible to be the word of God as far as it is translated correctly." Although he used the word translated, the Prophet obviously had in mind a wider meaning, such as the term transmitted; for as his own statements illustrate, there was more involved than mere translation of languages. From the words of Joseph Smith and also the vision of Nephi, we can see that the intended meaning of the eight article is, "We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is transmitted correctly." Editing, adding to, taking from, as well as translating, have all contributed to the present condition of the Bible.

With this point firmly in place, we can see that the real condition of the Bible is not that we lack capable men or women who can read and translate from the ancient languages. The problem is the absence today of an adequate, complete, and accurate manuscript to translate.

Prophecies of the Restoration of Lost Material

I have noticed that whenever the Lord predicts a loss or a falling away, he also speaks of a restoration, a return of that which is lost. This is true not only of priesthood and of church organization, but also of scripture. As we see with the words of the angel to Nephi, "Neither will the Lord God suffer that the Gentiles shall forever remain in that awful state of blindness, which thou beholdest they are in, because of the plain and most precious parts of the gospel of the Lamb which have been kept back by that abominable church, whose formation thou hast seen" (1 Ne. 13:32).

The loss of so many plain and precious parts has rendered some doctrinal things in the Bible obscure and ambiguous. Also the purposes of God are not so well discerned in the Bible as they were originally.

After explaining that the Gentiles in America will take the Bible to the Lamanites, the angel showed Nephi that the lost and missing parts will be restored through "other books":

"And the angel spake unto me, saying: These last records, which thou hast seen among the Gentiles, shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them; and shall make known to all kindreds, tongues, and people, that the Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved" (1 Ne. 13:39-40).

The "other books" and "last records" spoken of in these two verses no doubt include the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, and the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible. The "other books" could also include the record of the ten tribes that will yet come to us. These books, which are our standard works, do indeed make known many passages that are lost and also tell of whole books that are missing from the Bible. They also clarify many doctrinal concepts. A similar prophecy, telling of a loss and then a restoration of Moses' writings, is found in Moses 1:40-41.

The angel continues the theme of restoration by stating that the "words of the Lamb" of God, who is Jesus Christ, shall be established and "made known in the records of thy seed [the Book of Mormon], as well as in the records of the twelve apostles of the Lamb [the New Testament]; wherefore they both shall be established in one; for there is one God and one Shepherd over all the earth" (1 Ne. 13:41). Every significant doctrinal question raised at the Nicene Council in a.d. 325 and in church councils and debates in the past sixteen hundred years of the Apostasy has been answered in the Book of Mormon and other latter-day revelation.

Additional Scripture Yet to Be Restored

The Book of Mormon not only confirms and certifies the truth of the biblical records, but by its very existence it shows that the Bible is not the complete source for the word of God. It makes clear that the Jewish record once had more books and that even the books we do have are reduced in size in some instances. We understand that these will eventually be restored to their original purity. We now have thirty-nine books in the Old Testament and twenty-seven in the New Testament, making a total of sixty-six books in all. In our present Church Sunday School curriculum, we take one year to study the Old Testament and another to study the New Testament. At BYU we use two semesters on the undergraduate level to go through the Old Testament and two more semesters to study the New Testament. There are also graduate-level advanced courses with another seven hours for the Old Testament and six hours for the New Testament.

With the clearer insight concerning the Bible and the promise of eventual restoration, we will someday have to take a much longer time to study the Bible when we have it in its complete and restored form. I can visualize that at some future semester at BYU, the Religion Department offering for the Bible will contain courses not only in the present two Old Testament courses, 301 and 302 (two hours each), but a semester in Brass Plates 303 (five hours), with an emphasis on the prophecies of Joseph in Egypt. We now have Old Testament 304 specializing in Isaiah. When the plates of brass are restored, we will need Old Testament 305, Zenock; 306, Zenos; and 307, the prophecies of Neum (each with three credit hours). At this rate, it could take a student four years just to take the beginning courses in the Old Testament alone. Instead of the present thirteen hours in an Old Testament offering, there could be as many as forty credit hours with the undergraduate and graduate offerings. An equal enlargement would be necessary with the New Testament. And we did not even mention courses in Lost Tribes 101, 102, and 103—three courses of two hours each, using as the text the record yet to come forth giving their history and an account of the Savior's visit to show his resurrected body to them (see 3 Ne. 17:4).

The Book of Mormon curriculum will likewise have to be enlarged. We will not only need the two beginning courses, 121 and 122, presently in the curriculum, but when the time of restitution really descends upon us, there probably will be courses in the Book of Morm. 123, Readings from the 116 Lost Pages (two hours); Book of Morm. 124, the Twenty-four Gold Plates of Ether (four hours); 125, 126, and 127, the Sealed Plates, containing a revelation "from the beginning of the world until the end thereof" (five hours each). Advanced courses might read as follows: 531, the Large Plates of Nephi, Mosiah; 532, Large Plates, Alma; 533, Large Plates, Helaman; and so on through the entire collection. This is in contrast to our offering today of a four-hour survey course on the Book of Mormon, and a four-hour upper-division course, and eight hours of graduate course work in Book of Mormon, making sixteen in all. At some future day there will be so many records available on the Book of Mormon alone that we could sensibly have forty to fifty information-packed semester hours in the Book of Mormon and a like number of biblical course selections. And all this because of the restoration of records that are mentioned in the Book of Mormon that are yet to be made available to us.

All of these records, being sacred and being translated by the power of God, will contain the truth and will shed additional light on man's origin and man's history in the world and his early culture and high civilization. These new records will also confirm what we already know in the scripture we now have. Thus, there will be a need also for revised courses about the ancient world and revised courses in American history before a.d. 1600. There will be a need also for revised courses in ancient civilization and in the origin of language, origin of writing, and the origin of man. Present courses on these subjects will no doubt be seen as inadequate and even erroneous in light of revealed knowledge.

The Law of Witnesses Is Operative with the Book of Mormon

It is not only desirable that the Book of Mormon should substantiate the Bible and supply certain missing parts, it is absolutely necessary for eternal justice. It appears that in the economy of God there must be more than one witness of the truths that are taught to mankind. Without a second or third witness, the law cannot be binding and valid in the day of judgment.

The law of witnesses is stated in Deut. 19:15 as follows: "At the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall the matter be established." This principle is referred to by Jesus in Matt. 18:16: "Take with thee one or two more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established." Paul likewise alludes to this law in 1 Tim. 5:19; 2 Cor. 13:1; and Heb. 10:28.

We have an interesting account of Jesus invoking the law of witnesses in John 5:31. The whole episode of John 5 is an encounter between Jesus and the Jewish rulers, with legal implications. Jesus said, "If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true." In plainer terms, the meaning is this: "If I am the only witness, my witness is not legally valid and binding."

Jesus then established John the Baptist as a witness for him (vv. 32-34). He further declared that he had more witness than the testimony of John. He identified this further witness as the testimony of his divine works; the testimony that the Father has given of him (v. 37), and also the testimony of the scriptures (v. 39), especially those things written by Moses (vv. 45-47). A short time later in John chapter 8, the Pharisees verbally attacked Jesus and said: "Thou bearest record of thyself; thy record is not true [that is, not legally valid]" (John 8:13). Jesus replied:

"I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me.

"It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true.

"I am one that bear witness of myself, and the Father that sent me beareth witness of me" (John 8:16-18).

An honest, candid reader with only a fourth-grade education can see that the Old and New Testaments teach that God himself establishes his truth in the earth by virtue of the law of witnesses and leaves men without excuse. The concept is clear and open and without argument or equivocation.

It must be equally clear to any reader that since Jesus invokes his Father as his second witness in John 8:18, the Father and the Son must be two separate men; otherwise, they are not two witnesses and could not fulfill the requirement wherein Jesus says, "I am one witness and the Father is the other witness."

We thus have this eternal and divine principle showing that God uses witnesses to establish his word. And so in like manner we have been given the Book of Mormon to establish the truth of the Bible—not just the truth of the Bible as history and as a cultural record, but to establish the greatest truth that the Bible was intended to declare, and that is to prove that the testimony of Jesus Christ contained in the scriptures is true and correct.

President Brigham Young gave this instruction:

"There is not that person on the face of the earth who has had the privilege of learning the Gospel of Jesus Christ from these two books, that can say that one is true, and the other is false. No Latter-day Saint, no man or woman, can say the Book of Mormon is true, and at the same time say that the Bible is untrue. If one be true, both are; and if one be false, both are false." [^12]

President Heber J. Grant added this:

"All my life I have been finding additional evidences that the . . . Book of Mormon is the greatest witness for the truth of the Bible that has ever been published." [^13]

The Time Is Right for a Second Witness to the Bible to Appear

Most of the Christian world today professes to hold the Bible in high esteem as a religious record—both the Old Testament and the New Testament. Our Jewish brethren profess a belief in the Old Testament as a record of their fathers. Yet it seems evident that the Bible has suffered neglect at the hands of millions who, while having certain reverence for the Bible as a religious record, have multiple doubts about its inspiration and historical accuracy. We do not have to go very far to find biblical adherents who at the same time doubt the story of creation in Genesis (the Garden of Eden story), who hold the Fall of man as a myth, who systematically reject the miracles of the Old and the New Testament, and who look upon Jesus Christ as a great teacher of ethics but hesitate to think of him as the divine and literal Son of God, and doubt that he rose from the grave with a tangible, physical, immortal body.

Millions professing faith in the Bible do not believe in the gift of prophecy, the ministry of angels, or the blessings of continued revelation. This is a great contradiction and inconsistency, but many seem to be in that situation. President Brigham Young had noticed this same tendency among the people and is reported to have said: "We take this book, the Bible, which I expect to see voted out of the so-called Christian world very soon, they are coming to it as fast as possible, I say we take this book for our guide." [^14]

At another time President Young declared:

"The Bible is true. It may not all have been translated aright, and many precious things may have been rejected in the compilation and translation of the Bible; but we understand, from the writings of one of the Apostles, that if all the sayings and doings of the Savior had been written, the world could not contain them. I will say that the world could not understand them. They do not understand what we have on record, nor the character of the Savior, as delineated in the Scriptures." [^15]

The way in which churches vote out the Bible is simply that they continue to use it for an ethical guide but stop believing what it teaches historically and doctrinally.

We are in the habit of using the Bible to prove the Book of Mormon is true, but as we have seen in various passages used in this chapter, the opposite should be the case. We should gain a testimony of the Book of Mormon by the Spirit and use it to prove that the Bible is true. The Book of Mormon has come to us directly through the intervention of heavenly beings and revelation. One of its purposes, as declared by the Lord himself in D&C 20:11, is to prove to the world that the "holy scriptures [the Bible] are true."

Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written:

"There is, however, one great difference between the Bible and the Book of Mormon that shows why some people can disbelieve the Bible and let the matter drop, but disbelieving the Book of Mormon, they find themselves compelled to arise in wrath and defame the Nephite record. It is that people who believe the Bible, as they suppose, can also believe any creed of their choice and belong to any church that suits them. But belief in the Book of Mormon presupposes the acceptance of Joseph Smith as a prophet as well as membership in the church organized by him. . . .

"Further, the Bible is difficult to interpret and understand, and reasonable men, approaching it wholly from an intellectual standpoint, can reach divergent conclusions on almost all doctrines—hence, the many contending sects in Christendom. The Bible [because it has been flawed by man] is indeed the perfect tool to support every conceivable doctrinal view. But the Book of Mormon is otherwise; this American scripture sets forth the doctrines of salvation in simplicity and plainness so that reasonable men, even from an intellectual standpoint, can scarcely disagree. This leaves religionists in the position where they must freely accept or openly oppose the Nephite scripture. There is no middle ground, no readily available gray area, no room for compromise." [^16]

It appears that the time is right in the history of mankind for the Book of Mormon to come forth from the Lord as another witness for the Lord Jesus Christ to sustain and support the truths already taught in the Bible. This has a double effect—first, it blesses the believer and guides him to the truth; and second, it leaves the unbeliever without excuse on the day of judgment.

We live in a materialistic and humanistic society in which it is popular to place one's trust in the learning of man, in worldly norms, and in physical comforts. Such a lifestyle does not require prayer, faith, sacrifice, or obedience to divine laws. It does not call for or expect, or even want, divine intervention. In such an environment, the things of God can be easily disregarded and neglected. In 2 Ne. 29:8-14 we read that the testimony of two nations is a witness for God. We are given to understand in that chapter that we will eventually have three major written sources of scripture: the record of the Jews—the Bible, which is a testament of Jesus Christ; the record of the Nephites—the Book of Mormon, which is another testament of Jesus Christ; and the record of the ten tribes—a third testament of Jesus Christ—three witnesses to the truth of the gospel of Jesus Christ: that he is the literal Son of God, that he shed his blood for atonement, died, and that he rose from the grave in splendor and physical perfection. And we are further invited to consider the fact that out of these records we shall be judged of God for our eternal salvation.

Notes

From Monte S. Nyman and Charles D. Tate Jr., eds., The Book of Mormon: First Nephi, the Doctrinal Foundation (Provo: Religious Studies Center, 1988), 193-215.

---
Notas:
[^1] Baptism at Bethabara The Time Element Scribes and Pharisees In the 3 Nephi account Jesus is a God, giving commandments that must not be ignored, whereas the speaker thought the Bible account tended more toward the idea of Jesus being only a teacher in the community. He noted that the Nephite version contains many expressions of "behold," "verily, verily," and the like, making Jesus a pronouncer of divine truth. Merrill F. Unger, Unger's Bible Dictionary (Chicago: Moody Press, 1985), 138, s.v. "Bethabara."
[^2] The Lamb of God The Recipients of Each Sermon "Neither by Jerusalem" The Nephite account emphasizes believing, being baptized, and coming unto Jesus, which the speaker pointed out are not found in the Matthew account. Krister Stendahl, "The Sermon on the Mount and Third Nephi," in Reflections on Mormonism: Judaeo-Christian Parallels, ed. Truman G. Madsen (Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1978), 139-54.
[^3] "The Uttermost Senine" He recognized that 3 Nephi gives greater attention to Jesus as the Messiah than does Matthew. In Matthew the attention is centered on the teaching; in 3 Nephi the attention is on Christ. Ibid., 152-54.
[^4] "Without a Cause" He noticed that in Matthew it says, "Bring thy gift to the altar" (Matt. 5:23), whereas the 3 Nephi account states, "If ye . . . desire to come unto me" (3 Ne. 12:23; italics added), then bring your gift to the altar, which tends to place the emphasis on Jesus and not on the altar. It is Jesus, not the altar that is most important in 3 Nephi.
[^5] "After All These Things Do the Gentiles Seek" He noted what he called a "preoccupation" in 3 Nephi with the right relation between the law of Moses and the prophecies, and what had been fulfilled and what had not been fulfilled. This clarification, he noticed, is lacking in Matthew.
[^6] "Thy Kingdom Come" The speaker noted that the phrase "he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes" (Matt. 7:29) is not in the Nephite account; but he also noted that the first ten verses of the chapter immediately following the Nephite sermon give an expansion on the very theme of Jesus' authority, thus giving the subject of authority even greater emphasis than the Matthew account (see 3 Ne. 15:1-10).
[^7] "Give Us This Day Our Daily Bread" He further observed that the Nephite account gives a Johannine style or exposition of Jesus, which the speaker said was much different from the image of Jesus given in the synoptic Gospels. In the synoptic Gospels Jesus employs symbols to make the point in his teaching. He talks about the kingdom, the shepherd, the seed, and so forth; but in John and in 3 Nephi, Jesus puts himself forth in a little different way and says, "I am the way," "I am the shepherd," "I am the vine," "I am the law," "I am the light." I would like to add that perhaps this is why the Gospel of John has no parables but does have two allegories (see John 10:1-15; 15:1). In parables we find such things as the kingdom of heaven is like this or that, whereas an allegory is more direct.
[^8] Ibid., 14:135-36; italics added.
[^9] Bruce R. McConkie, A New Witness for the Articles of Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), 460-61.
[^10] See John Hick, ed., The Myth of God Incarnate (London: SCM Press Ltd., 1977).
[^11] Ezra Taft Benson, The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 49-50.
