Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 7

Some Comparisons of the Book of Mormon with the Old and New Testaments

We will examine some of the ways in which the Book of Mormon and the Bible clarify, enlarge upon, or complement each other. In this Church we do not disparage the Bible, but we recognize that the Book of Mormon is an indispensable guide to a better comprehension of the Bible. The scriptures say that the Book of Mormon and the Bible will grow together to give increased understanding to the reader.

The Lord often uses secular scholarship to bring forth tangible proof that supports what he has already revealed to the Saints through his prophets and which they will have learned by the Spirit. Secular research today is supplying the details that undergird the principles of bodily health that the Lord revealed through Joseph Smith a long time ago as the Word of Wisdom. The same thing is true of other facets of history and doctrine found in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, and the other standard works. We read in 2 Ne. 27:21 that the Lord says, "I will show unto the children of men that I am able to do mine own work." In 2 Ne. 11:3 it is recorded that "God sendeth more witnesses, and he proveth all his words." Many of the archaeological discoveries coming forth support the word of the Lord.

Invasion of Canaan

When the Israelites entered the land of Canaan, they began to drive out the people there. This continued down to the time of David, with the people of Israel being taken captive and the slaying of many people. The justification for this is not easily found in the Bible, but it is given in the Book of Mormon. At this juncture we see Nephi reasoning with his unbelieving brothers and trying to persuade them that the God of Israel, who led their fathers, will also lead them. Referring to the time when the Israelites drove out the Canaanites, he said:

"Do ye suppose that the children of this land, . . . who were driven out by our fathers, . . . were righteous? Behold, I say unto you, Nay.

"Do ye suppose that our fathers would have been more choice than they if they [these other people] had been righteous? I say unto you, Nay. . . .

" . . . But behold, this people had rejected every word of God, and they were ripe in iniquity; and the fulness of the wrath of God was upon them; and the Lord did curse the land against them, and bless it unto our fathers" (1 Ne. 17:33-35).

Except in a small reference to Abraham, the Bible does not mention the important detail of this people's iniquity. The Lord told Abraham that his seed could not possess the land as yet, "for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full" (Gen. 15:16). The Book of Mormon enlarges on this theme and gives a reason for what was done: "And he [the Lord] raiseth up a righteous nation, and destroyeth the nations of the wicked" (1 Ne. 17:37).

The Holy One of Israel

The title "Holy One of Israel" occurs thirty-four times in the Bible. It is chiefly an Isaiah term, occurring twenty-seven times in the book of Isaiah, three times in Psalms, twice in Jeremiah, and once in Ezekiel. It is also found in 2 Kgs. 19:22, but it is Isaiah speaking at that point, so all in all, the prophet Isaiah uses the term twenty-eight of the thirty-four times it appears in the Bible. By comparison, the Book of Mormon uses "Holy One of Israel" forty times, of which nine are in 1 Nephi, twenty-eight are in 2 Nephi, two are in Omni, and one is in 3 Nephi. A bright student would probably figure out by himself who the Holy One of Israel is, but there is a clear statement in 2 Ne. 25:29 that "Christ is the Holy One of Israel."

The world of biblical scholarship talks about what it calls the "Isaiah problem." This is the idea that there were at least two Isaiahs and that the book of Isaiah was written by at least two men at widely different times. This separation is supposedly ascertained by differences in content, vocabulary, literary style, and the like. It is held that chapters 1-39 are by one Isaiah and chapters 40-66 are by the other. I have found it interesting that the term "Holy One of Israel," which as we have noted is almost exclusively an Isaiah phrase, is about equally distributed throughout these two parts of the book of Isaiah. That is, of the twenty-seven times this phrase occurs in the book of Isaiah, thirteen of them are found within chapters 1-39, and fourteen are within chapters 40-66. The point is that this special phrase, "the Holy One of Israel," is a unique Isaiah term; it attests to the unity of the book of Isaiah, and it suggests that the same man wrote it all.

Jesus Is the God of the Whole Earth

The Book of Mormon emphasizes magnificently that Jesus is the God of the whole earth and that he has manifested himself among all nations. I believe we too often think in terms of only three groups: the Jews, the Nephites, and the ten tribes. But the Book of Mormon paints a picture that is much more colorful than that:

"For I command all men, both in the east and in the west, and in the north, and in the south, and in the islands of the sea, that they shall write the words which I speak unto them. . . .

"For behold, I shall speak unto the Jews and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the Nephites and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto the other tribes of the house of Israel, which I have led away, and they shall write it; and I shall also speak unto all nations of the earth and they shall write it" (2 Ne. 29:11-12).

Alma wanted to be an angel so that he could preach to the whole world. Then he reconsidered, saying that it was not his calling to do that, for the Lord had other men in other lands to do it, and he ought to be content with his own assignment. Alma said:

"Why should I desire that I were an angel, that I could speak unto all the ends of the earth?

"For behold, the Lord doth grant unto all nations, of their own nation and tongue, to teach his word, yea, in wisdom, all that he seeth fit that they should have" (Alma 29:7-8).

These references give added meaning to the statement Jesus made when he came to the Nephites after his resurrection and declared, "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, . . . the God of the whole earth" (3 Ne. 11:10, 14). We read also from the title page of the Book of Mormon that "Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself unto all nations."

Now I know that all of us believe that Jesus is the God of the whole earth, but have we really appreciated what that means? He has not been an absent landlord, his has not been a "caretaker" administration, but he has been actively working among all peoples, giving them what they could bear—to some a little more, to others a little less. This is a major point in the Book of Mormon, for it tells us who Jesus is and what he has been doing. The Book of Mormon would not be the powerful witness for Christ that it is if it did not emphasize his worldwide activity.

Consider for a moment what this concept can do when applied to the wise men from the East who came to see Jesus soon after his birth, as recorded in Matthew, chapter 2. Who were these wise men? We do not know their names, but they must have been prophets from somewhere east of Jerusalem. They were spiritually alive and awake. They could see the star that others did not see. They knew the meaning of the star. They wanted to see the Christ child to worship him, but they didn't have certain Jewish scriptures, so they had to ask some questions locally. They were able to be guided by dreams and were warned to go home by a different path for their safety. I'm sure it was a great honor to visit the Christ child and to take him gifts. Not just anyone could do that, nor would just anyone recognize the signs of his birth. These men went by divine appointment and were to return to their people and bear record that they knew that the Son of God had come upon the earth, for they had seen him for themselves. To the Nephites, the Lord gave the sign of a day and a night and a day without any darkness (see 3 Ne. 1:12-21) as evidence that the Messiah was born. To the people in the East, the Lord gave these wise men as special witnesses, that they could testify of the same miraculous event: the birth of the Son of God. The Book of Mormon gives us the foundation for believing that these wise men could be prophets, for it declares that the Lord has been at work among all nations and all people.

John the Beloved

John, known as the Beloved and also as John the Revelator, is mentioned by name three times (see 1 Ne. 14:27; 3 Ne. 28:6; Ether 4:16) in the Book of Mormon, and his particular work is identified nearly six hundred years before he was born (see 1 Ne. 14:18-27). It is specified in the Book of Mormon that John would be an Apostle of Jesus Christ among the Jews (see 1 Ne. 14:23), and that by his request he would not die a natural death in the manner of men but would experience a physical change that would prolong his earthly ministry until the Second Coming of the Lord (see 3 Ne. 28:6-8). The great revelations written by John were eventually to be unfolded to the eyes of all people (see Ether 4:16). Nephi was given the same vision that John was to see but was told that it was not his privilege to write it, for the Lord had ordained John to do it (see 1 Ne. 14:24-25). Of no other member of the Jewish Twelve does the Book of Mormon speak so emphatically; he is the only one of them who is mentioned by name in the Book of Mormon.

But the relationship of John the Revelator and the Book of Mormon goes further than the specific items mentioned above. Two instances of this relationship are as follows:

The book of 1 Nephi chapter 10, contains a prophecy by Lehi about the prophet who would prepare the way before the Lord and would then baptize the Lord. The prophet is not mentioned by name, but the reference to John the Baptist is unmistakable. The language reminds us of the first chapter of John's Gospel. Of particular interest is the statement that he would baptize "in Bethabara, beyond Jordan" (1 Ne. 10:9).

Although each of the four Gospels gives an account of the ministry of John the Baptist, only the Gospel of John states that the Baptist was at Bethabara (John 1:28). The word Bethabara appears only this one time in the New Testament, and then only in the King James Version. The majority of the manuscripts on which the newer Bible translations are based (and also the Catholic Douay) have the word Bethany instead of Bethabara. This is usually identified as a second Bethany, of unknown locale, not the familiar Bethany near Jerusalem. The manuscripts from which the King James Version was translated contain the word Bethabara, and the Book of Mormon text supports this rendering. Note the specific and deliberate way this matter is presented in each record:

King James Version

"These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing.

"The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him, and saith, Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world" (John 1:28-29).

Book of Mormon

"And my father said he [the prophet] should baptize in Bethabara, beyond Jordan; and he also said . . . that he should baptize the Messiah with water.

"And after he had baptized the Messiah with water, he should behold and bear record that he had baptized the Lamb of God, who should take away the sins of the world" (1 Ne. 10:9-10).

I understand that Bethabara really did exist as a geographic location, that it was part of John the Baptist's ministry and the place of Jesus' baptism. The word Bethabara is Aramaic, meaning "house [or place] of the ford." [^1] Bethabara, being built up for a crossing of the river, could have a pool on the uphill side and would be a likely place for baptism by immersion.

The four Gospels give many name-titles for the Savior. The writings of John, however, show a distinct preference for Lamb (generally Lamb of God) and Messiah. These terms never occur in the books of Matthew, Mark, or Luke, but are used in the Gospel of John and in the book of Revelation. Curiously enough, these very terms are frequently used in the writings of Nephi, and especially so in the prophetic or revelatory parts, such as 1 Nephi chapters 10-14 and 2 Nephi chapters 31-33. For example, in 1 and 2 Nephi the word Lamb is used twenty-nine times and Lambof God thirty-two times, a total of sixty-one times. Helaman (6:5) used Lamb once, Alma used Lamb of God three times (Alma 7:14; 13:11; 34:36), and Moroni used Lamb twice (Ether 13:10-11) and Lamb of God once (Morm. 9:2). Therefore, Lamb of God is used seven times. Lamb and Lamb of God are used a total of sixty-eight times, of which Nephi used the terms sixty-one times. (Although much of 1 and 2 Nephi consist of the teachings of Jacob, Jacob does not use this term.)

The terms Lamb and Lamb of God are used in the Gospels only by John the Beloved, and then only in the first chapter of John and in the book of Revelation. In the Revelation of John the word Lamb is used twenty-seven times with reference to Jesus. This is remarkable, since John and Nephi had the same vision and they used the same language.

Just what do these statistics mean? The complete significance probably isn't yet perceived by us. But whatever the meaning, it is evident that there exists a close relationship between John the Beloved and the Book of Mormon, especially the part of it that Nephi wrote. This relationship exists not only by direct reference to the man John, but also in similarity of language, terminology, and subject matter. This may eventually become a literary point for the authenticity of the Book of Mormon as manuscripts such as the Dead Sea Scrolls are discovered. This will continue to demonstrate that the writings of John the Beloved are solidly Jewish in content and in style. Nephi and John both used the terms Lamb, Lamb of God, and Bethabara; and Nephi and John each had the same apocalyptic vision (see 1 Ne. 14:19-27). In the meantime, the Book of Mormon continues to serve as a witness for the authenticity of the biblical record, and in this particular case for the correctness of the King James Version of the Bible (in the use of the word Bethabara). No doubt in time to come we shall learn of the full significance of the Johannine-type of language in the Book of Mormon. I simply want to point out that there is a striking relationship.

Some people might wish to explain this on the basis that Joseph Smith was simply impressed with the writings of John and so used that style of language in making the Book of Mormon translation. If this were the case, we'd have to ask, Why, then, are these words limited almost exclusively to Nephi's writings and to the prophetic or revelatory parts? And why do these words not occur in the writings of Jacob that are interspersed among Nephi's words?

The Savior's Sermon to the Nephites Compared to the Sermon on the Mount

The most striking and lengthy parallel between the Book of Mormon and the New Testament is the Savior's sermon to the Nephites recorded in 3 Ne. 12-14. It immediately reminds us of the Sermon on the Mount recorded in Matthew, chapters 5-7. Not only is the subject matter in the same sequence, but the phraseology is nearly identical in numerous and extensive passages.

The Sermon on the Mount has been quoted out of context probably more than any other sermon on record. We have sources to help us correctly understand it—Matthew in the King James Version, Matthew in the Joseph Smith Translation, and 3 Nephi in the Book of Mormon.

At the close of the Lord's sermon to the Nephites he said, "Behold, ye have heard the things which I taught [to the Jews] before I ascended to my Father" (3 Ne. 15:1). It seems likely that when the Prophet Joseph found the similarity of subject matter on the Nephite plates, he turned to the King James Version for a guide and a pattern in the translation. Anyone who examines the two records will perceive that in some instances he followed the King James Version rather closely but not completely.

An analysis of the two sermons also brings many differences, some of which are of fundamental importance to one's awareness. A number of these are as follows:

The Sermon on the Mount was delivered during the Savior's mortal ministry, before his Atonement, and while the law of Moses was still in effect; whereas, the sermon to the Nephites was after the law was fulfilled and the Savior was in a resurrected, glorified condition.

The account in Matthew assigns the fulfillment of the law to the future tense; the Nephite record uses the past tense. Note also the emphasis on Jesus as the fulfiller, and that we ought to come unto him.

King James Version

"Think not that I am come to destroy the law, or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to fulfill.

"For verily I say unto you, Till the heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be fulfilled" (Matt. 5:17-18).

Book of Mormon

"Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets. I am not come to destroy but to fulfil;

"For verily I say unto you, one jot nor one tittle hath not passed away from the law, but in me it hath all been fulfilled.

"And behold, I have given you the law and the commandments of my Father, that ye shall believe in me, and that ye shall repent of your sins, and come unto me with a broken heart and a contrite spirit. Behold, ye have the commandments before you, and the law is fulfilled. . . .

"Therefore those things which were of old time, which were under the law, in me are all fulfilled.

"Old things are done away, and all things have become new" (3 Ne. 12:17-19, 46-47; italics added).

Just whom the Sermon on the Mount was given to is not clearly specified in the King James Version. Matt. 5:1 indicates that Jesus delivered it to "his disciples"; however, it is still interpreted by many readers as though Jesus had delivered it to the multitudes, which he did not do. The Joseph Smith Translation is stronger and presents the Sermon on the Mount as a semiprivate discourse for disciples only, specifically to those who were about to go on missions. The occasion was not a public meeting.

In the sermon to the Nephites, however, certain portions are specifically directed to the multitudes who were present, and certain other portions were for the Nephite Twelve only. To recognize the difference in the audiences of these two sermons is of importance in understanding the textual differences.

Some Particulars of Geography, Culture, and Nationality

There is no mention of scribes, Pharisees, publicans, priests, or Levites in the Nephite sermon; but in the sermon recorded by Matthew, Pharisees are mentioned once (see Matt. 5:20), publicans once, and scribes twice (see Matt. 5:20; 7:29). The Joseph Smith Translation contains the same mention of scribes, Pharisees, Levites, and publicans, and in addition gives another reference to Pharisees, one more to scribes, and a reference each to priests and Levites (see JST, Matt. 7:6).

These terms are very apropos to first-century Palestine but not to Nephite culture; hence, they do not occur in the Nephite record. Reference to Pharisees and publicans would be conspicuously out of place in the Nephite sermon.

The Sermon on the Mount as recorded by Matthew makes mention of Jerusalem. The Nephite sermon does not.

King James Version

"But I say unto you, Swear not at all. . . .

"Nor by the earth; for it is his footstool: neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great King" (Matt. 5:34-35; italics added).

Joseph Smith Translation

"But I say unto you, swear not all; . . . nor by the earth, for it is his footstool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King" (Matt. 5:38; italics added).

Book of Mormon

"But verily, verily, I say unto you, swear not at all; . . .

"Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool" (3 Ne. 12:34-35).

Note that the reference to Jerusalem is not in the Nephite account, which would have been somewhat out of place.

King James Version

"Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing" (Matt. 5:26; italics added).

Book of Mormon

"Verily, verily, I say unto thee, thou shalt by no means come out thence until thou hast paid the uttermost senine. And while ye are in prison can ye pay even one senine? Verily, verily, I say unto you, Nay" (3 Ne. 12:26; italics added).

A senine is a Nephite money term and is more likely to be said to the Nephites than farthing. The Joseph Smith Translation retains the word farthing in this case. But even more interesting, the Book of Mormon elaborates and explains that you can't pay your debts while in the prison. A nice clarification.

The Nephite sermon does not contain the phrase "without a cause" after the admonition that one should not be angry with a brother.

King James Version

"But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment" (Matt. 5:22; italics added).

Joseph Smith Translation

"But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother, shall be in danger of his judgment" (Matt. 5:24; italics added).

Book of Mormon

"But I say unto you, that whosoever is angry with his brother shall be in danger of his judgment"(3 1 Ne. 12:22).

Manuscript discoveries of the New Testament since the time of Joseph Smith support the Nephite rendition, and are reflected in the various new translations of the Bible, which also omit the phrase "without a cause."

King James Version

"Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

"(For after all these things do the Gentiles seek:) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things" (Matt. 6:31-32; italics added).

Joseph Smith Translation

"Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

" . . . After all these things do the Gentiles seek.

"Behold, I say unto you, that your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things" (Matt. 6:35-37; italics added).

Book of Mormon

"Therefore take no thought, saying, What shall we eat? or, What shall we drink? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed?

"For your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all these things" (3 Ne. 13:31-32).

The comment about Gentiles is not found in the Nephite sermon. There were no Gentiles among the Nephites. The Book of Mormon prophets use the term Gentile frequently, but always in prophecy, not in day-to-day instruction to the people.

The phrase "Thy kingdom come" is not included in the Lord's Prayer in 3 Nephi. It is unlikely that the kingdom, or Church, was set up in Palestine at the time the Sermon on the Mount was given. Among the Nephites, however, there already existed an organized Church with authority and ordinances (see Mosiah 23:16; Alma 5:62). This may account for the absence of the phrase "thy kingdom come" in the Nephite sermon; the kingdom was already among them. The kingdom spoken of in this case would be the kingdom of God on earth, the Church, and not the kingdom of heaven (see D&C 65).

The sentence "Give us this day our daily bread," which is found in both the King James Version and the Joseph Smith Translation, is not found in the Book of Mormon account of the Lord's Prayer. Some people have wondered why it is not in the Nephite sermon. I think there is a very logical reason for this, and it stems from the difference in the audience to which each sermon was addressed. The biblical sermon was to the Twelve and to a few special disciples. These had been called "out of the world" and were full-time disciples, not engaged in a regular occupational livelihood. They were to take "no thought" for what they should eat or wear; that is, it was not to be a matter of chief concern with them. It was not part of their assignment. They were to depend upon the Lord and the kindness of the people for their food. It was reasonable for Jesus to teach them to pray, "Heavenly Father, give us this day our bread for the day."

The sermon to the Nephites, on the other hand, was directed to a multitude of people who were obliged to labor to obtain food for their sustenance. They were not called with the same calling that the Twelve were. A major part of their life would consist of laboring for food; therefore, they were not directed to ask the Father for their daily bread in the specific sense in which the Twelve were to ask, since they were expected to labor for it in the usual way, common to mankind.

The Effect of the Sermon

The King James Version and the Joseph Smith Translation state that the effect of the Sermon on the Mount was one of astonishment, for Jesus spoke not as the scribes but as one having authority.

King James Version

"And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were astonished at his doctrine:

"For he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes" (Matt. 7:28-29).

Joseph Smith Translation

"And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings with his disciples, the people were astonished at his doctrine;

"For he taught them as one having authority from God, and not as having authority from the Scribes" (Matt. 7:36-37; italics added).

The Nephite account also tells the effect of the sermon, but does not have the phrase about astonishment nor the one about the scribes. It does, however, describe a much different situation (see 3 Ne. 15:2-9). An item of major importance to the Nephite listeners was the Lord's comment that "Old things are done away, and all things have become new" (3 Ne. 12:47). This statement was not included in the sermon delivered to the Jews. This single statement, which perhaps most listeners today would let pass over with hardly a notice, even when listening care-fully, was a thing of marvel and wonder to those Nephites who were present at the delivery. We might ask, "Why were they so surprised?"

Today we are so oriented to the concept of the law of Moses having been fulfilled and the gospel being among us that the above statement causes us few if any vibrations. But to those living at the time of the change, the idea seemed outstanding. This detail of what was impressive to the Nephite audience is consistent with the whole situation of the different settings of the two sermons, and also with the different setting in which the present-day reader finds himself. The law of Moses is simply not a pressing issue among us today and has not been since the earliest centuries. It is just as reasonable that they should be excited about it as it is that we would not be excited. It is unlikely that Joseph Smith would have been concerned with this item had he been merely constructing a story. Would he have been clever enough to have thought of its importance to the first-century people? The emphasis of the Nephite record on this point is a circumstantial situation showing the truthfulness of the Nephite sermon.

Plain and Precious Things Restored

On 11 March 1978, at the BYU campus, the dean of Harvard Divinity School gave a very interesting and instructive address in which he pointed out some differences between the Sermon on the Mount and the Nephite sermon. He is a world-famous textual critic and author and is well qualified by training and intellect to deliver such an address. He is a Christian gentleman. I thought that his findings were refreshing and informative. His observations were, in general, that the Nephite record makes Jesus to be a greater person than does the Sermon on the Mount. The following are some examples of his observations: [^2]

Enough observations; now to the interpretations. This cultured gentleman interpreted these differences as being typical of any new religion. "New religions," he said in substance, "are typically eager to know a lot of facts and are desirous of having the answers to questions; they want everything made perfectly clear." [^3] In other words, he saw the Nephite account not as an accurate, new revelation, but rather as Joseph Smith's reaction or revision of the Matthew account, exhibiting (or being typical of) the psychological needs of a new religion. He liked the Matthew version better because it is vague and indefinite. He said that to him, that was the beauty of it.

Although his interpretation may be one way of looking at the relationship of the two sermons, most of us would want a stronger approach and would take issue with those conclusions. We can all greatly benefit from this scholar's astute observations, but I for one feel that we can use the Nephite sermon to learn of some of the plain and precious things that have been taken from the Bible. Nothing would please those who corrupted the Bible more than for them to know that they had so successfully altered the Sermon on the Mount as to depict Jesus only as a great teacher, a man of the community rather than as the God of Israel, the God of the whole earth, and the Only Begotten Son of the Father. The fact that this great scholar reached the conclusion that he did is evidence that the corrupters of the biblical text have done their work very well. This illustrates all the more why the world stands in need of a new revelation, a fresh look, another witness for Christ, a corroborating witness such as the Book of Mormon to establish the truth of the Bible so that these two accounts might grow together "unto the confounding of false doctrines and laying down of contentions" (2 Ne. 3:12).

Conclusion

What, then, is a major reward or consequence of comparing the teachings of the Book of Mormon with those of the Old and New Testaments? Well, for one thing, by sensing the clarity and the plainness of the Book of Mormon we can see what things need to be emphasized in our teaching. We ought to emphasize that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself to all nations, and that his teachings are commandments, not simply ethical platitudes. It further broadens our appreciation of who the Savior is and what he has been doing with the people of the earth ever since the beginning. The Book of Mormon sets the pattern of our teaching—but sometimes we might not appreciate its plainness and how good it really is, except by contrasting it with other books and other teachers.

It is interesting to note that the Gospel of John and the Gospel of Matthew have taken a great beating from the world of textual criticism in the past hundred years. These two books have been among the most severely maligned, criticized, and questioned as to authority, dating, literary style, and authenticity in all the New Testament; yet it is these two books, and especially John, that are the most supported and authenticated by the Book of Mormon. For many years the idea was held among Bible scholars that the Gospel of John was primarily Greek in style and content. The Dead Sea Scrolls show us little real value by way of doctrine or history, but they do a great service in helping to establish the Gospel of John as a record that is very Jewish in character, style, and subject matter, and not Greekish at all, which is something that we could also discern from the Book of Mormon.

I am grateful for the record known as the Book of Mormon; it has a character, a style, a flavor, and a message all its own. I'm glad to have been able to perceive some few things not only of its teaching but also of its support of the Bible and its help in understanding the Bible and the work of the Lord on this earth. I have a testimony from the Holy Spirit that the Book of Mormon is the word of the Lord.

Notes

From theSecond Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the Book of Mormon, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, August 1978 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1978), 18-23.

---
Notas:
[^1] George Q. Cannon, in Conference Report,Oct. 1897, 38.
[^2] The Lamb of God The Recipients of Each Sermon "Neither by Jerusalem" The Nephite account emphasizes believing, being baptized, and coming unto Jesus, which the speaker pointed out are not found in the Matthew account. Krister Stendahl, "The Sermon on the Mount and Third Nephi," in Reflections on Mormonism: Judaeo-Christian Parallels, ed. Truman G. Madsen (Provo, Utah: BYU Religious Studies Center, 1978), 139-54.
[^3] "The Uttermost Senine" He recognized that 3 Nephi gives greater attention to Jesus as the Messiah than does Matthew. In Matthew the attention is centered on the teaching; in 3 Nephi the attention is on Christ. Ibid., 152-54.
