Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

The Old Testament

Chapter 10

A Tapestry Woven Throughout the Old Testament

The Lord has had one plan of salvation for man ever since the beginning of our premortal life. There have been no ordinances, covenants, doctrines, or priesthood revealed to man on the earth that did not exist in the plan in the premortal time (see D&C 132:5, 8-11).

All the promises and provisions of the gospel existed and were known by us at that time. There have been no changes in the plan.

It is probable that in the Grand Council we saw a panoramic view of the future activity of man on the earth and we saw the plan introduced to Adam, and reintroduced again and again as the need continued. We would have realized at that time that there is but one plan of the Father and that it would be introduced among mankind in various degrees of completeness at different times according to the receptivity of the people. The Old Testament contains a hint of the continuous theme of the plan and of the coming of the Son of God as the Messiah in order to bring about the salvation of the human family. In reality, the plan, the covenant, the priesthood, and the gospel are all the same thing. These concepts are plainer in the Joseph Smith Translation and in other latter-day revelation than in the King James Version. After we learn the plan from latter-day revelation and then examine the Old Testament, we can see evidences of it, but there is not enough in the King James Version to learn it from that alone.

The House of Israel

The implementation of the plan of redemption on this earth was established by covenant and priesthood with Adam, and continued through Enoch, on to Noah. As the human family increased in number, the channel through which the plan and the priesthood were focused was centered in the covenant to Abraham, with a particular family, a covenant race. As the covenant nation grew in numbers, individual families were selected from within it to fulfill certain assignments. The kings of Israel were to come primarily through Judah, which was later solidified through David and his posterity. David became the founder of the Messianic family and was promised an eternal Davidic throne (see Jer. 33:15-21; Ps. 89:1-4, 36-37; 132:11; Acts 2:29-32). This was the lineage through which the Messiah would come, who would reign forever as King of Kings. The Davidic promise reaches fulfillment through Jesus Christ. [^1]

The family of Aaron, within the tribe of Levi, was appointed to be the priests to administer the introductory ordinances and also to handle the financial and real estate affairs of the kingdom, both on earth during mortality and also in eternity. Their assignment is a permanent calling throughout all their generations (see Ex. 40:12-15; D&C 58:14-18; 84:18). [^2] Since eternity is as real as mortality, there will always be a need for the services and duties of the Aaronic Priesthood, both in time and in eternity. The Presiding Bishop will one day be of this lineage.

The tribe of Joseph, especially the family of Ephraim, was appointed to hold the priesthood birthright or firstborn privileges (see 1 Chr. 5:1-2; Jer. 31:9; D&C 133:30-35) in the last days, the time of restoration, fulfillment, and culmination of God's purposes on the earth. The birthright responsibilities of the priesthood will always be in effect, both in time and eternity. The families of David, Aaron, and Joseph each have a particular but different birthright in the overall plan.

The Old Testament prophets knew the plan and the history, and they spoke from that perspective. They knew the roles that Judah, Levi, and Joseph would play all through the Bible, and also in the Restoration. The Old Testament prophecies weave a tapestry of golden threads illustrating the roles of Judah, Joseph, and Levi. The promise is often first assigned to a whole tribe, then narrows to a family, and is often fulfilled in an individual. Thus: Judah, then David, then Christ. Also: Joseph, then Ephraim, then Joseph Smith. Also: Levi, then Aaron, and finally the Presiding Bishop.

The particular covenants, which had their beginning anciently, are as valid today as they were when first given, and will continue to unfold in the last days. The gospel covenant includes:

Everything that is contained in the plan of salvation and gospel of Jesus Christ is likewise found in embryo or in miniature terms (microcosm) in the covenant of Abraham. The terms of the covenant of Abraham are a concise way of stating the terms of the entire gospel. Whenever it is possible among mankind, all of the provisions of the gospel covenant are implemented, at which time individual items are expanded by many revelations to meet the needs of the time. This was the case with Adam and Enoch, who had the whole plan. No doubt Enoch was given many revelations about how to run his welfare program. At other times only portions of the covenant are directly involved because of the unbelief of the people. This was the case with the children of Israel when the law of Moses was given (see D&C 84:19-28). Eventually all of the covenants will be permanently in full force and operation upon the earth.

All of the promises and hopes of redemption spoken of by the prophets of the Old Testament were dependent upon the life and atonement of a Messiah who would have to be a supernatural being—more than a man—he must be a God. The groundwork of redemption from the Fall of Adam was laid by Jesus, who is Jehovah, who came to redeem all things that pertain to the earth. While on earth as a mortal, he paid the debt incurred by man's sin, and conquered death. He will return to earth to completely establish the entire plan and to set all things in order pertaining to the salvation of man and the whole world. In preparation for the Lord's glorious return, the children of Joseph are charged with the responsibility of preparing a kingdom under the Lord's direction—a kingdom that will be ready to receive him when he comes. Latter-day "Josephs" do a similar work to that done by Joseph of Egypt.3

In 365 years or so Enoch was successful in establishing a people who were righteous and of one heart, one mind, and had no poor among them—called Zion (see Moses 7:18-20).Melchizedek seems to have accomplished about the same type of thing (see JST, Gen. 14:25-40; Alma 13:14-19). The Nephites established a similar society for two hundred years after the time of the Savior (see 4 Nephi). Every prophet, beginning with Adam, would have established the complete program and implemented every gospel covenant if the people had been willing. [^3] The promise is that the most glorious kingdom finally will be established in the dispensation of the fulness of times, and it will be permanent.

Solomon in All His Glory

The house of Israel is the Lord's special instrument through which he implements his system on the earth. In David's time and in Solomon's time Israel had an excellent opportunity to establish a Zion that would have been a light and an example to all the nations.

Other Nations at the Time of David and Solomon

There was no single, great, dominating world military power in the tenth century b.c. Egypt was on a political decline and was losing its influence in outlying areas. Assyria, which would become a major power later, was just beginning. Babylon, Persia, Macedonia, and Rome would each come in its turn, but none of these was a threat to Israel at the time of David and Solomon (1000-900 b.c.).

China was a large nation, just beginning to form an empire, but was too far away to be any real threat to Israel. India and the peoples of the Indus Valley were numerous, but appeared to be disunited and were commercial nations rather than military powers.

The Jaredites in America (as in Ether chapter 10) were going through internal strife and civil war and were too far away from Israel to have any relationship; they were too weak anyway.

The Arab states of North Africa and the peoples of Syria and Mesopotamia were powerful small states, but were involved in merchandizing rather than political and military domination.

A History of Lost Opportunity

The covenant people, Israel, the Lord's own chosen treasure, had an unprecedented opportunity to demonstrate to all the known world how the people of God could prosper in true riches. Had they been united and obedient and faithful, they would have built another Zion as Enoch did.

Instead, the kings, and subsequently the people, engaged in activities unbecoming the covenant race. They wanted a king like all the other nations (see 1 Sam. 8). Individual families, such as David's, were torn by dissension, abuse, and murder. Solomon achieved a measure of material glory but at such financial stress that it precipitated a revolt and rebellion, which resulted in ten of the tribes forming their own kingdom, separate from the tribes of Judah and Benjamin (see 1 Kgs. 11-13). After that, there was continual civil war between the two parts of the house of Israel. First the ten tribes, being disobedient to the commandments, were subdued and taken away by the rising Assyrian Empire (see 2 Kgs. 17; 18:11). A little more than a century later, the Jews, also very disobedient and proud, were captured and taken away by the powerful Babylonians (see 2 Kgs. 24-25). In each case the government was crushed and the people broken, scattered, and taken physically out of the land that had been given Israel as a national home.

It is the privilege of Israel, as the covenant people of the Lord, to be a light to the nations (Gentiles). But it appears that in most instances when they should have been the teachers and the examples, they had need of someone teaching them the elementary doctrines and purposes of the gospel. They seemed to be unaware of their own special destiny and opportunity.

Amos, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Ezra, Malachi, and other Old Testament prophets, knowing the plan and the covenants, spoke of the reasons why their captivity had come and of the times when the Jews and the ten tribes would be restored to their national glory and righteous condition, and again be given their land. The prophets spoke of the roles that David, Aaron, and Joseph would play in that Restoration, not only in restoring the Jews from Babylon to Jerusalem in 500 b.c., but also in restoring all the house of Israel to the covenant and to their lands in the last days.

The Last Days—The Day of Fulfillment

Thousands of years have passed since the events of Old Testament history. But the flesh and blood descendants of ancient Israel are still on the earth, and the same covenant and the Father's only plan still holds. The literal descendants of ancient Israel have mixed themselves among the nations, and the Lord has set his hand the second time to recover Israel and establish Zion on the earth. (The first time was in bringing the Jews back to the Holy Land from Babylon and restoring them prior to Jesus' first coming.)

Joseph's flesh and blood descendants with the birthright have been called on first to begin the Restoration. The ancient covenant has been restored and reactivated. Not every provision of the covenant can be practiced at present, however; therefore, some of the economic, political, and social aspects of the plan are now held in abeyance until a more appropriate time. All of the covenants were initially restored, however, through Joseph Smith and were practiced for a short time in the 1830s and 1840s until temporarily discontinued. The Brethren still have the keys to these things, but the time has not yet come. Since no direct descendants of Aaron have been designated by revelation as bishops, high priests of the Melchizedek Priesthood have been temporarily substituted (see D&C 68:14-21). [^4]

We can benefit from the Old Testament because it shows our ancient fathers and mothers struggling with the same responsibilities and the same plan that has been given to the Church today. Because the Lord knew that the prophets would not be completely successful, he inspired them to tell of a time when success would be obtained in the last days. A view of the "big picture" gives us a perspective of where we now are in the program, where we are going, and why we should study the Old Testament—and how to benefit from its teachings and history. In many ways the books of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, Zechariah, and Malachi read like the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants.

In due time the children of Aaron (under the leadership of a presiding bishop appointed by the First Presidency) will take their destined place in the temporal affairs related to the consecration of property. The children of Joseph will build the New Jerusalem, and the other tribes, led by Judah, will rebuild the old Jerusalem. And Jesus, the Son of God, as the fulfillment of the Davidic promise, will reign in person on the earth. Although the literal descendants of Joseph have begun the restoration, all people of every lineage may join in, be grafted into the house of Israel, and participate and obtain all the blessings. Ephraim was called to be the tribe of starters, and will direct.

It is not likely that the Latter-day Saints as a whole will be the political, financial, and scientific leaders of the world before the Millennium (see 1 Cor. 1:26-29; D&C 1:23; 133:57). [^5]

Our purpose is to show the world how to live as honest citizens, as happy families, and how to be successful in the real purposes of life. Such was also the role of ancient Israel. The world is showing us how tragically transgression works on a daily basis. Our role is to show the world how gloriously the gospel works on a daily basis.

Summary

There is continuity and pattern in the Old Testament and in all the scriptures. The plan of God was complete even in the beginning and has not changed. The rules of right and of wrong and the results that flow from obedience or disobedience are always the same. Central in the whole plan is the Messiah and Redeemer, who is literally a God born to earth. The same gospel covenant, reflected in the Abrahamic covenant, still operates among the latter-day prophets and the people and is the only method that will establish a permanent and lasting Zion in which the inhabitants will be happy, will be of one mind because they are righteous, and where there will be no poor among them.

In the words of Joseph Smith: "The building up of Zion is a cause that has interested the people of God in every age; it is a theme upon which prophets, priests and kings have dwelt with peculiar delight; they have looked forward with joyful anticipation to the day in which we live; and fired with heavenly and joyful anticipations they have sung and written and prophesied of this our day; but they died without the sight; we are the favored people that God has made choice of to bring about the Latter-day glory; it is left for us to see, participate in and help to roll forward the Latter-day glory. . . . The heavenly Priesthood will unite with the earthly, to bring about those great purposes; and whilst we are thus united in one common cause, to roll forth the kingdom of God, the heavenly Priesthood are not idle spectators, the Spirit of God will be showered down from above, and it will dwell in our midst. The blessings of the Most High will rest upon our tabernacles, and our name will be handed down to future ages; our children will rise up and call us blessed; and generations yet unborn will dwell with peculiar delight upon the scenes that we have passed through, the privations that we have endured; the untiring zeal that we have manifested; the all but insurmountable difficulties that we have overcome in laying the foundation of a work that brought about the glory and blessing which they will realize; a work that God and angels have contemplated with delight for generations past; that fired the souls of the ancient patriarchs and prophets; a work that is destined to bring about the destruction of the powers of darkness, the renovation of the earth, the glory of God, and the salvation of the human family." [^6]

The Prophet Joseph Smith also said: "Brethren, you are in the pathway to eternal fame, and immortal glory; and inasmuch as you feel interested for the covenant people of the Lord, the God of their fathers shall bless you. Do not be discouraged on account of the greatness of the work; only be humble and faithful. . . . He who scattered Israel has promised to gather them; therefore inasmuch as you are to be instrumental in this great work, He will endow you with power, wisdom, might and intelligence, and every qualification necessary; while your minds will expand wider and wider, until you can circumscribe the earth and the heavens, reach forth into eternity, and contemplate the mighty acts of Jehovah in all their variety and glory." [^7]

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Bible, a Sealed Book," 8th Annual CES Symposium on the Scriptures, Brigham Young University, 14 Aug. 1984, 3.
[^2] Brigham Young, in Deseret News, Feb. 1852; italics added.
[^3] Spencer W. Kimball, "What IHope You Will Teach My Grandchildren," address to seminary and institute personnel at Brigham Young University, 11 July 1966.
[^4] Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses, 7:74-75.
[^5] Orson Pratt, discourse delivered 14 Mar. 1875, as quoted in N. B. Lundwall, comp., Wonders of the Universe (Salt Lake City:Nels B. Lundwall, 1937), 204.
[^6] Ibid., 197.
[^7] John A. Widtsoe, Evidences and Reconciliations, arr. G. Homer Durham, 3 vols. in 1 (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960), 16-17.
