Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 14

Beyond the Biblical Account: Adam, Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and Moses in Latter-day Revelation

This chapter discusses the contribution of latter-day revelation in enabling us to correctly understand what the early patriarchs were like and what they taught. The Bible, of course, gives us a great amount of historical information about these things, but it is often vague in doctrinal content. It is a cardinal principle in this church that many plain and precious things have been deliberately removed from the text of the Bible since the time it was written. The most serious kinds of things that were removed were the doctrinal things. The angel in 1 Ne. 13 said that "many plain and precious things" were "taken away" "out of the book," and also "many covenants were taken away" (1 Ne. 13:28-29). Most of the extractions occurred in the first century after Christ; thus the Jewish and Christian world since that time has not had a completely adequate Bible. The Bible is wonderful, even so, and is a force for good and for righteousness in the earth, but think how marvelous it must have been when it was complete and doctrinally much richer than it now is.

Consequences to the Bible When Certain Portions Were Removed

Two problems arise when information is taken out of a record. First, of course, there is the loss of what is gone. But second, the loss of one piece of information often renders some of the remaining information unintelligible or even misleading. Many of the missing parts were vital to a correct understanding of the historical, intellectual, and doctrinal milieu in which the ancient prophets and patriarchs lived. Without those missing parts the picture is fragmented and vague, if not distorted. My purpose is to discuss a number of things that are found only in latter-day revelation, yet that pertain to the biblical story. These are things that we would not know if we had only the Bible.

Let me cite some examples from two Bible dictionaries. First, from the Cambridge Bible Dictionary on the fall of Adam. This is the dictionary that was published for many years in the missionary edition of the Bible, which was used in the Church before the LDS edition was published in 1979. The dictionary entry reads:

"Fall. This word denotes the first entrance of sin into the world, as described in Gen. 3. The story which is there told should probably be regarded as allegory rather than as literal history. The Bible does not teach that man was originally created perfect, i.e., with all his moral faculties perfectly developed, but that at a certain point in the history of the race the development took a wrong turn, which was not in accordance with God's original purpose. Man consciously set himself to act in opposition to the will of his Creator. This deliberate act of self-assertion produced in the race a natural inclination towards what is wrong, a taint which is handed on from one generation to another, and which is generally called 'original sin'; we are all 'by nature born in sin.'" [^1]

And from Harper's Bible Dictionary:

"Fall, the.The lapse from innocence and goodness, the first apostasy: the loss of Adam's position of integrity, virtue, and innocence, after his sin, as related in the Genesis accounts of the Eden tragedy. . . .

"There is no [Old Testament] doctrine of the Fall. But the Fall and the atoning grace of Christ are the core of the [New Testament] theology of Paul." [^2]

And now, on the subject of offering sacrifice, as stated in the Cambridge Bible Dictionary:

"Sacrifice. No Divine command can be quoted for the institution of sacrifice; the desire to offer some thank-offering was instinctive in man. . . . The earliest sacrifices [were] those of Cain, Abel, and Noah. . . . The idea of propitiation became prominent later on, after the Mosaic Law had brought in a fuller knowledge of sin, and had produced a deeper sense of guilt." [^3]

In contrast to the foregoing statement about the origin and purpose of sacrifice, the Lord has revealed that God commanded Adam to offer sacrifice and to use the firstlings of his flock for that purpose. An angel later explained to Adam the similitude of this sacrifice of an animal to the forthcoming sacrifice of Jesus Christ (see JST, Gen. 4:5-8; Moses 5:4-10). Furthermore, the Fall is spoken of in latter-day revelation as an actual event, not as an allegory, and is regarded by us as necessary and as part of the eternal plan. Those who prepared these two dictionaries were no doubt good and God-fearing Christian scholars, but they simply did not have the benefit of a complete Bible or of latter-day revelation.

It is true, as Harper's Bible Dictionary stated, that the Old Testament now has no doctrine of the Fall, but that is because almost all traces of doctrinal discussions of the Fall have been removed. Latter-day scripture attests that at one time the Old Testament, especially Genesis, had a very clear doctrine of the Fall, beginning with God's revelation to Adam on the subject. We know from latter-day scriptures that the ancient biblical prophets taught the concept of the fall of Adam and the atonement of Christ. That is especially evident in the Book of Mormon and in the Joseph Smith Translation.

Although it is true that nearly all of the doctrines of the gospel are mentioned in the Bible, they are not organized with proximity to one another and are scattered throughout the Bible such that they are not easily recognized nor properly associated. After people have learned the gospel and become acquainted with the plan of salvation from latter-day revelation, they can then see traces of the plan and discover references to it in the Bible, but they cannot initially construct the plan and fit it together from the Bible alone.

Twenty-five years ago another teacher and I were standing along a roadway in Washington State to photograph Mt. Rainier in the distance. Considerable mist in the air made the view hazy and obscure. My friend told me he could put a filter on his camera, remove much of the haze, and thus the photo would be clearer. That was a new idea to me, but I liked it. In a similar way, we can look through the lens of latter-day revelation today and see the ancient patriarchs with much of the mist and obscurity removed. I believe we can filter out some of the accumulated fog and smog and distant haze. I mean the fog of mistranslation, the smog of neglect or unbelief, and the haze of fragmentary records.

Sources of Information

The chief sources of information for this discussion are the standard works of the Church and the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

An interesting phenomenon about gospel study is that the more you know, the more you want to know. You recall that Abraham said he wanted to be a greater follower of righteousness and to possess a greater knowledge (see Abr. 1:2). Likewise, Moses yearned for another chance to commune with God, for he said, "I have other things to inquire of him" (Moses 1:18). When a person is once awakened to the knowledge and inklings of the doctrine and laws of God, the soul thirsts for gospel knowledge even more vigorously than the body craves food.

A second factor about studying the gospel is that the more one learns the more he or she is able to learn. Just so, the latter-day revelation contained in our standard works and in the teachings of Joseph Smith opens up vistas of understanding and spiritual joy like nothing else can do.

Unity and Continuity in the Work of God on Earth

Before examining some of the specific contributions of latter-day revelation to our understanding of the ancient prophets—things that are important but are entirely lacking or are clouded and obscured in the biblical account—I will make some general summary observations about these latter-day revelations.

One item of importance is the continuity or the unity of purpose that latter-day revelation unfolds to us about the ancient order of things. We learn that beginning with Adam, all of the prophets and patriarchs had the gospel of Jesus Christ, and it was the same gospel then as it is now. Adam had the same gospel, the same ordinances, the same endowment, the same celestial marriage, and the same covenants that you and I have received by being members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Furthermore, these prophets knew of each other. The earlier ones met together, and the later ones knew they were engaged in the same gospel as the earlier ones were engaged in, and for the same purposes. These things become more evident as we read the latter-day scriptures and the words of Joseph Smith.

In searching out these facts and comparing the scriptures, we will actually be fulfilling some ancient prophecies. For example, in 2 Ne. 3:12 we read that the writings of the loins of Judah (the Bible) and the writings of the loins of Joseph (the Book of Mormon) shall come together in the last days. That is a parallel passage to Ezek. 37:14-17, in which it is said that the stick of Ephraim and the stick of Judah shall become one in our hands. But notice the special wording of 2 Ne. 3:12. These writings shall "grow together, unto the confounding of false doctrines." Growing together is more than just being placed together under one cover or in a plastic, zippered carrying case. To "grow" there must be action. It is dynamic. If it grows, it gets better because understanding and learning increase as study progresses. That is what happens when we use latter-day revelation to understand the Bible.

I have come to the firm conclusion that the Lord wants us to know the doctrine and to know it well. One purpose of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon is so that we can learn—mark what it says—"the very points of his doctrine" (1 Ne. 15:14). And in D&C 10:62, the Lord says he wants "the true points of my doctrine" to be brought forth so as to lessen contention. The Lord also says that those who have only the Bible in its imperfect, altered condition are in "that awful state of blindness" because they lack the greater knowledge they ought to have about the gospel (1 Ne. 13:32).

I hope that what is presented here is in harmony with the spirit, the intention, and the proper use of these sacred statements. I will discuss Adam and Eve, then Enoch, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and Moses, in that order. Then I will make a few brief conclusions.

Adam and Eve

It is proper to begin with Adam and Eve, even though we cannot enter into an extensive biography. Rather, I will deal with a few specific points of historical and doctrinal importance.

The idea of a Garden of Eden is taught in each of the standard works and is a frequent topic in Joseph Smith's teachings. There is no indication in the Bible where the garden was located, and the popular conclusion is that such a place, if it existed at all, was somewhere in the Near East or Asia. Latter-day scripture does not categorically, in ten words or less, pinpoint the garden in a precise locality. It does, however, place Adam in the Western Hemisphere, stating that he dwelt at Adam-ondi-Ahman, and speaks particularly of Spring Hill in Daviess County, Missouri, as the place where Adam shall come to a future council meeting. Drawing on the information in D&C 78:15; 116:1; and 117:8-11, Latter-day Saints concluded early that the area now called the state of Missouri is the place where Adam and Eve dwelt after their expulsion from the garden.

I do not know of an existing document containing the specific and precise declaration in the words of Joseph Smith in which he located the Garden of Eden in an exact spot, but we have several secondary sources saying that he did so. President Brigham Young, President George Q. Cannon, President Heber C. Kimball, and President Joseph Fielding Smith have said that Joseph Smith taught that the Garden of Eden was located in Jackson County, Missouri, where the city of Independence now is. Here are their words:

President Brigham Young declared: "Joseph, the Prophet, told me that the Garden of Eden was in Jackson County, Missouri. When Adam was driven out he went to the place we now call Adam-ondi-Ahman, Daviess County, Missouri." [^4]

President George Q. Cannon asked an audience in the Salt Lake Tabernacle in 1867 why the Latter-day Saints talk and pray so much about returning to Zion (Missouri). He then answered his question himself by saying that we are grateful for our home in the west, but "we look forward to that land [Zion] with indescribable feelings, because it is the place where God has said His City shall be built. It is the land where Adam, the Ancient of Days, will gather his posterity again, and where the blessings of God will descend upon them. It is the land for which the wise and learned have travelled and sought in vain. Asia has been ransacked in endeavoring to locate the Garden of Eden. Men have supposed that because the Ark rested on Ararat that the flood commenced there, or rather that it was from thence the Ark started to sail. But God in His revelations has informed us that it was on this choice land of Joseph where Adam was placed and the Garden of Eden was laid out. The spot has been designated, and we look forward with peculiar feelings to repossessing that land." [^5]

President Heber C. Kimball, speaking in Provo, Utah, in 1863, discussed several things about Adam and the redemption of the earth: "The spot chosen for the garden of Eden was Jackson County, in the State of Missouri, where Independence now stands; it was occupied in the morn of creation by Adam and his associates who came with him for the express purpose of peopling this earth." He further commented that "the Prophet Joseph frequently spoke of these things in the revelations which he gave, but the people generally did not understand them." [^6]

There is an interesting scriptural statement, or formula, that says the "first shall be last and the last shall be first" (Matt. 19:30; 20:16; Ether 13:12; D&C 29:30). That, of course, has a lot of meanings and can be applied to a number of things. When applied to the city of New Jerusalem, however, the idea could be quite instructive. The Lord revealed in D&C 57:1-3 and 84:1-3 that the New Jerusalem and temple should be where Independence now is. On the basis of the first being last and the last being first, we can reason that the Lord's city in the last dispensation should be at the same place where it all began, in the Garden of Eden.

President Joseph Fielding Smith taught that the Garden of Eden and the New Jerusalem were in the same place: "In accord with the revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we teach that the Garden of Eden was on the American continent located where the City of Zion, or the New Jerusalem will be built. When Adam and Eve were driven out of the Garden, they eventually dwelt at a place called Adam-ondi-Ahman, situated in what is now Daviess County, Missouri." [^7]

As to the family of Adam, Genesis gives the names of Cain, Abel, and Seth, as though these were the earliest children of Adam and Eve. It does not say they are first; it simply does not mention any before them, which leads the reader to assume they were the first. Later, in Gen. 4:17, mention is made of Cain's wife, with no explanation about who she is. That has been a problem to some students because no daughters of Adam and Eve had been mentioned. In the Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 4:1-3 (Moses 5:1-3), we read that Adam and Eve had many sons and daughters, and these sons and daughters had sons and daughters (making Adam and Eve grandparents) before either Cain or Abel were born. Whom did Cain marry? The Joseph Smith Translation of Gen. 5:27 identifies her as a daughter of one of his brothers (see Moses 5:28).

No mention is made in Genesis about how Adam and Eve felt about the Fall and having been cast out of the Garden of Eden. But in the Joseph Smith Translation of Gen. 4:9-12 (Moses 5:10-11), we find both of them rejoicing because of the great new life and spiritual opportunities available to them as a result of the Fall. We don't know how they felt about it immediately, but after they were taught the gospel, they rejoiced because of the Fall.

It is only from latter-day revelation that we learn that Adam and Eve would have had no children without the Fall. The Bible does not define this, and therefore many have looked upon the transgression of Adam as a bad thing, believing that if Adam had not transgressed, the earth would have kept its paradisiacal status and the entire human family could have lived in paradise without sin, death, and so forth. Little do these theorists know or realize that none of the human family would have been born if Adam and Eve had not fallen. The references for this very significant and essential doctrine are 2 Ne. 2:23; Moses 5:11; and Moses 6:48.

Furthermore, we learn from latter-day scripture that Adam could read and write, having a perfect and pure language, and that a record was kept which was called the Book of Remembrance. Adam and his immediate posterity kept this record, and they taught their children to read and write in a language that was pure and undefiled (see JST, Gen. 6:5-6; Moses 6:5-6).

Enoch, seven generations and nearly a thousand years later, makes reference to this book (see JST, Gen. 6:48-50; Moses 6:45-46), as does Abraham another thousand years after that (see Abr. 1:28-31). Abraham said he had in his possession detailed and informative written records kept by his ancestors back to Adam and the Creation. Those records contained information not known to mankind today (see Abraham facsimile 2, items 8-21).

Nothing in the Bible suggests such a set of records or such a highly developed, literate society among Adam and his immediate family. Yet in latter-day revelation this subject is not simply alluded to or hinted at; it is a major thrust of the revelation about Adam.

Latter-day Saints have opportunity to view Adam in much clearer light than do those who depend on the Bible alone. We read in the Joseph Smith Translation of Gen. 4-5 (Moses 5-6), that Adam offered animal sacrifice with faith toward the coming Messiah and that he was visited by angels, was taught the doctrine of the Fall and the Atonement, was baptized with water, and held the priesthood. We learn from the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith that Adam was visited by Christ and possessed keys of every dispensation as the father and the patriarch of the human race. None of this doctrinal information is discernible from the present Bible record.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said that Adam "is the father of the human family, and presides over the spirits of all men. . . . He is the head, and was told to multiply. The keys [of the priesthood] were first given to him, and by him to others. He will have to give an account of his stewardship [to God] and they [those who have held keys] to him. . . . Christ is the Great High Priest; Adam next." [^8]

The Prophet Joseph Smith also said of Adam: "I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman. He called together his children and blessed them with a patriarchal blessing. The Lord appeared in their midst, and he [Adam] blessed them all, and foretold what should befall them to the latest generation." [^9]

The Prophet further said:["[Adam] is Michael, because he was the first and father of all, not only by progeny, but the first to hold the spiritual blessings, to whom was made known the plan of ordinances for the salvation of his posterity unto the end, and to whom Christ was first revealed, and through whom Christ has been revealed from heaven, and will continue to be revealed from henceforth. Adam holds the keys of the dispensation of the fulness of times; i.e., the dispensation of all the times that have been and will be revealed through him from the beginning . . . to the end of the dispensations that are to be revealed. . . .

["[The Lord] set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever, and set Adam to watch over them, to reveal them from heaven to man, or to send angels to reveal them. . . .

"These angels are under the direction of Michael or Adam, who acts under the direction of the Lord. . . .

"This, then, is the nature of the Priesthood; every man holding the Presidency of his dispensation, and one man holding the Presidency of them all, even Adam." [^10]

None of the foregoing teachings from the Prophet Joseph Smith could be discerned from the biblical record alone, yet it is basic, indispensable information about Adam and necessary for us to know if we are to understand much about Adam and the plan of God for this earth.

Adam's son Seth is spoken of as a "perfect man," in the express likeness of Adam's person, and is said to be so much like Adam, he could be distinguished from him only by his age (see D&C 107:43). This certainty attests to the physical perfection and beauty of Adam and Seth. There is more, however, that we can learn about this. In January 1843 the Prophet Joseph spoke of his own brother Alvin, who had died some years before. Alvin "was a very handsome man, surpassed by none but Adam and Seth."11 I do not know Alvin's exact physical dimensions, but the Smiths were a tall family. Joseph Smith Sr. was six feet three inches tall; Hyrum and Joseph were six feet; their brother William is said to have been six foot four. We have every reason to believe that Alvin was therefore also tall and long limbed. Beauty and handsomeness are in the eye of the beholder and are relative terms; yet by nineteenth-century standards Joseph Smith believed Alvin to be a handsome man, and by those same standards he judged Adam and Seth, whom the Lord said were perfect men, to be even more handsome than Alvin. It follows, then, in my thinking, that if by modern standards Adam and Seth were very handsome, and this is speaking of their whole appearance, they were not caveman physiques only one step removed from the apes. Joseph would never have thought a Neanderthal type was more handsome than his beloved brother Alvin. I think we are safe in concluding that Adam and Seth were upright, straight, tall, and well-proportioned by our standards today.

Joseph Smith was not guessing at Adam's appearance, for he had said in 1839: "I saw Adam in the valley of Adam-ondi-Ahman." [^11] The Prophet was quoted by Oliver B. Huntington as saying that Adam was "such a perfect man, great and stout, that he never stumbled or fell a joint to the ground." [^12] President John Taylor knew about Joseph Smith's acquaintance with Adam and referred to it as follows: "If you were to ask Joseph what sort of a looking man Adam was, he would tell you at once; he would tell you his size and appearance and all about him. You might have asked him what sort of men Peter, James and John were, and he could have told you. Why? Because he had seen them." [^13]

Enoch

Enoch is a patriarch frequently spoken of in the Church, yet very little is given about him in the Bible. Today we speak of Enoch and his City of Zion that was translated and taken from the earth nearly five thousand years ago. We also read in the scripture that Enoch's city will return to the earth in the last days to be joined with the New Jerusalem, which will be built upon the earth in Jackson County, Missouri. We speak of Enoch's city having the ideal social and economic system whereby there were no poor among them. None of this information is given in the Bible; all of it is dependent upon latter-day revelation. The Bible tells us that Enoch was translated, but says nothing about a city of Enoch and nothing of Enoch's ministry as a preacher of the gospel of Jesus Christ.

From Joseph Smith we learn not only all of that about Enoch but also that after his translation he became a ministering angel to the people on other planets of a terrestrial order. The Prophet also told us that Enoch came as a ministering angel and instructed Paul. [^14]

Although the Bible gives us to understand that Enoch was a righteous man and a man of faith, it does not categorically tell us what Enoch did. From the Joseph Smith Translation we learn that Enoch was a missionary and a successful expounder of the gospel of Jesus Christ, including the Fall of Adam, and he had great visions of eternity, the spirit world, the Judgment, and like things.

One of the greatest statements concerning the Fall of Adam and the Atonement of Jesus Christ and the effect of the Atonement in freeing little children from so-called original sin is given by Enoch in Moses 6:49-54. We read from Enoch that Adam had been taught that for a remission of any sins he committed after he became mortal, he would have to repent, exercise faith in Jesus Christ, and be baptized in water. But for the transgression in the Garden of Eden, he was forgiven without baptism. Here are Enoch's words:

"But God hath made known unto our fathers that all men must repent.

"And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

"And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

"And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

"Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world" (JST, Gen. 6:51-56; Moses 6:50-54).

Nothing surpasses this for clarity in any other passage or reference. Because these are the words of the Lord to Adam, cited by Enoch and contained in the writings of Moses, it shows that all three of these prophets were acquainted with the doctrine of Christ relative to the Fall and the status of little children.

Enoch was present at a great conference at Adam-ondi-Ahman held three years before the death of Adam. The proceedings of the meeting and the prophecies of Adam uttered at that conference were all written at the time in the book of Enoch and are yet to be revealed to us (see D&C 107:57).

Enoch had a vision of things from the premortal spirit world through mortality up to and including the Millennium and beyond. He saw Noah and the Flood and Jesus being crucified. He saw the Resurrection and the restoration of the gospel in the last days. That is all recorded in Moses 6-7.

Enoch was the great-grandfather of Noah, and he saw in vision Noah and his family. He saw that Noah built the ark, and he saw the coming of the Flood. Enoch received a promise that his seed, or posterity, would never be completely destroyed but would continue on the earth as long as the earth should stand. "And the Lord showed Enoch all things, even to the end of the world" (Moses 7:67). None of that is in our present Bible.

There is an interesting and highly spiritual event recorded in Moses 7:28-41, in which Enoch witnessed the God of heaven weeping. He expressed his astonishment that the Lord, who had so many creations and so much power, should weep. The Lord explained that he wept because of the wickedness of his children, that they were without natural affection, they hated one another and would not receive him to be their Father and God, and that because of their wickedness they would have to suffer. Then Enoch also wept with the Lord. That is a most spiritual and touching scene, and we are indebted to the Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis (also recorded in the book of Moses), which contains this remarkable record.

There is another point to be made from this particular episode. When Enoch saw the Lord weep, he said, "How is it that the heavens weep, and shed forth their tears as the rain upon the mountains?" (Moses 7:28). Remember, this was hundreds of years before Noah was born. Many have noted that the Bible does not mention rain until the Flood at Noah's time and so have wondered if perchance there was no rain that fell upon the earth until the Flood. The verse in which Enoch compares the heavens weeping to the falling rain strongly suggests that Enoch was well acquainted with rain long before Noah.

Although it was some three thousand years before Christ that Enoch was translated (which means his life in the flesh was extended in such a way that he did not die), we learn from D&C 133:54-55 that Enoch had undergone a change equal to death and was resurrected at the time of Jesus' resurrection. Such a change could occur in the twinkling of an eye, but it happened. Thus, as is the case with all those translated before the time of Christ, Enoch is now a resurrected being.

It was with Enoch as with all of the patriarchs and prophets: he was baptized and confirmed, ordained and endowed in the regular order of the gospel and its ordinances.

Noah

We have already spoken somewhat of Noah, but there are a few other things to be noted. The Genesis story of the Flood is well known to Bible readers. It is mentioned in the Old Testament, the New Testament, and also the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price. Strange as it may seem upon inspection, our present book of Genesis does not give a single word of what Noah preached to the people for the 120 years he warned of the coming deluge. Not one word! Gen. 6-8 tells the story, but nothing is said about what Noah preached. In these chapters the Lord talks a lot to Noah, but no record is there of what Noah said to the people.

We learn from the Joseph Smith Translation (see Moses 8:23-24), however, that Noah preached repentance, faith in Jesus Christ, baptism, and the reception of the Holy Ghost. He also warned the people that if they did not accept the gospel of Christ, the floods would come upon them. That is important. It was not for rejecting a weather report that the people were destroyed but for rejecting the first principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Noah was not a weather prophet but a prophet of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Perhaps you hadn't noticed this great gap and deficiency in Genesis, but it is there. In the New Testament Peter does a little better and says that Noah was "a preacher of righteousness," but no direct word is said about Noah's preaching the gospel of Christ (2 Pet. 2:5). Because of latter-day revelation we know that Noah, like all the other prophets, was baptized, confirmed, ordained, and endowed, with the same gospel and the same ordinances that are preached among us in the Church today. We don't know who baptized Noah, but we learn from D&C 107:52 that Noah was ordained at the age of ten years by his grandfather, Methuselah.

We learn from the Prophet Joseph Smith that Noah is Gabriel and that he stands next to Adam in the hierarchy of the priesthood. Noah was like a second Adam in saving things through the Flood and repopulating the earth. [^15]

Because Noah is Gabriel, we realize it was really Noah who came to Zacharias and to Mary and announced the forthcoming birth of John the Baptist and of Jesus (see Luke 1). We further learn from D&C 27:6-7 that this same person, who is called Gabriel and also Elias, has the assignment to bring to pass "the restoration of all things" in the last days. No doubt he, being Noah, holds this position as second to Adam. Adam, you recall, presides over all dispensations. Noah seems to have a special responsibility under Adam to bring about the Restoration. Thus both Adam and Noah have a special relationship to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Many other interesting things about Noah are taught only in latter-day revelation, but space will not permit a more detailed report.

Melchizedek

Like Enoch, Melchizedek has been almost lost to the Bible, yet he is and was one of the greatest of prophets and patriarchs. Alma says of him, "There were many before him, and also there were many afterwards, but none were greater" (Alma 13:19).

Little is said in Genesis of the ministry of Melchizedek, but from the Joseph Smith Translation we learn that he was valiant even as a youth and wrought great miracles by faith.

We know also that in the ancient Church the priesthood of the Son of God was named the Melchizedek Priesthood because of Melchizedek's great faith and righteousness, so as to avoid the too-frequent use of the name of Deity (see D&C 107:1-2). Latter-day revelation makes it clear that Melchizedek was a believer in Jesus Christ and was a preacher of the gospel of Christ. For example, Alma says that Melchizedek was a high priest after the order of the holy priesthood. Alma also explains that such a high priest is ordained "after the order of the Son, the Only Begotten of the Father" (Alma 13:9; see also vv. 7-8; D&C 107:2-3). The same declaration is made of Melchizedek in the Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 14:25-40. Because of latter-day revelation we know that Melchizedek had faith in Christ and was baptized, received the gift of the Holy Ghost, was ordained, and was endowed with the same ordinances in the same gospel we know in the Church today.

In the old sixth-century church of Saint Appollonaire in Ravenna, Italy, is a mosaic showing Melchizedek at an altar with bread and wine—a reflection of Gen. 14:18. The mosaic goes beyond this passage of scripture, however, for on one side of the altar is Abel offering a lamb. On the other side is Abraham with his son Isaac. Above the whole scene is the rainbow, reminiscent of Noah. And through the clouds, reaching down from heaven, is the hand of God. This very unusual piece of art brings together many notable prophets, each with a redemptive motif, in association with Christ. The fact that this mosaic exists shows that somebody in Ravenna had ideas about Melchizedek in the sixth century after Christ. It speaks of a unity of purpose in the ministries of Abel, Noah, Abraham, and Melchizedek. Christianity and Judaism have all but lost sight of Melchizedek today, probably because the Bible now contains so very little about him. Later Christian art does not emphasize Melchizedek; therefore, we have to go back to the earliest centuries to find evidence of a tradition about him.

The Prophet Joseph explained that it was Melchizedek who taught Abraham the gospel of Jesus Christ and who also ordained Abraham to the priesthood [^16] (see D&C 84:14).

Gen. 14:18 reports that Melchizedek brought forth bread and wine for himself and Abraham. The Joseph Smith Translation, however, rewords this verse to say, "Melchizedek . . . brake bread and blest it; and he blest the wine, he being the priest of the most high God" (JST, Gen. 14:17). This wording suggests that there were two blessings, one for the bread and one for the wine. That would be unusual procedure for a regular meal. If it is not a description of the sacramental emblems of the forthcoming Atonement of Jesus Christ, then it surely comes close to being so.

There can be no mistaking the evidence from latter-day scripture and from Joseph Smith's teachings that Melchizedek was a prophet of Jesus Christ.

Abraham

Much has already been said of Abraham, so I will add only a single instance from his writings. I have pointed out that Adam, Enoch, Noah, and Melchizedek each had the gospel of Christ, with the same baptism, the same priesthood, and the same endowment that are found in the Church today. There are several ways to establish this point, but one of the most important is the Prophet Joseph Smith's explanation of Facsimile 2 (item 3) in the book of Abraham. It is here stated that the "grand Key-words of the Holy Priesthood" were "revealed to Adam in the Garden of Eden, as also to Seth, Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, and all to whom the Priesthood was revealed." This language seems to be very direct and easy to be understood. It says, in effect, that the endowment, which is the ceremony by which one receives the grand key words, was given to all the prophets, beginning with Adam.

Moses

There is no question from the New Testament, especially from John 5-6 and Luke 24:25-27, that Moses knew of the coming of Jesus Christ and wrote of him. These are New Testament explanations, however, and the Old Testament references are not that clear. Even so, in our present Bible there is more evidence for Moses knowing of Christ than there is for the earlier prophets. That concept is strengthened in latter-day revelation with the glorious vision of Moses recorded in Moses 1. Moses there learned much about the work of Jesus Christ as Creator and learned that he is the Savior and the Only Begotten of the Father (see Moses 1:6-21, 32-33). Just as Genesis is a preface to the Old Testament, so Moses 1 is a preface to Genesis.

In a revelation to the Prophet Joseph Smith, we learn that Moses was ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood by his father-in-law, Jethro, and a priesthood lineage is given from Adam to Moses (see D&C 84:6-15).

The Continuity of the Lord's Work

Among the many things that latter-day revelation contributes to an understanding of the Old Testament, none is more forceful than the evidence of continuity in the work of the prophets from Adam on down through the centuries. This unity and continuation of purpose is no longer evident in the Bible. I have no doubt it was there in the beginning, but it has become obscured.

The patriarchs from Adam to Methuselah were all on the earth together and knew one another and were all in the meeting at Adam-ondi-Ahman. There was an unbroken line of ordination from Adam to Methuselah, and from him on down to Noah and from Noah to Moses. When the Lord called Noah and taught him of his ministry and commanded him to build an ark, he also told him that he had the same priesthood and covenant that was given to Enoch (see JST, Gen. 8:23, enlarging KJV, Gen. 6:18; JST Gen. 9:15, 17, enlarging KJV, Gen. 9:9, 11; JST Gen. 9:21-25, enlarging KJV, Gen. 9:16). Later, when the priesthood and covenant were given to Melchizedek, he was told that it was the same that Enoch possessed (see JST, Gen. 14:25-40). Still later, when Abraham was called and ordained, the Lord compared his calling to that of Enoch and told him to remember Enoch's covenant (see JST, Gen. 13:13, enlarging KJV, Gen. 13:14).

These Joseph Smith Translation passages, plus the priesthood genealogy lists of D&C 84:6-17 and 107:40-52, certify the credentials of the ancient patriarchs, showing that they were called of God and ordained under the hand of a living priesthood bearer. These passages certify that the work of God is standardized and unified. There was unity, and there was organization. Unity and organization cannot be discovered in our present book of Genesis, which tends to treat each patriarch and prophet independently as well as scantily.

Every Dispensation Was Governed by the Gospel Law

Everything is governed by a law that was formulated and existed in the premortal existence before the world was created. The gospel and plan of salvation existed then, and the same plan is still operating. Nothing has been added; nothing has been taken away. We read in D&C 130:20-21:

"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—

"And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated."

And in D&C 132:5, 8-12, we read:

"For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. . . .

"Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

"Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, . . . except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

"I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord."

Not every point needs to be repeated in the scripture about each prophet's calling, once we know the laws of the gospel. For example, the Prophet Joseph understood it this way:

"The gospel has always been the same; the officers to officiate, the same; the ordinances to fulfill these requirements, the same, and the signs and fruits resulting from the promises, the same: therefore, as Noah was a preacher of righteousness he must have been baptized and ordained to the priesthood by the laying on of the hands, etc." [^17]

"He [God] set the ordinances to be the same forever and ever." [^18]

"It was the design of the councils of heaven before the world was, that the principles and laws of the priesthood should be predicated upon the gathering of the people in every age of the world. . . . Ordinances instituted in the heavens before the foundation of the world, in the priesthood, for the salvation of men, are not to be altered or changed. All must be saved on the same principles." [^19]

The concept taught here by the Prophet Joseph Smith must be understood if one wishes to get a clear perspective of the work of God on the earth. This perspective and cohesiveness is no longer found in the biblical record. We are grateful for latter-day scripture that puts it together for us in a comprehensive package.

Conclusions

What are some contributions of latter-day revelation in understanding the Old Testament?

I am grateful for the Bible and for the latter-day revelation that adds to and clarifies it.

Notes

FromRichard D. Draper, ed., A Witness of Jesus Christ: The 1989 Sperry Symposium on the Old Testament (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990), 134-54.

---
Notas:
[^1] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 59-60.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985), 79.
[^3] Ibid., 13-14, 17-18.
[^4] See James Gilluly et al., Principles of Geology (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman and Co., 1958), chapters 3, 7.
[^5] Joseph Fielding Smith, "The Sacrament and the Atonement," address given at the LDS institute of religion, Salt Lake City, 14 Jan. 1961, 5. Typescript of original recording in author's possession, with written permission from President Smith to use it.
[^6] Orson F. Whitney, in Forace Green, comp., Cowley and Whitney on Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), 287.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 12.
[^8] See ibid., 12.
[^9] See Orson Pratt, Masterful Discourses and Writings of Orson Pratt (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1962), 349; Orson Pratt, in Journal of Discourses,1:280-84; Mormon Doctrine, "Flood of Noah," 289; and Joseph Fielding Smith, Man, His Origin and Destiny (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1954), 432-36.
[^10] Joseph Fielding Smith, address to the seminary/institute faculty, 15 June 1956, 9-10. Typescript of original tape in author's possession.
[^11] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 256.
[^12] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 158.
[^13] Diary of Oliver B. Huntington, as cited in Hyrum Andrus, Joseph Smith, the Man and the Seer (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1960), 92.
[^14] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 18:326.
[^15] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 170-71.
[^16] See ibid., 157.
[^17] See ibid., 323-24.
[^18] Ibid., 264.
[^19] Ibid., 168.
