Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 15

Problems in Teaching the Old Testament

Latter-day Revelation Clarifies the Past

I am particularly glad for latter-day revelation and the prophets of this dispensation who have provided a key and a perspective by which we can understand things of ancient date. I look at the Old Testament through the telescope, the filter, and the yardstick of latter-day revelation.

The Book of Mormon, the book of Abraham, the Joseph Smith Translation (of which the book of Moses is an extract), and the Doctrine and Covenants provide us functional telescopes by which we who live in the latter days can see more clearly and examine in detail the history and the doctrines of God's ancient people who are separated from us by the distance of time, geography, and culture. The latter-day revelations reduce that distance because in those revelations we find a restoration of the ancient gospel, which also magnifies our vision. Whereas the Bible often tells us what happened, latter-day revelation will also tell us why it happened.

Furthermore, we have been adequately warned that the Bible has not come down to us in its original purity, accuracy, nor completeness; therefore, we are obliged to use reliable latter-day sources as a type of filter in order to discern the information of the Bible more distinctly. I propose that we examine and use latter-day revelation to filter out whatever error and tradition has been accumulated and thus see the actual Old Testament setting more clearly.

It wouldn't matter much whether we in this day understood these ancient things or not, if it were not that we accept the Old Testament as sacred scripture and as a record of important events that really happened, such as the Creation, the fall of Adam, and the Flood; and we accept it also as a record of people who really lived, such as Adam, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Jacob, and Joseph. We are living in the dispensation of gathering and of bringing together the work of all the holy prophets from the beginning. Those ancient patriarchs are our flesh and blood ancestors; we are their literal children, and the promises of the Lord given to them have now been planted in our hearts. Many of the promises and prophecies that were once given to them are to be fulfilled and realized in us and our children.

The Prophet Joseph Smith said that there has been no change in the constitution of mankind since the Fall of Adam, [^1] and what it takes to save a soul now is the same that it took to save a soul in any age of the world. [^2] This is an extremely important standardizing concept and forms part of the telescope and yardstick that gives us understanding when looking at things of ancient date.

It Is Not Necessary to Answer Every Question

I will try to demonstrate how we might use latter-day revelation to handle some of the problems a teacher might encounter in working with the Old Testament. But first I want to say that it is not necessary for us to try to answer every question. We are to teach the doctrine and the principles of the Restoration, not make a fetish of the history or the culture. Furthermore, we are not responsible for the Bible. We reverence it and accept it. Its general message is true, but we have some reservations concerning its accuracy. I think we would do well to acknowledge that there are problems and offer alternate points of understanding whenever possible, based on latter-day revelation or sound reasoning. But we should not feel obliged to assume the "blame" for difficulties or errors or contradictions in the Bible. The same is true of the disagreements in the Gospel records of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. These variations are their problems, not ours. I think it is impossible to harmonize everything, and we have better things to do.

The Gospel Is Older Than the Earth

Many people have trouble with the idea that the gospel, with all its ordinances, should be known long before the coming of Jesus Christ. Many people do not want the ancient patriarchs and prophets to have baptism, the fulness of the gospel, and the temple ordinances. They want an evolutionary development of the gospel, with early man being a savage and gradually God revealing himself through various acts of nature and then through Moses at Sinai and so on, until the full revelation of Jesus Christ is received in the New Testament. Unfortunately, the Bible in its present condition tends to contribute to this line of thinking, not so much in what it says but in what it does not say about the gospel and plan of salvation in the early ages of mankind.

The Book of Mormon, the Pearl of Great Price, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith unitedly testify that the gospel, with all its ordinances and covenants, was made known fully to Adam by direct and immediate revelation right at the beginning and not by an evolutionary process.

I think it is absolutely essential to our teaching that we establish clearly in our own minds and then in the minds of students, both of high school and university ages, that the gospel and plan of salvation with all its ordinances existed before the world and was revealed in its fulness to Adam and to the early patriarchs, such as Seth, Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, Abraham, and Moses. I would point out that the gospel they had consisted of the very same doctrines and ordinances that we now have in the plan of salvation. I would draw attention to such verses as D&C 132:5, 11, 28, wherein the Lord repeatedly says that these principles, laws, and ordinances were worked out and established by the Father and the Son, and ordained unto us "before the world was." This same concept is embodied in the biblical statement that Jesus is a Lamb slain from before the foundation of the world (see 1 Pet. 1:20; Rev. 13:8).

Alma reminded his son that there is only one Savior, and since a soul is as precious before the coming of Christ as afterward, it is necessary that the gospel be taught even before the time of Christ. Alma says moreover that it is not only necessary that the gospel be taught at all times but that it is also just as easy for the Lord to reveal the gospel at one time as it is at another time (see Alma 39:17-19). Since the plan of salvation is older than the earth, there is nothing strained or difficult in God revealing the whole plan to Adam right from the beginning of the world. The plan of salvation was already old when Adam and this world were still new. Was Adam baptized? Yes. Did he have the gift of the Holy Ghost? Yes. Did he have the Melchizedek Priesthood? Yes. Did he have his endowments and the same covenants that we obtain in the temple? Yes. Was he married for eternity? Yes. Did he understand the consequences of his Fall, both for himself and his posterity? Yes. Did he know about the coming of Jesus Christ? Yes. Did he have a correct knowledge of God and of the spirit world and of the resurrection of the dead? Yes, he did. There can be no doubt about these things if one believes the scriptures and the teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

I will read an excerpt from the Prophet's second lecture on faith. The entire lecture, including the catechism, deals with this subject in a most clear and unmistakable way, but space will permit only an excerpt here:

"First, after man was created, he was not left without intelligence or understanding, to wander in darkness and spend an existence in ignorance and doubt (on the great and important point which effected his happiness) as to the real fact by whom he was created, or unto whom he was amenable for his conduct. God conversed with him face to face. In his presence he was permitted to stand, and from his own mouth he was permitted to receive instruction. He heard his voice, walked before him and gazed upon his glory, while intelligence burst upon his understanding, and enabled him to give names to the vast assemblage of his Maker's works.

"Secondly, we have seen, that though man did transgress, his transgression did not deprive him of the previous knowledge with which he was endowed relative to the existence and glory of his Creator; for no sooner did he hear his voice than he sought to hide himself from his presence. . . .

"The reason why we have been thus particular on this part of our subject, is that this class may see by what means it was that God became an object of faith among men after the fall; and what it was that stirred up the faith of multitudes to feel after him—to search after a knowledge of his character, perfections and attributes, until they became extensively acquainted with him, and not only commune with him and behold his glory, but be partakers of his power and stand in his presence."3

With a firm conviction that there is only one gospel, we see that there are no "bargain days" for salvation and that all must be saved on the same principles at any time period of the world. The plan of salvation is not an experimental thing but has been used with success on more ancient worlds than ours. We will now look at some specific questions that often arise in teaching the Old Testament.

Some Frequently Asked Questions

Age of the Earth

What do we say about the age of the earth? Is there a conflict between scientific dating and the scriptures? How can we answer students on this without causing friction between the public school and the seminary?

The age of the earth is a subject that often arises in discussions on the early chapters of Genesis. I do not think we can settle it here, but we can give consideration to some suitable viewpoints. I do not profess to know how old the earth is or to know how to calculate it. The exact age is not as important to us as it is to know that the earth was created on purpose by the Lord as a home for the human family both now and in eternity. We know from D&C 88:17-20 and 130:9 that this earth will become a glorified celestial kingdom and that it will be Christ's earth. It is called his footstool (see D&C 38:17; Moses 6:9, 44). It is not only the place where we got our physical bodies but also where Jesus Christ, the great Creator, Redeemer, the great Jehovah got his physical body. It is the earth on which the infinite Atonement was worked out and where the resurrection of Jesus took place. It will eventually "be crowned even with the presence of God the Father" (D&C 88:19). All of these factors dignify the earth beyond our comprehension. The earth is sacred.

Moses asked the Lord how the earth was created and why (see Moses 1:30) but did not ask how long it took. Although "how long" would be interesting, it is not as basic as how, why, or bywhom.

In D&C 101:32-33 there is a promise to us:

"In that day when the Lord shall come, he shall reveal all things—

"Things which have passed, and hidden things which no man knew, things of the earth, by which it was made, and the purpose and the end thereof."

Since these things will not be revealed in their fulness until the Lord comes, we will have to be patient and understand that we do not at this time have all the facts. But please note that this caution from the Lord is not a one-sided warning directed only to those who use the scriptures. It also places a limitation on the learning the world thinks it has. At the same time, this passage does not demand that we disregard all that the Lord has already said, simply because he has not yet said it all. The revelations tell us some things about the earth, and we can be certain that the word of the Lord will not fail and will be verified in this and all cases. Additional revelations will not cancel what he has already told us.

There are some scriptural facts about the age of the earth that have a bearing on our understanding of the plan of salvation and our being here on the earth.

We have it clear enough in Abraham chapters 4-5 that the earth was formed in six creative or working periods. These are called "times" in Abraham's account, whereas in Genesis and Moses these periods are called "days." Abraham says a "time" is one thousand of our years (see Abr. 5:13; 3:4). I have often wondered if there were also additional (nonworking) periods needed for curative or chemical reaction time placed in between the creative periods, similar to the time needed for bread dough to rise between the mixing and the baking stages.

Secondly, we do not know how long after the Creation it was before the Garden of Eden was planted, how long after the garden was ready before Adam and Eve were placed in it, and how long they were in the garden before they fell. It is natural and reasonable to assume that all of these unknown periods were relatively short, so that the earth could get on with the business and purpose of its creation. Yet, the fact is, we do not know the exact length of these undefined periods. Even so, these cumulative periods would hardly amount to the billions of years spoken of in the geologic column.

Far more important than the length of the creative and formative period is the awareness that the earth underwent a change when Adam and Eve became mortal. The mortal existence of the earth and of man is of supreme importance to the plan of salvation and our belief in the scriptural records. The concept is clearly and repeatedly taught in the Doctrine and Covenants that the earth will experience a six-thousand-year temporal existence followed by a millennium at seven thousand years, as explained in D&C 77:2, 6-7, 12 and 88:108-10.

The question that lies before us is how to deal with the apparent contrast of the age of the earth expressed in geologic terms as billions of years, as compared with the relatively short period presented in the scriptures.

Today men calculate the age of the earth by various means, such as the lead/uranium, potassium/argon, and strontium/rubidium processes. If I understand the mechanisms correctly, these various systems regard the earth itself as a sort of radioactive clock or chronometer, because radioactive elements are continually decaying and undergoing a gradual change toward becoming other elements. For example, we are told that uranium 238 is very slowly becoming lead. The ratio or the progress of the one element becoming the other element suggests how long the process has been in operation and thus how long these substances have been in their present existence. Such measurements are based on the idea of uniformitarianism, which is simply that the present is the key to the past and that currently observed processes are sufficient to explain processes from the beginning. [^3]

The question vital to this method of time measurement is whether or not uniformitarianism is a stable enough concept to be dependable.

I cannot give an authoritative scientific answer to this question, but I can offer a point of view for you to consider based upon the scriptures. When Jesus made the wine at the wedding feast of Cana, it was almost instantaneous, yet that wine had the properties normally requiring months or years of aging. When the governor of the feast tasted it (not knowing its source or history), he said it was "good wine" (John 2:1-10; cf. Luke 5:39). This control over time applies to all of Jesus' creation-type miracles, as in John 6:5-13, Mark 8:1-9, and 3 Ne. 20:1-7.

Several passages of scripture bear directly on the matter of time and aging. For example, in Moses 3:9 we read that before the Fall things "remaineth in the sphere" in which God created them. And in 2 Ne. 2:22 father Lehi explained that without the fall of Adam "all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end." We can see from these passages that before the fall of Adam, when there was no death, conditions were different than they are now in mortality with death. The fall of Adam introduced a major change or interruption to the paradisiacal order of things. That not everyone will believe in this concept of an interruption is spoken of by Peter: he mentions the Creation and the Flood and then adds that scoffers will deny there has been a change and will say that "all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation" (2 Pet. 3:4).

These passages of scripture attest that a change came over the earth when Adam fell. That is, the Fall affected more than Adam and Eve only. These scriptures tell us that conditions have not always been just as they are now. When Adam fell, the whole creation fell. We know that under differing conditions the speed of various processes can also change. In our society men have learned how to apply increased pressure and heat to carbon substances to produce industrial diamonds more rapidly than nature does it. Even something as familiar as a microwave oven demonstrates that things can be cooked faster without burning than our grandmothers thought possible. Water boils at a lower temperature at ten thousand feet elevation than at sea level, and consequently the time required to cook food also varies accordingly. On the other hand, we can intensify and increase the boiling temperature by using pressure cookers, thus cooking food more rapidly. We use these principles in our homes almost daily.

I'm suggesting that we have every reason to believe from the scriptures that the fall of Adam is real, and that before the Fall this earth was under different conditions than it is now, and consequently a time clock that measures processes taking place in mortality cannot be depended upon to be accurate for anything before the Fall, any more than the governor of the wedding feast could know by sight or taste that the instantaneous miracle wine provided by Jesus was not aged by the normal time-consuming process common to wine making.

These various examples do not actually prove anything about the age of the earth, and they won't convert skeptics, but they provide an alternate way of thinking about the age of the earth and why it can have the properties of great age without being as old as though it had always been mortal. Hopefully this could give students the courage to believe that the scriptures might be right. I would suggest to students that they feel free to learn as much as they want about the geological method of measuring time but that they also be familiar with the doctrine of the scriptures.

You see how important it is that we teach carefully and clearly from the scriptures what the fall of Adam was and what its consequences were. We do our students a great disservice if we gloss over the Fall. If we do not emphasize the doctrinal fundamentals of the Creation, the Fall, the Atonement, the Apostasy, and the Restoration, we fail to give students the perspective, and we leave them unprepared to face and make choices about some of the major decisions of life.

Conflicting Commandments to Adam

Why did the Lord give Adam conflicting commandments in the Garden of Eden? Did Adam obey God's will when he partook of the fruit? If so, why was he punished?

We do not yet have the complete story nor all of the elements and circumstances that were operative in the fall of Adam—that is, in the process of Adam and Eve becoming mortal. If we had more of the facts we would see that it was all very orderly and according to eternal principles and procedures. Hidden under the story of the rib and the forbidden fruit are some deeper meanings.

Consider these words from President Joseph Fielding Smith:

"Why did Adam come here? Not subject to death when he was placed upon the earth, there had to come a change in his body through the partaking of this element—whatever you want to call it, fruit—that brought blood into his body; and blood became the life of the body instead of spirit. And blood has in it the seeds of death, some mortal element. Mortality was created through the eating of forbidden fruit, if you want to call it forbidden, but I think the Lord has made it clear that it was not forbidden. He merely said to Adam, if you want to stay here [in the garden] this is the situation. If so, don't eat it." [^4]

You can tell that President Smith did not view the Fall as a tragic miscarriage or impediment to the purposes of God. It was just the opposite—the Lord wanted Adam to fall. Mortality was an essential and necessary step in the progress of the human family. President Smith said he understood the meaning to be that Adam was forbidden to stay in the garden if he ate one particular fruit—not that he was absolutely forbidden to eat the fruit in the first place. That clarifies a vital point, and I like the spiritual insight of this great latter-day spiritual giant and theologian.

Permit me another observation. The question is often asked, Why didn't God just create man mortal and save him the trauma and experience of falling through transgression and conflicting commandments? That is a good question, but it is philosophically unsound. In the plan of salvation, God does for mankind only what they cannot do for themselves. Man must do all he can for himself. If Adam and Eve had been created mortal, they would have been denied one of the steps in the process that they were capable of performing themselves. As we read in Alma 42:12, man "brought upon himself" his own fall. The Fall was a necessary condition to be arrived at, and man was capable of bringing it about, so it was required of him, or rather, it was his privilege to do so.

The scripture says, "Whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it" (Eccl. 3:14). If God had created man mortal, then death, sin, and all the circumstances of mortality would be eternal and permanent—whereas if man himself brings the Fall, he is the responsible moral agent and God is able to rescue and redeem him from it. Such a system also places Adam and Eve subject to punishment or reward for their actions. I think we have to conclude that the Fall was accomplished in the very best possible way—"all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things" (2 Ne. 2:24).

We agree with Elder Orson F. Whitney: "When Adam fell, he fell forward." [^5] And we agree with the Prophet Joseph Smith who said Adam was chosen to "open the way of the world." [^6] Adam had the privilege of getting things under way by his own actions. This is far better than being created mortal and sinful.

The Flood

Was the entire earth covered with water in the flood of Noah's day?

The account of the Flood given in Genesis chapters 6-9 indicates that the Flood was worldwide. Everything in the scriptures, both ancient and modern, seems to sustain that idea. It is only when people begin to rationalize that they feel that a universal flood is unreasonable, amoral, or unlikely. We can briefly consider some scriptures:

Â In Moses chapter 7 the flood of Noah is mentioned at least five times in a vision Enoch was given several hundred years before the Flood came. Enoch knew a great deal about the future ministry of Noah, who would be his great-grandson. By vision Enoch saw Noah, the ark, and the worldwide destruction of the Flood and prayed that the earth would never again be covered with a flood. Enoch also beheld in vision that all the families of the earth after that time would come from Noah (thus making Noah almost like a second Adam). This would not be the case if the Flood were only a local event. The message is that all the people of the earth would be slain in the Flood except the family of Noah on the ark. Enoch was granted his wish, and God promised him that he would not again destroy the world with water (see Moses 7:34-52).

Â As recorded in Gen. 9 and confirmed and clarified in the Joseph Smith Translation of Gen. 9:6-20, the rainbow was designated as a token (this time not to Enoch but to Noah) that the Lord would never again "smite every living thing as he hath done" by a flood of water. Since there have been numerous destructive floods on earth since Noah's time, either the promise of God has failed or these subsequent local floods have been different from Noah's flood. If we give serious attention to the covenant spelled out in the Joseph Smith Translation of Gen. 9, we must conclude that Noah's flood was worldwide and not simply a local inconvenience.

Â Notice the wording of Ether 13:2, speaking of America. Moroni recorded the words of Ether saying that "after the waters had receded from off the face of this land it became a choice land above all other lands." This surely attests to the flood of Noah having covered the Western Hemisphere.

Â Abr. 1:23-24 tells of Ham and Egyptus, the immediate family of Noah, and says that when Egyptus discovered the land of Egypt, it was under water. Because the time frame is so close to Noah, it is no doubt the flood of Noah's day that is being referred to and not just the annual flooding of the Nile. Egypt is in a different part of the world from the Western Hemisphere, thousands of miles away—even though the land was all in one piece at that time (Gen. 10:25; D&C 133:23-24; Moses 2:9; this topic receives additional treatment in chapter 35, "The Law of Restoration as Taught in the Book of Mormon"). The distance from Egypt to America does not fit the dimensions of merely a local flood.

Â Many of the Brethren have spoken of the flood of Noah's day as the baptism of the earth. Since sprinkling and pouring are not baptism, a complete immersion is required. The Prophet Joseph wrote, "Noah was born to save seed of everything, when the earth was washed of its wickedness by the Flood." [^7] This sounds as though he viewed the Flood as a baptism. President Brigham Young, Elder Orson Pratt, President John Taylor, Elder Charles W. Penrose, Elder Orson F. Whitney, Elder Bruce R. McConkie, and President Joseph Fielding Smith have each written of the Flood as the baptism of the earth, since this earth is scheduled to become a celestial kingdom. The earth is a living entity; it was created, fell, was baptized, will be cleansed by fire, will die, and will be renewed to its paradisiacal glory and become celestial. [^8]

Lot and His Daughters

How could Lot, a righteous man, willfully turn his daughters over to wicked men?

Gen. 19:4-9

In the King James Version and all other commonly accepted versions of the Bible, Lot is visited at his home by some holy men (the Bible calls them angels [v. 1], but I think the context makes it clear they are mortal prophets). The men of Sodom came that night to Lot's house and asked for these men that they might "know them" (in the biblical sense). This is a case of intended homosexuality. The story reads that Lot wished to protect these men who had come to his house, so he voluntarily offered his daughters to the men of Sodom and told them that they may do as they wished with the girls. The account gives the impression that the men rejected the offer and wished to gain entrance into Lot's house and to the men.

Lot was Abraham's nephew, holding the priesthood, and was a righteous man. It is troublesome to see him offer his daughters in this manner. The Joseph Smith Translation helps by showing that it was the men of Sodom who asked for the girls, and Lot stoutly refused, saying he would not participate in such wickedness (see vv. 10-15).

Later in the chapter (vv. 30-38), after Lot's wife was gone, he and his two daughters were living in a cave. The daughters had no husbands, so they contrived a plan that they might have children. The record says they got their father drunk with wine two nights following, and each conceived a child from him. The story in the Bible contains no observation about the rightness or wrongness of that event. The Joseph Smith Translation of Gen. 19:37-39, however twice declares that these women thus "dealt wickedly."

Jacob's Patriarchal Blessing

How could Jacob get a different patriarchal blessing through deceit and it be legitimate?

This question has reference to the account given in Genesis chapter 27, in which it appears that both Rebekah and Jacob participated in a cover-up, putting a piece of wool on the neck and on the arm, to deceive Isaac into giving Jacob the birthright blessing that would rightly belong to the older brother Esau. We wish we had a more complete account of what really happened. We do not get additional help from the Joseph Smith Translation in this instance. I'll add a comment by President Joseph Fielding Smith on the subject of patriarchal blessings. Among other things, President Smith said:

"I am here today to stand in the defense of Jacob. I don't like these statements that are made so frequently about Jacob being a thief, a robber in stealing his brother's blessing. He didn't steal his brother's blessing. You are certainly placing Isaac in a bad situation if you say that Jacob stole his brother's blessing. Don't you think that Isaac had inspiration enough to give Jacob the blessing that belonged to him and that if he had come without misrepresentation to his father to receive a blessing, he would have got his own blessing just the same? Jacob didn't understand it and neither did his mother. It was the mother that put Jacob up to this little trick and she said that she would stand in the breach and take the blame. Jacob didn't steal anything, furthermore, he had bought the birthright which his father, I suppose, did not recognize. When he went to get his blessing, he got the blessing the Lord gave him and had for him, and he didn't steal anything from Esau. The Lord would not have permitted it. Furthermore, the Lord gave him the same blessing, or much of the same blessing on another occasion. Esau got the blessing that he deserved and I am sure had he come to his father first that is the blessing he would have received. The Lord honored Jacob even to the extent that he appeared to him and that he chose him and recognized and placed him at the head of the Twelve Tribes of Israel, the chosen people. Brethren, quit your lambasting Jacob." [^9]

There is a difference between the words of a blessing and the actual realization and reception of the promises stated in the blessing. The Lord would not have been obligated to fulfill the words of Isaac if Jacob and Esau didn't get the blessing they each deserved. We have an interesting parallel many years later when Joseph sought to change Jacob's hands from left to right, for the oldest son and such, in blessing Ephraim and Manasseh. What seemed to be right was not right, and inspiration prevailed. So in answer to the question, How can Jacob get a legitimate, different patriarchal blessing through deceit? I would answer, he can't, and he didn't.

Why Would God Command the Israelites to Kill Others?

Why would the Lord command the Israelites to kill men, women, and children during the occupation of Canaan?

The story in Deuteronomy and in Joshua details a series of harsh experiences in which the Israelites literally destroyed many of the inhabitants of Canaan, slaying men, women, and children (see Deut. 2:34; 7:7, 10-11; 9:4; Josh. 6:21; 9:24). We generally turn to 1 Ne. 17:31-38 for justification of this, wherein Nephi explained to his brothers that the Israelites would not have been permitted to drive out the nations from the promised land if those nations had been righteous. Nephi said that those peoples were not righteous—they were not even neutral—for Nephi says they had "rejected every word of God, and they were ripe in iniquity; and the fulness of the wrath of God was upon them; and the Lord did curse the land against them" (1 Ne. 17:35).

We find support for this concept in Gen. 15:16, wherein the Lord tells Abraham that his seed cannot inherit the promised land for yet some time because the "iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full." This is further supported in Deut. 2:1-37, wherein the Lord instructed Moses to pass by the children of Esau and the Ammonites and not make war on them, but to utterly destroy the Amorites. Further, in Deut. 7:1-2, 9-10 seven nations, among them the Amorites, were marked for destruction. At this point the Lord said he honors those who keep his covenants, preserving them for a thousand generations, but destroys those who hate him. This appears to be an explanation and a statement about the Amorites' situation. This concept is further illustrated in Deut. 9:4-5, wherein the Lord told the Israelites that they would be victorious in their battles with the people of the land; and then he tells them why—"for the wickedness of these nations the Lord doth drive them out from before thee."

The doctrine to be observed here is what is called being "ripe in iniquity" and receiving the "fulness of God's wrath." These are not neutral categories but are the result of rejection of the gospel. There are three conditions: first, righteousness, which in its truest sense requires one to have the gospel, including the priesthood, and to honor and obey it; being ripe in iniquity, which means to have had the gospel and to have rejected it completely. And the third category is not having been offered the gospel. Such persons live in ignorance, but they do not qualify either for righteousness or for ripeness.

The Book of Mormon makes it very clear that willfully rejecting, rebelling, and fighting against the gospel is a terrible situation for those who do it. Therefore in Alma 24:30 we read, "And thus we can plainly discern, that after a people have been once enlightened by the Spirit of God, and have had great knowledge of things pertaining to righteousness, and then have fallen away into sin and transgression, they become more hardened, and thus their state becomes worse than though they had never known these things."

Mormon told of the condition of his people four centuries later who "did not dwindle in unbelief, but they did wilfully rebel against the gospel of Christ; and they did teach their children that they should not believe" (4 Ne. 1:38; Morm. 1:16). These societies were therefore ripening for destruction. The terms "ripe in iniquity" and "fulness of the wrath of God" are further used and clarified in Ether 2:8-11.

A difficult question arises as to why the innocent children should perish. I think Mormon touched on this in the verse we just read. The innocent children won't stay innocent if they grow to maturity in a society ripe in iniquity. It is harsh to our sensibilities for them to be slain, but it is the means of their eternal salvation. It will also fill up the measure of their fathers' wickedness that they contributed to their children's destruction. It is the circumstances described in Alma 14:10-11 and 60:13. These scriptures are given to us for our instruction.

We do not know the details about who it was that taught the people of Canaan the gospel, which they rejected, but perhaps it happened in the days of Melchizedek and the subsequent years. We can at least tell from Deuteronomy and from 1 Nephi that these peoples had been adequately taught and that they had willfully rejected "every word of God" and thus were ripe in iniquity. This is the same situation with the adult people in the days of Noah who were consequently drowned in the Flood and which will be the case also with millions, I suppose, at the Second Coming of Jesus. The teaching of the gospel converts some people; others are left without excuse if they reject it to the third and fourth generations.

I quote from the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said something applicable here:

"That which is wrong under one circumstance, may be, and often is, right under another.

"God said, 'Thou shalt not kill;' at another time He said, 'Thou shalt utterly destroy.' This is the principle on which the government of heaven is conducted—by revelation adapted to the circumstances in which the children of the kingdom are placed. Whatever God requires is right, no matter what it is, although we may not see the reason thereof till long after the events transpire." [^10]

Why Was Moses Denied Entrance to the Promised Land?

Why was Moses denied entrance into the promised land? Was it because he disobeyed the Lord over getting the water from the rock?

The passages of scripture involved in this instance are many (see Num. 20:1-12; Deut. 3:24-27; 4:21; 31:2; 32:51; 1 Ne. 17:29; Alma 45:19; D&C 84:19-26).

If one stayed strictly with the statements in the Bible, it would lead to the conclusion that the Lord was angry with Moses because he struck the rock with the rod in anger, and also that he said to the people, "we" gave you water from the rock (see Num. 20:1-12), thus taking credit to himself instead of honoring the Lord. A pretty good case for this point of view could be built from the Bible alone, but I think there is a wider range of influences and factors that we need to consider.

I do not doubt the event happened with the rod and the rock and the water. But I am not convinced that such is the real reason Moses did not enter into the promised land of Canaan.

The children of Israel could have traversed the three hundred miles or so from Egypt to Canaan and entered the promised land in much less than forty years, if they had been ready and prepared to do so. Moses tried to get them ready, but it was too hard for them. When Moses went to Sinai, the people heard the voice of God and they saw the smoke and the fire, and they said to Moses, we can't stand that experience. In the future you speak with the Lord, and we will speak to you, "but let not God speak with us, lest we die" (Ex. 20:19). They were not prepared for direct contact with the Lord at that stage of their lives. In other words, they were not ready to "enter into his rest."

Consequently, the Lord said that the generation that came out of Egypt would not enter Canaan (except Joshua and Caleb) and they would all remain in the wilderness until the old ones had died and a new generation had arisen. As a result of their unbelief the Lord took away the ordinances of the higher priesthood—the temple ordinances—that would bring them into the presence of God—and gave the children of Israel the law of Moses with the law of carnal commandments and the Aaronic Priesthood in the place thereof. D&C 84:22-26 explains this:

"For without this [the ordinances of the higher priesthood] no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live.

"Now this Moses plainly taught to the children of Israel in the wilderness, and sought diligently to sanctify his people that they might behold the face of God;

"But they hardened their hearts and could not endure his presence; therefore, the Lord in his wrath, for his anger was kindled against them, swore that they should not enter into his rest while in the wilderness, which rest is the fulness of his glory.

"Therefore, he took Moses out of their midst, and the Holy priesthood also;

"And the lesser priesthood continued, which priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and the preparatory gospel."

It is clear that the Lord was angry, but with the children of Israel, not with Moses. He took Moses out of their midst as a punishment to them. He translated Moses—took him to a better place. I'm sure Moses felt duly repaid for missing his scheduled trip to Israel after all those years. It is unthinkable that the Lord was too angry with Moses to let him go to Israel, but pleased enough to translate him. This is a subject where only latter-day revelation can give us the proper understanding, and we have frequently missed the point of this in our teaching in the Church. There is a great spiritual lesson to be taught in showing that as a people we often may not be worthy of the leadership and the guidance we have received, and that we are missing many blessings we could be enjoying if we were prepared.

The Revelations Provide Many Answers

We have discussed only a few items, but we have spoken from the perspective of the Restoration and of the doctrinal foundation latter-day revelation has given to us. We have honored the gift of prophecy, visions, miracles, revelation, and the role of a living prophet. We are commanded to seek learning "even by study and also by faith" (D&C 88:118). How does one seek learning by faith? It has something to do with believing that what the Lord has said in his revelations is true. That is where we ought to start. O Lord, save us from sophisticated unbelief and cynicism that masquerades as faith while it denies the plain reading the Lord has given us.

I have a testimony in my soul, borne of the Holy Ghost, that the Lord Jesus Christ is our Savior and that his revelations to us mean what they say. I have an equally positive feeling that as we serve in our Church callings and as we teach the gospel to those around us, including our youth, we are engaged in the work of God under the direction of living prophets and Apostles, from the President of the Church on down.

Notes

From the Eleventh Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the Old Testament, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, August 1987 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1987), 12-19.

---
Notas:
[^1] George A. Buttrick et al., eds., Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, 4 vols.(New York: Abingdon Press, 1962), 2:979.
[^2] Ibid., 4:934.
[^3] Merril F. Unger, Unger's Bible Dictionary (Chicago: Moody Press, 1985), 1179.
[^4] See Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365.
[^5] See ibid., 168, 264, 308.
[^6] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:68.
[^7] In ibid., 3:100.
[^8] Ibid., 100-101.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] See History of the Church, 2:236.
