Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 16

Our Heritage from Joseph of Israel

There is something wonderful and exciting about our ancient ancestor Joseph, the son of Jacob, who is generally known as Joseph of Egypt. More correctly, he is Joseph of Israel, who lived in Egypt. He is a hero in many ways and is one of the outstanding seers of all time. So great was he in the work of the Lord that the name Joseph has a quality of reverence about it; just hearing the name causes spiritual echoes and visual images to come to mind. His faithfulness thirty-six hundred years ago, from boyhood to old age, led to promises and covenants and blessings being given to him personally and has influenced the writing of scripture and the work of the Church right up to this very moment. This heritage from Joseph will continue to influence us throughout the eternities to come.

The Biblical Account of Joseph

The Bible contains no book of Joseph, but the book of Genesis has a great deal of information about him. It is instructive to analyze its contents. The word genesis means "beginning" (LDSBible Dictionary, s.v. "genesis"); the book derives its title from its first three words: "In the beginning." Genesis tells of many beginnings: the beginning, or creation, of the earth; the beginning of man, of animals, of sin, of the preaching of the gospel, of families, of tribes, and of nations; and the beginning of the house of Israel. The book of Genesis introduces the rest of the Bible and was written to give the Israelites, just out of Egypt, a knowledge of who they were, the purposes of God, and the origin of things in the world. Genesis gives background essential to recognizing the hand of God in the Creation, the establishment of a covenant with Abraham, and the founding of the house of Israel as the Lord's special people among the nations. It is through Israel that the name of the Lord is to be preserved and the gospel is to be taught throughout the earth among all peoples.

A chapter-by-chapter analysis of Genesis shows that not all things were treated equally. For example, the amount of space given to the stories of Abraham and Joseph is disproportionate to the length of time each one lived.

Genesis chapters 1-2 cover the creation of the earth and the origin of life on the earth. Thousands and thousands of years are covered in just two chapters.

Genesis chapters 3-5 deal with the fall of man and the history of early families from Adam to Noah—at least fifteen hundred years are covered in three chapters, averaging more than five hundred years per chapter.

Genesis chapters 6-11 cover the events from the birth of Noah through the Tower of Babel—possibly five hundred years in six chapters, averaging almost one hundred years per chapter.

Genesis chapters 12-27 introduce Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; two hundred years are covered in sixteen chapters—fewer than fourteen years per chapter.

Genesis chapters 28-36 relate the life of Jacob, his marriages, and the beginnings of the tribes of Israel; eight chapters cover no more than one hundred years—twelve years per chapter.

Genesis chapters 37-50 detail the life of Joseph. Chapter 38 is about Judah, leaving thirteen chapters for the story of Joseph from age 17 to 110; ninety-three years are covered in those thirteen chapters, averaging fewer than eight years per chapter.

The book of Genesis covers seventy-eight pages in my copy of the Bible. If we deduct four pages for the account of the Creation, that leaves seventy-four pages to cover the time from the fall of Adam to the death of Joseph, a period of about twenty-three hundred years. The ninety-three years of Joseph's life from age 17 to 110 are covered in twenty-four pages; in other words, 30 percent of Genesis covers only 5 percent of the time period. That proportion ought to give us an idea of how Moses, the inspired author of Genesis, felt about the importance of Joseph's story.

The Name Joseph

According to The Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, the name Joseph means "to add" or "may God add," as adding to one's life through a posterity.1 The Egyptian name given to Joseph was Zaphnath-paaneah (see Gen. 41:45), which experts say could mean "God speaks" or "God reveals."2Unger's Bible Dictionary interprets that name to mean "sustainer of life."3 Others have felt the name Joseph is an adaptation of the name Asaph, meaning "to gather." What we know about Joseph fits all of these interpretations very well.

Joseph's Life on Earth

Joseph was chosen in the Grand Council before the world was. [^1] He is one of the "noble and great ones" seen in vision by Abraham (Abraham 3:22) and was foreordained to become a ruler on the earth and in eternity.

As to his mortal life, Joseph was the eleventh son of Jacob and the first child of Rachel. He seems to have been considerably younger than his half-brothers Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, the sons of Jacob's first wife, Leah. It is likely that Jacob was in his early nineties when Joseph was born. Joseph was thirty years of age when he was made overseer of Egypt (see Gen. 41:46) seven years later the famine began, and two years later still, Joseph made himself known to his brothers, making him about thirty-nine at that time (see Gen. 45:6). A short time later Jacob went to Egypt and met the pharaoh, who asked Jacob his age; Jacob responded that he was one hundred thirty (see Gen. 47:9). If we can trust that information given in the text of Genesis, we would conclude that Jacob must have been approximately ninety-one when Joseph was born.

When Reuben, who was Jacob's firstborn, lost the birthright because of transgression (see Gen. 35:22; 49:4; 1 Chr. 5:1), the blessing went to the firstborn of the second wife, Rachel. And thus Joseph was given the birthright in his father's house—the house of Israel. The birthright carried with it certain prerogatives and responsibilities. It entailed an inheritance of land; but more important, it meant the right to preside in the family after the death of the father. Birthright is presidency and leadership.

Our understanding of the office associated with the birthright is enhanced by our knowledge of the holy priesthood and the keys to preside. The priesthood and the requisite keys descended in regular succession by lineage from Adam and were conferred upon Abraham, by Abraham to Isaac, by Isaac to Jacob, and by Jacob to Joseph. Such power and prerogatives were not mere tribal custom and folklore, as some scholars would have us believe, but were the priesthood powers designed to regulate and set in order the affairs of the kingdom of God on the earth and were the channel through which God revealed his will to his prophets.

Joseph and the Gospel

Little is said in the scriptures about Joseph's having the gospel and knowing the doctrine of Jesus Christ, but we know from other scripture (see Jacob 4:4-5; Mosiah 13:33-35) that all of the prophets believed in Jesus, who was to come, and of necessity they were baptized, confirmed, ordained, and called according to the proper order of the kingdom. All true prophets and seers have been witnesses for the Lord Jesus Christ, even though our current Bibles lack that information. [^2]

As a young man, Joseph had several dreams that foreshadowed his earthly mission and his leadership in the family. One dream was of his brothers' sheaves of grain bowing down to his sheaf. Some of his dreams are recorded in Gen. 37:5-11, and a partial fulfillment is noted in Gen. 42:6-9, when his brothers bowed before him in Egypt. Joseph's belief in the gospel of Jesus Christ, including his reliance on dreams and visions, is another part of our heritage from him.

Joseph's Integrity

The life of Joseph illustrates the truth that when the Lord wants something done, he has a particular baby born who will grow up and do it. That is true of all the prophets and apostles and was true of Joseph. The Lord foresaw the need to preserve the house of Israel during a widespread famine and through other dangers, and he had Joseph waiting and ready, able to do the work.

The story of Joseph exemplifies the Lord's knowledge of the situation of all his children and his awareness of their individual circumstances. He often proves and tries them to the uttermost, tempering and strengthening them to accomplish very difficult tasks. Perhaps the most significant test of Joseph's faithfulness and love of God came through his experience with Potiphar's wife, who day by day sought to have him "lie" with her in carnal immorality. Joseph's response was that he would not do so because his master, her husband, trusted him, and he could not do this great wickedness and sin against God. Thereupon, the woman, frustrated in her efforts to seduce him, falsely accused him of trying to seduce her, and he was thrown into prison (see Gen. 39:3-20). That must have been a very discouraging turn of events to be so treated for obeying the Lord's law of chastity. Joseph's experiences with his older brothers who sold him as a slave, the false accusation by Potiphar's wife, Joseph's leadership in the prison, and finally, the God-given inspiration to interpret the Pharaoh's dream—all signify that the Lord does not make our paths easy, but he does help those who trust in him. Joseph would not have had the wisdom, and perhaps not even the opportunity to use his wisdom, if he had not been blessed of the Lord for his faithfulness in times of adversity. The Lord, who looketh on the heart, knew of Joseph's integrity.

Thus, part of our heritage from Joseph is his good example. Joseph's life reminds us of the Lord's promises in the Doctrine and Covenants, which were spoken to all of us:

"For thus saith the Lord—I, the Lord, am merciful and gracious unto those who fear me, and delight to honor those who serve me in righteousness and in truth unto the end.

"Great shall be their reward and eternal shall be their glory.

"And to them will I reveal all mysteries, yea, all the hidden mysteries of my kingdom from days of old, and for ages to come, will I make known unto them the good pleasure of my will concerning all things pertaining to my kingdom.

"Yea, even the wonders of eternity shall they know, and things to come will I show them, even the things of many generations.

"And their wisdom shall be great, and their understanding reach to heaven; and before them the wisdom of the wise shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent shall come to naught.

"For by my Spirit will I enlighten them, and by my power will I make known unto them the secrets of my will—yea, even those things which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor yet entered into the heart of man" (D&C 76:5-10).

These words assure us that the Lord will help all who sincerely obey him. He may not make everyone prime minister of Egypt, but he will not overlook anyone; he will rescue and generously reward each of us in his own time and in his own way. I believe that what the Lord does for us will be better than if we had dictated the terms ourselves.

The Consequences of Sin

The record of Joseph's brothers also demonstrates that unrighteous acts that remain uncorrected leave a residue in our consciousness that at some future time will surface to our sorrow and shame. Remember that when Joseph's brothers arrived in Egypt looking for food, he recognized them and temporarily confined them. They didn't know him, nor did they know the cause of their imprisonment, but their imaginations became active. They began to argue among themselves, and Reuben said, in effect, "I told you that you should not have mistreated our younger brother those many years ago. When we saw his anguish at our plan to sell him, and he pleaded for mercy, you should have listened" (see Gen. 42:21-22). That was twenty years after the selling of Joseph, but in that crisis, it all came back to trouble them. What they didn't know was that Joseph was listening to them in their plight and could understand them.

Later, when Joseph made himself known to his brothers and sent them back to Canaan to get their father, Jacob, and to tell him that Joseph was yet alive, the problem was increased for the elder brothers—Joseph wanted Jacob to come to Egypt to see him and live out the famine. This development presented certain difficulties to them. After selling Joseph, they had taken his coat of many colors, dipped it in goats' blood, and asked their father if he recognized it. He at once came to the conclusion that a vicious animal had slain the boy. The brothers didn't actually say that, but they arranged the evidence in such a way that it led to their father's wrong conclusion. They beheld their father's sorrow and long mourning, and yet they let him believe a lie for more than twenty years while they professed innocence. Now all that would change. Jacob would go to Egypt, and Joseph would be able to tell him how it really happened. Circumstances have a way of surfacing, no matter how carefully and deeply concealed. That is true of good deeds as well as of bad. All things shall, at some time, be manifest to our glory and honor or to our shame. The lesson of the need for repentance, taught by this episode in the lives of his brothers, is also part of our heritage from Joseph.

Joseph was aware of the discomfort his brothers were feeling. The account reads:

"And Joseph said unto his brethren, I am Joseph; doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for they were troubled at his presence.

"And Joseph said unto his brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.

"Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life" (Gen. 45:3-5).

When their father, Jacob, died seventeen years later and was buried in Hebron, the brothers feared that Joseph might then take action against them for their misdeeds. Joseph's magnanimity was again demonstrated:

"And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead, they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil which we did unto him.

"And they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died, saying,

"So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.

"And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and they said, Behold, we be thy servants.

"And Joseph said unto them, Fear not: for am I in the place of God?

"But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.

"Now therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted them, and spake kindly unto them" (Gen. 50:15-21).

Before Jacob died he gave each of his sons a father's blessing, or in other words, a patriarchal blessing. That was not only a blessing regarding each son but a prophecy and explanation of the posterity of each one. Of Joseph, Jacob said:

"Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall:

"The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him:

"But his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob; (from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel:)

"Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb:

"The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren" (Gen. 49:22-26).

I want to pay particular attention to the last sentence, which speaks of the "everlasting hills" and the blessings upon him who was "separate from his brethren." The land of the everlasting hills we regard as the Western Hemisphere—North and South America. The matter of Joseph's being separate from his brethren was partially fulfilled by the Nephites and Lamanites dwelling for many centuries in the Western Hemisphere, separate from the other tribes of Israel. Moreover, there will be further fulfillment of this separation, for we learn from Ether 13:2-11 and 3 Ne. 20-21 that Joseph's seed shall build and inhabit the New Jerusalem on the American continent, whereas the other tribes of Israel will find inheritances in and around the old Jerusalem. This separation was explained by President Joseph Fielding Smith:

"Because of his faithfulness and integrity, Joseph received greater blessings than the progenitors of Jacob and was rewarded with the land of Zion. His brothers, with malicious intent, separated him and cast him out from among them. The Lord, in rewarding him, separated him from his brothers—the other tribes of Israel—and gave him an inheritance in a land that is choice above all other lands, which, we have learned from the Book of Mormon and modern revelation, is America." [^3] Thus, the events in Joseph's own life foreshadowed the more permanent arrangement of his posterity, who will remain separate from the other tribes by divine decree and special blessing in the land choice above all other lands.

Nephi, speaking of the ancient Joseph, said: "He truly prophesied concerning all his seed. And the prophecies which he wrote, there are not many greater" (2 Ne. 4:2). And father Lehi said: "I am a descendant of Joseph who was carried captive into Egypt. And great were the covenants of the Lord which he made unto Joseph. Wherefore, Joseph truly saw our day" (2 Ne. 3:4-5).

Joseph saw the times of Lehi, Nephi, and the Book of Mormon peoples, and he also saw our day in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. He prophesied of Moses, of Aaron, and of the Messiah, and he also prophesied of Joseph Smith Sr., Joseph Smith Jr., and Oliver Cowdery.

We know that more of Joseph's prophecies were contained on the plates of brass. Parts of them are cited in the Book of Mormon (see 2 Ne. 3), and additional information is given in Joseph Smith's translation of Gen. 50. The Prophet knew of even further information coming from ancient Joseph, particularly about the restoration of the priesthood to Joseph Smith and his scribe Oliver Cowdery. The account was written in Oliver's handwriting in 1835 in the patriarchal blessing book of Joseph Smith Sr. The document is preserved in the Church archives. A portion of Oliver's record reads as follows: "Therefore we repaired to the woods, even as our father Joseph said we should, that is, to the bush, and called upon the name of the Lord, and he answered us out of the heavens. And while we were in the heavenly vision, the angel came down and bestowed upon us this priesthood; and then, as I have said, we repaired to the water and were baptized. After this, we received the high and holy priesthood; but an account of this will be given elsewhere, or in another place." [^4]

Elder Joseph Fielding Smith commented on this little-known prophecy: "In this statement, made by Oliver, reference is made to a prophecy by Joseph of old, son of Jacob, in which he declared that the priesthood should be restored in the last days through the administration of an angel 'in the bush.' In the Book of Mormon we are given a glimpse at the prophecy uttered by Joseph concerning the Restoration, but the prophecy has only been given in part unto us, and is yet to be revealed. Without doubt, it was made known to the Prophet in connection with many other things that have not yet been given to the world. The Prophet has, however, added some light concerning this prophecy, and has revealed to us the manner of the ordination to the Melchizedek Priesthood of himself and Oliver Cowdery.

"On the 18th day of December, 1833, when the Prophet blessed his father, and ordained him to the Patriarchal priesthood, he also blessed a number of others, among whom was Oliver Cowdery. After pronouncing Oliver's blessing, the Prophet said:

"'These blessings shall come upon him [Oliver] according to the blessings of the prophecy of Joseph in ancient days, which he said should come upon the seer of the last days and the scribe that should sit with him, and that should be ordained with him, by the hands of the angel in the bush, unto the lesser priesthood, and after receive the holy priesthood under the hands of those who had been held in reserve for a long season, even those who received it under the hands of the Messiah, while he should dwell in the flesh upon the earth, and should receive the blessings with him, even the seer of the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, saith he, even Joseph of old.'" [^5]

Elder Smith explained further that this information was copied by Oliver into the record under the date of 2 October 1835. [^6]

I have been particular on this point to emphasize the precise knowledge that ancient Joseph possessed about the doings of Joseph Smith and his scribe Oliver Cowdery in the last days.

The Writings of Joseph

There is not today a book of Joseph in the standard works, but we can be very certain that Joseph did write and there will yet be a book of his writings available to the Church. Nephi said that there were not many prophecies greater than those Joseph had written (see 2 Ne. 4:2). Furthermore, when Joseph Smith obtained the two Egyptian papyri scrolls from Michael Chandler in 1835 at Kirtland, the Prophet identified one of them as containing the writings of Joseph of Egypt. [^7] The Prophet did not publish a translation from the Joseph scroll, but he must have examined it and formed an idea of its contents, for Oliver Cowdery wrote an extensive and detailed account of it, which was published in the Messenger and Advocate in Kirtland, Ohio, in December 1835. [^8] We assume that Oliver obtained his detailed information about the Joseph scroll from the Prophet. It appears from Brother Cowdery's description that several of the pieces of papyri the Church obtained from the New York Metropolitan Museum in 1967 are from the Joseph scroll. Surely we can look forward to a time to come when the Church will have a complete record and translation of all of Joseph's writings.

The Posterity of Joseph Today

We are given to understand, without equivocation, that Joseph Smith Jr. was a direct descendant of Joseph of Egypt. The Book of Mormon so declares in 2 Ne. 3:7-15. President Brigham Young often spoke on this theme, stating emphatically that Joseph Smith was a literal, biological descendant of ancient Joseph. For example, on 9 October 1859 he said: "It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he [Joseph Smith] should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and powers of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man." [^9]

On an earlier occasion President Young had said: "You have heard Joseph say that the people did not know him; he had his eyes on the relation to blood-relations. Some have supposed that he meant spirit, but it was the blood-relation. This is it that he referred to. His descent from Joseph that was sold into Egypt was direct, and the blood was pure in him. That is why the Lord chose him and we are pure when this blood-strain from Ephraim comes down pure. The decrees of the Almighty will be exalted—that blood which was in him was pure, and he had the sole right and lawful power, as he was the legal heir to the blood that has been on the earth and has come down through a pure lineage. The union of various ancestors kept that blood pure. There is a great deal the people do not understand, and many of the Latter-day Saints have to learn all about it." [^10]

We have already noted that events in the life of Joseph of old were typical or symbolic of events in the lives of his posterity, as in his being separate from his brethren. The comparison can be carried further. Just as Joseph saved his people with corn (literally, cornbread) in Egypt, so the family of Joseph today has the "bread of life," the priesthood and the gospel of Jesus Christ, to feed to a spiritually famished world, to gather scattered Israel, and to restore them to the true Church and fold of God. We can benefit from President Young's words on this subject: God "foreknew what Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, would do. Joseph was foreordained to be the temporal saviour of his father's house, and the seed of Joseph are ordained to be the spiritual and temporal saviours of all the house of Israel in the latter days. Joseph's seed has mixed itself with all the seed of man upon the face of the whole earth. The great majority of those who are now before me are the descendants of that Joseph who was sold. Joseph Smith, Junior, was foreordained to come through the loins of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and so on down through the Prophets and Apostles; and thus he came forth in the last days to be a minister of salvation, and to hold the keys of the last dispensation of the fulness of times."14

It is not by accident nor by coincidence that most of the members of the Church today are literal descendants of ancient Joseph. Such lineage is plainly declared in their individual patriarchal blessings and in the revelations of the Lord. The descent from Joseph is actual, literal, and biological in the bloodstreams of Church members. We read in the Doctrine and Covenants, "Ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh," and the priesthood "must needs remain through you and your lineage" (D&C 86:9-10).

A number of years ago, Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles reported the results of a survey of a large number of patriarchal blessings of Church members in specific geographical areas. His conclusions were published in 1981 and are quite instructive:

"Patriarchal blessings clearly point out that it is the tribe of Joseph that is carrying forward the last dispensation. And how could it be otherwise? . . .

"So it is Joseph who is doing the present-day work through The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Patriarchal blessings give the lineage of Church members receiving the blessings, and they are predominantly of Joseph.

"For example, three different patriarchs in Great Britain report that of their blessings, very few indeed show a lineage other than that of Ephraim. One of those patriarchs has given more than six hundred blessings, another five hundred, and the third more than three hundred. Each reports that of all his blessings, not more than half a dozen declare a lineage other than of Ephraim.

"This clearly shows that Great Britain is a land of Ephraim. But the same thing may be said of other European countries. They too are Ephraim. Converts by the thousands have come from there. It is not expected, of course, that all of the millions in Europe will join the Church. . . . But those who do come are primarily of Ephraim. And Ephraim is a son of Joseph.

"Throughout the Polynesian islands and Latin America the blood of Manasseh is dominant.

"In Mexico, patriarchs report that 75 percent of the blessings indicate the lineage of Manasseh and 25 percent, of Ephraim. Only two or three blessings out of hundreds given mention any other tribe.

"In Peru one patriarch in a given period gave 95 blessings, of which 90 indicated the blood of Manasseh, 3 of Ephraim, and 2 of Abraham.

"Another patriarch in the same area gave 347 blessings in a given period, of which 122 were of Ephraim, 130 of Manasseh, 90 of Joseph, 2 of Asher, 2 of Benjamin, and 1 of Levi.

"Another patriarch in that land has given over nine hundred blessings, of which 90 percent are of Manasseh and the rest of Ephraim, except for a half dozen referring to other tribes.

"In New Zealand virtually all of the Europeans are declared to be of Ephraim and the Polynesians of Manasseh, [with] a few declared simply to be of Joseph.

"In Tonga . . . patriarchs report that 75 percent of their blessings show a lineage of Manasseh and 25 percent of Ephraim. Out of many blessings given only 4 were related to other tribes.

"It is interesting to see how the blessings occur in still other lands. In Hong Kong, out of 326 blessings, 323 were of Ephraim and 3 of Manasseh.

"In Taiwan, out of a group of 210 blessings, all were of Ephraim. In the Philippines every blessing given by the patriarchs there declared a lineage of Ephraim.

"In Japan, out of 2,641 blessings, 1,326 were shown to be of Joseph, 444 specifically of Ephraim, and 871 of Manasseh. No other tribes were mentioned.

"In Italy, out of 150 blessings, all were declared of Ephraim. No exceptions.

"In France one patriarch reported on 300 blessings of which 280 were of Ephraim and the rest of Manasseh except a few of Judah.

"Another French patriarch gave 94 blessings, all showing a line of Ephraim except one of Judah. A third French patriarch just beginning his work said that all of his blessings thus far showed the line of Ephraim.

"In Argentina, out of 100 blessings given, 66 were of Ephraim and 33 of Manasseh, with one from another tribe.

"Out of 100 blessings in Chile, 60 were of Ephraim and 40 of Manasseh. From 100 blessings given in Uruguay, 21 were of Ephraim, 76 of Manasseh, and 3 from other tribes. In North America nearly all Indians are shown to be of Manasseh. The sifting of the blood of Joseph and his sons Ephraim and Manasseh to all parts of the world is nothing short of miraculous. And it is likewise obviously an act of Providence that the Latter-day Saints being brought into the Church in all parts of the world are overwhelmingly of the blood of Joseph.

"It is highly significant in the light of the prophecies concerning Joseph and his latter-day mission." [^11]

On the subject of our lineage, President Spencer W. Kimball said with great clarity: "The Lamanite is a chosen child of God, but he is not the only chosen one. There are many other good people including the Anglos, the French, the German, and the English, who are also of Ephraim and Manasseh. They, with the Lamanites, are also a chosen people, and they are a remnant of Jacob. The Lamanite is not wholly and exclusively the remnant of the Jacob which the Book of Mormon talks about. We are all of Israel! We are of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and Joseph through Ephraim and Manasseh. We are all of us remnants of Jacob." [^12]

Some may think that present-day Latter-day Saints are descendants of Joseph only by assignment or by adoption, but such a conclusion is not in harmony with the scriptures, the promises to the ancient prophets, nor the teachings of the latter-day prophets. We must understand that our descent from Joseph is literal. Elder Bruce R. McConkie, speaking at a Brigham Young University summer session on 8 August 1967, was asked whether we, as Latter-day Saints, are literal descendants of Israel or Israelites by adoption. His answer, which I have on audiotape, was as follows: "We are literally of the seed of Abraham. Let's just drill it into ourselves! We are literally of the seed of Abraham. We are natural heirs according to the flesh. We are not adopted nor anything else. I don't know how there could be language more express than these revelations, 'natural heirs according to the flesh,' 'lawful heirs,' 'the literal seed of the body.' You see He [the Lord] just goes out of his way to make it literal. The literal seed of your body has the right to the priesthood and the gospel, and that is us. Now, granted that somebody can be adopted in but they are so few and far between up to now, that we can just about forget about them." [^13]

That most Latter-day Saints are descended from ancient Joseph is reflected in an address delivered by President Ezra Taft Benson on 2 May 1976 in Calgary, Alberta, Canada, to an audience that included many Jewish people. President Benson titled his discourse "A Message to Judah from Joseph." [^14]

Thus we see that our earthly lineage is another part of our heritage from ancient Joseph. We have the same gospel of Jesus Christ that he had, the same priesthood, the same Abrahamic covenant, the same blood in our veins, and similar responsibility to feed the bread of life to our fellow beings in the world. When Joseph's brothers went into Egypt, they did not know him. Yet he knew who he was. That is similar to the way it is today. The world does not know who we are—that we are Joseph's seed. What a tragedy it would have been if Joseph had not known himself who he was. It will likewise be tragic if we ourselves do not recognize and appreciate our true identity.

Dignity of the Name of Joseph

In view of the greatness of ancient Joseph and the many righteous Josephs in sacred history, such as Joseph the husband of Mary, Joseph Smith Sr., Joseph Smith Jr., Joseph F. Smith, Joseph Fielding Smith, and many others, the name Joseph has a certain dignity about it. Along this line, there is an account of Joseph Smith talking with an unfriendly minister of religion, who said to the Prophet:

"'Why, I told my congregation the other Sunday that they might as well believe Joe Smith as such theology as that.'

"'Did you say Joe Smith in a sermon?' [asked Joseph Smith].

"'Of course I did. Why not?'

"The Prophet's reply was given with a quiet superiority that was overwhelming: 'Considering only the day and the place it would have been more respectful to have said Lieutenant General Joseph Smith.'" [^15]

Further, in 1909 President Joseph F. Smith wrote to one of his daughters concerning his feelings about the name Joseph. A portion of the letter reads as follows: "Somehow the name Joseph has fixed in my mind a sense of sacredness, as being the name of the Prophet that would not permit me to abbreviate it even if it were borne by my worst enemy. Aside from that . . . it is very sacred to me, and I cannot think, with any pleasure of her nick-naming her husband, when to do so seems to cast not only a slight on his name but on the whole line of Josephs reaching back to him who was sold into Egypt." [^16]

As far as salvation in the celestial kingdom is concerned, it makes no difference what our name or our lineage is, for Christ died for all mankind, and salvation comes by the grace of Christ and our willing obedience. Promises were made, however, to the ancient prophets and patriarchs that the gospel would be offered to their posterity. In the Lord's orderly manner of doing things, he has called upon the biological descendants of ancient Joseph to be the ones who would hold those blessings first in the last days and to be the leaders in building the dispensation of the fulness of times and in extending the blessings of the gospel to others. All persons of other tribes will have equal opportunity, through obedience to the gospel. They will, however, receive the gospel, the priesthood, and the ordinances through the agency of the descendants of Joseph, which is the birthright tribe, for that is the way the Lord has chosen to do it.

Notes

From Paul Y. Hoskisson, ed., Thy People Shall Be My People and Thy God My God: The 22nd Annual Sidney B. Sperry Symposium (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), 1-16.

---
Notas:
[^1] William W. Phelps, "The Spirit of God," in Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 2.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 180-81.
[^3] Ibid., 319.
[^4] Ibid., 180.
[^5] Compare Josephus, Antiquities, Book VIII, ch. 1, v. 3; 171 of Whiston's 1981 translation.
[^6] Doctrines of Salvation, 3:68.
[^7] In ibid., 3:100.
[^8] Ibid., 100-101.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] See History of the Church, 2:236.
[^11] See Oliver Cowdery, "To the Elders of the Church of the Latter Day Saints," Latter Day Saints' Messenger and Advocate, Dec. 1835, 236-37.
[^12] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:289-90.
[^13] Brigham Young, in Utah Genealogical and Historical Magazine, July 1920, 107; discourse delivered 8 Jan. 1845.
[^14] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:290.
[^15] Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981), 15-17.
[^16] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 600-601.
