Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 17

The Aaronic Priesthood: "An Everlasting Priesthood throughout Their Generations"

The title emphasizes that the Aaronic Priesthood is not of a temporary nature and has an important role in the Restoration. I alone am responsible for the views in this chapter, but I believe they are in harmony with what the Lord has revealed.

In order to establish a necessary background, we need to consider the Old Testament in general and then focus on the Aaronic Priesthood. The Old Testament is necessary background to all the other standard works. We could learn the plan of salvation from latter-day revelation, but we wouldn't have the richness and the fulness and the appreciation for latter-day revelation if we didn't know something about revelation and scripture anciently.

In the Church we will eventually have access to the plates of brass. That will focus our attention on the Old Testament and the Middle East. Eventually we will also receive the sealed plates, the book of Enoch, the records of the lost tribes, and other lost books. As the gathering of Israel progresses, the purposes of God will continue to unfold—and as we see them happening, it will focus attention on the Old Testament.

Restoration of All Things

The fulness of times is the period to which the Old Testament prophets looked for the accomplishment of things that they were unable to do. Every prophet and patriarch would have established the Millennium and the fulness of the kingdom of God, would have established Zion if he had been able to do so. They obtained the promise that the day would come when a permanent kingdom of righteousness and holiness would be established. And they called it the restoration of all things. We live in the time when it is under way. We're helping to bring it about, and we need to know what is going to be restored. If we don't have a familiarity with the Old Testament, we never will quite appreciate what it means when we read "the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory" (Article of Faith 1:10), or when we sing about "restoring their judges and all as at first," [^1] nor will we know what is implied when the scripture says "the restoration of all things" (D&C 27:6; 86:10).

As I listen to sermons and singing of other religious groups, I am impressed with their sincerity and good feeling. Many of them have a great spiritual feeling, but they don't understand the purposes of God on the earth in this day, and that's where we should differ with them. We have a wider appreciation of what the Lord intends to do on the earth. The Book of Mormon says the eternal purposes of the Lord must roll on and go forward (see Morm. 8:22). We will do our Church work better and be happier in our work if we can see the larger picture and the eternal purposes of God unfolding on the earth.

Three Families in Israel

The scripture says that the Aaronic Priesthood has an everlasting role in the gospel. The gospel works through families, not just individuals. Within the house of Israel, there have been three families that the Lord has singled out and to whom he has given special promises—not promises of easy salvation but promises of responsibility through which his purposes will be worked out upon the earth.

The following chart shows three lineages within Israel—the family of Judah, through which came David and many kings, and through which the Savior came, the King of Kings. We are acquainted with the emphasis in the scriptures on the tribe of Judah—of Judah's own blessing that was given to him by his father Jacob (Genesis 49:8-12), and then the kings and leaders pertaining to the family of Judah.

Then there's the family of Joseph. Great promises were made to Joseph personally and to his posterity. It is the family through which Joseph Smith the Prophet came, and as you know the lineage of Joseph has been predominant in the Church in these last days. Most of the people in the Church at the present time are designated in their patriarchal blessings as being descendants of Joseph, most of them Ephraim, many of them Manasseh. Even as Joseph saved his brethren from starvation with temporal salvation by providing grain, so the lineage of Joseph has the bread of life, the gospel, to give to the other tribes and to the world in the last days. There is a mission for the family of Joseph (see JST, Gen. 48:8-11).

There's a third family prominently spoken of in the Old and New Testaments and in the Doctrine and Covenants, and that is the family of Levi. Through the family of Levi came the great prophet Moses and also other Levites. There is also Aaron, and from Aaron came many priests and high priests and above all, John the Baptist.

The point is that we study the Old Testament not alone for the history but for the application we can make from it. Knowing those things from the Old Testament helps us understand the New Testament. And knowing those things in the Old and New Testament helps us understand the Book of Mormon. And knowing things from ancient scripture enables us more perfectly to understand the Doctrine and Covenants. And understanding the Doctrine and Covenants enables us to see more clearly what is happening in the earth today in the Church and what is yet to happen.

Gospel Adoption

In the gospel there are two kinds of adoption. There's adoption into the house of Israel, where a person not already of the lineage of Israel may be adopted into Israel through baptism and the reception of the Holy Ghost.

The other kind of adoption, which even an Israelite must experience—which all people must experience—is that we are adopted into the family of Jesus Christ, whereby we become his sons and his daughters and thus heirs to the promises that are given to the firstborn. It is a special privilege to be counted as the sons and daughters of Jesus Christ. The Book of Mormon and the New Testament teach that doctrine. There is in the gospel a provision called being "born again." If you are born again, we might ask, who are your parents this time? When you are born again, you become sons and daughters of Jesus Christ in a spiritual way, and you become heirs to his blessings.

I mention these things to emphasize that many terms in the scriptures are family-related. We talk about the promises made to the fathers (Acts 13:32; 26:6; D&C 2:2; 96:7), and the hearts of the children will turn to the fathers (Mal. 4:6; 3 Ne. 25:6; D&C 128:17). We talk about being born again (John 3:3, 7; Mosiah 27:25; Alma 5:49; 7:14; Moses 6:59). We talk about being sons and daughters (D&C 25:1). We talk of the sons of Levi (D&C 13:1), the sons of Moses (D&C 84:6, 31-34). We talk about patriarchs (D&C 124:91, 124), inheritance of the firstborn (D&C 76:54-70), and many other terms in the scriptures that have family connections. There is a major concept of the family through the generations with promises being made to certain lineages. If such were not important, then why so much emphasis in the scriptures on adoption into the family of Israel? Sometimes we as individuals don't say much about it, but it is a scriptural topic and a doctrinal topic.

Aaronic Priesthood Part of the Restoration

We have done much thinking, reading, talking, and writing in the past about Judah and his family and Joseph and his family. Perhaps we have somewhat overlooked what is said about the family of Aaron—not only the past history but also the promises that Aaron's lineage has as part of the restoration of all things.

Unless you have already made an extensive study of the lineage of Aaron as presented in the Old Testament, it will surprise you to see how much is given there about Aaron and his seed. Without that background, we will not really appreciate what will yet transpire on this earth in this Church as a result of the restoration of the Aaronic Priesthood by John the Baptist to Joseph Smith on 15 May 1829.

We know about John the Baptist coming to the banks of the Susquehanna River, ordaining Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to the Priesthood of Aaron. Look at D&C 13 and catch the significance of what John said. Notice that he refers to them as "fellow servants":

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness" (D&C 13:1).

It is from the latter part that I think we can learn a little more. The Aaronic Priesthood is "never to be taken again from the earth, until"—I suppose the meaning there is "so that" rather than the usual "until." The word "until" implies that maybe it's going to be taken again from the earth. This verse does not mean that. The Aaronic Priesthood is here upon the earth to stay. And it's going to stay so long that even the sons of Levi, who are scattered throughout the length and the breadth of the earth, will come in and once again "offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness" as in ancient times. And even after that, the Aaronic Priesthood will stay. The scriptures say that this priesthood was restored and will stay. The duties which the Aaronic Priesthood is authorized to do will still be necessary during the Millennium and afterwards. The Aaronic Priesthood is not a temporary thing which will be supplanted or superseded by the Melchizedek Priesthood. Notice what the Prophet Joseph Smith said in answer to the question, Was the priesthood of Melchizedek taken away when Moses died?

"All priesthood is Melchizedek, but there are different portions or degrees of it. That portion which brought Moses to speak with God face to face was taken away; but that which brought the ministry of angels remained. All the prophets had the Melchizedek Priesthood and were ordained by God himself." [^2]

After the time of Moses, the Aaronic Priesthood continued with the sons of Aaron, and continued down to the time of John the Baptist, but the individual prophets (Jeremiah, Isaiah, etc.) who lived in that time had the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Four Dimensions of Restoration

There are several major dimensions to the restoration of the gospel, and as we examine the scriptures and examine Church history we see that there is much yet to be restored in this dispensation. There are at least four dimensions: ecclesiastical, political, economic, and social.

What we've done best during this dispensation so far is to conduct ourselves in the ecclesiastical manner. We have a church that is growing in numbers and becoming worldwide, and we have many missionaries and many members and many temples, and in the ecclesiastical dimension we're doing very well.

There is a political side to the kingdom that is not being worked on at present because it is not the proper time. It will be done in the Lord's own time.

There is an economic side to the kingdom of God. It is spoken of in D&C 42 of the Doctrine and Covenants—about forty additional sections, from about D&C 42 to 82, deal with the economic dimension of the kingdom. We sometimes call it the united order, or the law of consecration. The early Saints tried to establish that in Ohio, again in Missouri, again in Box Elder County, and in Orderville, and various places. It is not being done right now in its fulness. This is not the time to be organized in an economic order. As individuals we are more under the economic system of the world than we are the economic system of the kingdom of God. But it will come when the Lord wants it to and when we're ready for it.

There is also a social dimension in the organization of families and the marriage covenant and so on that was introduced in the days of the Prophet Joseph Smith and was legally, though temporarily, ended by the Manifesto.

We are not currently functioning in the fulness of these last three areas. I suppose that when the fulness of Zion is established like Enoch's city, all four of those dimensions will function in their fulness. So far, we are primarily functioning as a church.

What does all of that have to do with the Aaronic Priesthood? It is primarily in the economic system. When the law of consecration is in full operation, with the dividing of inheritances and all that was originally attempted in the Church but temporarily discontinued, the sons of Aaron and the Presiding Bishop and so on will come into their more full responsibility. That is an assignment the Lord gave them that has not yet been totally implemented.

Priesthood from Adam to Moses

It will be helpful to trace the history of the priesthood on the earth from Adam to the present day. There was one priesthood from Adam to Moses. It was originally called the Holy Order after the Order of the Son of God and later called Melchizedek Priesthood. There's no mention in those early years of there being a higher priesthood and a lesser priesthood. We have already noted from the Prophet Joseph Smith: "All priesthood is Melchizedek."

The Doctrine and Covenants gives us a priesthood lineage from Adam to Moses in D&C 84:6-17. There was no hereditary requirement for the priesthood at that time.

Aaronic Priesthood and the Law of Moses

"The Levitical Priesthood is forever hereditary," said the Prophet Joseph Smith, "fixed on the head of Aaron and his sons forever." [^3] How correct do you think the Prophet Joseph really was? Did he really mean forever? He said it twice in that sentence.

The Israelites in Moses' day did not want direct contact with God. The law of Moses was given because of a lack of obedience to the gospel of Christ (Ex. 20:18-20).

See Ex. 19 and 20. There is a rather interesting and revealing concept here. When the Lord came down on Mt. Sinai, it was a very colorful and eventful experience. The earth shook; there was thunder; there was lightning; they heard the voice of the Lord; and it scared the people.

"It came to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; so that all the people that was in the camp trembled.

" . . . Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the nether part of the mount.

" . . . mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in fire:

. . . the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace, and the whole mount quaked greatly.

" . . . when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and louder, Moses spake, and God answered him by a voice.

"And the Lord came down upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount: . . . the Lord called Moses up to the top of the Mount; and Moses went up.

"And the Lord said unto Moses, Go down, charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze, and many of them perish.

" . . . let the priests also, which come near to the Lord, sanctify themselves, lest the Lord break forth upon them" (19:16-22).

Then God gave them the Ten Commandments. When Moses was reviewing this in Deuteronomy, he said, You heard the Lord speak. You heard his voice (see Deut. 5:23-31).

Now to Exodus 20:

"The people saw the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking: and when the people saw it, they removed, and stood afar off. And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die" (vv. 18-19).

There's the telling principle. They said, Moses, you talk with God—let God talk to you, and then you talk to us, but we don't want to talk directly with the Lord. They weren't ready. They could not stand his presence. They couldn't stand to hear him. It frightened them. They preferred not to.

"Moses said unto the people, Fear not: for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your faces, that ye sin not.

" . . . the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God was.

"And the Lord said unto Moses, Thus thou shalt say unto the children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven" (vv. 20-22).

As a consequence of years of disobedience,the Lord said, You are not ready for the fulness of the gospel. You are not ready for the higher blessings of the Melchizedek Priesthood. So the Lord said he would take the greater blessings of the priesthood away with Moses, and he would leave the Aaronic Priesthood, or the lesser portion of the priesthood, in its stead. He set up the priests, Aaron and his sons, and gave them the lesser priesthood, but gave them also an assignment which would last throughout all their generations.

Aaronic Priesthood was needed to administer the law of Moses and the law of carnal commandments. It was a lesser priesthood for a lesser law—a preparatory law of performances and ordinances—until Christ. Many Book of Mormon references help in understanding the law of Moses (see Mosiah 3:14-15; 13:29; Alma 25:15; 34:13).

The law of Moses was a law of obedience seven days a week in both religious and secular things. It listed rules for every day, carnal commandments for common daily activities, even for planting crops. Today we plant carrots, lettuce, spinach, beans, and beets all in one enclosure. Under the law of Moses (Leviticus 11, 23; Deut. 22), the Israelites were commanded to put a fence between each different type of crop—not to indicate that there is anything morally wrong with planting different seeds in the same piece of ground, but rather to teach a lesson and keep the lesson in remembrance during the week, as well as on the Sabbath day, that the house of Israel was not to marry (mix their seed) outside of their people and outside of the believers. It was a secular law which reminded them of their spiritual obligation. In like manner, there was a law in those same references concerning their clothing. They could not have clothing that mixed cotton and wool and linen or leather all in the same garment. Today we wear clothing that's partly polyester and partly cotton and so on, but they were told not to do so. There's nothing morally wrong with wearing a piece of clothing made up of different fibers; but if the people practiced the rule during the week, it would help them remember that they were different, that they were covenant people and ought not to marry outside the faith and outside of their people. It gave them a law of obedience that they could practice every day in addition to their worship in the tabernacle or in the synagogue on the Sabbath day.

Heavy penalties were attached to unauthorized acts. Nadab and Abihu were the older two sons of Aaron who performed acts beyond their privileges, so, the scripture says, the Lord slew them.

The law of Moses was a good law, given to the people by a good prophet. It featured divine priesthood. It was Atonement-centered, adapted to a people not ready for the fulness of the gospel. I get nervous when I hear people criticize the law of Moses as though it were a bad law. Moses was a good prophet. And the priesthood that Moses had with the law of Moses was a good priesthood. We ought not to look at the law of Moses as a bad law but rather as a lesser law. It was a law given to prepare those people who were not ready for the higher ordinances, to remind them day by day.

The Aaronic Priesthood Anciently

The chart below illustrates the family of Levi.Levi had three sons, with the second being named Kohath. Kohath's oldest son was named Amram, who married Jochebed, who was also a Levitish girl. From that marriage came three children that we know of: Miriam, Aaron, and Moses. Aaron had four sons: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. The Lord designated Aaron and his sons to be the priests. The other Levites could have the lesser portion of the Aaronic Priesthood, but only Aaron and his sons could be priests.

We have a pattern of that in Aaronic Priesthood duties today. We have the deacons, who pass the sacrament, and the teachers, who prepare the sacrament, but only the priests can administer it. In that day, the other Levites could wash the animal and prepare the sacrifice, but only a priest could actually sacrifice it. To be a priest, you had to be a descendant of Aaron. If you were the firstborn of Aaron, you could not only be a priest but could be the president of the priests, which they called the high priest and which we call a bishop.

If you haven't looked for these concepts in the Old Testament, you'll be surprised how much detail there is as you read through these books. We often look at Exodus, Leviticus, and Numbers as being rather dry and almost not pertaining to us. They are not dry if you look at the right things and if you have an eye for the restoration of all things. That the Lord revealed the Aaronic Priesthood in this dispensation by special ordination suggests that there is something particularly important about the Aaronic Priesthood. When you look at what these books say about Aaron and his sons, you get a feeling of interest. Those books become meaningful because they teach how significant the Aaronic Priesthood is and how much detail is given about the Aaronic Priesthood that pertains to the restoration.

Protestant, Catholic, or Jewish commentaries on the Bible often refer to the Levites as a cult. They say there grew up a cult of the Aaronic Priesthood. That's because those of other faiths don't understand the program of the Lord. With the added information from latter-day revelation, we would not look upon Aaron and his sons as a cult. We look upon the Aaronic Priesthood as part of the kingdom of God.

Exodus 28—as well as other places—talks about the clothing that Aaron and his sons should wear while they are working in the priest's office. Aaron would be the first high priest under the Aaronic Priesthood. We don't confuse that with the high priest under the Melchizedek Priesthood. Under the Aaronic Priesthood the president of the priests was called high priest:

"Take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, [and] Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.

" . . . [for] thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory and for beauty" (vv. 1-2). Note the word beauty.

"Thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's garments to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

" . . . these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate, . . . an ephod, . . . a robe, . . . a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle: . . . they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister unto me in the priest's office" (vv. 3-4).

Now look at the beauty of the garments: "They shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen" (v. 5). Fine linen means white linen. So the clothing included a white robe decorated with blue and purple and scarlet and gold. Gold here may have more reference to a color than it does to a metal. Take a garment made of linen that is white, and decorate it with those beautiful colors.

"And they shall make the ephod of gold, . . . of purple, of scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work" (v. 6).

Verse 8 describes a curious girdle and two onyx stones. There is much detail as to the beauty of the garment.

Ezek. 44:17-18 is informative. Ezekiel is talking about the temple that will yet be built in the last days, and he has a very interesting comment. Most of our temples today are air-conditioned, but Ezekiel indicated concern even then for the clothing as it related to the temperature and environment of the temple:

"And it shall come to pass, that when they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments; and no wool shall come upon them, whiles they minister in the gates of the inner court, and within.

[[For] They shall have linen bonnets upon their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins; they shall not gird themselves with any thing that causeth sweat."

Wool is warmer than linen, and the Lord likes his servants to be comfortable. That struck me as being unique, that the Lord says, in effect, clothe yourselves with cool clothing, colorful clothing.

Even though of proper lineage and otherwise worthy, the individual Levite still had to be called and ordained, as was Aaron. The priests and the Levites were designated for offering sacrifices and temple service. The hereditary nature of the Aaronic Priesthood is still in force and is part of the restoration. See Exodus 30:

"Thou shalt anoint Aaron and his sons, and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office.

"And thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your generations."

"Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it: it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you" (vv. 30-32).

The preceding verses refer to olive oil, with certain spices, frankincense, and other things added, but you notice that he said olive oil is to be a holy anointing oil "throughout your generations." See also Ex. 40:12-16:

"And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and wash them with water.

"And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him; that he may minister unto me in the priest's office.

" . . . thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with coats:

" . . . thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office: for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.

"Thus did Moses: according to all that the Lord commanded him, so did he."

Levites Gravitated Primarily to the Kingdom of Judah

When Israel went into the promised land, Joshua divided the land into various counties, but no land inheritance was given to Levi. The sons of Levi were given a small piece of land—sort of a parsonage—in every county near all of the cities throughout the land and near all of the tribes, so that there were Levites scattered around in all of the provinces, among all the other tribes. They were given about an acre, where a man and his family could raise their own gardens and their own crops and have their animals. This is explained in Leviticus, where they were told to have a piece of ground on which to nurture and support their family. In addition, they were given a piece of the sacrifice—the animal—when it was offered. When the ten tribes revolted and set up their own government separate from the house of Judah, there were Levites among them. When the king of the ten tribes replaced the Levites with non-Levite priests, the real Levites, being offended, went back to Judah (1 Kgs. 12:31; 2 Chr. 11:13-16). Thus it appears that the Levites today are chiefly among the Jews, not the ten tribes, and are scattered wherever Jewish people are today.

There were apparently no Levites among the Nephites. The Nephites were of Joseph and apparently didn't have any Aaronites or Levites, who would have been natural heirs to the Aaronic Priesthood. However, they obeyed the law of Moses. Therefore, we conclude that because the Nephites had the Melchizedek Priesthood, they could do everything the Aaronic Priesthood could do. Since the Aaronic Priesthood was limited to the sons of Aaron, the Nephites could not have functioned in the law of Moses unless they had had the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Role of Aaronic Priesthood in Determining Land Inheritances

When the children of Israel went into the promised land under Joshua, the Lord designated that the priests of Aaron should divide the lands according to lot. One of the roles of the Aaronic Priesthood was the division of property, the allotment, or the inheritance, to each family. In D&C 68:14-21, we read:

"There remain hereafter, in the due time of the Lord, other bishops to be set apart unto the church, to minister even according to the first;

"Wherefore they shall be high priests who are worthy, and they shall be appointed by the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood, except they be literal descendants of Aaron.

"And if they be literal descendants of Aaron they have a legal right to the bishopric, if they are [of] the firstborn among the sons of Aaron;

"For the firstborn holds the right of the presidency over this priesthood, and the keys or authority of the same.

"No man has a legal right to this office, to hold the keys of this priesthood, except he be a literal descendant and the firstborn of Aaron.

"But, as a high priest of the Melchizedek Priesthood has authority to officiate in all the lesser offices he may officiate in the office of bishop when no literal descendant of Aaron can be found, provided he is called and set apart and ordained unto this power, under the hands of the First Presidency of the Melchizedek Priesthood.

"And a literal descendant of Aaron, also, must be designated by this Presidency, and found worthy, and anointed, and ordained under the hands of this Presidency, otherwise they are not legally authorized to officiate in their priesthood.

"But, by virtue of the decree concerning their right of the priesthood descending from father to son, they may claim their anointing if at any time they can prove their lineage, or do ascertain it by revelation from the Lord under the hands of the above named Presidency."

Notice those words in verse 21: "by virtue of the decree"—that has to be the decree of the Lord—"concerning their right of the priesthood descending from father to son." That procedure was outlined and started in the Old Testament, continued down through the New Testament, continues to the last days, and is specified in the Doctrine and Covenants. This is talking about the office of Presiding Bishop.

The first bishop appointed in this dispensation was Edward Partridge. He was not of Levi, but he had the Melchizedek Priesthood. The revelation talks about what a bishop will do. There are many such items in the Doctrine and Covenants, and if we're not looking for them, we have a tendency to just pass them by. We have in the Church today people whose patriarchal blessings designate them as Levites, and some who are even designated of the family of Aaron, but the Lord has not seen fit to call them into the Presiding Bishopric or any presiding office. This is probably because the time is not right. Similarly, the Saints were going to set up the law of consecration in Independence and in other places in Missouri and Ohio, but they were not successful, and the time is not right even yet, apparently, for them to continue with it.

We read in Doctrine and Covenants 58:

"Yea, for this cause I have sent you hither, and have selected my servant Edward Partridge, . . . have appointed unto him his mission in this land.

"But if he repent not of his sins, which are unbelief and blindness of heart, let him take heed lest he fall.

"Behold his mission is given unto him, and it shall not be given again" (vv. 14-16).

In other words, the Lord says, I have explained it once. It is not necessary to say it again. He's already been told what he's supposed to do when he gets to Jackson County, Missouri. He is to be the bishop, which we already know rightly belongs to the lineage of Aaron.

[Whoso[ever] standeth in this mission is appointed to be a judge in Israel, like as it was in ancient days, to divide the lands of the heritage of God unto his children;

"And to judge his people by the testimony of the just, and by the assistance of his counselors, according to the laws of the kingdom which are given by the prophets of God.

"For verily I say unto you, my law shall be kept on this land" (vv. 17-19; emphasis added).

Although the Church was not successful in establishing that type of economic system in Missouri or Ohio or Box Elder County or Orderville, I believe that the day will come when this order of things will be established. When that day comes, the sons of Aaron will be the lawful and legal ones to sit in the bishop's office and to do the work of the bishop, which is "like as it was in ancient days, to divide the lands of the heritage of God unto his children" (D&C 58:17).

We should clearly understand that it doesn't matter what tribe of Israel a person is from or even that a person is not literally of the blood of Israel, as far as individual salvation is concerned, as long as a person obeys and keeps the commandments of God. But in this great, eternal plan that God has for this earth, and the bits and pieces of it that have been revealed, we begin to see that the Lord works through certain families to bring certain things about. Through the lineage of Judah, he brought certain kings and the Messiah, and he will yet do more things. Through the lineage of Joseph he brought the Book of Mormon people, and Joseph Smith, and most of us and he will yet do more things. And through the lineage of Levi and the sons of Aaron he brought certain ancient things about and will yet do more things.

The Significance of John the Baptist

John the Baptist was the logical, the reasonable, and the right man to do the work that he did when he was here upon the earth. The law of Moses was to bring people to Christ, and the Aaronic Priesthood is for that purpose. And John the Baptist, being a direct descendant of Aaron and being the firstborn of his parents (Luke 1:5-7), was given the keys of the Aaronic Priesthood in his day. We read in D&C 68 of the Doctrine and Covenants that no man has a right to these keys, except he be a literal descendant of Aaron. John the Baptist was that man in his day. Then, when it came time for the restoration of the gospel in our day, that same John the Baptist was sent to earth to confer that same priesthood, because he held the keys and thus was sent to bring the priesthood to the earth in the last days as part of the restoration of all things.

We just haven't progressed that far in this dispensation yet to have reached the point where the sons of Levi and the sons of Aaron are called upon to perform that duty, but that day will come, and they are the ones who have been designated to have that assignment. Now, they'll probably be given the Melchizedek Priest-hood also, but they will be of Levi's lineage. When we recall that all priesthood is Melchizedek anyway, [^4] we can see there is a future role, an eternal role, for the sons of Levi yet upon the earth.

Some Aaronic Priesthood History

The following chart shows a list of many ancient Aaronic high priests. Aaron was the first Aaronic high priest (see Ex. 28:1, 4). was the second (see Num. 20:26, Eleazar 28). Eli was from Aaron's son Ithamar (see 1 Chr. 24:3). [^5] You remember Aaron's two oldest sons were slain. We know the story of Eli and Samuel and Hannah and many interesting and important things about Eli. Eli didn't tend to his children well. His sons did wrong, and Eli did not restrict them, so the Lord rejected Eli and his sons (1 Sam. 2:27-36; 3:12; 1 Kgs. 2:27). We can't make our children do what they ought to, but we can teach them. The Lord brought an accusation against Eli because he didn't teach them. Samuel's children didn't do what they ought to do either, but Samuel had tried to restrain them and teach them, and the Lord did not reject Samuel.

With Eli's rejection, the line of priesthood came back to Zadok (1 Chr. 16:39; 1 Kgs. 2:35), who was a descendant of Eleazar (1 Chr. 24:3), and he was the high priest at the time of the dedication of Solomon's temple. We learn all this in the Old Testament.

Seraiah was the last high priest before the Babylonian captivity (2 Kgs. 25:18-21). When the Jews were actually carried into Babylon, Jehozadak was the high priest then and was actually carried to Babylon (1 Chr. 6:14-15). Eliashib was the high priest in Jerusalem about seventy years later, at the time of the return under Ezra (Nehemiah 3:1).

Purifying the Sons of Levi

When Ezra examined the Jews and the Aaronites who had returned from Babylon, he found that many of them had married non-Israelite wives. He said to them something like this: Brethren, you are of the lineage of Aaron and you have special responsibilities, but you cannot function in this office if you're married outside of the Church and outside of the family of Aaron. So he told them to either give up their foreign wives or give up their calling in the priesthood (see Ezra 9-10). I suppose some did one thing and some did another. There was no doubt grumbling and sorrow and weeping. There was no doubt much discomfort, but it took a strong man like Ezra to cause them to obey. D&C 85 will give you a feeling that Ezra did right when he told the children of Aaron—the sons of Aaron—that they could not have it both ways. If they wanted to function in the priesthood, they had to marry within the tribe and the faith and keep the commandments. Ezra had a difficult time, as we read in Nehemiah and also in Ezra, with the Jews as they returned from Babylon to Israel. They had very difficult times with those situations where the priests of Aaronic lineage had not honored their calling. Many of them simply were not allowed to serve.

When Jesus came among the Nephites, he told them that there were words from Malachi that they did not have, and the Father had commanded Jesus to give them those words (3 1 Ne. 24:1; 26:1). One of the chapters is Mal. 3. There were no Aaronites and Levites among the Nephites, but Jesus said the Nephites would need this information at a future time. I suppose that is because the Book of Mormon was to deal with this subject in the fulness of times.

Malachi lived a hundred years after Ezra. Mal. 3 reads like this:

"Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts.

"But who may abide the day of his coming? . . . who shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a refiner's fire, and like fullers' soap:

" . . . he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall purify the sons of Levi" (3:1-3).

This is talking about the last days. Do you see the similarity to the way it was in Ezra's day? When the Lord comes, who shall stand when he appears? And he will need to purify the sons of Levi:

"And purge them as gold and silver, that they may offer unto the Lord an offering in righteousness.

"Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in former years" (3:3-4).

As the chapter continues it speaks of tithing. Isn't it interesting that the Lord wanted that information about the sons of Levi to be had by the Book of Mormon people, as well as for them to have the law of tithing and know about the coming of Elijah as told in chapter 4? Isn't it interesting that when John the Baptist ordained Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, he also made reference to the sons of Levi yet offering an offering in righteousness? (see D&C 13:1).

As believers in the restoration, knowing that the Aaronic Priesthood has been restored, we realize that it has a larger mission than we might at first have supposed. It is my belief that when the time comes that the Lord sees fit to establish the political, social, and economic aspects of the kingdom, he will call upon the sons of Aaron. They may have to be purified a bit, because they've been in apostasy now for two thousand years or more—but the sons of Aaron once again will fill their rightful place. As scripture says, the Lord conferred a priesthood upon Aaron and his sons "throughout all their generations" (D&C 84:18; 107:13).

Future Role of the Sons of Levi

Now, temporarily, while the sons of Levi are in their scattered condition and without the gospel, the Lord is fulfilling the work of the Aaronic Priesthood—the business of deacons, teachers, priests, and bishops—through the ministrations of the Melchizedek Priesthood. But when the time comes that it is right for the other aspects of the kingdom to be established, I think the Lord will then call upon the children of Aaron, which is their right because of the decree that the priest-hood of Aaron is to come down from father to son. We will see in that day that these prophecies—both Old Testament prophecies and Doctrine and Covenants prophecies—will be fulfilled.

I don't know whether I'll be around when that is done, but I would like to be aware of what the plan is. The most important prophet to us is the living prophet. I want to see the purposes that God has announced both in ancient and modern scripture and if possible be a part of it. When the time comes, whenever it is, that the Lord sees fit to reintroduce his economic order to the earth, and when he calls the sons of Aaron to serve in their rightful position, that should not be a surprise to us. Because we have believed the scriptures, we should not be surprised to see the eternal purposes of the Lord roll forth and the kingdom be more fully developed.

The chart on the following page shows the various Aaronic high priests. The line of authority went down to John the Baptist, who was the legitimate high priest in his day. He was not accepted by the Jews. He was not accepted by the Roman government. That didn't make any difference. He had the keys. He did the work in person that the law of Moses was to do as a statute. John personally led the Savior down into the water and baptized him, and John prepared a people to receive the Lord Jesus Christ.

From the Old Testament and with the help of the records of Josephus, eighty-three Aaronic high priests have been identified from Aaron to John the Baptist. That includes Aaron (Nadab and Abihu had no posterity), Eleazar, Phinehas, Eli, Zadok, Jehozadak, and the Maccabean priests. In the New Testament, Annas and Caiaphas were appointed by Rome, even though they were not of the proper lineage. They shouldn't have served in that priesthood calling, however. John the Baptist was the legal high priest, though not recognized by either Rome or the Jews. Some day, a future presiding priest, the presiding bishop in the Church, will be of the Aaronic lineage. Although the scripture does not categorically say it, my guess is that he will be a descendant of John the Baptist.

The scriptures are true. And whether we are on this side of the veil or have passed on to the other side, at some future point we will see these great promises and the unfolding of the program of the Lord come to pass in very deed, exactly as the Lord revealed it.

Further Reading

McConkie, Bruce R. Mormon Doctrine. 2d ed. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1966. S.v. "Aaronic Priesthood."

———. The Promised Messiah: The First Coming of Christ. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978. See 409-13.

Palmer, Lee A. Aaronic Priesthood through the Centuries. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978.

Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Selected by Joseph Fielding Smith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976. See 60, 112, 173, 261, 273, 275-76, 318-19, 335-36.

Smith, Joseph Fielding. Answers to Gospel Questions. 5 vols. Compiled by Joseph Fielding Smith Jr. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957-66. See 1:124-26.

———. Doctrines of Salvation. 3 vols. Compiled by Bruce R. McConkie. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1954-56. See vol. 3, index, s.v. "Aaronic Priesthood."

Notes

From the Fifteenth Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the Old Testament, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, August 1991.

---
Notas:
[^1] William W. Phelps, "The Spirit of God," in Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985), no. 2.
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 180-81.
[^3] Ibid., 319.
[^4] Ibid., 180.
[^5] Compare Josephus, Antiquities, Book VIII, ch. 1, v. 3; 171 of Whiston's 1981 translation.
