Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

The New Testament

Chapter 19

A Latter-day Perspective about the New Testament

There cannot be any doubt that many, if not all, of the ancient Twelve Apostles did extensive missionary service and travel, even though a record of it is not contained in our present New Testament. Jesus commanded the Twelve to go to all nations, teaching the gospel of Christ and baptizing all who would believe (see Matt. 28:19-20). Apocryphal sources and early tradition tell us that the original Apostles were true to their commission, traveling throughout the countries of Africa, India, Mesopotamia, the Near East, and so forth, preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. [^1] Yet the New Testament that has been among Christianity for the past eighteen hundred years focuses primarily on the area immediately surrounding the northern shores of the Mediterranean Sea—Greece, Turkey, Italy, with slight mention of Spain—and contains no record of the ministry of the Twelve in other parts of the world such as Egypt and India.

There is a reasonable explanation for this narrow focus. The New Testament is a record of the work and preaching of then-living prophets and apostles who went forth with priesthood authority to build up and regulate the Church of Jesus Christ in the first century a.d. Most of the writings and records of travel of those early authorized brethren have not been preserved for later generations. Why then have the particular missionary records of Paul, Peter, and John been preserved instead of the others? Could it not be that they were preserved in the wisdom of God for the benefit of the Restoration in the last days? Knowing in what areas and among what people the Restoration in the latter days would need to begin, the Lord preserved those sacred records that dealt with the establishment of the Church in southern Europe, and which would move throughout Europe, the British Isles, and into Scandinavia. Although there was an apostasy of the true church, a form of Christianity survived, and the records also survived to some extent. Thus there was a New Testament as a scriptural witness and a base for the restoration of the fulness of the gospel, which would come through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Most of the settlers in early North America were from the countries of Europe, and they brought the Bible with them. The Protestant Reformation of the sixteenth century based most of its philosophy on the writings of Paul and his emphasis on grace. The Reformation was absolutely necessary in preparation for, and was actually a prologue to, the Restoration in the nineteenth century. The Joseph Smith family, and the Youngs, Kimballs, Pratts, Whitmers, Taylors, Richardses, and other early families in the Church were of European Protestant stock and were all believers in the Bible. Furthermore, as missionaries of the Church went forth in the late 1830s and immediately thereafter, most of the converts came from such European countries as England, Wales, Scotland, Scandinavia, Germany, and Holland, where Protestantism was firmly in place.

It seems natural that the Lord preserved what he did in the New Testament because it was that part of the history and doctrine of the Church of the first century that would be most usable and serviceable in establishing The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the dispensation of the fulness of times. The Lord knew and designed that it should be among those in America of European extraction that the Restoration in the latter days should first take root. It would then be nourished by converts from Europe. From this beginning the gospel in the latter days will spread to all other nations. Without the New Testament already among the people, it would have been a great deal more difficult than it was for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to be established in the nineteenth century. It would also have been more difficult without the particular type of New Testament that produced the Protestant Reformation of the sixteenth century. Everything seems to have been designed in favor of the restoration of the gospel in the latter days.

Notes

Adapted from Robert J. Matthews, Behold the Messiah (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1994), 290-92.

---
Notas:
[^1] God has a purpose in man's creation. Lehi: 1 Ne. 10:6; 2 Ne. 2:4, 19, 25 Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9-11.
