Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 25

The Role of Stephen as an Introduction to the Work of the Apostle Paul

Our information about Stephen is found primarily in chapters 6 and 7 of the book of Acts. There are also three single-verse references to him in Acts 8:2; 11:19; and 22:20. The general facts of Stephen's life are that he was one of the seven who were chosen and set apart to work in the welfare duties of the early Church. He is classed among several who are "of honest report, full of the Holy Ghost and wisdom" (Acts 6:3) and is specifically spoken of as a man "full of faith and of the Holy Ghost" (Acts 6:5) and of "power," who "did great wonders and miracles among the people" (Acts 6:8).

In the course of his ministry, Stephen disputed with several groups of Jewish religionists in Jerusalem, was accused of speaking blasphemous words, and was called before the council (Sanhedrin) for examination, before whom he made a lengthy address. He angered the council by his declarations and was taken outside the city, Jerusalem, and was stoned to death. Devout men buried his body and made great lamentation over him. A young man named Saul, later to be known as Paul, witnessed at least some of these events.

Little else is known about Stephen's personal life. Although we usually think of him as a young man at the time of his death, there is really no scriptural evidence for this belief. Furthermore, we know nothing about his parents, family, wife, or children. Traditionally, he is called the first Christian martyr. In a way he is, since he is the first of the Church of whom we have a record in the New Testament who was slain for his testimony of Jesus Christ; however, if we think of John the Baptist as a Christian martyr, which indeed he was, then his death precedes that of Stephen. Stephen is well remembered in tradition. Churches have been erected in his honor, hospitals have been named after him, and St. Stephen's gate toward the north of the east wall of present-day Jerusalem is a reminder of his death. There are also various legends about his burial place. Among the so-called relics once claimed by the Catholic Church was the body of St. Stephen. It was maintained by some that when religious pilgrims opened his grave in about a.d. 400, "an odor, such as that of paradise, was smelt, which instantly cured the various diseases of seventy-three" of those present. [^1]

But today we will look at Stephen from the point of view of his missionary activities in Jerusalem, especially his doctrinal teachings, and the subsequent influence that he had on Paul. Stephen was a forerunner, a harbinger, of expanding missionary work. His was the earliest recorded voice that we have (after Christ), foreshadowing the life and teachings of Paul. It appears to have been Stephen who planted the seeds which sprouted into Paul's magnificent obsession that the law of Moses was fulfilled in Christ and ought no longer to be obeyed.

Stephen is an ideal representative of the Church at that early period. His life and teachings are a visible model of what the Church stood for and what the gospel meant in that day. Therefore, the full report of his ministry cannot be appreciated if he is viewed in isolation. He has to be seen in the larger picture of the entire New Testament. Since he is a forerunner of a great missionary endeavor, he seems to be ahead of his time. And in a way he was. He was exactly in line with the gospel of Jesus Christ and with the true church, but he was years ahead of many of the Jewish-oriented members of the Church. We are all well acquainted with the work of Paul, but we have been less appreciative of Stephen. Yet it is as if Paul picked up the baton from Stephen's broken and battered body and extended Stephen's preliminary overture into a fully orchestrated symphony. Stephen is the first of whom we have record in the Church after the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ who proclaimed that the law of Moses had been fulfilled in Christ and therefore ought not to be continued. He also preached of the coming destruction of the temple in Jerusalem. We do not have Stephen's exact words on all of these points, but from the reaction of the people it is evident that Stephen had put his message across to Paul and the others that the law of Moses was fulfilled in Christ. They, of course, did not agree.

Let us now turn to the account of Stephen's ministry as written by Luke and see him in the context of the Church in his day. Luke, the author of the book of Acts, was a splendid writer. He puts into his story many important and very necessary details and does it so artfully that a casual reader might often miss the significance of these details. Yet the details are necessary in order to get a clear picture of the early Church. Without those details we see the Church as through a glass darkly. Without the help of the details we see a picture projected on a screen but somewhat out of focus: the general images are discernable, but the definition, the clarity, is lost. As a slight mechanical adjustment brings a picture into focus on a screen so that the major elements are easily perceived in their true perspective and the message is clearly conveyed, so in like manner was Luke a master in supplying the necessary detail to bring the story of the early Church into focus. He did not include all of the activities of the Church (most of the Twelve are barely mentioned), but he inserted those things necessary to give the reader a proper perspective on how the gospel was extended from an exclusively Jewish field of labor to a Samaritan and finally a gentile emphasis. Luke was selective in what he included. He knew the importance of Stephen's ministry; thus, he included it, even though he did not include activities of all of the Brethren.

In the book of Acts, Luke explains how the early missionary activity of the Church was opened up so that the gospel was preached not only for the benefit of the Jews but was taught to the Gentiles also. As Luke shows, this outreach was not all at once but was accomplished over a period of time, with the ministry of Stephen being a most important connecting link in the process.

As Luke begins the book of Acts, he presents the resurrected Lord instructing the Twelve that they are to remain in Jerusalem until the Holy Ghost is given to them. After receiving the Holy Ghost they are to become witnesses of him "in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth" (Acts 1:8). This expanded field of labor is a major change of assignment for the Twelve; two years earlier, when the Lord sent them forth on their first missions, they were to go to the Jews only. At that early time, Jesus specifically said, "Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city of the Samaritans enter ye not" (Matt. 10:5-6). The extension of the gospel from only the Jews to the rest of the world was not to be in one great leap, nor all at one time. It was a series of thrusts. The instruction of Jesus—as just noted from Acts 1:8—was that the gospel was to be preached first in Jerusalem, then throughout Judea, then extended to the Samaritans, and then finally to the remainder of the world (meaning the Gentiles). The Brethren did not withdraw from one group when they went to another but rather continually expanded and extended the gospel to additional peoples.

The sequence outlined by Jesus is interesting, and as Luke goes on to demonstrate, it was followed carefully by the Brethren. The early chapters of Acts record the activities of the coming of the Holy Ghost at the feast of Pentecost. It was the gift of the Holy Ghost that they received on that occasion, for the Twelve and the other members of the Church had already enjoyed the power of the Holy Ghost, else they would not have had testimonies of the Savior and of the gospel. They would not have responded to the gospel in the first place had not the Spirit borne witness to their souls. But now they had the full power and gift of the Holy Ghost.

After the great conversion at Pentecost, Luke records the activities of Peter and John in healing the lame man (see Acts 3), the operation of the welfare system (see Acts 4-5), and the selection of seven men to assist the Twelve in the distribution of welfare commodities. All of this was in and round about Jerusalem. This takes us through Acts, chapters 1 through 7. Luke is careful to point out that the Pentecost multitude was not exclusively Jewish by lineage, for there were some among them who were Gentiles, converts to Judaism (see Acts 2:10). These are called "proselytes" (Acts 2:10). This is one of Luke's grand details. A proselyte is one born of non-Israelite (in this case, Greek or Roman) lineage, who joins the Jews' religion by circumcision and obedience to the other requirements of the law of Moses. Such proselytes to Judaism were the first non-Jewish converts to the Church. That is, they were Gentiles by lineage but had converted to Judaism before they joined the Church of Jesus Christ. Luke points out that there were such proselytes in the Pentecost multitudes. There were three thousand people that day who were baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ. There were, no doubt, some gentile proselytes among them. But no one seems to have been alarmed when such "Gentiles-turned-Jews" came into the Church.

Luke later points out that Nicolas, one of the seven, was a proselyte from Antioch. This means he was a Gentile by lineage but had joined the Jews' religion before he came into the Church of Jesus Christ. Again, there was no objection within the Church, since such persons had in effect become "Jews" by renouncing their paganism and accepting the law of Moses by circumcision and other requirements of the law. The concept grows stronger in Luke's account, since Nicolas, one of the seven, was not simply a member of the Church, as were the proselytes mentioned in Acts 2, but he was one of the leading and official Brethren.

Thus in the first seven chapters of Acts, Luke has accomplished his purpose and has shown us that there were Gentiles in the early Church, even in high offices, but he also shows that in every case they had first become Jews by subscribing to the law of Moses before they became Christians. (The word Grecians of Acts 6:1 needs some clarification. They were not Greek members of the Church but were Jews who spoke the Greek language. They were not Gentiles; they were liberal-minded Jews.)

There is a pattern in this in our own day. As we have taken the gospel in these last days to the Chinese, Japanese, and Koreans, our first converts among them came from those who had already left Buddhism and Confucianism and had become Protestants or Catholics. There was a preparation, a halfway step for the Far Eastern religions into nominal Christianity and then into the gospel of Jesus Christ. In like manner, in New Testament times, the earliest Gentiles to come into the Church were those who had already left their pagan ways and had become proselytes to Judaism.

Then as we progress to Acts 8, Luke introduces another important dimension. Philip goes among the Samaritans and baptizes them. The Samaritans are not Jewish, but they are Israelitish. They are a mixture of the tribes of Israel and other races. They were not pure Israelites, as were the Jews, but were part-Israel. Taking the gospel to them represents going a half step toward the Gentiles. It is also a half step theologically. The Samaritans had the law of Moses, so missionary work among them was actually not a major departure from the missionary work among the Jews. It was, however, a geographical, ethnic, and cultural extension beyond Judaism. Later, Philip was also instrumental in baptizing the eunuch, a convert from Egypt, who had earlier become a convert to Judaism (see Acts 8:27-39). He was black, perhaps, since he was from Ethiopia (and was thus non-Israelite) and yet a convert to Judaism before coming to the Church of Jesus Christ. This is still another half step in the dimension of Church expansion. The inclusion of this event by Luke helps to broaden the image of the cosmopolitan background of the Church. It is another of Luke's important details.

In Acts 9 Luke records the conversion of Paul and thus has him waiting in the wings, so to speak, preparing for the great gentile missionary harvest that is ripening but is not quite ready. When the field is ready, Paul will be on hand, previously trained, tempered, and anxious to do the work.

In Acts 10 and 11, Cornelius, a Gentile by lineage and one who favors Judaism but is not a proselyte, joins the Church through the instrumentality of Peter. This is a major departure in policy, since for the first time, one not of Israelite lineage, and one who has not subscribed to the law of Moses (thus one uncircumcised), comes into the Church. His "non-law of Moses status" accounts for the reason this circumstance was handled by Peter, the President, and was accompanied by visions, the ministering of an angel, the voice of the Spirit, and other miracles. It also accounts for the strong opposition encountered by Peter when the Jewish Christians at Jerusalem heard of it. They had not objected earlier to other Gentile converts because they had all been proselytes—but this one (Cornelius) was not! He had come into the Church without the benefit of the law of Moses, and many people in the Church were terribly upset.

With the way now officially opened for teaching the gospel directly to the Gentiles, without their first having to be inducted into the law of Moses, the stage was set for a major missionary thrust throughout the known world. The time had come for a man such as Paul to begin his ministry among the Gentiles. We all realize, however, that even though the way was cleared doctrinally for Gentile missionary work without the requirement of adherence to the law of Moses, and although it had become the official program and policy of the Church, such a new procedure was not yet culturally accepted in the hearts of many Jewish-minded Christians, especially in Jerusalem, where Christians were still Jewish in thought and were reluctant to relinquish their hold on the law of Moses.

We have moved ahead in our look at the early Church in order to gain a perspective on missionary activity. We should now return to Acts 6 and 7 to see Stephen in Jerusalem, preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Jews. He was clearly on the cutting edge of the work, and although perfectly in line with the gospel and the future needs of the Church, he was a pioneer in his views.

Acts 6:9-15 tells us that Stephen disputed with certain Jews in Jerusalem who were there from various other areas, such as Asia, Cyrene, Alexandria, and Cilicia. Luke says that Stephen's audience "were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which" Stephen spoke (Acts 6:10). They then accused Stephen before the council of having uttered "blasphemous words against Moses, and against God" (Acts 6:11). The formal accusation was "This man ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place [the temple], and the law," for he said that "Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us" (Acts 6:13-14).

The charge was probably mostly true. Stephen could quote the Lord himself on the matter of the law of Moses being fulfilled (see Matt. 5:17-18). Furthermore, Stephen must have had some insight toward a forthcoming change in the Sabbath day, an end to animal sacrifice, an end to circumcision, and an end to the other rituals of the law.

When taken before the council, Stephen's face was as "the face of an angel" (Acts 6:15). The high priest asked him if the charges were true, and Stephen spoke in his own defense. He delivered a lengthy address in which he emphasized certain orthodox and historical things in order to defend his position. He told of Abraham, the friend of God, a righteous man, who lived and gained heaven's favor. He spoke also of Joseph, who had the Lord's blessings. He then dwelt at length on the goodness of Moses and the commandments God gave to Israel on Mount Sinai through Moses and emphasized that the people of Moses' day would not receive and obey Moses' words. The impact was that all of these patriarchs had been righteous without the law of Moses. Stephen then explained that the Israelites had frequently been disobedient to God and had rejected the prophets: "Ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do ye" (Acts 7:51). He told them that as their fathers had rejected the prophets who showed them of the coming of Christ, likewise the council (the audience he was addressing) had rejected the very Christ when he came among them (see Acts 7:52). Remember, Stephen's ministry was only a year or two after the death of Jesus. The council's rejection of the Savior was still fresh on their minds.

This lecture by Stephen heavily influenced those who were present, but it did not win him many friends. The council was angry and "gnashed on him with their teeth" (Acts 7:54). It was not this speech, however, that most troubled them. After the discourse, Stephen looked up into heaven and, being full of the Holy Ghost, said aloud, "Behold, I see . . . the Son of man [Jesus] standing on the right hand of God" (Acts 7:56). This was more than the council could take. Stephen said he had had a vision in which he had seen the Father and the Son. But to the council he had spoken blasphemy. Nor were they at all pleased for him to say that Jesus, whom the council had only a short time before condemned to die, was now in heaven with God and in a favored, right-hand position. So "they cried out with a loud voice, and . . . ran upon [Stephen] . . . and cast him out of the city, and stoned him" until he died (Acts 7:57-58).

The scripture says that Saul, a young man, was present and that he "was consenting unto [Stephen's] death" (Acts 8:1). They who cast the stones laid their outer garments at the feet of Saul, while Stephen in great meekness knelt down and said, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge" (Acts 7:60).

As we all know, Saul was subsequently converted while on the road to Damascus and in a few years became the great "apostle of the Gentiles" (Rom. 11:13). It is probable that Stephen's gracious manner had almost as much effect upon Paul as did his stirring words. Paul was from Cilicia and grew up in Jerusalem. He no doubt was of that synagogue in Jerusalem with whom Stephen had so eloquently disputed. Paul was no doubt present at Stephen's defense in the council and had seen his angelic face on that occasion. He would have observed the kneeling Stephen plead with the Lord for the forgiveness of his persecutors. All of this must have made an impression in Paul's memory because sometime later during a vision, Paul said to the Lord Jesus, "When the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him" (Acts 22:20).

It is possible, even probable, that Paul was thinking about Stephen's words and gracious manner just before his own vision on the road to Damascus. Paul's work from that time forth consisted in bringing the gospel to both Jew and Gentile, and of testifying and explaining that the law of Moses was fulfilled in Christ, that salvation came because of grace through the atonement of Jesus and not alone by the works of the law—a concept he had no doubt heard Stephen expound in the synagogues of Jerusalem.

Some of Paul's sermons and writings closely parallel the words of Stephen, especially Paul's sermon at Antioch of Pisidia during his first mission (see Acts 13:14-49). The form of that sermon is very similar to Stephen's defense before the council, recorded in Acts 7. Paul's forgiving attitude in 2 Tim. 4:16 is also reminiscent of Stephen's last utterance, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge" (Acts 7:60). It would be interesting to have a transcript of the disputations that took place between Stephen and the Jews in the synagogues at Jerusalem. It is certain that Stephen said something about the law of Moses being fulfilled and being no longer in force, or his enemies would not have accused him of being contrary to Moses and saying that Jesus (already dead) would change the customs of the law (see Acts 6:13). Stephen was something of an eastern Abinadi, who testified that salvation was dependent on the atonement of Jesus Christ, notwithstanding the law of Moses. And like Abinadi, he gave his life for his testimony of Jesus Christ. And like Abinadi, his face shone like an angel's. It was no doubt these experiences involving Stephen that formed Paul's earliest training about the mission of Jesus and the proper relationship of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the law of Moses. Paul violently resisted the information at first, until the Lord took him in hand. And it was Stephen who taught the future great Apostle some early lessons in both doctrine and deportment in the gospel.

Notes

From the Fourth Annual Church Educational System Religious Educators' Symposium on the New Testament, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, August 1980 (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1980), 23-26.

---
Notas:
[^1] Paul came to Jerusalem following a very successful tour throughout the Greek-speaking cities of Asia Minor in the countries known today as Turkey, Greece, and Macedonia. Success had been chiefly among the Gentiles. He had also angered many devout Jews both within and outside of the Church because he taught that Jesus had fulfilled the law of Moses and therefore the Gentiles did not need to subscribe to it in becoming Church members. He also taught that the Jews ought to discontinue observing it. As a youth in Jerusalem he lived as a Pharisee, the straitest discipline of the Jews' religion. The Jews knew of his respectable life but wouldn't admit it. The Prophet Joseph Smith described Paul: "He is about five feet high; very dark hair; dark complexion; dark skin; large Roman nose; sharp face; small black eyes, penetrating as eternity; round shoulders; a whining voice, except when elevated, and then it almost resembled the roaring of a lion" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 180).
