Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 26

Paul's Magnificent Defense before King Agrippa(Acts 26)

The book of Acts contains several addresses by Paul the Apostle. However, these are digests rather than complete transcripts of what was actually spoken. We should be grateful to have even a digest, for at Ephesus Paul preached all night, and we have not a single word of what he said (see Acts 20:7-12). We would be greatly enriched if we had more complete records of Paul's mighty discourses.

Possibly the most momentous occasion of a speech by Paul was at Caesarea, when, as a prisoner in chains, he delivered an impassioned declaration of the doctrine of Christ before government authorities having both Roman and Jewish connections. Fortunately a record of this address is extant which occupies most of Acts 26. Although it is a valuable report, it too is at best a summary. Nonetheless, it may be the most complete coverage of one of Paul's most important discourses.

To appreciate what Paul chose to say at Caesarea, some background information is necessary concerning (1) who Paul was, (2) what his doctrinal and ministerial contributions were, and (3) the events leading to his imprisonment at Caesarea.

Overview of Paul's Life and Accomplishments

With regard to Paul's identity and accomplishments, an encyclopedia entry might include the following:

PAUL. Personal History. Born approximately a.d. 5 in Tarsus, capital of Cilicia. Tribe of Benjamin. Pharisee; son of a Pharisee. Inherited Roman citizenship from father. Originally named Saul; later took the name Paul. Small physical stature.1 Multilingual: Hebrew, Aramaic, Greek, possibly Latin. Studied in Jerusalem under Jewish teacher Gamaliel. Professionally trained in the law; occupation, tentmaker. Strong personality, bold and aggressive mannerisms. Highly intelligent, dynamic, active, assertive, persistent, philosophically inclined, logical, devout, affectionate in temperament.2 Commissioned by the high priest and Jewish council (Sanhedrin) to imprison Jews who had become Christians; he then pursued and imprisoned many. Was subsequently himself converted to Jesus Christ by a personal manifestation of the resurrected Lord in a daylight vision near Damascus. Thereafter traveled extensively, without ceasing, as an ardent Apostle of Jesus Christ. Martyred near Rome, approximately a.d. 68.

Accomplishments. Prolific writer. Eloquent orator. Although once a fierce defender of Judaism as the faith of his fathers, and a persistent persecutor of the followers of Jesus, he became Christianity's most visible convert and advocate, energetically promoting the faith he once tried to destroy. Zealous attention to non-Jews brought a reputation as "Apostle of the Gentiles." Active administrator in organizing and regulating local Church units; calling, assigning, transferring, and releasing missionaries and presiding officers of branches; and also collecting clothing and money churchwide to aid the poor in Jerusalem. Although he traveled much, he communicated by letter when necessary. As an Apostle he represented Jesus Christ and preached the doctrines of the gospel, with emphasis on the redeeming power of Jesus, salvation by grace (a reaction against trusting in the works of the law of Moses), and also the reality of the literal resurrection of the dead, Jesus being the first and all mankind to follow.

Summary. Paul was chosen for a particular purpose, among particular peoples, at a particular time. His Jewish lineage and culture, supplemented by his acquaintance with the Greek environment, his Roman citizenship, and his education, language diversity, diligent temperament, and religious nature, fitted him for the apostolic task of presenting the message of Jesus Christ to those of high religious, military, and government status. Paul specifically defined the law of Moses as it pertained to both Jew and Gentile. No one else had done it so thoroughly at a point in time so crucial to the existence of the New Testament church.

Events Leading to Paul's Imprisonment at Caesarea (Acts 21-25)

A series of dramatic events resulted in Paul's being imprisoned first at Jerusalem and then at Caesarea. An account of these is as follows:

Felix refused to make a decision in the case, saying that he would wait until the chief captain of the military came from Jerusalem to Caesarea. This was a thinly veiled stalling tactic adopted by Felix because he did not want to offend the Jews by making a decision favorable to Paul (Felix's own wife, Drusilla, was a Jewess of the Herod Agrippa family); yet Felix didn't want to turn a Roman citizen, whom he knew was innocent, over to the Jews and certain death. Felix also hoped for money from Paul or his associates (Acts 24:26). After two years, Felix was replaced in office by one Festus. Meanwhile, Paul was frustrated as he remained in the prison.

It appears that Festus (as a new governor) did not want to alienate the Jewish rulers, even though he knew that Paul had done nothing deserving death under Jewish or Roman law. He even asked Paul if he would be willing to go to Jerusalem for trial. Paul, knowing he would not get a fair trial in Jerusalem, recognizing also that his life would not be secure in Jerusalem, and seeing that he could not count on Festus for legal and personal protection, therefore appealed his case to Caesar's court in Rome as a Roman citizen. Festus honored Paul's request, possibly because it freed him of having to make a decision regarding Paul that might offend the Jews. However, sending Paul to Rome created for Festus a dilemma; he had no crime under Roman law with which to accuse Paul. While pondering how to handle this situation, he retained Paul in prison in Caesarea.

The hand of the Lord might be visible in Paul's appeal and Festus's willingness. Previously the Lord had appeared to Paul and told him that even as he had borne witness of him in Jerusalem (to the Sanhedrin), so would he also do at Rome (to the Emperor) (see Acts 23:11).

To this high-level gathering, Paul was ushered in and introduced. Festus explained the purpose (to find an acceptable accusation against Paul) and asked Agrippa to conduct the proceedings.

No ordinary occasion this! Tension, trial, and litigation had been mounting against Paul for years and had now reached the summit. That such a meeting occurred says that the authorities believed Christianity was a power to be reckoned with, and Paul was well known as one of its most able spokesmen. No doubt a silence fell over the spectators as Paul was introduced. There he stood, unafraid, unquivering, clothed in the most ordinary garb, about to make what may have been the most significant discourse of his life. The spectators represented the most varied array of earthly authority that had ever been assembled to hear an Apostle of Jesus Christ. Paul could not have missed the gravity of the occasion. Thirty-some years earlier at the time of Paul's conversion, Jesus had told the nervous and doubting Ananias in Damascus that Paul (then Saul) was "a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel" (Acts 9:15). If ever he was to be a witness for his Lord to kings and Gentiles, the time had arrived. After Festus's introductory remarks, King Agrippa said to Paul, "Thou art permitted to speak for thyself" (Acts 26:1).

Paul's Apostolic Response

Paul's discourse before Agrippa and the other spectators is usually characterized as a defense, yet it was also a solemn declaration of the doctrine of Christ. After a few pleasantries at the beginning, Paul put forth at least seven distinct points that described his life, his faith, and his testimony of Jesus. The speech was never formally completed because Paul was abruptly interrupted by Festus, and apparently he did not resume his discourse before the audience departed.

Paul's Polite yet Dramatic Presentation

Paul began by thanking Agrippa for the opportunity to speak for himself to answer the accusation the Jews had made against him. He praised the king as a man thoroughly familiar with Jewish customs and questions. After these preliminaries, he began his earnest declaration:

It was at this point that Festus loudly interrupted and declared Paul mad because of his much learning (see Acts 26:24). The "much learning" that irritated Festus is the clue that Paul had cited extensively from the prophets. Festus just wasn't ready for that much scripture and testimony. Festus's reaction also illus-trates the trouble the unbelieving world had with the doctrine of resurrection. It is possible also that Festus's irritation was partly due to the fact that Paul's speech was not providing the valid crime with which to charge him so Festus could send him to Rome.

Paul politely responded to Festus that he was not mad but had spoken the sober truth. Then, believing that Agrippa had greater spiritual capacity for receiving the truth, he again boldly addressed him, saying, "King Agrippa, I know that thou believest" the prophets. Agrippa responded, "Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian" (Acts 26:25-28). Various manuscripts, other than those used for the King James Version, render Agrippa's words: "Did you think you could convert me so quickly?" Paul's dignified and apostolic response was that he hoped everyone present could be as he (Paul) was, except for the chains. This ends the account of Paul's words, Then the audience arose and departed.

Four Points Concerning Jesus

It is to be noted that Paul made four significant points pertaining to Jesus: (1) It is Jesus who made the resurrection a reality, he being the first who should rise; (2) the doctrine of Jesus, including resurrection, is the doctrine of Moses and the prophets; (3) it is the Jews, not the Christians, who have departed from the teachings of the prophets; and (4) the gospel of Christ is for everyone, not only the Jews but also the Gentiles.

The Nature of Truth

After the discourse, Agrippa and Festus agreed that Paul had done nothing worthy of death or imprisonment and could be set free if he had not appealed to Rome. Legally he could have been set free anyway, but it appears that these rulers were willing to "pass the buck" to Rome so that they themselves would not have to handle a difficult case—not difficult because of the points of law but difficult because of the risk of unpopularity to the governor. Truth is hard to deal with by rulers who do not want to take a stand and who wish to please everyone. Pilate, Felix, Festus, and Agrippa faced such dilemmas as a result of the awkward situation that truth often produces in the lives of human beings. They were therefore "willing to do the Jews a pleasure" (see Acts 25:9). Such situations result in righteous men and women becoming martyrs sacrificed on the altar of the rulers' pride and convenience.

Paul was sent to Rome and was under arrest for at least two years. He is believed to have testified before the emperor, and tradition has it that he was beheaded near Rome (see Acts 28:31; 2 Tim. 4:16-17). Although it may appear that truth was trampled underfoot by Paul's death, it was only a temporary delay. The great Apostle left both the Sanhedrin and the Roman authorities without excuse, and this will be remembered on the day of judgment, when truth will have another hearing. As for Paul, there "is laid up for [him] a crown of righteousness" when "the Lord, the righteous judge" holds court (2 Tim. 4:8).

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

Paul records that the Corinthians said of him: "His letters . . . are weighty and powerful; but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech contemptible" (2 Cor. 10:10).

"Though he once, according to his own word, persecuted the Church of God and wasted it, yet after embracing the faith, his labors were unceasing to spread the glorious news: and like a faithful soldier, when called to give his life in the cause which he had espoused, he laid it down, as he says, with an assurance of an eternal crown. Follow the labors of this Apostle from the time of his conversion to the time of his death, and you will have a fair sample of industry and patience in promulgating the Gospel of Christ. Derided, whipped, and stoned, the moment he escaped the hands of his persecutors he as zealously as ever proclaimed the doctrine of the Savior. And all may know that he did not embrace the faith for honor in his life, nor for the gain of earthly goods. What, then, could have induced him to undergo all this toil? It was, as he said, that he might obtain the crown of righteousness from the hand of God" (ibid., 63-64).
