Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

The Joseph Smith Translation

Chapter 27

Translating the Bible by the Spirit of Revelation

That the Prophet Joseph Smith made what he termed a "new translation" of the Bible is quite well known among members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. What is not so well known is why and how he did it, and even less appreciated is the effect it has had on the membership of the Church. Virtually every member of the Church in the 150 years since that day until the present, and everyone who will yet be a member, has been or will be affected by that translation. Even those who know nothing about the facts of the translation, nor of a single textual correction, are affected by it in their daily lives as Church members.

As one becomes familiar with the historical facts of the translation and learns of the textual corrections, improvements, and additions, that person's understanding of the doctrinal restoration becomes more clear. A history of the Prophet's translation of the Bible parallels much of the history of the book of Doctrine and Covenants and the history of the Church from 1830 to 1833. These concepts, although possibly not known and understood generally in the Church, have been discussed at least partially in other publications. [^1] In this chapter we will touch upon these subjects only lightly. My main purpose here is to put forth the Prophet Joseph Smith as a superior example of one who learned by the inspiration of the Spirit, lived by the Spirit, and taught by that same Spirit. As the Prophet Joseph Smith searched the scriptures, he obtained light and knowledge by the spirit of revelation. That acquisition enabled him to translate the text and give the meaning in plainer words than did the King James text. It also provided material that had been lost from the King James text. In light of this revelatory process, the Prophet's work with the Bible becomes an example, a signboard, and an invitation to every one of us to acquire like spiritual insight.

To develop the theme we will briefly consider what the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible is, why he did it, how it was done, and the results that have come from it. As noted above, we will pay less detailed attention to the precise doctrinal contributions (although they are highly significant) and more to the underlying message that is generated by the translation activity itself. In so doing we must draw a distinction between the process of translation and the product of the translation, or the printed Bible. The process will capture our most direct attention.

What Is the Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible?

The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible is a work done by the Prophet Joseph Smith and his scribes chiefly during the years from 1830 to 1833, with some additional revisions until his death in June 1844. It consists of a manuscript of 477 pages, each measuring approximately eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches.

The work has been known by various names. The Prophet Joseph consistently called it the New Translation. When first published in 1867 by the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (hereafter called RLDS) it was titled Holy Scriptures. Due to terminology that became increasingly common among the RLDS, the title was enlarged in a printing of 1937 to read Holy Scriptures, Inspired Version. It has also frequently been dubbed unofficially as the Inspired Revision. The work has now been titled the Joseph Smith Translation by official action of the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This action was taken in connection with the publication in 1979 of an edition of the King James Version of the Bible containing study and reference notes including excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation.

The manuscript notes and other paraphernalia connected with the Prophet's translation of the Bible are now in the possession of the RLDS Church in Independence, Missouri. The RLDS have also published the work repeatedly in varying editions and formats since 1867.

The Joseph Smith Translation is inseparably connected with the revelations that are published in the Doctrine and Covenants and also with the daily activities of the Prophet Joseph Smith during the early years of the Church. This relationship is clearly delineated in seven separate section headings and in seventeen footnotes of the 1981 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants published by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah. [^2] There is no substantive difference between the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants and the revelations in the Joseph Smith Translation, even though the latter are labeled a "translation." They are a "translation" in the sense of being a clarification or restoration of a text, but not in the usual sense in which the word translation is used, meaning the rendering of a subject from one language to another.

The work was not finished nor published in its entirety by the Prophet Joseph. During his lifetime, excerpts appeared in The Evening and the Morning Star, the Times and Seasons, and Lectures on Faith. There was also a broadside tract of Matt. 24 issued in Kirtland about 1835. Later, excerpts were published in the Millennial Star and the Pearl of Great Price. [^3] It is clear, however, that the Prophet was planning a complete publication of the Joseph Smith Translation before the time of his death. His extensive efforts toward publication are a strong suggestion that even if it were not a finished product, enough was accomplished to merit its use among the Saints. The Prophet went through the entire Bible from Genesis through Revelation and made thousands of changes but did not make all of the corrections that might someday need to be made. The printed edition of the Joseph Smith Translation has at least thirty-four hundred verses that read differently from the King James text.

Why Was a Translation of the Bible Made by the Prophet Joseph Smith?

There are really two questions that should be considered here. First, why was the Bible translated yet again, and second, why was Joseph Smith the one to do it?

The simplest and most direct answer to the second question is that the Lord commanded him to do it. This is evident from D&C 45:60-62 and 76:15, which clearly assign the Prophet to the work. He regarded his work with the Bible as "a branch of his calling" as a prophet. [^4]

The answer to the first question is just as simple and direct: the Bible needed it. We can see from Moroni's words to the Prophet in September 1823 that some passages as they stand in the King James Version needed to be rephrased for clarity. The Prophet noted in his history that several of the quotations by Moroni were given with a little variation from the way they read in our Bibles (see Joseph Smith—History 1:36-41). Joseph Smith had also learned by experience that the various teachers of religion interpreted "the same passages . . . so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling [some questions] by an appeal to the Bible" (Joseph Smith—History 1:12). He also saw that it caused great contention among the ministers. This certainly would give a signal to him that the Bible is not sufficiently clear in many instances. Nephi also informs us that many plain and precious parts containing important points of doctrine, and also many covenants of the Lord, have been taken out of the Bible (see 1 Ne. 13:21-42).

Another reason for making the translation is that the Prophet in his early years (he was twenty-five when he began the translation) needed the experience as well as the information that the translation process would bring to him. Furthermore, the Church membership and the world needed, or would need, the doctrinal information and also the example of the spiritual benefits that come from searching the scriptures.

That the Christian world senses the need for a better translation than the King James Version is abundantly evident from the large number of translations that have been made since the King James Version first appeared. One who wishes to purchase a Bible today has a selection of more than two dozen English translations from which to choose, [^5] all of which have come into being since the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith.

How Did the Prophet Joseph Proceed with the Translation?

We wish we had a detailed account by the Prophet Joseph's own hand as to how he made the translation of the Bible, but we do not. From various comments by himself and others, and from examining the handwritten manuscript, we are able to reconstruct the process and establish the time frame.

The Prophet and Oliver Cowdery began the translation in June 1830, using an edition of the King James Version printed in 1828 by H. and E. Phinney in Cooperstown, New York. This Bible they had purchased on 8 October 1829 for $3.75 from the E. B. Grandin Bookstore in Palmyra, New York. It appears that the Prophet would read from the King James text and dictate to the scribe, who would record the material. The first scribe in point of time was Oliver Cowdery, the second John Whitmer. The third and major scribe was Sidney Rigdon. Other persons helped to a lesser degree. [^6] The main translation activity was completed by 2 July 1833, after which there was considerable revision and editing to prepare the document for publication. This procedure resulted in the original draft's being supplemented or in some instances even replaced with a revised and edited copy.

The translation was a revelatory process, not based on a knowledge of the biblical languages nor the perusal of ancient manuscripts. The evidence of the handwritten documents and of the markings placed in the Phinney edition of the King James Version indicates that the basic text was the English language King James Version. The substantial variations from that text were due to the inspiration received by the Prophet Joseph while he was studying the text.

Translating by the Spirit of Revelation

Four items serve to illustrate the revelatory process of the translation. First, on page 3 of the Old Testament manuscript is found this caption, "A Revelation given to the elders of the Church of Christ on the First Book of Moses." This extends to material from Gen. 1:1 through Gen. 3. On page 8 of the manuscript there is another caption, "A Revelation concerning Adam after he had been driven out of the Garden of Eden." [^7]

Second, on page 1 of the New Testament manuscript are these words, which indicate how the Brethren felt about what they were doing: "A Translation of the New Testament Translated by the Power of God." [^8]

Third is the wording of D&C 76:15-18, given in connection with the vision of the degrees of glory. We read in this case that as the Prophet and Sidney were doing the work of translation, they came to the text of John 5:29, and it was revealed to them that it should read differently than it stands in the King James Version. Concerning this rewording the Prophet said: "Now this caused us to marvel, for it was given unto us of the Spirit" (D&C 76:18). The words "given to us of the Spirit" are a clue to the process of translation.

The fourth illustration is from D&C 45:60-62 and is a confirmation of the other three, showing that the process was a learning activity. We particularly note these words: "It shall not be given unto you to know any further concerning this chapter until the New Testament be translated, and in it all these things shall be made known" (D&C 45:60; italics added). This clearly attests to the fact that the translation was to be a learning experience to the Prophet, which would bring him to an understanding of things heretofore not known by him. He was not reading the Bible in order to find errors so that he could offer his premeditated corrections. Rather, he was by divine appointment searching the text for its intended meaning, and in the process the Lord gave him knowledge to clarify and purify the text and even to restore lost material where necessary.

A Lesson in Spirituality

The Prophet Joseph Smith lived by the spirit of revelation. He made decisions by it, he learned by it, and he taught by it. Because of this spirit, which is the gift of the Holy Ghost, the Prophet could unlock the closed doors of biblical knowledge and could obtain "the true meaning and intention" of even the most vague and "mysterious passages" (Joseph Smith—History 1:74). He learned how to recognize the voice of the Spirit and thus to get revelation when it was needed. Although such an ability is a gift, it is also an attainment and requires energy, experience, and practice, even for a prophet.

That the gift of revelation requires effort and experience is manifest in several instances. For example, we read in D&C 9:6-10 that the Lord chided Oliver Cowdery for expecting that he could translate "when [he] took no thought save it was to ask me." He was counseled that he must "study it out in [his] mind" and then respond to the burning in his bosom, if it was right, or to the "stupor of thought," if it was wrong. In the infancy of this dispensation, when the gospel was being unfolded day by day and when even the leaders were beginners, one can sense the Lord tenderly working with them (and with us) in showing how to commune with the Spirit. In D&C 6:5, 10-12, 14, we find these instructions to Oliver Cowdery: "If you will ask of me you shall receive; if you will knock it shall be opened unto you. . . . Behold thou hast a gift. . . . Remember it is sacred and cometh from above—and if thou wilt inquire, thou shalt know mysteries; therefore thou shalt exercise thy gift. . . . Trifle not with sacred things. . . . As often as thou hast inquired thou hast received instruction of my Spirit" (italics added).

A few days later the Lord again counseled Oliver about how to use the Spirit. This is found in the D&C 8:2-4: "Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground. Therefore this is thy gift; apply unto it" (italics added).

We can benefit from the instruction to exercise the gift and to "apply unto it." Still later, the Lord spoke to Hyrum Smith, saying: "I will impart unto you of my Spirit, which shall enlighten your mind, which shall fill your soul with joy . . . and . . . by this shall you know, all things whatsoever you desire of me. . . . [A]ppeal unto my Spirit" (D&C 11:13-14, 18). These things show that even though the gift of revelation is bestowed, the recipient must still apply himself to the task and become familiar with the workings of the Spirit.

This same developmental process is demonstrated in the experience of the Prophet Joseph Smith. We are indebted to Elder Orson Pratt for an enlightening comment on this point, which is an excerpt from the minutes of the School of the Prophets in Salt Lake City, 14 January 1871, and has to do with the translation of the Book of Mormon and also the Bible:

"He [Elder Pratt] mentioned that as Joseph used the Urim and Thummim in translation of the Book of Mormon, he wondered why he did not use it in the translation of the New Testament. Joseph explained to him that the experience he had acquired while translating the Book of Mormon by the use of the Urim and Thumim had rendered him so well acquainted with the Spirit of Revelation and Prophecy, that in the translating of the New Testament he did not need the aid that was necessary in the 1st instance." [^9]

Translating by the spirit of revelation as the Prophet searched the scriptures is both a lesson and an invitation to all of us. Although none of us is commissioned by the Lord to make another translation of the Bible, yet it is plain to see that light, inspiration, and revelation come to those who pursue it for the right reasons through searching the scriptures. We have before us in the history of the Church several examples showing this principle at work. It was reading James 1:5 that caused the Prophet to seek for additional information that led to the First Vision in 1820; it was reading the newly translated account from the Book of Mormon that led Joseph and Oliver to inquire about baptism, which resulted in John the Baptist conferring the Aaronic Priesthood upon them in 1829; and it was President Joseph F. Smith's pondering over the meaning, after having read 1 Pet. 3 and 4, that parted the veil and gave him a view of how the gospel is preached in the world of departed spirits (see D&C 138:1-11). President Smith said, "As I pondered over these things which are written [1 Pet. 3-4], the eyes of my understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me, and I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great" (D&C 138:11).

Such experiences are patterns that show us there is understanding and new knowledge to be gained when we search, pray, ponder, and meditate upon the holy scriptures and hear the voice of the Lord through his Spirit. In this way we come to know not only the doctrines of the gospel and the will of the Lord as revealed in ancient time but also the application to us individually in our own time.

Speaking of this spirit of revelation, the Prophet Joseph explained: "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation; for instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." [^10]

As we consider the marvelous things in the Joseph Smith Translation—the clarifications, additions, and corrections that far exceed the content of all other versions of the Bible—it is a cause for rejoicing that these great truths were made known to the Prophet not through language and ancient manuscripts, as only a few of the learned might be privileged to learn them, but rather through the spirit of revelation, which every faithful Saint may possess. It is likewise an encouragement to strive to develop within us that same spirit and enjoy its same fruits, for "God hath not revealed anything to Joseph, but what He will make known unto the Twelve, and even the least Saint may know all things as fast as he is able to bear them." [^11]

What Were the Results of the Prophet's Translation of the Bible?

First, as indicated, the translation process was to be a learning experience for the Prophet. This is always the case if the Holy Ghost is involved, for "no [one] can receive the Holy Ghost without receiving revelations." [^12] Information isn't revelation unless it comes from outside of the individual and is new to his awareness. Such is the meaning also of inspiration. This word comes from the Latin word meaning to "infuse" or "to enter" from without. It is my conviction that the first and most important result of the translation of the Bible was the spiritual education of the Prophet himself.

Second, one revelation often calls for more revelation, for by the very nature of things we learn line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, as we are able to bear it. As noted, the major period of translation was from June 1830 through 2 July 1833. It is wonderfully significant that during this same period most of the doctrinal revelations now published in the Doctrine and Covenants were received. Even such major doctrinal statements as D&C 107 and 132, which are now dated later than 1833, were based on revelation actually received in 1831, as is explained in the headnotes to these two sections. [^13] This historical and topical parallel between the Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants is not a coincidence; it is a consequence. While the Prophet labored intently with the text of the holy scriptures, the Lord through his Spirit gave him detailed knowledge and also understanding of the doctrines and the history of the gospel from the premortal world through the Millennium. This resulted in an improved biblical text as well as a collection of revelatory material for the Doctrine and Covenants.

Expressing a similar conviction, President George Q. Cannon wrote: "The labor was its own reward, bringing in the performance a special blessing of broadened comprehension to the Prophet and a general blessing of enlightenment to the people through his subsequent teachings." [^14]

Some of the great revelations coming through the Prophet and preserved in the Joseph Smith Translation are the visions of Moses (also found in Moses 1) and an outpouring of knowledge about the Grand Council and about the Creation, Adam, Satan and Cain, and Enoch and Noah, as recorded in Gen. 1-7 of the Joseph Smith Translation (and also published as chapters 2-8 of the book of Moses in the Pearl of Great Price).

The revelation concerning Enoch given in December 1830 (JST, Gen. 6-7; Moses 6-7) laid the groundwork for the next twenty-five or so revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants about Zion and about the law of stewardship and consecration received from February through October 1831 (see D&C 42-65). The age of accountability, set at eight years of age by the Lord, was revealed to the Prophet in about April 1831 in connection with Joseph's translation of Gen. 17:11, dealing with Abraham. This was several months before the doctrine was given in D&C 68:25-28 in November 1831. Knowing the age at which children begin to become accountable determines the practice of the Church relative to baptism of children and has thus affected the lives of millions and will continue to do so. The relation of the Joseph Smith Translation to the vision of the degrees of glory has already been mentioned. To this list we would add the revelation on the plurality and eternity of marriage, now published as D&C 132 of the Doctrine and Covenants, which in its present form was written in July 1843, but which was initially revealed in 1831. Furthermore, the revelation on priesthood councils and quorums, now identified as D&C 107, also has an early attachment to the work of the Bible translation, as we have already mentioned.

We therefore see that the age for baptism, the concept of building Zion, the degrees of glory in the afterlife, and the eternal marriage and family covenant were all closely allied with the process of Bible translation. That is, these four fundamental doctrines, which are cornerstones in the gospel of Jesus Christ, are inseparably connected with the Prophet Joseph's translation activity. The connection is both historical and doctrinal, because it was in the process of the Bible translation that these doctrines were revealed to the Prophet. They were drawn forth and amplified to him as he examined the traces of these concepts that remain in the Bible. On the basis of these four fundamental cornerstones of faith and doctrine, one feels confident in repeating the earlier assertion that the Joseph Smith Translation has in some way affected the life of every member of the Church in the past 150 years and will yet affect the lives of all future members of the Church.

In addition to the revelations establishing the doctrine of the Church, the Prophet's work has also provided us with the most correct edition of the Bible currently available. Even though all of the translations available through the scholarly world have some variation among them, they are primarily the result of minor translation preferences and choices of words. Although we would not discount the value of the refinements made due to the academic process, these scholarly Bibles are still very much alike in content, whereas the Bible produced by the Prophet Joseph Smith is much different. The Joseph Smith Translation is less concerned with these small refinements and is more concerned with sweeping innovations introducing new material—or rather, restoring lost material. Huge sections, sometimes containing hundreds of words, were added to Gen. 5, Gen. 14, Gen. 48, Gen. 50, Isa. 29, Matt. 21:48-56, and Luke 3:4-10. Moreover, supplementary portions of varying shorter lengths are added to fifty-two of the sixty-six books of the Bible. (Thirteen virtually unaffected books are Ruth, Ezra, Esther, Ecclesiastes, Lamentations, Obadiah, Micah, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, Haggai, Malachi, 2 John, and 3 John. A fourteenth book, the Song of Solomon, was deleted.) The books of Genesis, Exodus, Isaiah, Matthew, Luke, Romans, and Revelation received the most corrections. The Joseph Smith Translation is a miraculous work embodying revelation and restoration by the Spirit. With the Joseph Smith Translation as with the Book of Mormon, the translation was by the "unlearned man," whose tools were faith and inspiration, rather than the "learned," who might trust in his knowledge of languages, worldly theology, and ancient manuscripts (see 2 Ne. 27; Isa. 29).

Evaluating the doctrinal correctness and usability of the Joseph Smith Translation, Elder Bruce R. McConkie left no doubt about his confidence in the work when he made the following public statement in 1984: "Use and rely on the Joseph Smith Translation, the so-called Inspired Version. [This] can scarcely be stated with too great an emphasis. The Joseph Smith Translation, or Inspired Version, is a thousand times over the best Bible now existing on earth. It contains all that the King James Version does, plus pages of additions and corrections and an occasional deletion. It was made by the spirit of revelation, and the changes and additions are the equivalent of the revealed word in the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants." [^15]

Two years earlier Elder McConkie had counseled the regional representatives and other leaders of the Church not to neglect the spiritual value of the Joseph Smith Translation: "Mark a new set of the standard works. Use the footnotes and teaching aids in our new editions. Pay particular attention to the inspired changes made by the Prophet Joseph Smith in the Bible." [^16]

President Gordon B. Hinckley, writing on the history of the Church and the spiritual growth of the Prophet Joseph Smith, offers the following observation:

"One of the projects undertaken by Joseph Smith before his removal to Ohio was a revision of the English Bible. He did not discredit the King James translation, but he knew, as has since been more generally recognized, that certain errors and omissions in that record had led to numerous difficulties among the sects of Christendom. . . .

"Upon his arrival in Ohio, Joseph continued with this labor, working as time permitted. . . .

"We have seen how Joseph Smith and the Church developed as various questions and problems arose. He sought the Lord for guidance and testified to the world that he received it. Most of the revelations which have since regulated the Church were received during this Ohio-Missouri period." [^17]

Thus the work of the Prophet Joseph Smith with the Bible was the means, first of all, of informing the Prophet; second, of providing a better Bible—even the best Bible—for the Saints and the world to profit thereby; and third, of major significance is the example and lesson the work itself sets before us of seeing the fruits of a prophet of God at work with the scriptures—searching the word of the Lord for inspiration and preparing himself for and receiving additional revelation. A translation that is conducted by the use of languages and based on a manuscript is limited to the knowledge of the translator and the content of the document to be translated, whereas, by comparison, a translation by a prophet through the spirit of revelation can expand to the extent that God chooses to reveal what he knows about the subject.

Summary

The translation of the Bible by the Prophet Joseph Smith is a storehouse of revealed doctrinal and historical knowledge, and every person interested in the gospel of Jesus Christ can benefit immensely from it, gaining intelligence and information not provided in any other source. And even beyond the factual benefit, we look to the process by which the Prophet was able to make the translation and realize that he has shown us the way that we too can gain knowledge unattainable by any other source or method. The unmistakable demonstration of this revelatory process has to be counted as extremely significant, along with the other contributions and advantages of the Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible.

It would make but little difference whether the Prophet were translating the Bible, the Book of Mormon, or the Abrahamic manuscripts; if the process is by the spirit of revelation, the product is a piece of divine truth, and because it comes from outside of the person (through revelation), it goes beyond the fund of knowledge previously available.

Notes

From Larry C. Porter and Susan Easton Black, eds., The Prophet Joseph: Essays on the Life and Mission of Joseph Smith (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1988),175-91.

The Evening and the Morning Star (Independence, Missouri)

August 1832: Gen. 7:1-78b

March 1833: Gen. 6:45-71; Gen. 7:20-25

April 1833: Gen. 4:1-5:4b Gen. 6:61-64; Gen. 7:5-13; Gen. 8:1-18; Gen. 9:17-23

Lectures on Theology (Kirtland, Ohio), first published in the Doctrine and Covenants in 1835 as "Lectures on Faith"

Lecture First: Heb. 11:1

Lecture Second: Gen. 1:27-31; Gen. 2:18-25, 27; Gen. 3:13-25; Gen. 4:1-9; Genesis 5:6b-9b; Gen. 5:17-25

Lecture Third: Rom. 10:14

Broadside Tract, "Extract from the New Translation of the Bible," published probably in Ohio, sometime between 1832 and 1837

Matt. 24

Times and Seasons (Nauvoo, Illinois), January 1843, 71-73.

"A Revelation to Joseph Smith, jun., given in June 1830" (Visions of Moses)

The Millennial Star (Liverpool, England), 15 March 1851, 90-93.

Gen. 1:1-3:12b

Pearl of Great Price (Liverpool, England), July 1851, 1-17, 30-32.

All of the foregoing portions of Genesis (except Gen. 9:17-23)

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 170-71.
[^2] See, for example, the headnotes to D&C 35; 71; 74; 76; 77; 86; 91; see also the footnote references to D&C 9:2; 35:20; 37:1; 41:7; 42:56; 45:12, 60; 49:21; 73:3; 76:17; 84:14, 24; 93:53; 94:10; 104:58; 107:2; 124:89.
[^3] The first publication of the entire text of the New Translation was in 1867 by the RLDS Church. Certain portions had been published by the LDS Church before that time, however. Most of these were published during the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph Smith, but some were later. A list of these extracts, arranged chronologically in the order of publication, follows. Biblical citations are as given in the printed Inspired Version, but, of course, these were not so identified in the original publications.
[^4] The Prophet's journal contains several references to his divine appointment to translate the Bible. On one occasion he labels it a "branch of my calling." See History of the Church, 1:238 (1 Dec. 1831).
[^5] For example, the Revised Version (RV), published in England in 1871 and the American Standard Version (ASV), published in the United States in 1881; the Revised Standard Version (RSV), 1946-1952; the New English Bible (NEB), 1961; the New World Translation (Watchtower Society), 1950; and the New American Bible (English Roman Catholic edition), 1970. See The New Testament from Twenty-six Translations (Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan Publishing House, 1967) as a source book on the many translations available. In addition to these Christian publications, there are various recent Jewish translations of the Old Testament now available.
[^6] For a more complete discussion of the scribes and their work, see Matthews, A Plainer Translation, chapters 2 and 3.
[^7] Old Testament Manuscript 2, pp. 1-8. This manuscript is in the possession of the RLDS Church, Independence, Missouri. Permission was given the writer to peruse the manuscript and make a typescript.
[^8] New Testament Manuscript 1, p. 1, in possession of the RLDS church, Independence, Missouri. A photocopy is published in Matthews, A Plainer Translation, 267.
[^9] Minutes from the School of the Prophets, SaltLake City, 14 Jan. 1871, manuscript in the Historical Library, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^10] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 151.
[^11] Ibid., 149.
[^12] Ibid., 328.
[^13] Further discussion on the early dating of these sections is found in Robert J. Woodford, "The Historical Development of the Doctrine and Covenants" (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1974); see also D&C 84; 107; 132.
[^14] George Q. Cannon, Life of Joseph Smith the Prophet (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1958), 147-48.
[^15] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Bible, a Sealed Book," in the supplement to A Symposium on the New Testament (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1984), 5.
[^16] Bruce R. McConkie, regional representatives' seminar, 2 Apr. 1982, Salt Lake City, Utah.
[^17] Gordon B. Hinckley, Truth Restored, 5th ed. (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1954), 99-100.
