Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 30

Contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation in Restoring Doctrine

The Holy Bible originally contained the revealed word of God in doctrinal plainness, but extensive omissions and changes early after the New Testament era significantly depleted the content of all manuscript copies to such an extent that no known Bibles now on earth present the fulness of the gospel in doctrinal clarity. The problem today lies not with inability to translate languages but with the absence of an adequate manuscript. This heavy loss of gospel truth has paralleled worldwide apostasy from the true Church, so that for centuries the world has seen neither an adequate Bible nor an adequate church. As an early accomplishment of the restoration of the true Church to the earth, the Prophet Joseph Smith was commanded to make a revelatory translation of the Bible, the process of which restored lost material to the Bible and contributed to the doctrinal base of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Historical Background

The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible (JST) was produced by the Prophet Joseph Smith and his close associates during the years 1830-1844. The handwritten manuscript consists of 464 pages, each eight and a half by fourteen inches. This is accompanied by an 1828 printing of the King James Version containing various pencil and ink markings which are actually directions pertaining to the manuscript. The manuscript itself consists of first and second and in some cases third drafts, edited and punctuated with a view toward publication. Every book of the Old and New Testaments received attention, although thirteen books were left unchanged. The written manuscript itself has no mention of Ecclesiastes. Joseph Smith called this work the "New Translation."

Extracts from the translation (now identified as the Book of Moses and Joseph Smith—Matthew in the Pearl of Great Price) were published and circulated in the time of the Prophet Joseph Smith. The presiding brethren of the Church had serious plans under way in Nauvoo for a complete publication, but Joseph Smith's martyrdom in 1844 and subsequent persecution prevented it. The manuscript and the marked Bible eventually came to the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS) through the Smith family and was published as the Holy Scriptures in 1867. Several editions containing modest variations have since been published by the RLDS Church. [^1]

The JST Is Often Overlooked by LDS Scholars

It is my observation that the JST has not received the attention it deserves and has not been recognized for what it is and for the extensive influence it has had on LDS scripture and doctrine. It has been largely neglected and even ignored by LDS scriptorians and historians. I suppose this condition exists for the following reasons: (1) Because the JST is a Bible, Church historians have not sensed its connection with latter-day revelation, scripture, or events in history. On the other hand, (2) because the JST is not a translation of the Bible in the usual sense of ancient manuscripts and languages, traditional, professionally trained textual experts in the Church have not regarded it as a translation at all, nor even as a serious biblical document. As a consequence, the JST has in effect been relegated to the incorrect status of an orphan, a stepchild, or an ugly duckling in the house of LDS scholarship.

In 1994 I examined every book listed under the heading of Doctrine and Covenants in the card file of the Harold B. Lee Library at Brigham Young University and discovered that even though there are many publications that discuss the origin, history, and content of the book of Doctrine and Covenants, few contain any mention of the JST, and only one author clearly discussed the role of the JST as a contributing factor to the doctrine of the Church. This was surprising since the translation of the Bible is referred to several times in the text of the Doctrine and Covenants and at least thirty-six times in the official seven-volume History of the Church.

Using Latter-day Revelation as an Interpretive Control

This chapter deals somewhat with biblical textual criticism, but because of space it can be only a survey. Those familiar with the technical nature of biblical criticism will recognize that some of the conclusions herein may seem to be oversimplifications. I think, however, that the statements presented here are based on reliable evidence. For space consideration, extensive supporting arguments cannot be presented, but citation is made to various published works. However, differing opinions exist even among world-renowned textual specialists, particularly as to which ancient biblical manuscripts present the most accurate text. My goal is to discuss the subject in a reasonable manner in the context of latter-day scripture and also of statements by the Prophet Joseph Smith. I feel that these sources offer a reliable dimension of interpretive control that non-LDS scholars do not enjoy. I do not pretend to be a biblical scholar; I am, however, very interested in textual criticism, have read much of the literature, and enjoy the search. I do not question what the textual critics have found. However, I do not always agree with their interpretations of their discoveries.

Unholy Hands on the Bible

The Prophet Joseph Smith expressed a basic tenet of the Church when in 1842 he wrote: "We believe the Bible to be the word of God, as far as it is translated correctly" (Article of Faith 1:8). In both earlier and later statements the Prophet clearly demonstrated that he did not mean only the translation of languages but rather the transmission of the Bible, such as copying, editing, and excising, in addition to translating. This wider view is evident by his following utterances:

"From sundry revelations which had been received, it was apparent that many important points touching the salvation of men, had been taken from the Bible, or lost before it was compiled." [^2]

And also:

"I believe the Bible as it read when it came from the pen of the original writers. Ignorant translators, careless transcribers, or designing and corrupt priests have committed many errors." [^3]

Textual experts have also noted from their examination of existing manuscripts that thousands of variations exist and have been perpetuated in the transmission of the Bible. There are several reasons for these differences; some were accidental and others were intentional. Accidental variations occur because of human frailty and the difficulty of copying an extensive document by hand and also by errors of sight and hearing. The planned, deliberate, intentional changes are far more damaging because they are selective and are usually of doctrinal significance. Planned departures in the text often are accomplished by simply omitting what one feels is objectionable. This could consist of words, sentences, paragraphs, or whole books.

Omissions and other kinds of differences would not be permanently damaging if the original manuscripts were available for comparison. In the absence of the originals, or near facsimiles, it appears that the wounded text produced by the many successive copiers, who were of varying degrees of integrity, has become an accepted base of the Old and New Testaments from which all Bibles today have descended. Many detailed and technical books are currently available that describe the known Bible manuscripts and laboriously and meticulously discuss the various readings. Textual criticism is a fascinating and time-consuming study, even though the experts do not agree on all points. Following are several concepts that I have observed in the writings of acclaimed biblical scholars. No one writer seems to say it all, but from the aggregate much useful information is obtained and some interesting observations can be deduced. I know these are selective on my part, but they are actual quotations from experienced, serious men.

Sir Frederick Kenyon (1863-1954), speaking of the New Testament, said:

"The originals of the several books have long ago disappeared. They must have perished in the very infancy of the Church; for no allusion is ever made to them by any Christian writer." [^4]

John W. Burgon (1813-88):

"It must not be imagined that all the causes of the depravation of the text of Holy Scripture were instinctive. Or that mistakes arose solely because scribes were overcome by personal infirmity, or were unconsciously the victims of surrounding circumstances. There was often more design and method in their error. They, or those who directed them, wished sometimes to 'correct' and 'improve' the copy or copies before them. And indeed occasionally they desired to make the Holy Scriptures witness to their own peculiar belief. Or they had their ideas of taste, and they did not scruple to alter passages to suit what they fancied was their enlightened judgment." [^5]

Burgon believed that "the omission of words, clauses and sentences" were the most numerous types of "corrupt variations from the genuine text" of the Bible. [^6] He also noticed that even where omissions had occurred in the text, the remainder of the passage generally appeared to be complete rather than dangling or awkward. Burgon saw this as a deliberate cover-up, which made omissions harder to detect. He states:

"Inadvertency may be made to bear the blame of some omissions, but it cannot bear the blame of shrewd and significant omissions of clauses which invariably leave the sense complete. A systematic and perpetual mutilation of the inspired text must be the result of design, not of accident." [^7]

While it was once believed by students that existing New Testament manuscripts could be traced in genealogical fashion in an unbroken line to the originals, it is now evident that a space of nearly three hundred years elapsed between the originals and the earliest New Testament manuscripts available today, except for some small fragments in which the gap is "only" one hundred fifty or two hundred years. The alarming truth is that none of the surviving manuscripts contain categorical information as to where, when, by whom, or from what precise source they were copied. Such information, if discovered at all, must come from detective-like investigation, which so far has not given significant answers. Some textual scholars realize that the second century a.d. presents an impenetrable barrier to tracing the history and source of New Testament documents. We read the following:

Dr. Frederick C. Grant (1891-?):

"Instead of tracing back the text to its original in the autographs by a steady process of convergence following back to a common source the divergent lines of descent, we shall have to stop when we get to the second century; and in place of some rule of preference for one type of text over another, or for their common agreements over their divergences, we shall have to trust a great deal more than heretofore to what is called internal criticism. . . .

"But now, with Kenyon's conclusions before us, it is more obvious than ever where our chief problems lie. 'In the first two centuries this original text disappeared under a mass of variants, created by errors, by conscious alterations, and by attempts to remedy the uncertainties thus created. Then, as further attempts to recover the lost truth were made, the families of text that we now know took shape. They were, however, nuclei rather than completed forms of text, and did not at once absorb all the atoms that the period of disorder had brought into existence.' (The Text of the Greek Bible, 242.)" [^8]

What Doctors Kenyon and Grant are saying is that there is a gap of at least two or three centuries between any present text and the originals. Surely anyone with a sense of history must be concerned about what changes could have occurred during that time, without apostolic leadership to correct errors and with no original manuscripts for honest folk to use for comparison.

Another dimension yet to be considered is the fact that the Bible contains the word of God and is therefore a target of Satan's influence. John W. Burgon, cited earlier, said it this way:

"The Scriptures became a mark for the shafts of Satan from the beginning, for the very reason that they were known to be the Word of God. So they were as eagerly solicited by heretical teachers on the one hand, as they were hotly defended by the orthodox on the other. Therefore, from friends and from foes the Scriptures are known to have experienced injury, and that in the earliest age of all. Nothing of the kind can be predicated of any other ancient writings. This consideration alone should suggest a severe exercise of judicial impartiality in the handling of ancient evidence of whatever sort. Observe that I have not said—and I certainly do not mean—that the Scriptures themselves have been permanently corrupted either by friend of foe. Error was fitful and uncertain, and was contradicted by other error. And it eventually sank before a manifold witness to the truth. Nevertheless, certain manuscripts belonging to a few small groups, particular copies of a Version, individual Fathers, these do, to the present hour, bear traces incontestably of ancient mischief." [^9]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie, a latter-day scripture advocate, also attributed corruption of the scriptures to the influence of Satan:

"As we consider them [the Book of Mormon, the Bible, and the revelations to Joseph Smith] we should be aware of the insidious and devil-directed attack upon them. Let me speak plainly. Satan hates and spurns the scriptures. The less scripture there is, and the more it is twisted and perverted, the greater is the rejoicing in the courts of hell. There has never been a book—not even the Book of Mormon—that has been so maligned and cursed and abused as the Bible." [^10]

That the Bible was intentionally altered by designing persons so as to neutralize its witness of Jesus Christ is also declared in the words of the angel to Nephi. After explaining to Nephi that "many plain and precious parts" would be taken "out of the book" that contained the words of the Jewish prophets and apostles, the angel also said:

"Wherefore, these things go forth from the Jews in purity unto the Gentiles, according to the truth which is in God.

"And after they go forth by the hand of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, from the Jews unto the Gentiles, thou seest the formation of that great and abominable church, which is most abominable above all other churches; for behold, they have taken away from the gospel of the Lamb many parts which are plain and most precious; and also many covenants of the Lord have they taken away.

"And all this have they done that they might pervert the right ways of the Lord, that they might blind the eyes and harden the hearts of the children of men.

"Wherefore, thou seest that after the book hath gone forth through the hands of the great and abominable church, that there are many plain and precious things taken away from the book, which is the book of the Lamb of God" (1 Ne. 13:25-28; italics added).

I have observed from my own study that most textual scholars emphasize the variants that were caused by the difficulties of writing, whereas the Book of Mormon (1 1 Ne. 13) and the Book of Moses (1:41) place the emphasis on the losses by designing and deceitful persons. The textual critics, of course, are governed in their thinking by their research, and they have no way of measuring the extent of the loss by omission, whereas prophets are more likely to judge the text by the help of the Spirit of God. For example, the Prophet Joseph Smith evaluated the Bible by comparison with the revelations he had received: "There are many things in the Bible which do not, as they now stand, accord with the revelations of the Holy Ghost to me." [^11]

Based on an extensive comparison of latter-day revelation with the Bible, it is my conviction that omissions to the Bible text are more extensive, occurred earlier, and were more intentional than the textual critics have realized.

Example from the Book of Mormon

The loss of 116 pages of Book of Mormon manuscript in 1829, within two years of the time Joseph Smith got the plates, alerts every Latter-day Saint to the fact that large sections of material can be lost to the text in a very short time. This particular example also serves to emphasize that in order to be effective, omissions must occur early, before multiple copies are extant. This condition requires that the perpetrators be near the top of a religious hierarchy or at least have access to the originals or near originals. Such a condition suggests that the corruption of the New Testament occurred early, before wide distribution, and must therefore have been an "inside job." This in fact was said by the angel to Nephi, as recorded in 1 Ne. 13:29: "And after these plain and precious things were taken away it [the record of the Jews] goeth forth unto all the nations of the Gentiles."

The Old Testament appears to have been depleted much earlier, even perhaps as early as 300 b.c., before the Septuagint or the Dead Sea Scrolls appeared, and thus they suffer from the same major loss as other manuscripts. Jesus stated to the Jews his displeasure that they had already, before his day, taken away the "fulness of the scriptures" (JST, Luke 11:53). It is true that the Jewish scribes developed intricate rules and safeguards for preserving the accuracy of the Old Testament text; however, these seem to have been put in place too late, after much loss had occurred. Furthermore, rules and safeguards are for honest people; scriptural thieves are not hampered by rabbinic rules.

The Difficulty of Recovering the Original Text

It was noted earlier that today there are no known original manuscripts of the Bible. There are, however, nearly five thousand New Testament manuscripts of varying degrees of completeness, containing thousands of textual differences. Three of these, known as Vaticanus, Sinaiticus, and Alexandrinus, are given the greatest credence by most nineteenth- and twentieth-century scholars. These manuscripts are in good condition, rather complete, and eloquently written in Greek, and were probably composed in Egypt in the fourth century a.d. They are thus separated from the originals by more than two hundred fifty years. It is not known who produced them or even from what documentary sources they were copied. Because these three were seemingly composed centuries earlier than most other available New Testament manuscripts, they are highly regarded by modern scholars and have been the basis of most of the revisions of the Bible in the past hundred years, such as the English Revised Version of 1881, the American Standard Revision of 1901, the Revised Standard Version of 1946-52, and the New English Bible of 1961. Although highly regarded by many scholars, comparison with latter-day revelation shows these particular texts to be doctrinally weaker than the New Testament manuscripts from which the King James Version was obtained.

The difficulty, if not impossibility, of completely determining the original text and meaning of the Bible by the methods of literary criticism alone (without the aid of new revelation) is staggering. The Bible is too extensive, too ancient, and too complex, and the sources are too uneven for that. Perhaps such a task could be illustrated as follows. Suppose one wished to know about a particular ancestor (whom we will call the "archetype") of two hundred fifty years ago—his size, facial features, hair pattern, countenance, intellect, personality, etc.—so well that if seen he would be recognized. To accomplish this the researchers had only a record of some of his descendants for four or five generations, lacking the earliest links in the genealogical chain. Even though current descendants could be interviewed and examined, and the writings, descriptions, and diaries of intervening ancestors long since dead could be studied, it would be next to impossible to reassemble the archetype. There are simply too many variables. The task is made more difficult if the researchers do not really know what particular features are right even when they find them, or do not know that there are some features in the archetype that are not found in any of the known descendants. Because of particular features that were present in the missing descendants, but which are not evident in any of the existing descendants, it is not possible that the archetype could be reconstructed accurately as to detail. Perhaps all that could be determined with certainty would be that the ancestor did exist at a given time and place, he wore clothes, and he has many descendants who have certain eye and hair color, certain types of physique, and so forth. If, however, an accurate color portrait could be discovered, accompanied by a detailed physical and personality description, then it is possible that a determination could be made of the archetype, and perhaps also a living descendant could then be recognized as having many of the same likenesses. I believe that the Joseph Smith Translation is that living portrait.

The Bible as a Witness for Christ

The scriptures have a basic mission to testify of Christ (see John 5:39). This may be the appropriate time to note the words of the angel to Nephi, as recorded in 1 Ne. 13:39-40. After explaining to Nephi that many plain and precious things would be taken "out of the book" containing the record of the Jews and the testimony of the Apostles of the Lamb (surely this is the Old and New Testaments), the angel speaks of a restoration, through the agency of "other books," which "shall establish the truth of the first, which are of the twelve apostles of the Lamb, and shall make known the plain and precious things which have been taken away from them" (1 Ne. 13:39-40). Two things are apparent here: (1) There has been a loss of material from the Bible, and (2) the missing parts shall be made known again through other books. It seems evident that these "other books" would include the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Joseph Smith Translation.

A similar reference is found in Moses 1:40-41, in which the Lord informs Moses that after he (Moses) has written a book about this earth (surely this is Genesis), others will "take many things out of the book which" Moses has written. However, the Lord will raise up another "like unto" Moses, and once again the lost material "shall be had among those who believe" and who accept this second Moses. If this later one is Joseph Smith, then the declaration is that he will restore certain words once written by Moses which have been taken away. Those who would not "believe" the words of Joseph Smith would not recognize the Restoration. (A related example of willful extraction of scripture, later restored, is found in Jer. 36:20-32, but there is not space to discuss that item here.)

Omissions from the Bible would weaken its power as a witness for the Lord Jesus Christ. To be an adequate witness, the Bible would need to have the missing parts returned to its pages.

The Lack of an Adequate Manuscript

It was noted earlier that the problem with recovering the original text and meaning of the Bible is not one of knowing the ancient biblical languages, but rather it is the absence of an adequate manuscript to be translated. This is the crux of the whole matter. A true translation of an inadequate manuscript cannot produce the material that is no longer in the manuscript. Only an intervention from outside of the manuscript can restore material that was originally in the manuscript but is not there now. Thus the need for a revelatory translation of the Bible by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Another illustration of the difficulty of recovering missing text by using an inadequate manuscript and the methods of literary criticism alone is found in the loss of the 116 pages of English translation of the Book of Mormon. These pages contained a record identified as the "book of Lehi" and were translated from the plates of Mormon. Because these pages got out of the possession of the Prophet Joseph Smith in 1829 and were never returned, the Book of Mormon, when published in 1830, did not contain a "book of Lehi," nor has any edition since that time.

The many editions and printings of the Book of Mormon, including the 1830, have had typographical errors and omissions. Most of these have to do with spelling, grammar, and visual oversight by scribes and typesetters. The same kinds of things that have occurred to the biblical manuscripts have happened (only to a much less extent) to the Book of Mormon. Textual scholars working with the Book of Mormon have several advantages that textual scholars of the Bible do not have, and these are that approximately one-third of the original "dictated manuscript" of the Book of Mormon and all of the "printers manuscript" of the Book of Mormon are available. Also, only 170 years have passed since the translation of the Book of Mormon, whereas the manuscripts of the Bible have been repeatedly copied for several millennia, and all originals and earliest copies have disappeared.

Even with the advantages available to scholars of the Book of Mormon, there is no trace of a manuscript containing the "book of Lehi." Hence, all current efforts to arrive at the original text cannot produce the "book of Lehi." In the absence of a manuscript, such text could be obtained only by revelation. In like manner, in the absence of an adequate manuscript, scholars cannot, by means of literary methods alone, discover what is no longer contained in biblical manuscripts. Current available manuscripts were prepared too late in time, after the passages were gone.

By making the foregoing assertions, I do not mean to imply that textual comparison does not have beneficial results. Several parallels exist between what scholars are able to do with the text of both the Book of Mormon and the Bible. The 1981 edition of the Book of Mormon contains nearly 180 textual corrections over earlier editions. These may be appreciated by comparing the 1981 edition with earlier editions of 2 Ne. 29:4; Alma 16:5; and Alma 32:30. However, these corrections were possible because there was manuscript evidence. Without such evidence, lost material cannot be regained except by revelation.

Judgmental Errors by Scholars Without Latter-day Revelation

An interesting, though I believe unfortunate, development has occurred among modern students of the biblical text. Because they have such confidence in fourth- and fifth-century manuscripts (Vaticanus, Sinaiticus, and Alexandrinus), they have measured other manuscripts by these three and concluded that not so much has been lost from the New Testament, but unauthorized material has been added. In other words, they unwittingly use the reduced text as the standard to test other manuscripts. Many examples of this can be seen by observing the footnotes in the Revised Standard Version and in the New English Bible. See Mark 16:9-20 and Matt. 6:13 for items in this category. This is essentially the thrust put forth by J. Reuben Clark Jr. in Why the King James Version, and is based on the content of latter-day revelation.

Many Warnings about Altering the Written Word

It is easier to focus on the corruption of the New Testament text than on the Old Testament, primarily because from the ministry of Jesus to the end of the New Testament record is about sixty years, whereas the Old Testament, covering four thousand years, must have undergone several tinkerings with the text.

Both ancient and latter-day scriptures carry repeated warnings and reports about altering the holy written word. There are so many references that it leads a reader to conclude that there is a tendency among mankind to "add to" and "take from" the word. It appears to have occurred several times. [^12] We will now discuss some of the significant contributions of the JST to the doctrine of the Church. Equally important is the role of the JST in restoring the Bible as a witness for Christ.

The Unfolding of the JST

The Bible, in spite of its deficiencies, is still a marvelous record of God's dealings with mankind and tells of Jesus' ministry among the Jews. However, the Prophet Joseph Smith, even as a boy, discovered that the Bible was sufficiently vague in some very important doctrinal matters that it actually created confusion rather than offering clear answers. His experience was that "the teachers of religion of the different sects understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to the Bible" (Joseph Smith—History 1:12). This condition led him to pray for information, which resulted in the First Vision, thus giving him information by new revelation. Joseph Smith also noticed that the angel Moroni quoted various passages "with a little variation" from the way they read in the Bible (Joseph Smith—History 1:36-39). Such experiences would give him, even at an early age, an awareness that the nineteenth-century Bible without additional revelation is an insufficient guide.

The Value of Original Sources

In studying the original manuscripts of the JST to check the accuracy of the published editions, a second theme emerged that appears apropos to the subject of Bible manuscript history. Much has been said here about the value that original sources would be in the study of the holy Bible. Quite unexpectedly to me, I discovered that the same is true with the JST. Without an examination of the original JST manuscripts prepared by the Prophet Joseph Smith and his scribes, I could not have obtained the perspective that the real purpose of the JST is to be a primary source of doctrine and to strengthen the Bible as a witness for the Lord Jesus Christ.

When reading printed editions of the JST, I had often noticed the similarity of doctrine and even identical phrases also found in the Doctrine and Covenants. From the published sources alone, it would generally be impossible to discover which of the two came first. I have often heard it said that Joseph Smith "Mormonized the Bible," that is, that he "corrected" the Bible on the basis of what he already knew about the gospel to make it conform to LDS doctrine. One prominent Church historian, William E. Berrett, promoted this concept in a textbook that was used in the Church school system for many years. In discussing the JST, he said that "the work was limited to those parts of the Bible upon which divine revelation had been received." [^13] Dr. Berrett was one of the few who mentioned the JST in his writings, but unfortunately he had not the benefit of the original manuscripts.

When in 1967 the opportunity arose for me to examine the original JST manuscripts in the RLDS archives, it was with the encouragement and support of William E. Berrett that I was able to go to Independence, Missouri, and make the study. At that time the sole purpose in my mind was to compare the published editions of the JST with the original sources to determine if the published editions were accurate. This was a fruitful exercise requiring weeks of diligent, eye-tiring effort. And I was happy to report that in the main, the printed Joseph Smith Translation by the RLDS Church correctly reflects the text of the manuscripts, except for a few adjustments yet to be made. To examine the originals over many months was inspiring. The task seemed significant given the fact that the RLDS had not previously made the manuscripts available for research and that no Latter-day Saint had seen or handled them in well over a century.

A Chronological Approach

Having completed the comparison, I could have concluded the story at that point, had it not been that the manuscripts contained dates of their composition, showed frequent changes in handwriting denoting changes of scribes, and yielded other revealing bits of information in addition to the text itself. Because of these dates, it became possible for me to determine when particular portions of the JST were made in relation to various revelations printed in the Doctrine and Covenants. This could not have been ascertained without the dates on the original manuscripts. It was learned that in many instances doctrinal utterances occurred in the JST earlier than in the Doctrine and Covenants. This remarkable fact opened the way for a chronological study of the JST and allowed me to see that the JST was often the source, not simply the beneficiary, of LDS doctrine.

Once this perspective is put in place, an entirely new vista lies before the willing researcher, and he sees a steady and progressive unfolding of doctrine in the early days of the Church. The Book of Mormon brought unparalleled light concerning many gospel subjects, but it had limited detail on premortal existence, degrees of glory, celestial marriage, the law of consecration of property, organization of priesthood quorums, the office of bishop, and such things. Many of these were first made known to the Prophet as he translated the Bible.

That the JST was to be a learning experience for the Prophet Joseph Smith is seen in the Lord's directive that he begin a translation of the New Testament:

"And now, behold, I say unto you, it shall not be given unto you to know any further concerning this chapter, until the New Testament be translated, and in it all these things shall be made known;

"Wherefore I give unto you that ye may now translate it, that ye may be prepared for the things to come" (D&C 45:60-61).

We will not have difficulty seeing the doctrinal contribution of the JST if we sort it out chronologically. We are not accustomed to doing that because we tend to think in terms of separate books rather than in terms of history. We read Book of Mormon one year, Doctrine and Covenants another year, and Bible another year. Without an awareness of the context, we tend to forget, or perhaps fail to ever learn, that the gospel was revealed to Joseph Smith line upon line, precept upon precept, here and there, a little at a time.

The Church in 1830

Consider what the Church was like in June 1830. What were the offices, the doctrines, and the practices of the Church in that day? It would be easier to tell what the Church was not. In June 1830 there were no wards, no stakes, no First Presidency, no Council of the Twelve, no patriarchs, no Seventies, no bishops, no Word of Wisdom, no revelation on degrees of glory, no tithing, no welfare program, no law of consecration or united order, no priesthood quorums of any kind, no temples, no endowments, no sealings, no marriages for eternity, no real understanding of the New Jerusalem, no baptisms for the dead, no Doctrine and Covenants, no Pearl of Great Price, and no JST. How did each of these things come to be, which today we recognize as vital to our spiritual life and basic to the Church?

The Book of Mormon came from the press during the week of March 18-25, 1830. In a few more days, on 6 April, the Church was organized. A few weeks later, in June 1830, we have the earliest revelation associated with the JST. We are familiar with it as the "Visions of Moses" in the Pearl of Great Price, Moses chapter one. We do not know the exact day in June on which the material was written, but it was in Harmony, Pennsylvania. Comparing the chronology of the JST with the Doctrine and Covenants shows a pattern that many of the concepts contained in the Doctrine and Covenants were first presented to the mind of the Prophet during his translation of the Bible and were actually first recorded therein. Later many of these subjects were enlarged upon by subsequent revelation and appear as parts of various sections of the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Prophet's Credentials as a Translator

The greatest credential of the Prophet Joseph Smith to translate the Bible was that he was commanded and authorized by the Lord to do so. His situation seems similar to that of Nephi, who was commanded to build a ship. Nephi felt confident that "if God had commanded me to do all things I could do them" (1 Ne. 17:50). By 1830, when the Prophet Joseph began the translation of the Bible, he was already an experienced translator because of the translation of the Book of Mormon. He said that he and Oliver Cowdery had specific help from the Holy Ghost so that the scriptures were "laid open to our understandings, and the true meaning and intention of their more mysterious passages revealed unto us in a manner which we never could attain to previously, nor ever before thought of" (Joseph Smith—History 1:74). Such aid would surpass even the help of a language and a lexicon.

Enoch and the Consecration of Property

An extensive revelation about Enoch and his people was received by Joseph Smith in December 1830 while he and Sidney Rigdon were translating from the fifth chapter of the King James Version of Genesis. Chronologically this came after D&C section 35 and before D&C 37. This revelation, called in early LDS literature the "Prophecy of Enoch," deals with the ministry of Enoch, his faith in Jesus Christ, his preaching of the gospel, his city which was called Zion, the righteousness of his people, the fact that there were no poor among them, the taking of the people into heaven, and a declaration that they would return to the earth in the last days and be joined with the New Jerusalem that would be built upon the earth (see Moses 6-7). This information about Enoch contains many items of history and doctrine of particular interest to the Latter-day Saints because it deals with the work of the Lord on the earth in our day—the establishment of latter-day Zion.

Consider the situation of the Church in December 1830. What did anyone in the Church know about Enoch or the New Jerusalem or the city of Zion or any of these things at that time? We certainly cannot learn much from the King James Version about Enoch or his city of Zion or the laws that governed the people of Zion. None of the Bibles available today say Enoch had a city or that his people were called "Zion" or that his people were translated. The entire offering in the Bible about Enoch can be read in less than two minutes and consists of only nine verses totaling thirty-eight lines of type, found in Gen. 5:18-24, Heb. 11:5, and Jude 1:14-15. All of that together would amount to about three-fourths of one column of print in a Bible. The Book of Mormon does not help on this subject, for it does not mention or allude to Enoch.

The Church in 1830 was entirely dependent on a new revelation in order to know anything substantial about Enoch, his ministry, the people of his city (Zion), or their laws. The introduction was in November and December 1830 while the Prophet was translating from Genesis. In the next few months (after the initial installment about Enoch) came the revelations in D&C 42-43, 45-51, and 57-59 (February-August 1831). What a marvelous prelude was the prophecy of Enoch in JST, Genesis chapter 7 (Moses 7) in laying the foundation for these later revelations. In length alone it is impressive. The information about Enoch and Zion, as revealed to Joseph Smith in November and December 1830 while he was translating the Bible, is eighteen times as long as all of the Enoch material that is contained in the King James Version and contains over fifty-two hundred more words of very detailed and informative text about Enoch and the gospel. Thus, if we want a correct historical perspective of how the Lord educated the Prophet Joseph about Zion, we must first read the revelations that were received while translating the Bible. This is perfectly proper, because that is the order in which they were received. It is only in publishing them in different books that we have created an artificial separation between JST, Gen. 6-7 and D&C 42-59. If one wishes to get a proper orientation about the sections in the Doctrine and Covenants dealing with consecration and the establishment of Zion, an appropriate procedure would be to first study JST, Gen. 6-7 (Moses 6-7) about Enoch and his people who were called Zion, their laws, their absence of poverty, their glory, etc., before reading D&C 38-59. JST, Gen. 7 is an overview of the glory and greatness of Enoch's Zion given to the Church as a prelude before the Lord revealed in detail the laws and requirements that would enable the Latter-day Saints to build a similar Zion.

We could gain a clearer, richer, and more comprehensive understanding of the way the doctrine of this dispensation was unfolded if we were to take the revelations received during the translation of the Bible and place them in their proper chronological order between the sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. [^14] We were not able to think of this idea until we had access to the original JST manuscripts, because we did not know the dates that are written thereon. Seeing the originals changes our perspective.

The Age of Accountability

In D&C 68:25-28 the age of accountability is explained as beginning at the age of eight years, at which time baptism should be administered. This is the only mention of this in the Doctrine and Covenants and is dated November 1831. However, baptism and the eight-year-old age of accountability is recorded in the JST in connection with Gen. 17:1-11. The dates on the JST manuscript show that this Genesis chapter was recorded sometime between February 1831 and April 1831 and was therefore from six to nine months earlier than it appears in the Doctrine and Covenants.

A careful reading of D&C 68:25-28 demonstrates that the declaration of the eight-year-old accountability at that instance does not sound like a "first-time" announcement anyway, but more like a reaffirmation or a reminder. And indeed that was the case, for as we have seen, the concept was already written in the translation of the Bible many months before it was reiterated in the Doctrine and Covenants. Without the dates on the original JST manuscript we would never have been able to reconstruct this historical connection.

The Vision of the Degrees of Glory

While translating John chapter 5 and pondering over verse 29 concerning the resurrection of the just and of the unjust, the Prophet received the vision of the degrees of glory. In the revelation itself we read this explanation:

"For while we were doing the work of translation, which the Lord had appointed unto us, we came to the twenty-ninth verse of the fifth chapter of John, which was given unto us as follows—

"Speaking of the resurrection of the dead, concerning those who shall hear the voice of the Son of Man:

"And shall come forth; they who have done good, in the resurrection of the just; and they who have done evil, in the resurrection of the unjust.

"Now this caused us to marvel, for it was given unto us of the Spirit.

"And while we meditated upon these things, the Lord touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and the glory of the Lord shone round about" (D&C 76:15-19).

The JST Is a Primary Source

Based on the line of thinking presented above, it is evident that many of the important doctrines and practices of this church were made known to the Prophet Joseph Smith during the course of his translation of the Bible. The reason the Kirtland era was such a great revelatory period may certainly be because it was the time in which the Prophet was engaged in most of the translation of the Bible. Time prohibits a discussion of each instance, but this concept includes revelations on at least the following subjects: the New Jerusalem, plural marriage, Zion, powers of the priesthood, quorums and councils in the Church, quorum organization and duties, the fall of Adam, the atonement of Jesus Christ, the spirit world, resurrection, exaltation, age of accountability, agency, and the nature of the devil, of man, and of God.

Restoring the Biblical Witness

At least one more vital point should be considered: What do we do with the JST—is it simply Joseph Smith's commentary on the Bible, or is it in part a restoration of lost material? In view of the role of the JST as a primary source of doctrine, produced not out of thin air but by command of the Lord as the Prophet went through the pages of the Bible itself, it seems there is a strong reason for arguing for the JST to be a restoration at least of meaning and doctrinal content. Every translation is to some extent a commentary and an interpretation. The JST deserves to be given recognition as a restoration of lost biblical content and meaning.

When Sidney Rigdon was called to be the scribe for Joseph Smith in the translation the Lord told him, "Thou shalt write for him; and the scriptures shall be given even as they are in mine own bosom" (D&C 35:20). The implication is that current Bibles were not in a condition like "the Lord's own bosom." Such a promise sounds strongly like a statement of restoration. It is either declaring a restoration, or it is saying that the ancient Bible never had the truth in the first place; but this would be contrary to the statement of the angel to Nephi that in the beginning the Bible was plain and precious, easy to be understood, and contained the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ (see 1 Ne. 13:24-25).

When we compare the Bible with the doctrinal clarity of the Book of Mormon, book of Moses, and book of Abraham, it is an insult to say that the biblical apostles and prophets were not able to write as clearly the doctrine of the Lord. Since many basic doctrines are not now precisely stated in current Bibles, we are led to conclude that the Bible has been ravaged by unholy hands and does not do justice to the original authors.

Some may think it too bold to say the JST is in part a revealed restoration. However, we note that D&C 45:15-59 claims to be a restoration of a dialogue that once took place between Jesus and the Twelve on the Mount of Olives. The LDS student may need to ask himself this question: If the Lord could and would reveal that Olivet conversation to Joseph Smith, could he not or would he not be willing and able to do so again and again in the translation of the Bible?

The Bible is Judah's witness for God and for Jesus Christ. It is not sufficient for the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price simply to restore the missing doctrinal truth. Justice to the Bible prophets requires that the Bible itself be restored to its original power as a witness for Jesus Christ and his gospel. Having the truth only in the other books of scripture cannot suffice. The Bible must also be made right. The JST is a start in the restoration of the Bible.

Conclusion

What is the conclusion to the matter? The Prophet's translation of the Bible is a primary catalyst bringing revelation of much of the doctrinal content of the Church. The Judeo-Christian world has failed to realize the extent to which the Bible, both Old and New Testaments, is weakened in doctrinal perspective and therefore weakened as the witness for Christ. It will remain so weakened until an original manuscript is found or a revelation is received. I submit that the JST is closer to the content and doctrine of the original Bible than anything the world has seen in the past nineteen hundred years. The Prophet Joseph Smith has given back to us some of the original doctrinal content of the Bible in this work called the Joseph Smith Translation.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] For more detail and photographs, see the author's A Plainer Translation: The Joseph Smith Translation of the Bible, A History and Commentary (Provo: Brigham Young University Press, 1975, 1985).
[^2] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 9-11. The Prophet made this statement on 16 February 1832.
[^3] Ibid., 327. The Prophet made this statement on 15 October 1843.
[^4] Sir Frederick Kenyon, Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts (New York: Harper and Row, 1962), 155.
[^5] John W. Burgon, "Causes of Corruption Chiefly Intentional," The Traditional Text of the New Testament, republished in Jay P. Green Sr., ed., Unholy Hands on the Bible, 3 vols. (Lafayette, Indiana: Sovereign Grace Trust Fund, 1990), 1:B-44.
[^6] Ibid., B-61.
[^7] Ibid., B-9.
[^8] Frederick C. Grant, "The Greek Text of the New Testament," An Introduction to the Revised Standard Version of the New Testament (n.p.: The International Council of Religious Education, 1946), 40. Also cited in J. Reuben Clark Jr., Why the King James Version (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1956), 364.
[^9] Burgon, "Causes of Corruption," B-4.
[^10] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Doctrinal Restoration," in Monte S. Nyman and Robert L. Millet, eds.,The Joseph Smith Translation (Provo: Religious Studies Center, Brigham Young University, 1985), 12.
[^11] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 310.
[^12] See, for example, Deut. 4:2; Prov. 30:5-6; Jer. 36:1-32; JST Luke 11:53; 2 Cor. 2:17; 4:2; Rev. 22:18-20; 1 Ne. 13:19-42; 14:1; Morm. 8:33; D&C 20:35; Moses 1:40-41.
[^13] William E. Berrett, The Restored Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1961), 100.
[^14] For example, Moses 1 would be just before D&C 25; JST Gen. 1-5 (Moses 2-5) would be just before D&C 29; JST Gen. 6 (Moses 6) would be just before D&C 35; and JST, Gen. 7 (Moses 7) would be just before D&C 37.
