Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Scriptures of the Restoration

The Book of Mormon

Chapter 31

A Physical Description of the Gold Plates of the Book of Mormon

Members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints accept without reservation the fact that on the twenty-second day of September, 1827, the Prophet Joseph Smith came into possession of an ancient record written upon plates "having the appearance of gold" from which, by miraculous means, he translated what is known as the Book of Mormon. This sacred record, written upon metal plates, was entrusted to the Prophet's care until the work required of him in translating was completed, at which time the record was returned to the custody of the heavenly messenger, the angel Moroni, who had delivered it to him.

This sacred, ancient record was shown only to a small number of persons. The record itself forbade the showing of it to any except a few whom the Lord would choose for the purpose of being witnesses (see 2 Ne. 27:12-13; Ether 5:2-3). The number of official witnesses who saw the plates and who had a firsthand knowledge of their appearance seems to be limited to twelve. [^1] Few others had the privilege of seeing them. [^2]

It seems to be the way of spiritual things that the majority of the people do not see with their eyes but rather are obliged to believe on the testimony of those witnesses who have seen. The essential part of the testimony is that the plates exist and were translated. Details about size, weight, and number are of secondary importance.

Each copy of the Book of Mormon contains the "Testimony of Three Witnesses" and also the "Testimony of Eight Witnesses," which affirm plainly that the witnesses have seen the plates, but both testimonies are notably silent as to precise and detailed information concerning the number, size, and probable weight of the plates. The "Testimony of Eight Witnesses" tells of "hefting" the record, which gives an indication that they are heavy.

Thus there is scant information available about the exact size, weight, or number of the plates. Several of the witnesses commented briefly about these items but with some variation.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, the translator, chief witness, and best-informed person in this dispensation in regard to the plates, shed some light on the subject in a letter written on 1 March 1842 to John Wentworth, editor of the Chicago Democrat: "These records were engraved on plates which had the appearance of gold; each plate was six inches wide and eight inches long and not quite so thick as common tin. They were filled with engravings, in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume as the leaves of a book with three rings running through the whole. The volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed. The characters on the unsealed part were small, and beautifully engraved." [^3]

Although the foregoing statement contains some very descriptive information, it does not say anything about the number of plates, the weight, and how much of the record was sealed.

Information given by some of the early brethren who were associated with the Prophet is enlightening, although somewhat variable. David Whitmer, one of the Three Witnesses, said shortly before his death, while being interviewed by a representative of the Kansas City Journal: "They appeared to be of gold, about six by nine inches in size, about as thick as parchment, a great many in number and bound together like the leaves of a book by massive rings passing through the edges." [^4]

Brother Whitmer's description makes the plates somewhat larger than the Prophet's account, but there is an agreement in substance as to appearance, thickness of each leaf, and the manner by which they were bound together. No mention is made of the weight, but a suggestion is made as to the abundance of the plates.

Martin Harris, another of the Three Witnesses, estimated the plates to be eight by seven inches, each plate being as thick as thick tin, and the volume to be four inches in thickness. [^5] That Brother Harris had a personal, firsthand knowledge of the physical properties of the plates is clear, for he explained: "I know of a surety the work is true; for did I not at one time hold the plates on my knees for an hour and a half, while in conversation with Joseph, when we went to bury them in the woods that the enemy might not obtain them? . . . And as many of the plates as Joseph Smith translated, I handled with my hands, plate after plate." [^6]

No mention was made by either David Whitmer or Martin Harris (two of the Three Witnesses) that a part of the plates was sealed, nor did they make any reference to the weight.

It appears that neither Oliver Cowdery, who was one of the Three Witnesses, nor any of the Eight Witnesses left a record giving the dimensions or a description of the plates.

Orson Pratt, who was not an eyewitness of the plates so far as we know, but who was close to the Prophet and those who were eyewitnesses, wrote this concerning the record: "Each plate was not far from seven by eight inches in width and length, being not quite as thick as common tin. They were filled on both sides with engravings, in Egyptian characters, and bound together in a volume, as the leaves of a book, and fastened at one edge with three rings running through the whole. This volume was something near six inches in thickness, a part of which was sealed." [^7]

Sixteen years later, while speaking in the Tabernacle at Salt Lake City, Elder Pratt is reported to have said that "about two-thirds [of the plates] were sealed up." [^8] He said nothing about the weight or the number of leaves.

It might be argued, with good cause, that since Elder Pratt was not given a special view of the plates, his testimony on the matter should not be equal with the others; but anyone familiar with Elder Pratt's logical and analytical manner and his thoroughness of investigation will not dismiss his statements lightly. It seems likely that he would have asked many if not all of the witnesses as to size and other detailed information before forming his conclusions.

President George Q. Cannon wrote that the plates were eight inches in width and formed a book about six inches in thickness. He said also that about one-third of the volume was sealed but that "the other leaves Joseph turned with his hand." [^9] Nothing was mentioned about length, weight, or number of plates.

The following table summarizes some of the main features of the reports given by the brethren as discussed above.

A Comparison of Various Descriptions of the Gold Plates

NameWidthLengthThickness of volumeWeightSealed partJoseph Smith 6"8" 6" David Whitmer 6"9" n/c n/c n/cMartin Harris7"8" 4" n/c n/cOrson Pratt7"8" 6" n/c 2/3George Q. Cannon 8" n/c 6" n/c 1/3Three Witnesses(Official Testimony)n/c n/c n/c n/c n/cEight Witnesses(Official Testimony)n/c n/c n/c "hefted"n/c*No comment

Inasmuch as we are not sufficiently informed as to the number of leaves, their exact size, or their composition (whether gold or alloy), it is impossible to correctly ascertain the exact weight of the plates. Estimates have been placed from about 125 to less than 50 pounds. [^10]

There is yet another facet to discuss about the description of the plates. It was mentioned previously that Elder Orson Pratt said that "about two-thirds [of the plates] were sealed up, and Joseph was commanded not to break the seal; that part of the record was hid up." [^11] Elder Pratt seemed to imply a larger sealed portion than President Cannon had indicated. However, we do not know the thickness of each leaf of the sealed portion, and it is possible he might have been speaking of the number of plates, rather than of the actual measurement in inches.

In the testimonies of the Three Witnesses and the Eight Witnesses there is no mention that any part was sealed. The foregoing table illustrates that the Prophet Joseph Smith, President Cannon, and Elder Pratt each said the volume was six inches in thickness. They mentioned also that a part was sealed. Brother Whitmer made no mention of the thickness of the volume, nor did he mention a sealed part, whereas Martin Harris gave the thickness of the volume to be four inches (considerably less than that given by the others) but did not mention any sealed portion. Thus, whenever a sealed portion was mentioned, the volume was consistently spoken of as being six inches. If the entire volume (sealed and unsealed) equaled six inches, and if one-third of it was sealed, then the unsealed part would equal the four inches spoken of by Martin Harris. This may account for the different descriptions. The fact that Brothers Harris and Whitmer were eyewitnesses and had handled the plates might suggest that they were describing only the unsealed portion that the Prophet had translated.

Is it possible that the unsealed portion was sometimes detached from the sealed portion during the time Joseph Smith was translating? Such a procedure would make for ease in handling, since the plates were relatively heavy and would be cumbersome. While working with the translation and moving the plates, it would be a convenience to handle only the part to be translated. Since neither Brother Harris nor Brother Whitmer mentioned anything about a sealed portion, it may be that they were describing only the plates that were used in the translation of the Book of Mormon and which did not include the sealed portion.

That the Three Witnesses may have viewed only the unsealed portion of the plates is suggested by a number of factors: first, by their individual expressions already quoted; second, from the report that an angel came and showed them the plates and "turned over the leaves one by one," which would not be the case with the sealed plates; and third, from a voice that spoke to the witnesses at the time saying: "These plates have been revealed by the power of God, and they have been translated by the power of God. The translation of them which you have seen is correct, and I command you to bear record of what you now see and hear." [^12]

Since the sealed plates were not translated by Joseph Smith, the voice, of necessity, was speaking of the unsealed portion (see 2 Ne. 27:7-10; Ether 5:1). The record of these events denotes that the witnesses were seeing precisely the plates that had been translated and that were not sealed.

Notes

From Robert J. Matthews, Who's Who in the Book of Mormon (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976), 67-70.

---
Notas:
[^1] Joseph Smith was chosen and was given sight and power and mercy from God to translate the Book of Mormon (see D&C 1:29; 3:9). Written to Lamanite, Jew, and Gentile He brought Lehi, Ishmael, and their families out of Jerusalem and thus spared them the destruction that soon came upon Jerusalem (see 1 Ne. 1-8). Orson Pratt, 14 Mar. 1875, in N. B. Lundwall, comp., Wonders of the Universe (Salt Lake City: Nels B. Lundwall, 1937), 197.
[^2] The manuscript containing the translation was sacred (see D&C 3:12; 20:6). By the command of the Lord He preserved Lehi's party in the wilderness and on the sea, and he brought them safely to the promised land of the Western Hemisphere. He gave them food, the Liahona, and the comfort of the Holy Ghost (see 1 Ne. 9-17). Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 70-71.
[^3] The Lord calls the Book of Mormon "my work" and declares that it contains the knowledge of the Savior and is directed to the latter-day Nephites and Lamanites because it is a message from their own fathers (see D&C 3:16-18). By revelation and the spirit of prophecy He taught the Nephites the gospel by visions, the ministry of angels, and the Holy Ghost and made promises and eternal covenants with them concerning their own lives and also their posterity (see 1 Ne. 8; 11-14; 2 Ne. 1-3; Alma 9:20-23). Ibid., 176.
[^4] The Book of Mormon is a separate and a second witness, along with the Bible, that Jesus is the Savior (see D&C 3:16). To come forth by miraculous means, through the gift and power of God He eased the heavy burdens of those in bondage (see Mosiah 24:8-15). Ibid., 194.
[^5] The gold plates have been preserved for the very purpose of fulfilling the Lord's promise to ancient prophets that he would bring a knowledge of the Savior to the latter-day descendants of the Nephites and Lamanites from their own fathers (see D&C 3:19-20). To show to the house of Israel what great things the Lord has done for their fathers He freed such groups as Alma and his people from physical captivity (see Mosiah 24:17-25) and also from the bondage of sin in giving them freedom and also remission of sins. As Alma said, God "delivered their souls from hell" and changed their hearts (Alma 5:4-7). In the 1840 and 1852 editions of the Book of Mormon the name Moroni was placed after the second paragraph, suggesting that he was the author of the title page, or at least of that paragraph, but his name has not appeared there in all subsequent printings.
[^6] The record is designed to teach the Lamanites about their fathers and about the promises of the Lord, and bring them to faith, repentance, and salvation through the merits of Christ (see D&C 3:20). That the covenants of the Lord might be known He blessed the prophets in their ministries, sometimes freeing them from prison, providing food and giving them joy and success in their labors, even in affliction (see Alma 14:17-29). Orson Pratt, "Divine Authenticity of the Book of Mormon," published 15 Oct. 1850, Liverpool, England; in Orson Pratt, Orson Pratt's Works on the Doctrines of the Gospel (Salt Lake City: Deseret News Press, 1945), 107.
[^7] Those who will not believe the testimony of Joseph Smith would not believe that the Book of Mormon is from God, even if Joseph Smith showed them the plates and other sacred objects (see D&C 5:7-8). To the convincing of Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting himself to all nations Jesus personally visited the people several times after his resurrection and taught them, healed the sick, and blessed the children. Above all, he proved to them that he was the God of Israel, had been slain for the sins of the world, and had truly risen from the dead with a tangible body (see 3 Ne. 11-28).
[^8] Three witnesses besides Joseph Smith shall testify that they have seen the sacred objects, and also that God declared the truth of it to them by his own voice from heaven (see D&C 5:11-12).
[^9] The Book of Mormon is a record of the "other sheep" spoken of by Jesus in the Bible and contains an account of "marvelous works" that those people did in the name of the Lord (see D&C 10:59-61).
[^10] There will be people who will accept and believe the Book of Mormon when they hear it and will bring to light the true points of doctrine it contains (see D&C 10:62-63).
[^11] The Book of Mormon is the truth and the word of God to the Gentiles, to the Jews, and to the Lamanites to convince them that Jesus is the true Messiah (see D&C 19:26-27).
[^12] The Book of Mormon is a record of a fallen people and contains the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles and to the Jews (see D&C 20:9).
