Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 35

The Law of Restoration as Taught in the Book of Mormon

Book of Mormon prophets tell of an all-encompassing law of restoration as a governing principle of the entire earth and everything in it. Every phase and dimension of this law is included in the mission of Jesus Christ as the Redeemer.

Although each of the standard works of scripture contains expressions relative to the law of restoration, none explains it as well as the Book of Mormon does, which contains some form of the term "restoration" (restore, restored, restoring) at least 55 times in a theological and eschatological sense. Because of its fundamental character, I have labeled it "the law of restoration." Alma calls it "the plan of restoration." Regardless of its name, the idea of restoration has a certain feeling of completeness, wholeness, and justice about it.

Restoration Has Barely Begun

Readers of the scriptures are aware of the phrase "restoration of all things," but perhaps many are content with an interpretation much narrower than the usage given it by the prophets themselves. Peter said that the Second Coming of Jesus Christ would occur during "the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began" (Acts 3:21). A parallel statement with greater clarity is given by the Lord in latter-day revelation concerning the prophet Elias, "to whom I have committed the keys of bringing to pass the restoration of all things spoken by the mouth of all the holy prophets since the world began, concerning the last days" (D&C 27:6). Both passages emphasize that the restoration theme has been known and spoken of from the beginning and pertains particularly to the last days. (See also D&C 77:14; 86:10 for other mention of restoration in the last days.)

Although we now live in the "last days" and much restoration has taken place, in truth, the Restoration has barely begun. Perhaps we have identified the Restoration primarily in terms of priesthood, Church organization, and gospel ordinances as given through the Prophet Joseph Smith. While these were the beginning, and without priesthood none of the other things could occur, the Restoration events yet to take place are more in number and of greater earth-shaking consequence than those that have so far taken place. The Restoration will continue throughout and beyond the Millennium until every soul is resurrected and judged and until all mankind and the earth itself have reached their final status.

While it is true that the Bible touches on the doctrine of restoration, it is from the Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants that we become aware of its scope and that it will eventually penetrate into every aspect of man's existence and of the earth as man's eternal home. After learning the doctrine from latter-day revelation, we can more easily recognize it in the biblical record.

Definition of Restoration

The concept of restoration as a worldwide phenomena seems to be fully understood by the early Book of Mormon prophets and is frequently referred to in their preaching but without introductory explanation. However, because Alma's son Corianton did not understand, Alma explained the nature of it to him, and it is from Alma's words that we have the simplest description of what restoration entails. Since Alma is speaking primarily in the context of the Resurrection and the Judgment (those being the specific areas of his son's questions), he applies the principle of restoration to those two particulars (see Alma 40:20-26). However, it is equally evident from Alma that the plan of restoration has much wider operation.

Among Alma's statements are the following definitions: "I say unto thee, my son, that the plan of restoration is requisite with the justice of God; for it is requisite that all things should be restored to their proper order" (Alma 41:2). And further: "And now behold, is the meaning of the word restoration to take a thing of a natural state and place it in an unnatural state, or to place it in a state opposite to its nature? O, my son, this is not the case" (Alma 41:12-13).

Restoration Is Needed because of the Fall of Adam

It should be noted that restoration is needed because of the Fall of Adam, which changed the nature and condition of the earth and all things on the earth. The prophet Lehi explained that "all things" would have continued in the same state or condition they were in at creation if it had not been for the Fall (see 2 Ne. 2:22). At the time of creation all things were pronounced "very good" (Moses 2:31), but the Fall brought sin, death, and separation from God. Because the Fall is real, and worldwide changes occurred, restoration became necessary and must be as extensive as the Fall.

Resurrection and Judgment Are Restorations

Alma's definition was that all things must be returned to their "proper order." Thus we see its application to the doctrine of resurrection and final judgment:

"Behold, it is requisite and just, according to the power and resurrection of Christ, that the soul of man should be restored to its body, and that every part of the body should be restored to itself.

"And it is requisite with the justice of God that men should be judged according to their works; and if their works were good in this life, and the desires of their hearts were good, that they should also, at the last day, be restored unto that which is good.

"And if their works are evil they shall be restored unto them for evil. Therefore, all things shall be restored to their proper order, every thing to its natural frame—mortality raised to immortality, corruption to incorruption— . . .

"Do not suppose, because it has been spoken concerning restoration, that ye shall be restored from sin to happiness. Behold, I say unto you, wickedness never was happiness. . . .

"The meaning of the word restoration, is to bring back again evil for evil, or carnal for carnal, or devilish for devilish—good for that which is good; righteous for that which is righteous; just for that which is just; merciful for that which is merciful.

"Therefore, my son, see that you are merciful unto your brethren; deal justly, judge righteously, and do good continually; and if ye do all these things then shall ye receive your reward; yea, ye shall have mercy restored unto you again; ye shall have justice restored unto you again; ye shall have a righteous judgment restored unto you again; and ye shall have good rewarded unto you again.

"For that which ye do send out shall return unto you again, and be restored; therefore, the word restoration more fully condemneth the sinner, and justifieth him not at all" (Alma 41:2-4, 10, 13-15).

Returning to the Presence of God

As justice requires that all things be restored and since man was originally in the presence of God before the Fall, the Restoration will bring mankind back into the presence of God after the resurrection, for the final judgment. Alma states: "The atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored into his presence, to be judged according to their works, according to the law and justice" (Alma 42:23).

Amulek taught precisely the same doctrine, that all mankind, both good and bad, would return to the presence of God for judgment after the resurrection. Amulek uses the word restoration where we would usually employ the word resurrection.

"The spirit and the body shall be reunited again in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright recollection of all our guilt.

"Now, this restoration shall come to all, both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of their heads be lost; but every thing shall be restored to its perfect frame" (Alma 11:43-44).

Other evidence that all, even the wicked, shall be restored to the presence of God for judgment after their resurrection is found in 2 Ne. 9:38; Alma 12:15, 24; Hel. 14:15-17; and Morm. 6:21.

As to the influence the law of restoration will have on us as individuals at the day of judgment, see the words of Samuel the Lamanite recorded in Hel. 14:30-31, which are precisely in agreement with Alma's teaching cited above. It is evident that restoration is a more comprehensive word than either resurrection or judgment.

Other Extensions of the Law of Restoration

Restoration of the Earth

The tenth article of faith of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints states that we believe that the "earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." This apparently refers to a return to the earth's condition before the Fall of Adam. Such a "renewal" could include various things, as suggested in the following discussion.

It appears that the earth when created was one land mass and one ocean (see Moses 2:9-10), but the land was later divided into continents and islands, which of course also divided the ocean. In Gen. 10:25 reference is made to a time when the earth (land) was divided, as into continents. Such a concept is given credence by latter-day revelation as recorded in D&C 133:24, which tells of a time yet future when "the earth shall be like as it was in the days before it was divided." This seems to be speaking of land mass, not of people or culture. How long or in what manner such an event would take place I do not profess to know, but the idea is consistent with the law and plan of restoration (see also JST, Rev. 6:14).

It is certain from geological discoveries of the remains of animals and the presence of fossil fuels that land areas now perpetually frozen or extremely arid once supported extensive vegetation and animal life. Such areas also may come under the scope of restoration when the earth is renewed to its original order and when the desert rejoices and blossoms as the rose (see Isa. 35).

The planet earth may even be moved from its present solar relationship to correspond with an earlier relationship in a different planetary and solar configuration. We wish we knew what the Prophet Joseph Smith hinted at when he said, "This earth will be rolled back into the presence of God, and crowned with celestial glory." [^1] Is this an allusion to a return to the "natural order" of the earth before the Fall?

Restoration of Israel

Book of Mormon prophets speak repeatedly about the restoration of Israel not only as a gathering to their original lands but a restoration of former blessings and spiritual power through acceptance of Jesus Christ as their Redeemer. Restoration is a larger term than gathering. Gathering of people to a particular land is part of restoration but not as complete. The Book of Mormon speaks not only of being gathered "home" but of being restored to "the true church and fold of God" (2 Ne. 9:2; see also 1 Ne. 21:6; 2 Ne. 25:17; Morm. 5:14; Isa. 1:26).

A strong indication of Nephi's and Jacob's breadth of understanding of the Redeemer's restorative mission is seen in their love for Isaiah's writings. Nephi said he favored Isaiah's words above others in persuading his (Nephi's) people to believe in their Redeemer (see 1 Ne. 19:23). As examples of Isaiah's words about the Redeemer, Nephi cites Isa. 48-49 and 2-12. While these chapters contain some references to Christ's mortal ministry and Atonement, they do not contain many of the things that most of us today would want to use to teach about Christ. However, these chapters from Isaiah do speak of the restoration of Israel, the destruction of wickedness on the earth, the triumph of righteousness, the millennial reign of the Messiah, and the redemption of the earth—all of which are very much the long-view work of Jesus as the Redeemer. It is clear that Nephi and his brother Jacob saw in Isaiah's writings the work of Jesus in bringing about the restoration of all things. It is only when we, ourselves, do not have the wider view that we fail to see it in Isaiah's words.

Miscellaneous Scriptural Passages

With the law of restoration as our interpretive control, we might with profit consider what is involved in a number of other phrases found in the scriptures. For example, is not the law of restoration employed in the chronological concept that "the first shall be last, and the last first" (Ether 13:12; D&C 29:30-32)? Likewise we read in Ecclesiastes: "The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be" (1:9), and also, "Cast thy bread upon the waters; for thou shalt find it after many days" (11:1).

There is unity and wholeness to the plan of restoration, as suggested in the report of the Savior's teachings to the Nephites. It is said that he "expounded all the scriptures in one" (3 Ne. 23:14) and explained everything unto them "both great and small . . . from the beginning" until the Second Coming and beyond, "even all things that should come upon the face of the earth," including the resurrection and the judgment (3 Ne. 26:1-4). Surely this great exposition of doctrine delivered by the Savior, the Great Restorer, included a detailed explanation of the restoration of all things as a major part of his mission.

Summary

As we have traveled through the scriptures and examined the expressions regarding the plan of God and the return of all things to their natural order, we develop a sense of belonging, of security, of understanding, and of trust in the justice and redeeming power of Jesus Christ. In the end, all things will be made right, and Jesus has the desire and ability to get it done.

Since all things are to be redeemed and made right, as accomplished by the mission of Jesus Christ, and since the whole plan and course of mankind and of the earth was known by God beforehand, we conclude that the plan and concept of restoration was known, discussed, and understood in the premortal councils, for God has known the end ever since the very beginning. In reality, the plan of restoration is the plan of redemption.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 180.
