Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

The Doctrine and Covenants

Chapter 36

The Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants: Historical and Doctrinal Companions

Throughout the forty years I have studied the Joseph Smith Translation, I have not been in a hurry, nor have I felt that I had a message for the Church. It has been a personal interest, and I have not felt a call to set anybody right.

During the years I was studying the manuscript, the effect it might have on others hardly crossed my mind. Few would have wanted the Joseph Smith Translation to draw much attention. But we have wider vision today, and we understand more about the background and the unity of the scriptures. We have made progress in the past decade, not only in the availability of the scriptures but also in our understanding of them. The Joseph Smith Translation is not just a better Bible; it was the channel, or the means, of doctrinal restoration in the infancy of this Church.

The Prophet Joseph Smith Is the Appointed Channel for Revelation of the Word of God

I have spent a large segment of my life in thinking about the Joseph Smith Translation because of my love for the Prophet Joseph Smith. I am not a Bible scholar. I do not know the ancient languages, nor can I read an ancient manuscript. I am very interested in textual criticism and the history of the Bible, and to be able to study the ancient text would be important to me, but I have only the mother tongue of faith, and I consider Joseph Smith's views to be more important and to contain greater fundamental truth than all that the world of secular scholarship can produce. Joseph Smith taught by the spirit of revelation, and by that spirit he translated the Bible. The Lord says, in D&C 5:10, "This generation shall have my word through" Joseph Smith. Therefore, I say we ought not to expect to get it in some other way. Our faith and our hopes for salvation are anchored in the Restoration far more than in any ancient book or manuscript.

Some Personal History

In the summer of 1944, when I was eighteen years of age, I was sitting one evening with my father and mother in our home listening to a radio address by Elder Joseph Fielding Smith on station KSL. He quoted John 1:18, "No man hath seen God at any time." He said that it was a mistranslation, and that this passage was corrected by revelation to Joseph Smith as follows: "No man hath seen God at any time, except he [God] hath borne record of the Son; for except it is through him no man can be saved" (JST, John 1:19). I had never before heard of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, but something forcibly struck me when Elder Smith said that it had been corrected by the Lord in a revelation. [^1] I have never lost the feeling. It awakened in me an intense desire to know more. I did not say anything to my parents about the experience; I just knew that I had been touched inside.

Copies of the Joseph Smith Translation were scarce in my hometown of Evanston, Wyoming. I could find only one—an 1867 first edition, and the book of Revelation had been cut out of that. Few people knew anything about it. Two or three people tried to dissuade me, saying the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints had altered it. They also said that Joseph Smith had not finished it anyway and that the Church did not accept it.

I found no one (even at Brigham Young University) who seemed to sense that the Joseph Smith Translation was mainstream activity of the Prophet resulting in much of the doctrinal restoration in this dispensation. It was regarded only as a sideline of the Prophet's work. I finally obtained a copy of my own from N. B. Lundwall in 1947. From then until 1950 I made a word-for-word comparison of the Joseph Smith Translation with the King James Version. I was fascinated by it, but I knew absolutely nothing about its background.

I was anxious to see the original manuscript that the RLDS church possessed. I also learned that there was a partial copy known as the Bernhisel Manuscript, which was had by our church. But both documents were unavailable for research at that time. Largely through the efforts of Reed C. Durham and the goodness of President Joseph Fielding Smith, the Bernhisel copy became available in about 1965. I tried for fifteen years to see the original manuscript in the RLDS archives; in 1968 they finally let me see it, read it, copy it, and take a few photographs.

No one is completely independent in researching a subject so large and complex, and I am indebted to President William E. Berrett, then the administrator of seminaries and institutes of religion, and to Richard P. Howard, historian of the RLDS church, and to several others, including President Joseph Fielding Smith and Elder Bruce R. McConkie. Just about everyone I have known has helped me in some way.

Multiple Contribution of Original Documents

The main reason I wanted to see the original manuscript was to determine whether the printed editions of the Joseph Smith Translation were published correctly. My interest was entirely in the text of the Bible. I was little interested in who the scribes were, how long it took to write it down, or where or when the work was done. The original manuscript was a great help in determining the accuracy of the printed text, and I am happy to report that my studies led me to the conclusion that the RLDS church has printed the Joseph Smith Translation in very close harmony with the manuscript, although there have been some corrections in spelling and grammar.

The search would have ended at that point had it not been that the manuscript had much more to say in addition to giving the biblical text. It took some time before I realized what else the original manuscript had to offer. To begin with, there were four manuscripts. One document covered chapters 1 through 24 of Genesis. Another manuscript, with a slightly different and enlarged text, started over with Gen. 1 and covered not only the twenty-four chapters but continued on all the way through the entire Old Testament.

There was also a manuscript for Matthew, starting with chapter 1 and going consecutively through chapter 26. Then a second manuscript, with a slightly enlarged text, started over with Matthew, chapter 1, and continued on all the way through the New Testament. These manuscripts were dated in various places. Also, the handwriting changed from time to time as different scribes were employed, and the spelling changed with each scribe.

Even more significant was that it became evident there were initial drafts and there were more polished, more extensive revisions. The manuscripts give us an idea of how the translation was done and of how revelation comes. It was clear that the Prophet Joseph had to struggle, meditate, and ask for light. The translation was not just a process of pouring information from one vessel to another. Nor was it a matter of inserting doctrine already understood. The manuscripts suggest that the Prophet received inspiration line upon line, here a little and there a little. It was a learning experience for him. I could see that understanding of spiritual things is progressive, and it comes as one is able to bear it.

Eventually I noticed that changes in handwriting and the dates on the manuscripts correspond with facts in Church history and sections in the Doctrine and Covenants. Oliver Cowdery, John Whitmer, and Sidney Rigdon move in and out of the manuscripts the same way they move in and out of the pages of Church history. Their lives are interwoven in the fabric and the writing of the Joseph Smith Translation. Richard Howard had already written a little on this subject, but it had more meaning when I could see it firsthand. It gave me a particular thrill to hold in my hands the very pages that the Prophet and others had held in their hands and upon which they had written.

The Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants Are Inseparable in Both Doctrine and History

Many of the pages contain the dates on which the Prophet was translating a particular passage or series of chapters. Historically, such information is useful. It is even more exciting for its doctrinal implications. It became apparent that some of the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants carry the same date as (or one of near proximity to) the date when a chapter in the Bible was translated. Sometimes the subject matter was similar, and often the wording of the Joseph Smith Translation is very close to the wording in the Doctrine and Covenants. This similarity called attention to the fact that the Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants were close together in the daily activity of the Prophet's life. D&C 29, 76, 77, 91, and others are examples of such closeness, where the translation of a Bible passage and a section in the Doctrine and Covenants have the same root.

What adds more to the discovery is that the listed dates show clearly that some doctrines were revealed and recorded in the Joseph Smith Translation before these same doctrines appeared in the Doctrine and Covenants. This is the case with the age of accountability for children (eight years old). We generally look to D&C 68:25-28, dated November 1831, for this information. But the Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 17:11, which was given to Abraham, also mentions that children become accountable at eight years of age. If we knew only the printed page, these would appear simply as similar doctrines, but the dating on the manuscript shows the Joseph Smith Translation passage to have been written at least as early as April, eight months before the date for D&C 68. This fact alone has to influence our view of Church history and our understanding of how the doctrinal restoration occurred; it certainly gives the Joseph Smith Translation greater prominence.

Some have thought that the Prophet simply went through the Bible, making it conform to Mormon doctrine—Mormonizing the Bible, they often call it. But the historical sequence shows this is not so. Translating the Bible was the process by which the revelation of these doctrines was given to Joseph Smith. How much Mormon doctrine was there in 1830 to copy from? Most of it was revealed later. If Elder McConkie had written Mormon Doctrine in 1830, it would have been a very small book.

These examples persuade us that the Joseph Smith Translation is as much at home in a discussion of the Doctrine and Covenants as it would be in a Bible discussion. We are not talking about a few isolated passages but about dozens of sections and verses, dealing with such basic cornerstones of doctrine as the age of accountability, the building of Zion, the patriarchal orders of Enoch and Melchizedek, the degrees of glory, premortal existence, priesthood, marriage, and the second coming of the Savior.

We see by these examples that there is an advantage in working with original sources. There is much to be learned by getting behind the printed page. We would never have been able to see the many relationships between the Joseph Smith Translation and the Doctrine and Covenants without the manuscript of the Joseph Smith Translation. In brief, we have been able to discern that the early sections of the Doctrine and Covenants deal with the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon and that many later sections relate directly to the translation and publication of parts of the Bible.

Becoming Literary Archaeologists

Every revelation that has been received was given at some specific place and time in some specific situation. But the past becomes covered with tradition and blurred with time, very similar to the way vegetation and drifting sands eventually cover rocks and structures. Time passes, leaders pass on, and new personalities come into prominence. As a consequence, we often do not know what lies just below the surface of the ground or behind a printed page, and so there often arises a misunderstanding, or perhaps no understanding at all. To know how it really was, we sometimes have to become literary archaeologists and dig down to original or prepublication sources. Then we see things we had not known, or we see them in a different light than ever before, no matter how many times we have trodden the path—whether it be a path through the field or through the printed pages of a book.

No matter how well a person knows the surface or how many times he has traveled over the ground, he will not know what lies even just under the surface—what form of art or architecture, or what message that past can tell—until he or someone else removes the surface accumulation and examines the facts of an earlier day. It is the same way with the Doctrine and Covenants and the Joseph Smith Translation. Many passages of the Doctrine and Covenants cannot be understood unless one knows the background; and in some cases the background can be discerned only by the manuscripts of the Joseph Smith Translation.

The World Lacks an Adequate Bible Manuscript

The modern problem with the Bible is not a matter of languages; it stems from a lack of an adequate Bible manuscript. There are plenty of scholars at Brigham Young University and at other places who can translate Greek, Hebrew, and Aramaic, but there is not available a complete and accurate manuscript from which to translate. All the known biblical documents are secondary sources. There are no originals. As you can see, working with secondary sources is not as good as working with originals. There is no way that a Bible translator today could ever render the words to read like the originals, or like the plates of brass, or the Book of Mormon, or the Joseph Smith Translation, when it comes to bearing a strong witness of Jesus Christ and the plan of salvation. Those plain and precious doctrines are gone, but the Lord raised up another Prophet, and they are had again by those who believe in the words of Joseph Smith—but not by anyone else. Remember, "this generation shall have my word through" him.

A Doctrinal Restoration Had to Occur

According to 1 Ne. 13:25-29, a corruption of the Bible has taken place. This corruption was a deliberate act with willful intent to deceive, and it occurred before the Bible went forth among the nations, at least by the second century a.d. This altered Bible was weakened doctrinally. In order for this weakening to occur so early and so effectively, it had to be an inside job. Some person or persons close to the center, with access to originals or near-originals, must have altered the text. Subsequent copies were then made from the altered text, and it is these that have made their way among all nations. It may seem strange to us that officials in the New Testament Church would alter the Bible, yet we have had similar behavior even by Church historians in this dispensation. For example, John Whitmer confiscated the entire Church history manuscript, and Martin Harris lost 116 pages of valuable manuscript, which has never yet returned. We should not think that corruptions inside and early were impossible in the New Testament Church; they have occurred within our own.

I do not like to accuse anyone. I do not know who took out those precious parts of the Bible. I know only that the evidence shows the material is gone. It reminds me of a group of people camping in the hills. While they were away from camp, something came and tore down the tent, ate the bacon, and caused considerable havoc. When the campers returned and saw the damage, they said, "A bear has been here." They did not see the bear, but the evidence called for something of that caliber. One thing was certain to them: no chipmunk did all that damage. And so it is here; the evidence calls for certain conclusions.

Because of the removal of the plain and precious doctrines from the Bible record, many people lost their way; and in a couple of centuries the wayward, wandering church staged a Nicene council, which produced a philosophical creed reflecting the apostate condition of that church. Every doctrinal problem and question raised by that council and creed has been answered by the doctrines restored through the Book of Mormon, the Joseph Smith Translation, the Doctrine and Covenants, and the Pearl of Great Price.

One of the great contributions of the Joseph Smith Translation is that it repeatedly clarifies biblical situations. It gives not only history but also statements of purpose and explanation.

The Joseph Smith Translation and the Brass Plates

As you know, Lehi, in 2 Ne. 2, gives a remarkable discourse wherein he tells how Satan came to be the devil in the premortal world. Lehi tells us that Adam and Eve would have had no children if there had been no Fall, and all things would have remained in their original state. Also, he says that the Messiah would come by reason of the Fall. Lehi says he learned all this marvelous doctrine from reading the plates of brass. As you know, absolutely none of these things is contained in the King James Version nor in any other Bible known to the modern world; however, all of these things: (1) Satan's history, (2) Adam's transgression, (3) the fact that man, the animals, and the earth would all have remained in their original state, (4) the fact that there would have been no children without the Fall, and (5) the role of the Messiah are found in the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth chapters of Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis. What is the point? Simply this: it is very clear that the contents of the Joseph Smith Translation, having received the touch of restoration through the hand of the prophet of God, resemble the doctrinal content of the brass plates more fully than do those of any other Bible. This is particularly so in Genesis and Isaiah but is also in other places.

We have not begun to appreciate the value of the Joseph Smith Translation, nor have we used it as a textual source the way we could. We seem to be too timid, perhaps a little too reluctant, maybe even a little embarrassed when we confront the academic world with a Bible based on revelation from God through a prophet and not certified by a manuscript from Babylon.

It Starts with the Joseph Smith Translation

The Joseph Smith Translation is often used to introduce a doctrinal subject that is later enlarged upon in subsequent revelations printed in the Doctrine and Covenants. It is helpful to study all the sources on a given subject because each has some unique offering. It is also advantageous to study the chronological sequence, because then the progress of the information unfolds naturally, and the doctrine is easier to understand, since that is the way it was revealed in the first place.

Consider, for example, the book of Revelation. We start with the King James Version. Then we compare the corrections, clarifications, and additions given in the Joseph Smith Translation. That helps considerably. Then we read D&C 77, which was revealed in connection with the Joseph Smith Translation. This section carries the doctrinal enlargement even further. Last, we read D&C 88, which is still a further extension.

Another example of this type of relationship concerns the degrees of glory. We begin first with the Bible and the Book of Mormon, both of which make it unmistakably clear that all persons will be resurrected with a physical body (see 1 Cor. 15:21-22; Alma 40:21, 23), never to die again. The Prophet was translating John 5:29 when he received the great vision of the three degrees of glory, D&C 76. Later he received D&C 88. Each revelation in its sequence is built upon the knowledge given earlier; each has given some new and additional concept not contained in the earlier. Can you see? Revelation is received line upon line—here a little and there a little. As far as a considerable portion of the Doctrine and Covenants is concerned, many of these revelations started with the Joseph Smith Translation.

Much of the background of the Joseph Smith Translation has already been adequately discussed in various books that have been published, and in the Ensign, so it does not seem necessary to recount those preliminary historical details in this discussion. It seems more appropriate to talk about relationships, applications, causes, and consequences—what all this means to you and me and to our families. I have tried to show that the translation of the Bible was a major, mainstream activity in the prophetic life of Joseph Smith, and that the Joseph Smith Translation is a major document, one not to be ignored, not only for biblical study, but also for the study of the Doctrine and Covenants, Pearl of Great Price, and LDS Church history. If I have not made that point clear at this stage, then I do not think anything else I could say will do it.

Why Has There Been Limited Use of the Joseph Smith Translation in the Church?

People often ask, "If the Joseph Smith Translation is as important as you say it is, why haven't we been using it in the Church all these years?" There are probably several reasons, but at least one is that maybe we weren't ready. For example, we have not used the Book of Mormon as we should have. We are getting better at it, but it was not until 1936 that there were even formal courses in Book of Mormon at Brigham Young University, and it was not until 1962 that it was a required subject. In like manner, I think neither we nor the world were ready to take on the consequences of having a Bible that is so far ahead of other Bibles and so far in advance of the scholarly world. We have used portions of it, such as the book of Moses and the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew in the Pearl of Great Price, and now we have much more of it in the footnotes and aids in the LDS edition of the Bible. Also, the fact that the RLDS church has possession of the manuscripts and has copyrighted the printed editions has been a limiting factor. Until recently we had no access to these manuscripts to corroborate the text.

How Did the Notion Arise That the RLDS Church Altered the Joseph Smith Translation?

A second question that has often arisen is "Did the RLDS church alter the Joseph Smith Translation in their printing of it?" This has been a very common minunderstanding and an oft-repeated accusation.

I think I can explain how that mistaken notion got started, and when we work our way through it we need no longer be hampered by it. You remember that the manuscripts of the Joseph Smith Translation consist of preliminary drafts and later drafts. These represent different stages of the revision. Earlier manuscripts have fewer revisions than the later ones. Earlier manuscripts naturally do not reflect the later corrections.

In the early days of the Church, excerpts from the Joseph Smith Translation were published in the Evening and Morning Star and the Times and Seasons, and portions were used in the Lectures on Faith. Also, short excerpts were copied for personal use by various individuals, such as John Whitmer, Edward Partridge, Newell K. Whitney, and others. These were all done using early, preliminary drafts as the source. After Joseph Smith was killed, the entire manuscript was retained by Sister Emma Smith, and eventually it was given to the RLDS church in 1866. It was not available to the LDS church in Utah.

In 1851, when the Moses and Matthew material in the Pearl of Great Price was first published by Elder Franklin D. Richards in Liverpool, England, the source of the documents was the early printings from the Church newspapers. These, in turn, were based on the original, preliminary documents representing the early stages of the translation. When the RLDS church printed the Joseph Smith Translation in 1867, it used the later manuscripts containing the final revisions and corrections by the Prophet Joseph Smith. Hence, when Latter-day Saints, using the Evening and Morning Star, their private copies, and the Pearl of Great Price as their standard, compared their text with the RLDS printed text, they naturally concluded that the RLDS church had made many alterations. I think that the mistaken notion came about because of a lack of understanding about the nature and condition of the original manuscripts. Had the Bernhisel copy been more widely known, it could have been of service because, incomplete and scant as it is, it yet reflects the later text and thus certifies the progressive nature of the manuscripts.

It would be well if we could free ourselves of the idea that the RLDS church changed the text. We could then put our energies into studying the material, being thereby lifted spiritually. I should add that since their original printings, the Pearl of Great Price and the Lectures on Faith have been updated. They now reflect the later revision and agree with the Joseph Smith Translation. This was done by Elder Orson Pratt in 1878.

Testimony

I have an assurance that Joseph Smith is a prophet, that he restored the true gospel of Jesus Christ, and that he restored lost doctrines and lost scripture by revelation. We are engaged in the building of Zion on the earth today under the direction of living prophets and Apostles, who are inspired by the Holy Ghost. The Bible and the latter-day scriptures, including the Joseph Smith Translation, are the voice of God to the world in our day, and we grow in spirituality when we become acquainted with them and study them. Jesus is our only Savior. Joseph Smith is his prophet. The Brethren today are his true successors. We are building Zion today. The work of God is done by revelation. What I have written is true.

Notes

FromRobert L. Millet and Larry E. Dahl, eds., Insights into the Doctrine and Covenants: The Capstone of Our Religion (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1989), 63-79.

---
Notas:
[^1] God is the Author and the Giver of the law, not just a user of it. A discussion of this is found in Robert J. Woodford, "The Historical Development of the Doctrine and Covenants" (Ph.D. dissertation, Brigham Young University, 1974), 1127-28.
