Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 37

The Olive Leaf: D&C 88

Background to the Revelation

As noted in the heading of the 1981 edition of the Doctrine and Covenants, the content of D&C 88 was received in portions on at least three different dates. Verses 1-126 were received on 27 and 28 December 1832 (how much on the first day is not known), and verses 127-37 were received on 3 January 1833. [^1] The date for verses 138-41 is not known.

Those present on at least the first two dates were Joseph Smith Sr., Sidney Rigdon, Orson Hyde, Joseph Smith Jr., Hyrum Smith, Samuel H. Smith, Newel K. Whitney, Frederick G. Williams, Ezra Thayer, and John Murdock. Brother Williams served as scribe.

This revelation (or collection of revelations) came only two days after the vivid communication now identified as Doctrine and Covenants section 87, which deals with the wars and destructions about to come upon the earth and which will eventually lead to a "full end of all nations" (D&C 87:6; see also 130:12-17). After the stern warnings and declarations found in the revelation on war, it is interesting that the Prophet identified this revelation as "the olive leaf . . . plucked from the Tree of Paradise, the Lord's message of Peace to us." This document, which has a strong doctrinal content, contains some of the most marvelous instructions we have on record and is calculated not only to inform but also to inspire every person who carefully examines it. To study it is a mind-stretching experience. The language is simple and direct, but the meaning has such depth that a mortal cannot grasp its entirety.

Every reader will notice at the outset that the subject matter of D&C 88 changes frequently. This increases the difficulty of discussion in a written treatment of the scripture, but we are greatly assisted by the voluminous footnotes and cross-references placed in the edition of the Doctrine and Covenants published in 1981. By following these study aids, we can facilitate our understanding and will need a minimum of other written materials. Moreover, as one's familiarity and understanding increases, he will sense that the revelation flows naturally from one doctrinal concept to another and that the various subjects are vitally related to each other. This revelation, in its many topics, holds out promises and encouragement by giving a glimpse of what the purposes of God are and what our own future can be.

We will, in the pages that follow, present some of the more significant features of D&C 88 and endeavor to show relationships to the larger doctrinal and historical setting of the Church in this dispensation. Since not every verse can be dealt with in detail, attention will be given to concepts that seem necessary to enable us to grasp, at least to some degree, the depth and sublimity of the revelation. The format is a commentary, intended to be read in connection with the scriptural text. Let it be remembered, moreover, that these are the personal opinions of the writer and not necessarily the official position of the Church.

Significant Doctrinal Contributions

Lord of Sabaoth (v. 2)

The term "Lord of Sabaoth" is also found in the New Testament (Rom. 9:29; James 5:4) and is usually identified as "Lord of Hosts," that is, "Lord of Armies," or as "Ruler over all." The term "Lord of Hosts" (Yahweh Saba'oth) is very common in the Old Testament. The Hebrew word saba'oth means "hosts" or "armies." The word Sabaoth does not appear in the Book of Mormon or the Pearl of Great Price, although "Lord of Hosts" appears in a number of places in both of these works. The title "Lord of Sabaoth" occurs in D&C 87:7; 88:2; 95:7; and 98:2, and it has a more extensive meaning than those unfamiliar with the Doctrine and Covenants give to it, with a unique declaration that the Lord of Sabaoth "is by interpretation, the creator of the first day, the beginning and the end" (D&C 95:7). Such a definition far exceeds the concept of just being Lord of many, because it places a time factor of being Lord at the beginning and even being the cause of or initiator of the "first day." This special primacy of Jesus is consistent with other concepts in sec-tion 88 that speak of Christ as the creator and the sustainer of the universe in an ultimate and infinite manner. This enlarged definition of Sabaoth enhances its use in 88:2 and is more descriptive than could be obtained from any source outside of the Doctrine and Covenants.

The Comforter or Promise of Eternal Life (vv. 3-4)

The Comforter here spoken of is identified as the Holy Spirit of Promise and is thus the Holy Ghost. He is the "first Comforter." The second Comforter, as explained by the Prophet Joseph Smith, is the Lord Jesus Christ, and that phrase has reference to a personal visit. [^2] The wording "another Comforter" has led some to wonder if this passage in 88:3-4 has reference to the Second Comforter and not to the Holy Ghost. However, the personage spoken of is clearly the Holy Spirit of Promise, and "the Holy Spirit of Promise is not the Second Comforter." [^3]

Friends (v. 3)

The close relationship of the Lord to his faithful servants is shown in his greeting them as friends. A servant carries out orders as he is commanded. A friend, however, is one with whom the Lord confides his purposes and plans. This subject is touched upon again in D&C 93:45-46 and is more fully explained in John 15:13-15: "Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you." The knowledge about to be entrusted to the Saints in this revelation is characteristic of that which would be shared by the Master with his faithful friends.

Church of the Firstborn (v. 5)

This term occurs in the New Testament (Heb. 12:23) and also in several places in the Doctrine and Covenants (76:54, 67, 71, 94; 77:11; 78:21; 93:22; 107:19). It has reference to those who inherit the fulness of salvation and exaltation. They belong not only to the Church of Jesus Christ (who himself is the Firstborn), but they constitute a church, the membership of which consists only of those who are exalted and thus have the inheritance of the firstborn. They are joint heirs with Jesus in all that the Father has and are thus the Church consisting of the firstborn. This is what the gospel does for those who obey it fully; it causes them to be born again and gives them an adoption in the eternal patriarchal family so that they have an inheritance as the firstborn even though they are younger in actual chronology(see also Gal. 3:26-27).

The Light of Christ (vv. 6-13)

In some manner that we do not fully understand, these verses state that the light of Christ is in the sun, moon, stars, and in the earth also, and this light gives life to all things and is the law by which all things are governed. This light shines and is also called the "light of truth" (v. 6) and "is the same light that quickeneth your understandings" (v. 11).

Elder Orson Pratt commented on these verses as follows:

"Who is there in this congregation, or upon the face of the earth, that can tell how that light operates in quickening the understandings of men? . . . Do you know how that is done? I do not; yet this is what God has revealed. He is the light that is in all things. Do you or I comprehend how that light is connected with all things? No. These are lessons which we have got to learn in the future, when we ascend in that scale of knowledge and intelligence now possessed by celestial beings. . . . We are told in this revelation that the light that quickens the understandings of the children of men and that lighteth all things is one and the same and that it is also the life of all things. What are we to understand by this? Have we life? Yes, we certainly have. Where did we obtain this life? When was it created or made? There is a revelation upon this subject which says that intelligence, or the light of truth, was not created, neither indeed can be [D&C 93:29]. Is it then eternal? Yes. Then this light that shines is eternal in its nature is it? Yes, because it is the same light that gives light to all things."4

The Redemption of the Soul (vv. 14-17)

The technical definition is that a "soul" consists of a spirit and a physical body. This is helpful in clarifying other passages of scripture dealing with the Creation, such as Moses 3:7-9 and Abr. 5:7. The scriptures are not always consistent with the use of the word soul, and sometimes it is used to mean only the spirit (Alma 40:21). The emphasis in the context of 88:14-17, however, is upon the resurrection and redemption of the soul along with the resurrection and redemption of the earth as a home on which glorified souls will live—and all this by the power of Jesus Christ.

Purpose and Destiny of the Earth (vv. 17-20, 25-27)

The revelations of God frequently talk about the earth on which we live. In Abr. 3:24-25 we are told that one purpose for the earth is to provide a place where man may dwell and be proved—a probationary place. D&C 88 deals with yet another factor, the fact that the eternal destiny of the earth is to be a celestial world, "sanctified from all unrighteousness," even worthy of the presence of God the Father (v. 18). Those who live on this earth who are meek and are redeemed and sanctified shall live on and possess this earth forever and ever in a resurrected state—resurrected bodies on a resurrected earth. For this intent the earth was made, and will die, and will be quickened.

The Earth Filleth the Measure of Its Creation (vv. 19, 25)

This phrase appears twice in the revelation (vv. 19, 25). A similar phrase is used in D&C 49:16-17 with the explanation that to answer the purpose of its creation the earth must be filled with man (see 1 Ne. 17:36). These references (combined with Abr. 3:24-25) give the clear scriptural statement that there is divine purpose both to man and to the earth:

Â In their creation

Â In their present continuance

Â In their eternal destiny

The revelation also reads as though the earth were intelligent. For example: "Verily I say unto you, the earth abideth the law of a celestial kingdom . . . and transgresseth not the law" (v. 25). Furthermore, in Moses 7:48-49 the earth is represented as speaking and experiencing pain because of the wickedness of mankind upon its surface. Many regard these as figurative expressions, but there may be something more literal involved (an idea we will consider further in connection with vv. 34-46).

Resurrection and Glory According to the Law Which Is Obeyed (vv. 21-24, 28-33)

These verses explain that every soul will be resurrected, some to glory and some to no glory, depending upon the law each person chose to obey. The law of Christ—the gospel—leads to a fulness of celestial glory. Any deviation leads to less. In these passages, "quickened" has reference to resurrection, and this quickening comes to all. Verses 24, 32, and 33 clearly indicate that the class of persons known as sons of perdition shall be "quickened"—that is, they will be resurrected in their physical body—but not to a place of glory, for they failed to receive the only gift (the atonement of Christ) that could have redeemed them. This is a clarification of D&C 76:38-39, which some have misinterpreted to mean that the sons of perdition would not receive the resurrection of the body. [^4]

All Kingdoms Are Governed by Law (vv. 34-45)

A key sentence in this passage states that God "hath given a law unto all things, by which they move in their times and seasons; and their courses are fixed, even the courses of the heavens and the earth . . . and all the planets" (vv. 42-43). At least two basic concepts are emphasized here:

These are both fundamental to the existence of the Lord's kingdoms. Only a limited discussion of these matters is presented here. [^5]

As to the "obedience" of the planets and especially of the earth, the question arises whether it is forced obedience or if there is agency and intelligence in nature (other than in man). Elder Orson Pratt felt there was intelligent choice:

"There does not seem to be any agency on the part of these materials [inanimate things], so far as we naturally comprehend it; at least, if there is an agency, it seems to be very obedient instead of disobedient. . . . at least [we] do not know of any disobedience. . . . There are some sayings in this same revelation, which seem to indicate that there is a degree of intelligence even in these materials [referring to the earth as in v. 25]. . . . Some . . . might say, that the earth is obliged to follow this course. I do not know about this, I am not so sure. I think if we could see a little further, we would understand that, connected with the materials of the earth is a living principle . . . that acts according to certain laws, intelligently, not blindly; and that our earth, in performing its course . . . does so according to law, as much as we do when we go forth and are buried in the waters of baptism." [^6]

Man Shall Eventually Comprehend Even God (vv. 47-50, 66-69)

There are some wonderfully descriptive concepts about God in these verses, such as majesty, power, light, truth, Spirit, wilderness, and the unveiling of his face to man. Concerning our relationship to God, we are told in these verses that as we witness the pattern and order of the cosmos, we have already seen him moving in his majesty and power; that eventually righteous men shall comprehend God by "being quickened in him and by him" (v. 49); and that God sustains man by his (God's) light. It is also stated that God's voice is Spirit and that mortal man hears it as a voice in the wilderness—"in the wilderness, because you cannot see him" (v. 66). The Lord continues the instruction by saying that if we have an eye single to his glory, our whole bodies shall be filled with light, and by that means we shall be able to see God and also be able to comprehend all things. These verses are a continuation of the revelation on light (given in vv. 6-13 already discussed), and they also add to an earlier exposition about light given in D&C 50:23-30. This is such an important subject that yet a further revelation about light is to be found in D&C 93:26-32. The frequency of the instruction about light suggests that it is important for us to know about it, that the Lord wants us to know, and that it is a subject difficult for us to understand in our mortal state.

These passages speak of man seeing the face of God and even comprehending him (which means understanding him), and of man himself knowing all things. Such accomplishments are not by intellectual learning or by research alone, great as these are as aids to arriving at the truth. A careful reading of the above passages shows clearly that man obtains great spiritual heights and privileges only by having an eye single to the glory of God, obeying the commandments, hearing the voice of the Spirit, and being "quickened" by the Lord. This is not secular but spiritual. To obtain these blessings, man must lift his thoughts from nature (the things that are created) up to nature's Author (the Creator). This is the special role of revealed religion and the purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ, as contrasted with the pursuit of other kinds of truth. Secular learning is an aid but is separate and distinct from the kind of learning that leads mankind to a full knowledge and acquaintance with God. A study of nature (the earth and all things in the earth or connected with the earth) and the creations beyond the sphere of this earth (that is, a study of the physical things that God has created)—astronomy—is an honorable and necessary pursuit; but to realize his potential, man must do more than that; he must also comprehend even God. The things of God are such that they can be learned only by revelation; therefore, a study of the revelations that make known the character of God and what he requires of man are absolutely essential for salvation (see Mosiah 4:9; Job 11:7). Man will not comprehend God unless he becomes like him, and this is not an easy accomplishment and cannot be obtained outside of the gospel of Jesus Christ. As the Prophet Joseph Smith explained:

"A fanciful and flowery and heated imagination beware of; because the things of God are of deep import; and time, and experience, and careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out. Thy mind, O man! if thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation, must stretch as high as the utmost heavens, and search into and contemplate the darkest abyss, and the broad expanse of eternity—thou must commune with God. How much more dignified and noble are the thoughts of God, than the vain imaginations of the human heart!" [^7]

And again from the Prophet:

"Let us here observe, that after any portion of the human family are made acquainted with the important fact that there is a God, who has created and does uphold all things, the extent of their knowledge respecting his character and glory will depend upon their diligence and faithfulness in seeking after him, until, like Enoch, the brother of Jared, and Moses, they shall obtain faith in God, and power with him to behold him face to face." [^8]

And yet again from the Prophet:

"We consider that God has created man with a mind capable of instruction, and a faculty which may be enlarged in proportion to the heed and diligence given to the light communicated from heaven to the intellect; and that the nearer man approaches perfection, the clearer are his views, and the greater his enjoyments, till he has overcome the evils of his life and lost every desire for sin; and like the ancients, arrives at that point of faith where he is wrapped in the power and glory of his Maker and is caught up to dwell with Him. But we consider that this is a station to which no man ever arrived in a moment: he must have been instructed in the government and laws of that kingdom by proper degrees, until his mind is capable in some measure of comprehending the propriety, justice, equality, and consistency of the same." [^9]

Perhaps two further points should be discussed relative to verse 66. The Lord here states that his voice is Spirit and that his Spirit is truth. The revelation says that man hears the voice of the Lord by hearing the Spirit. This is similar to D&C 18:34-36, in which the Lord says that those who have felt and heard his Spirit "can testify that you have heard my voice, and know my words" (18:36). This is an informative definition of what it means to hear the voice of the Lord.

The other point is occasioned by the Lord stating that he is a voice in the wilderness—in the wilderness because we cannot see him (v. 66). These words are followed two verses later by the explanation that if one sanctifies himself so that his mind becomes single to God, the day will come when he will see God. Note the contrast between mortal man being in the wilderness at first but growing in light until he sees God. That is, when the Lord unveils his face to a friend, that person is in the wilderness no longer. What beautiful imagery!

A Parable about the Inhabitants of Other Worlds (vv. 51-65)

After declaring the existence, harmony, and relationship of the various bodies that constitute the heavenly machinery, including the sun, moon, stars, and planets, the Lord asked: "Unto what shall I liken these kingdoms, that ye may understand? Behold, all these are kingdoms" (vv. 46-47). In answer to his own question the Lord gives a parable of a man sending his servants into the field and visiting each of them in turn. He would withdraw from one to visit another. Each servant saw his Lord's countenance and was made glad—"every man in his hour, and in his time, and in his season. . . . Every man in his own order" (vv. 51-60). "Therefore," said the Lord, "unto this parable I will liken all these kingdoms [the worlds he has created], and the inhabitants thereof—every kingdom in its hour, and in its time, and in its season, even according to the decree which God hath made" (v. 61).

This parable is one of the plainest assertions in the scriptures that there are inhabitants on other worlds and that Jesus Christ is their Savior and Lord, visiting each in its time (see D&C 76:23-24). [^10]

The Solemn Assembly, and a Great and Last Promise (vv. 69-76)

The Lord instructed the Prophet to call a solemn assembly of the "first laborers in this last kingdom." This was to be held in Kirtland and was to include a spiritual manifestation to those who were worthy. Much needed to be done in anticipation. They were to prepare their hearts and minds, rid themselves of idle thoughts and of excess laughter. Those expecting to be invited to attend were to organize themselves and sanctify their lives, purify their hearts and cleanse their hands and feet, in order that they would be "clean from the blood of this wicked generation" (vv. 69, 74-75).

The instruction to hold a solemn assembly comes immediately following the promise that the day will come when the faithful will see the face of the Lord, and thus it is clear these two circumstances are related. That the Lord would show himself to his servants and give them the transcendent joy that accompanies a personal visit from their Savior is called "the great and last promise" (vv. 69, 75), and the Lord said he would fulfill it if his people would prepare themselves.

The phrase "great and last promise" attracts our attention, and we wish the revelation provided a direct definition of how the word last is used in this instance. Certainly the meaning is not that this was the final (or chronologically last) promise he would make to his servants. The meaning therefore seems to be that this was the ultimate promise—that is, that when they were ready, they would see his face and stand in his presence. The feeling is also contained in the passage that this was the last reminder until they had accomplished the preparation needed to obtain the promise the Lord had given them.

A few days after receiving D&C 88, the Prophet Joseph Smith sent a copy of the revelation to the Brethren in Missouri and told them of the anticipated visit of the Savior in the forthcoming assembly. Part of his letter, dated 14 January 1833, reads:

"You will see that the Lord commanded us, in Kirtland, to build a house of God, and establish a school for the Prophets, this is the word of the Lord to us, and we must, yea, the Lord helping us, we will obey: as on conditions of our obedience He has promised us great things; yea, even a visit from the heavens to honor us with His own presence. We greatly fear before the Lord lest we should fail of this great honor, which our Master proposes to confer on us; we are seeking for humility and great faith lest we be ashamed in His presence." [^11]

Subsequently the Prophet gave repeated instruction to the Brethren about the preparation they must make to be ready for the assembly, which would not be held for some years in the future. We note one such instance in the following letter, dated 12 November 1835:

"We must have all things prepared, and call our solemn assembly as the Lord has commanded us. . . . The endowment you are so anxious about, you cannot comprehend now . . . but strive to be prepared in your hearts. . . . when we meet in the solemn assembly . . . we must be clean every whit. . . . If we are faithful . . . I will venture to prophesy that we will get a blessing that will be worth remembering, if we should live as long as John the Revelator; our blessings will be such as we have not realized before, nor received in this generation. . . .

"All who are prepared, and are sufficiently pure to abide the presence of the Savior will see him in the solemn assembly." [^12]

The assembly was not held until the temple was completed. Finally on 30 March 1836, three days after the temple was dedicated, the meeting was convened. It lasted more than a day and a night. The Prophet referred to the spiritual experiences as "a day of Pentecost" and said that "speaking in tongues was manifest, the Savior made his appearance to some, and angels ministered to others." [^13]

The term "solemn assembly" is mentioned several times in the Old Testament, one notable occurrence being just after the dedication of the temple by King Solomon (2 Chr. 7:9). Other occurrences had to do with special events and fast days in the history of Israel.

An Informed Ministry, Knowledge by Study and by Faith (vv. 77-86, 117-18)

In order that the servants of the Lord might effectively carry the message of the Restoration to the inhabitants of the earth, the Lord specified that they should study and become acquainted with many branches of knowledge in addition to the doctrines of the kingdom (vv. 77-80). They were to "seek learning, even by study and also by faith" (v. 118). What it means to seek learning "by study" we already know something about, but how to seek learning "by faith" requires even more experience and serious contemplation. Whatever else is required in order for one to seek learning by faith, at least two factors have to be recognized. First, the individual seeking the learning must have an eye single to the glory of God; his motives cannot be selfish. Second, he has to trust the revealed word of God as being true. If he wants to gain spiritual knowledge for himself, he has to believe that what the Lord has already revealed in the scriptures is correct, especially the latter-day scriptures. He then proceeds to study, using the scriptures as the standard by which to measure and interpret whatever knowledge he may gain in the other branches of learning. This would seem to be true in all subject matter areas but especially in the study of fields closely related to human behavior and potential.

Although all truth is valuable, some areas are more critical for preparing the elders for their ministry to the nations of the earth and also for their own salvation and spiritual welfare. President Brigham Young spoke of a "perfect celestial science," which he defined as the study of all truth and useful information gained through books, experience, and revelation. He emphasized, however, the single importance of theology:

"Do the Elders of Israel understand all that the Lord requires of them? They do not. . . . They can learn from themselves—from the world—from the government of heaven—from the management, government, control, doctrines, and laws of eternity, which will yet be exhibited before us. The Lord has established the world, with its varied productions, for the education of his children. . . .

" . . . There are a great many branches of education: some go to college to learn languages, some to study law, some to study physic, and some to study astronomy, and various other branches of science. We want every branch of science taught in this place that is taught in the world. But our favourite study is that branch which particularly belongs to the Elders of Israel—namely, theology. Every Elder should become a profound theologian—should understand this branch better than all the world. There is no Elder who has the power of God upon him but understands more of the principles of theology than all the world put together." [^14]

The type of individuals which the Lord requires for his ministry are those persons whose garments are clean from the blood of this generation. Those not yet clean were to wait for another time to be called. Those who were called were to labor diligently to warn the people of the judgments to come. The brethren were told in the revelation that not everyone will accept the message, and that one aspect of their teaching was to issue a warning voice so as to leave the world "without excuse"; in this way "their sins are upon their own heads" (vv. 81-82). The number of converts one makes is not the measure of success of the mission. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained:

"It is not the multitude of preachers that is to bring about the glorious millennium! but it is those who are 'called, and chosen, and faithful.' . . . Remember that your business is to preach the Gospel in all humility and meekness, and warn sinners to repent and come to Christ. . . . If you do your duty, it will be just as well with you, as though all men embraced the Gospel." [^15]

Signs, Earthly Commotions, and Angels Prepare the Way for the Second Coming (vv. 87-116)

This large segment of D&C 88 bears a striking similarity to chapters 7-22 in the book of Revelation. It is a prophecy of destruction and calamity but also a message of hope. It is, as with all revealed scripture, an assurance that in the end righteousness will triumph over evil, Christ over the devil, and the Saints over their oppressors. Ultimate victory will come through the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Prophet had been involved for many months with making an initial draft of an inspired translation of the New Testament, concluding with the book of Revelation in March 1832. In the process of making the translation, many important things were revealed to him about the gospel and in this case about future events to take place on the earth (see D&C 45:60-62). The history of the earth, the ministry of seven angels who play a prominent part in the final judgment scenes, and the opening of the seven seals are significant aspects of the Revelation of John. These were reiterated and partially explained in D&C 77 as a consequence of the translation and were further enlarged upon in these verses from D&C 88. Thus we regard this part of D&C 88 as a further clarification and explanation of the Revelation of John. These are eschatological items—the winding-up events to take place on the earth before it is prepared for the celestial glory. All nations must hear the proclamation of the gospel and be informed of the means of redemption. The earth must die and wickedness be cleansed from off its face. There will be a resurrection of all mankind and a final judgment. Through faith in Jesus the Saints will have gained the victory over sin and death and will be crowned with eternal glory (vv. 106-7). The calamities and convulsive quaking of the earth, along with the wars and the pestilences spoken of in these verses, are the "details" involved in the larger concept of the earth being prepared for its eternal celestial destiny.

Before these final things occur, however, the servants of God must prepare themselves for their mission to the world. Therefore, the Lord again took up the subject of the temple and the school, because without these, the missionaries could not be prepared for their ministry. Without the servants of God bearing testimony, the honest in heart would not be gathered and the unrepentant would not be warned and left without excuse.

A House of Learning, a House of God (vv. 117-37)

In the remaining verses of the revelation, the Lord outlined the procedure for the School of the Prophets and the establishment of a house—a temple—for the school and other sacred purposes. The house is referred to as a place of prayer, fasting, faith, learning, glory, and order, which is therefore "a house of God" (v. 119).

One of the most apparent factors of this part of the revelation is that knowledge, wisdom, books, learning, faith, prayer, glory, and fasting are all closely associated. Learning and wisdom are not solely intellectual pursuits but are linked with faith, prayer, and fasting. The School of the Prophets thus presents the highest and the best ideal in education. It is a symbol of inspired learning and shows that true education cannot be separated from a spiritual and divine purpose.

In order for mortal men and women to be able to learn essential truths, there has to be a certain mind-set and spiritual preparation. This revelation states that intellectual attainment is inseparably connected with both physical and spiritual characteristics. Thus the instructions are given that those who were to participate in the school were also to cease from lightmindedness, loud laughter, pride, lustful desires, covetousness, idleness, uncleanness, fault finding, and excessive sleep (vv. 122-24). In addition, they were to practice diligence, study, faith, prayer, love for one another, and charity; and they were to retire to bed early and arise early (vv. 118, 123, 125-26).

The School of the Prophets called for a mix of hard intellectual effort and inspiration from the Holy Ghost, and characterized a very particular kind of educational process. Learning was to be assisted by the light of the gospel and the light of inspiration. The role the Holy Ghost plays in enabling one to learn was explained dramatically by Elder Orson Pratt:

"What does [the Holy Ghost] do for the education of men? Far more than our academies do. Our children have, by hard study, year after year, to acquire their learning in these human institutions; hard thinking is necessary, reasoning, gaining little by little, and it frequently requires many years of close application to become what is termed a learned man—a man that understands the sciences, that has worked his way through the various departments of mathematics, and perhaps geology, and mineralogy, and all the sciences, such as are usually taught in universities. But the man filled with the Holy Ghost has got the advantage of students who graduate at our universities. Why? Because he can learn more in ten minutes, in regard to many things, than another, not so favored, can in all his life. Indeed, he can learn some things by the operations of the Holy Ghost, which no natural man or woman could learn, however gifted they might be. You may inquire where they could learn these things? I answer, by the revelations of the Holy Ghost, which brings to light many things that are past, and shows things that are in the future. The Lord . . . opens the past and future to the minds of men, just as Jesus promised his disciples, when he was about to leave them. 'Howbeit when he, the Spirit of Truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth; and he will show you things to come' (John 16:13)." [^16]

With verse 126 the original revelation is concluded. The portion from verse 127 onward was added on 3 January 1833, and one notices a change in the literary style in the second part. It is equally inspired and informative but seems less poetic and more prosaic.

The order of the school in the house of God is presented, showing proper greetings of the Brethren. The president of the school is to enter the room first and hold a place of honor. With uplifted hands, the president shall greet the members in the name of the Lord in token of the everlasting covenant (vv. 127-37).

The School of the Prophets first met in an upstairs room of the Gilbert and Whitney store in Kirtland. Later it met in a building near the temple, and finally in an upstairs room of the temple (see D&C 95:17). A similar school was held in Missouri for a short time (see D&C 97:3-6). [^17]

It was while the school was meeting in the store that a question arose about the use of alcohol and tobacco in the school. On 27 February 1833, at the Prophet's inquiry, he received the "Word of Wisdom," which is now known as D&C 89. This section (and D&C 88) both show that there is a connection between physical things and intellectual and spiritual attainment. One of the promises for obedience to the principles of the Word of Wisdom is to "find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures" (D&C 89:19). This information could well have been included in the instruction about the School of the Prophets in D&C 88, because it is of the same general nature. The guidelines given in D&C 88 about the school, especially concerning sleep, could be part of the Word of Wisdom. From this instance, as with many others, we can see that revelations come in a progressive manner, as they are needed and asked for, and as the people are able to bear them, line upon line, here and there a little.

As noted, the School of the Prophets was to include only those who were totally dedicated to the Lord and who were clean from sin. In June 1833, the Lord rebuked the Brethren because "contentions arose in the school," which the Lord said was "a very grievous sin" (D&C 95:10). It was also in the School of the Prophets that the seven excellent lessons known as the "Lectures on Faith" were taught. [^18]

The schools were eventually discontinued in Kirtland and in Missouri and revived again in the West under the direction of the First Presidency. The School of the Prophets still exists today but is limited to the First Presidency and the Quorum of the Twelve. It may formally be expanded at some future time to include others, in preparation for their ministry to the nations of the earth.

The Washing of Feet (vv. 138-41)

Membership in the School of the Prophets was specifically declared to be reserved for those who are "clean from the blood of this generation" (v. 138); they were to be received into the school by the washing of feet, administered by the president of the Church. This ritual was to be preceded by partaking of the sacramental emblems of the Savior's flesh and blood (vv. 139-41). Concerning the washing of feet, the Prophet Joseph Smith said:

"The item to which I wish the more particularly to call your attention tonight, is the ordinance of washing of feet. This we have not done as yet, but it is necessary now, as much as it was in the days of the Savior; and we must have a place prepared, that we may attend to this ordinance aside from the world. . . .

"We must have all things prepared, and call our solemn assembly as the Lord has commanded us, that we may be able to accomplish His great work, and it must be done in God's own way. The house of the Lord must be prepared, and the solemn assembly called and organized in it, according to the order of the house of God; and in it we must attend to the ordinance of washing of feet. It was never intended for any but official members. It is calculated to unite our hearts, that we may be one in feeling and sentiment, and that our faith may be strong, so that Satan cannot overthrow us, nor have any power over us here." [^19]

Conclusion

It cannot be emphasized too greatly that D&C 88 is one of the most glorious documents given to man for his spiritual progress and attainment. It speaks of things in a simple, straightforward manner yet deals with concepts so profound and far-reaching that it takes extensive study and contemplation just to appreciate its grandeur. The careful reader is literally bathed in light as a consequence of the experience. One of the things this revelation does for the reader is to lay before him the high priority the Lord has placed on learning and the acquisition of knowledge. Yet it makes unmistakably clear that this is not a cold intellectual pursuit but a spiritual attainment.

Another characteristic that becomes clear from a study of this revelation is the consistency of its content with earlier revelation and an awareness that later revelations continue to expand upon the same themes.

The student of D&C 88 is rewarded with an enlarged view of the purposes of God, the coming of future events on the earth, and the role of the servants of the Lord in helping to prepare for the Second Coming of the Savior. The reader also senses more fully the promises that are made to individuals. When one begins to understand these things, he is encouraged to prepare himself, by study and by faith, to contribute whatever he can to help the eternal purposes of the Lord roll forward. We thus appreciate a little of what the Prophet had in mind when he named it the "Olive Leaf, . . . the Lord's message of peace to us." [^20]

Notes

FromRobert L. Millet and Kent P. Jackson, eds., Studies in Scripture: Volume 1, The Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Randall Book Co., 1984), 340-57.

---
Notas:
[^1] The primary purpose of scripture is to be a testimony of Christ rather than a biography. Advocate (29:5) Jesus appeared personally to Adam and others at the gathering at Adam-ondi-Ahman and blessed Adam (see 107:54-55). D&C 93:21. All citations in these notes are to the D&C.
[^2] The revelations contain personal promises from the Lord to us as individuals. Almighty (84:96) Jesus is the Savior of other worlds in addition to this earth (see 88:42-63). 93:11.
[^3] The Doctrine and Covenants gives many names and titles for Jesus Christ. Alpha and Omega (19:1) He saves animals and other forms of life, in addition to men (see 29:23-25; 77:2-3; 101:23-24). 93:15.
[^4] Specific statements in the Doctrine and Covenants declare the mission of Jesus Christ. Alphus and Omegus (95:17) He gives revelations "after the manner of the language" of the people or of the prophet who receives the revelation (see 1:24). 38:3; 76:24; 93:9-10.
[^5] The Doctrine and Covenants reveals information about Jesus that cannot be found in any other standard work. Beginning and the End (38:1) This earth is destined to become a celestial kingdom (see 88:17-19, 25-26) and will be Christ's (see 130:9). That is, he will dwell on the earth and will govern it. 43:34; 88:42-63.
[^6] The Prophet Joseph Smith is the greatest witness for Christ in 1,900 years. Beloved Son (93:15) Jesus will return to earth and partake of the sacrament with the righteous of all dispensations (see 27:4). This is alluded to in a very sketchy manner in the New Testament but not with the clarity of the Doctrine and Covenants. 38:1.
[^7] Bridegroom (33:17-18) Jesus will be clothed in red garments at his second coming (see 133:48). This is alluded to in Isa. 63 but is so unclear that the meaning is lost. 38:1.
[^8] Christ (38:4) The Savior will not come in the form of a woman or as a man traveling on the earth (see 49:22). 95:7.
[^9] Christ the Lamb (76:85) There are at least five titles or names applied to Jesus in the Doctrine and Covenants that are not given elsewhere: Son Ahman (see 78:20); Lord of Sabaoth, which means Creator of the first day (see 95:7); stem of Jesse (see 113:1-2); stone of Israel (see 50:44); and Endless (see 19:10). Being Creator of the first day probably also has something to do with his creation of many worlds. 88:42.
[^10] Christ the Lord (19:1) The revelations show that Jesus is interested in real estate purchases, the size of buildings, the number of rooms, printing presses, temples, hotels, jails, books, curriculum, schools, tanneries, chariots, mules, canals, and other daily things, including proper food and drink and the fragrance and beauty of flowers (see 59:18-20). He is not only interested in Jerusalem, Rome, Egypt, Babylon, Corinth, and Athens but in Palmyra, Cumorah, Kirtland, Far West, Liberty, Adam-ondi-Ahman, Nauvoo, Independence, Salt Lake City, New York, Albany, and Boston. 19:24.
[^11] Creator of the first day (95:7) Jesus' visit to the spirit world between his death and Resurrection is explained, outlining what he did and did not do there (see 138). Contrary to what one would think from 1 Pet. 3:18-20 or even D&C 76:73, we learn that Jesus did not go among the wicked to teach them personally. Detailed knowledge of Jesus' spirit world ministry is found only in the Doctrine and Covenants and not in any other standard work. 93:4, 11.
[^12] Creator of worlds (38:3; 76:24; 93:9-10) There is an emphasis in the Doctrine and Covenants on Jesus' knowledge, majesty, and greatness. He says he looked "upon the wide expanse of eternity, and all the seraphic hosts of heaven before the world was made." He also said, "all things are present before mine eyes" and I "knoweth all things" (38:1-2). 93:12-13.
[^13] Deliverer from death (138:23) Jesus is the God of Enoch and his brethren (see 45:11) and has taken the Zion of Enoch to his own bosom (see 38:4). 93:7.
[^14] Endless (19:10) Jesus received a fulness of truth, even all truth (see 93:26). 93:15.
[^15] Eternal King (128:23) There is an indication that Jesus was born in the flesh in this world on 6 April (see 20:1). 93:15.
[^16] First and the Last (110:4) The Bible and Book of Mormon speak of Jesus as the light of the world, but the Doctrine and Covenants extends that thought further and says he is "a light which cannot be hid in darkness" (14:9). 93:17.
[^17] Firstborn (93:21) The concept of going from grace to grace and receiving grace for grace, which is barely hinted at in John 1:16-17 is extended in the Doctrine and Covenants to show that not only does man progress that way but Jesus progressed to perfection the same way (see 93:12-20). 38:2.
[^18] God (19:16-18) The Light of Christ permeates the immensity of space (see 88:7-13) and is the light, the controller, and the power of the sun, stars, moon, and the planets. 133:26.
[^19] God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (136:21) Christ has promised that all who keep his commandments and obey his voice shall see his face (see 88:67-68; 93:1). 20:22.
[^20] God of Enoch (45:11) The celestial law is the law of Christ (see 88:21). That is, the fulness of the gospel is the law of Christ and is designed to get people into the celestial kingdom. The gospel is the celestial law. 20:22.
