Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Scriptural Truths

The Great Plan of the Eternal God

Chapter 40

The Origin of Man

Since the revelations inform us that the Father is a personage with a body of flesh and bone, there is no difficulty understanding that mankind is created in the image of God's person. But the children of God are dual beings—they are both spirit and flesh—and the Lord has revealed through his prophets and their writings that we are the children of God as to both our spirit and our flesh.

The Spirit Body

Human beings are individual, intelligent, thinking, accountable spirit personages. Some spirits are female; others are male. Spirits are capable of love, hate, joy, sorrow, obedience, disobedience, loyalty, rebellion, and many other character traits and attributes. Spirits are immortal; they never die. They were begotten by our heavenly parents.

The human spirit is a personage that resembles the physical body. Spirit substance is real matter but is considerably more refined than the physical substance of the mortal, fallen, temporal world of earth life.

Scriptural passages that refer to the human spirit include the following: Gen. 25:8; Num. 16:22; 1 Kgs. 17:21; Job 32:8; Eccl. 12:7; Zech. 12:1; Luke 24:39; Acts 7:59; Heb. 12:9; James 2:26; 1 Pet. 3:19; 1 Ne. 11:11; 2 Ne. 9:8-14; Mosiah 2:28; Alma 11:43-45; 40:11; 42:9; Ether 3:15-16; Moro. 10:34; D&C 76:12-14, 25-29; Moses 6:36; 7:57; Abr. 3:18-19; 3:22

The rebellion of Lucifer, a spirit being, is clearly depicted in the foregoing passage. D&C 29:36 adds (clarifying Rev. 12:4) that there were many spirits who followed Lucifer in his rebellion. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that the devil's punishment is to never receive a physical body. [^1] Thus the devil and his spirit-being "angels" will remain spirits throughout eternity, never to receive a physical body.

Of the nature of spirits the Prophet Joseph Smith has written that "the spirit is a substance; that it is material, but that it is more pure, elastic and refined matter than the body; that it existed before the body, can exist in the body; and will exist separate from the body, when the body will be mouldering in the dust; and will in the resurrection, be again united with it." [^2]

Spirit bodies resemble bodies of flesh and bone. This is evident from the Brother of Jared's experience with the premortal Jesus, recorded in Ether 3. This event occurred 2,000 or more years before Christ's birth. "Behold, this body, which ye now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit will I appear unto my people in the flesh" (Ether 3:16).

The form and visual appearance of human spirits (and animal spirits also) resemble their earthly bodies, as recorded in D&C 77:2: "That which is spiritual being in the likeness of that which is temporal; and that which is temporal in the likeness of that which is spiritual; the spirit of man in the likeness of his person, as also the spirit of the beast, and every other creature which God has created."

There is a great variety of intelligence and capacity among spirits. Since all spirits had agency in premortality, variety and gradation soon became apparent. Some spirits became noble and great in knowledge and in character. Likewise, some did not. The greatest of all, of course, is he whom we know as Jehovah, or later as Jesus Christ. Another, among the mightiest and most accomplished, was the spirit known as Michael the archangel. Michael means "who is like God" (a statement, not a question). Michael is the only one designated as an archangel in the scriptures. More will be spoken about him later in this chapter.

Other spirits who obtained noble status in the premortal existence are those who would become prophets and leaders of the Church on the earth. This is explained in D&C 138:53-56, wherein President Joseph F. Smith declared:

"The Prophet Joseph Smith, and my father, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and other choice spirits who were reserved to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying the foundations of the great latter-day work,

"Including the building of the temples and the performance of ordinances therein for the redemption of the dead, were also in the spirit world.

"I observed that they were also among the noble and great ones who were chosen in the beginning to be rulers in the Church of God.

"Even before they were born, they, with many others, received their first lessons in the world of spirits and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the Lord to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men."

From the foregoing and other passages, we perceive that there is instruction in the premortal existence and that obedience to gospel principles makes for spiritual progress. Although only men are spoken of in the foregoing passage, we may rest assured that female spirits were and are among the noble and great ones.

The premortal spiritual existence is also alluded to in D&C 49:17 and 93:38.

The Physical Body

An account of the creation of the physical bodies of Adam and Eve is given in the book of Genesis and also in the books of Moses and Abraham. All the details, of course, are not made plain, but the underlying truth is apparent: our physical creation (as with our spiritual creation) was intentional, deliberate, purposeful, and nonaccidental. Our creation in both spirit and body was a deliberate design and act of God. Our bodies were created in part to become tabernacles for our spirits to live in while on earth.

Another purpose of the physical body is to provide an eternal tabernacle for the spirit after the Resurrection. We read in D&C 93:33-34 that a spirit without a body cannot have a fulness of joy, and even with a body a fulness of joy can be obtained only when the spirit and body are "inseparably connected," that is, when resurrected (see also Alma 11:45). Thus the physical body is designed and prepared as a tabernacle of the spirit not for mortality alone but for eternity. These factors give us a clue as to why the spirits of the dead feel that a long separation from their physical bodies is a type of bondage (see D&C 45:17; 138:50).

The Prophet Joseph Smith enlarged on this theme: "We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principle of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment." [^3]

Adam's body is said to have been created from the dust of the earth (see Gen. 2:7; D&C 77:12; Moses 3:7; and Abr. 5:7), meaning that it was created or made from the elements of the earth. The book of Moses offers further insight into this matter by stating that Adam's children were also created from the dust of the earth (see Moses 6:59). The same expression used to describe the bodily creation of Adam's children was used to describe the creation of Adam's body. Does this not suggest the same process was used? Adam is also spoken of as being the "son of God" (Moses 6:22).

In the gospel of Jesus Christ the human family is at the pinnacle of dignity because the first man and the first woman, Adam and Eve, were the direct and first-generation, literal offspring of heavenly parents both in the spirit body and in the physical body. The human family is literally, in every sense, the offspring of God. This is according to divine law, for the scriptural accounts state that living things reproduce and bring forth "after their kind" and that the "seed could only bring forth the same in itself, after his kind" (Abr. 4:11-12, 21, 24-25). Mankind, both male and female, was created in the image and the likeness of the Gods (see Abr. 4:26-27).

The writings of Moses, revealed to Joseph Smith, quote from "the book of the generations of Adam," saying that in the beginning the bodies of men and women on the earth were made "in the likeness of God . . . [and] in the image of his own body" (Moses 6:8-9). There follows a detailed listing of Adam's earthly family from generation to generation—not a pedigree of the spirits of men but of the physical body—and it lists Adam, Seth, Enos, and so on for seven generations down to Enoch (see Moses 6:10-21). It is precisely stated that Adam "begat a son in his own likeness, after his own image, and called his name Seth" (Moses 6:10). This is the precise and identical language by which Adam's own physical creation is spoken of. Since we know how Adam and Eve begat Seth's body, does this not imply that the same process also applies to the way Adam's body was formed? This conclusion is reinforced by the following verse: "And this is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God" (Moses 6:22).

Since these statements are in the context of fathers begetting the bodies of children on the earth, the consistent and plain reading of the scripture conveys the idea that just as Seth is the son of Adam and Eve, so also are Adam and Eve, in the physical body, the physical offspring of heavenly parents. Any other reading would be strained and artificial. This is a demonstration of the law that living things, including the Gods, reproduce "after their kind." Thus the terms "fatherhood of God" and "brotherhood of man" are not simply figures of speech but are literal expressions when seen through the lens of latter-day revelation.

There is something comforting and reassuring in searching holy writ and knowing that the human family's pedigree chart runs back to God and not to the animals. The foregoing passages make it quite easy and natural for us to realize that Adam and Eve were not the products of organic evolution, up from the ape, but rather that human beings have a divine origin in both body and spirit.

The First Presidency of the Church in 1909 confirmed the divine origin of mankind in both body and spirit. Following is an excerpt from the document. Please note that it deals specifically with the spirit and the body, comparing Adam and Jesus Christ, as well as dealing generally with all mankind:

"All men and women are in the similitude of the universal Father and Mother, and are literally the sons and daughters of Deity. . . .

"Adam, our great progenitor, 'the first man,' was, like Christ, a pre-existent spirit, and like Christ he took upon him an appropriate body, the body of a man, and so became a living soul. . . . [A]ll men existed in the spirit before any man existed in the flesh, and . . . all who have inhabited the earth since Adam have taken bodies and become souls in like manner.

"It is held by some that Adam was not the first man upon this earth, and that the original human being was a development from lower orders of the animal creation. These, however, are the theories of men. The word of the Lord declares that Adam was 'the first man of all men' (Moses 1:34), and we are therefore in duty bound to regard him as the primal parent of our race. It was shown to the brother of Jared that all men were created in the beginning after the image of God; and whether we take this to mean the spirit or the body, or both, it commits us to the same conclusion: Man began life as a human being, in the likeness of our Heavenly Father."5

Some may wonder how Jesus could be the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh if Adam also was thus begotten. Elder Bruce R. McConkie expressed his understanding of the creation of Adam in these words, while discussing the meaning of Luke 3:38, which says Adam is the son of God: "This statement, found also in Moses 6:22, has a deep and profound significance and also means what it says. Father Adam came, as indicated, to this sphere, gaining an immortal body, because death had not yet entered the world (2 Ne. 2:22). Jesus, on the other hand, was the Only Begotten in the flesh, meaning into a world of mortality where death already reigned." [^4]

Adam's physical body was the tabernacle of the great and majestic Michael the archangel. When the premortal spirit known as Michael came to earth and obtained a physical tabernacle, he was known as Adam (see D&C 27:11). It is fitting that such a noble spirit be tabernacled in a body that was the literal offspring of God rather than in the body of an animal.

Thus from Adam and Eve, our first parents on the earth, has come the family of all the earth (see 2 Ne. 2:20). And within the physical body of each person, sons and daughters of Adam and Eve, there dwells an immortal spirit. When Adam and Eve were placed in the Garden of Eden, they were deathless. Being the children of immortal, celestial, exalted parents, they (Adam and Eve) were also without death. When Adam and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit, they became mortal, or fallen, and capable of producing mortal children, that is, the human family of all the earth. Hence, the human race shares a common origin, with the parents of our spirits residing in the heavens and the parents of our flesh being the first mortal flesh on earth (see Moses 3:7).

Notes

FromJohn K. Challis and John G. Scott, eds., Riches of Eternity: Fundamental Doctrines from the Doctrine and Covenants (Salt Lake City: Aspen Books, 1993), 17-29.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 160, 292, 324.
[^2] Ibid., 324-25.
[^3] Ibid., 197-98.
[^4] Ezra Taft Benson, The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 28.
