Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 41

The Fall of Man

The Prophet Joseph Smith, commenting on our need for revelation if we want correct information, said, "Men of the present time [speak] of heaven and hell, and have never seen either; and I will say that no man knows these things without [revelation]." And he also said, "We never can comprehend the things of God and of heaven, but by revelation. We may spiritualize and express opinions to all eternity; but that is no authority." The Prophet further declared, "Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." [^1]

Our purpose in this chapter is to present and comment on what the Lord, who was present and who remembers the situation, has revealed about the fall of man and its effects on man and the entire creation.

The Plan of Salvation: A Doctrinal Framework of Fixed Principles

A special contribution of latter-day revelation is the concept that there is a plan of salvation that has existed in the mind of God from before the creation of the world, a concept about which the current biblical record makes no definitive statements. While there is not enough in the Bible alone to learn that God does indeed have such a plan, after learning about the plan from latter-day scriptures one can then discern traces of it in the Bible.

The Father's plan calls for the fall of man as an indispensable step and process in his purpose to "bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man" (Moses 1:39). Thus the creation, the fall, and the redemption are all necessary parts of the Lord's grand design; all were planned, and each is essential to the success of the others.

That God has a plan for mankind is mentioned at least twenty-eight times in latter-day scripture. These scriptures give various names for the divine plan, such as the following:

"Great and eternal plan" (Alma 34:16)

"Great plan of happiness" (Alma 42:8)

"Great plan of redemption" (Jacob 6:8, Alma 34:31)

"Plan of deliverance" (2 Ne. 11:5)

"Plan of mercy" (Alma 42:15, 31)

"Plan of our God" (2 Ne. 9:13)

"Plan of redemption" (Alma 12:25-26, 30, 32-33; 17:16; 18:39; 22:13; 29:2; 39:18; 42:11, 13)

"Plan of restoration" (Alma 41:2)

"Plan of salvation" (Jarom 1:2; Alma 24:14; 42:5; Moses 6:62)

"Plan of the Eternal God" (Alma 34:9)

"Plan of the great Creator" (2 Ne. 9:6)

"Their [the Gods'] plan" (Abr. 4:21)

The plan of God calls for a creation, a fall that brings two kinds of death, a probationary period, a set of commandments and ordinances, an infinite atonement by a God, a resurrection, a judgment, and an assignment to one's everlasting destiny. It would destroy the plan if any part of any step were changed or omitted (see Alma 42:8). The plan is a package—none of it is superfluous; none is optional. The whole of it is "fitly joined together" by that which "every joint supplieth" (Eph. 4:16).

The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that there are immutable laws that govern the premortal, mortal, and postmortal existences. He called these laws "fixed principles."

"The organization of the spiritual and heavenly worlds, and of spiritual and heavenly beings, was agreeable to the most perfect order and harmony: their limits and bounds were fixed irrevocably, and voluntarily subscribed to in their heavenly estate by themselves, and were by our first parents subscribed to upon the earth. Hence the importance of embracing and subscribing to principles of eternal truth by all men upon the earth that expect eternal life.

"I assure the Saints that truth, in reference to these matters, can and may be known through the revelations of God." [^2]

And again from the Prophet:

"God has made certain decrees which are fixed and immovable; for instance, God set the sun, the moon, and the stars in the heavens, and gave them their laws, conditions and bounds, which they cannot pass, except by His commandments; they all move in perfect harmony in their sphere and order, and are as lights, wonders and signs unto us. The sea also has its bounds which it cannot pass. God has set many signs on the earth, as well as in the heavens; for instance, the oak of the forest, the fruit of the tree, the herb of the field, all bear a sign that seed hath been planted there; for it is a decree of the Lord that every tree, plant, and herb bearing seed should bring forth of its kind, and cannot come forth after any other law or principle." [^3]

Why We Should Learn about the Fall

The reason why it is important for us to know that God has a plan for the salvation of man and that the plan includes the fall of man is that such knowledge dignifies the Fall and gives man a sense of security by removing the idea of chance or happenstance. The idea of a plan of God directs us to the conclusion that the Fall (1) was necessary, (2) was not a surprise to God, (3) was not an outright rebellion, (4) was an actual occurrence, and (5) is an essential part of the journey of man toward perfection. There may be other dimensions to the Fall, but the above conclusions are philosophically and doctrinally of basic importance for man to know while he lives on the earth as a mortal. If it were not for the concept that a comprehensive, intelligent plan of God is being carried out in behalf of the earth and man, it would not be possible for us to gain the necessary perspective and to have the necessary faith in the atonement of Jesus Christ. The revelations unfold to us a doctrinal framework of understanding so that we can have faith in the right things.

President Ezra Taft Benson has given us a very good reason why we should understand the Fall:

"Just as a man does not really desire food until he is hungry, so he does not desire the salvation of Christ until he knows why he needs Christ. No one adequately and properly knows why he needs Christ until he understands and accepts the doctrine of the Fall and its effect upon all mankind. And no other book in the world explains this vital doctrine nearly as well as the Book of Mormon." [^4]

Statements about the Fall

There are many evidences in the world that mankind is in a fallen condition. We understand that the human family is the offspring of Deity—not just one of his creations but literally his spirit children—his sons and his daughters. Man therefore has a different relationship to God than do the animals, the earth, and the planets and stars. Those things are the work of his hands; man is his offspring. Yet surprisingly, despite this divine lineage, man has displayed much hatred, selfishness, greed, war, sickness, and other traits far beneath the majesty and high moral character of an all-wise, all-knowing, perfect, and benevolent God. A little reflection on the history of mankind and the nature of man's society will lead one to conclude either that man is not the offspring of a noble Deity or that man has departed from the ways of God and fallen from any position of holiness and righteousness that he once had. At any rate, mortal man, past and present, has not consistently displayed the traits of virtue or the physical, moral, spiritual, and intellectual perfection that naturally one would expect to be found in the family of a perfect, glorious God.

The Lord has given an explanation through his prophets as to how these conditions were brought about. They are the results of the fall of Adam, or the fall of man. In the Doctrine and Covenants we read:

"We know that there is a God in heaven, who is infinite and eternal, from everlasting to everlasting the same unchangeable God . . . ; and that he created man, male and female, after his own image and in his own likeness, created he them;

"And gave unto them commandments that they should love and serve him, the only living and true God. . . .

"But by the transgression of these holy laws man became sensual and devilish, and became fallen man" (D&C 20:17-20).

This same doctrine was taught by Aaron, son of Mosiah:

"And it came to pass that when Aaron saw that the king would believe his words, he began from the creation of Adam, reading the scriptures unto the king—how God created man after his own image, and that God gave him commandments, and that because of transgression, man had fallen.

"And Aaron did expound unto him the scriptures from the creation of Adam, laying the fall of man before him, and their carnal state and also the plan of redemption, which was prepared from the foundation of the world, through Christ, for all whosoever would believe on his name.

"And since man had fallen he could not merit anything of himself; but the sufferings and death of Christ atone for their sins, through faith and repentance" (Alma 22:12-14).

The Fall Was an Actual Occurrence

In order to be of eternal value, it is essential that the fall of Adam be a historical event that actually happened at a specific time and place. We accept Adam and Eve as real persons who lived, transgressed, and brought about their own fall and the consequent fall of all mankind. If we had a complete record, it would be possible to mark on the calendar the actual time that the Fall occurred. Likewise, if we had an adequate map, it would be possible to mark the exact spot where the transgression occurred. The Fall is just that real and absolute. A real man and a real woman did, at a particular time and geographical location, transgress a commandment, which brought about the fall of man, an event which has affected not only all of mankind but also the whole creation. The Fall is a historical event, an actual fact, an absolute occurrence, and is not simply a philosophical or so-called "religious" truth.

The Question of Original Sin

Since the effects of the fall of Adam have been passed on to all of Adam's posterity through birth into mortality, every one of Adam's descendants, except Jesus Christ, has fully partaken of the fall of Adam and will experience both physical and spiritual death. Jesus came into the world as the Only Begotten of the Father in the flesh, and therefore death did not dominate him as it does the rest of Adam's posterity. Jesus had ancestry through the Father outside of or beyond the descent from Adam, and therefore Jesus had "life in himself" because he was the Son of God in the flesh (John 5:26; see also 10:17-18). Thus he was able to atone for the Fall and pay the debt occasioned by Adam; hence what we lost in Adam we regain by Christ. Although all must die, Jesus will raise all of Adam's descendants in the resurrection so they will never die a physical death again (see Alma 11:45). All of Adam's posterity has been shut out of the presence of God by virtue of the Fall, but because of the atonement—made by Jesus Christ, who had no sin—all of Adam's posterity will be rescued from the spiritual death and be brought back into the presence of God for a judgment of individual deeds (see Alma 42:23; Hel. 14:17). If an individual at that time has unremitted sins, he may be sent away again from the presence of God permanently—for his own sins, not for Adam's transgression.

Because man inherits the effects of the fall of Adam, it raises the question of original sin and whether or not children are born sinners, having inherited sin from Adam. Advocates of original sin, a concept taught for centuries throughout Christendom, rely on their interpretation (or misinterpretation) of Paul's writings for justification of their opinions.

Paul is more specific than other biblical writers in discussing the Fall, and he testifies that Adam's fall has descended upon man's nature. For example, to the Corinthians he wrote, "In Adam all die" (1 Cor. 15:22). To the Roman Saints he declared: "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. . . . For if through the offence of one many be dead, much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ, hath abounded unto many. . . . For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous" (Rom. 5:12, 15, 19).

Even though Paul discusses the relationship of Adam to Christ better than any other writer in the Bible, his writings in their current form do not approach the clarity of the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and Covenants, or the Pearl of Great Price. Because of the particular wording of the above passage from Romans, theologians have concluded that infants actually inherit the sin of Adam. This they call "original sin."

"Original sin" is the concept that since Adam's fall brought death and alienation to all of the human family, little children are born in sin or under the penalty of sin and are out of favor with God: therefore, should they die in their infancy without baptism, they would be forever shut out from the presence of the face of God. This belief seems to stem from an awareness of the effects of the Fall without a complete awareness of the results of the Atonement. This concept of original sin is indeed a false doctrine because it recognizes the Fall and the consequent death and sin but fails to acknowledge the work of the Savior in redeeming mankind from the Fall. The doctrine of original sin would be partly true if there had been no atonement wrought by Jesus Christ, and it would apply not only to children but also to the whole human family. But since Christ did perform an atonement, the doctrine of original sin, as it has been traditionally taught, is not correct.

The doctrine of original sin, as held throughout portions of Christianity, is based on the reasoning of various philosophers who lived during the era of the Apostasy. It arose among these philosophers as early as the second and third centuries a.d. and was more fully developed by Augustine in the fifth century. This reasoning held that the posterity of Adam actually sinned by Adam's transgression. Proponents of this concept would cite Rom. 5:12, 15, 19 (quoted above), which they interpreted to mean that through Adam sin entered into the world, and so in the trespass of Adam all men sinned themselves. We should note at this point that there is a difference between a child's inheriting the actual sin itself and his inheriting only the consequences of the sin. It appears that the church fathers of the second to fourth centuries a.d. were teaching that children actually sinned in Adam. Latter-day revelation teaches that man inherits only the consequences, not the sin itself.

Since children were regarded as actual sinners from birth, it was but a short intellectual journey for the uninspired philosophers to suppose that children would therefore be denied a place in heaven if they died before receiving baptism. Hence the concept of infant baptism was developed to accommodate this particular view of the fall of Adam.

This mistaken view of original sin—holding that little children are born in sin—also led to the development in Catholicism of the doctrine of the "immaculate conception." This doctrine is not, as many have supposed, a reference to Jesus' own conception; rather, it is the belief that Mary, mother of Jesus, was conceived miraculously in her mother's womb so that she (Mary) would not be born with the taint of original sin, and thus she could be free to conceive the holy child Jesus.

There is nothing in our current Old or New Testaments that clearly and unequivocally explains just how the Fall of Adam applies to children—whether mankind actually sinned in Adam or whether man only suffers the consequences of the Fall. Nor does there appear in the Bible a statement that clearly defines how the Atonement specifically relates to children. There is just such a statement, however, in the book of Moses, which was revealed as part of the Prophet Joseph Smith's translation of Genesis.

In this particular passage the prophet Enoch teaches the people about Adam and how death and sin came into the world. Enoch reminds his hearers just what was taught to Adam and how the plan of salvation was explained to the first man:

"And he [God] called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

"And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

"And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must repent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

"Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world" (Moses 6:51-54).

We are fully assured by this passage that Adam stands forgiven of his transgression in the garden and that his posterity is free from all responsibility for that transgression. We are held accountable only for our own sins. If this passage had remained in the book of Genesis or if the correct doctrine had survived in our current New Testament, the whole mistaken concept of original sin and infant baptism as taught and practiced by much of Christianity for the past eighteen hundred years could have been avoided.

In a discourse recorded in the Book of Mormon, King Benjamin explains that man inherits his fallen condition from Adam, but he also says that the atonement of Christ shields the untaught and the little children from the full force of the Fall. "For behold," he says, "and also his blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God" (Mosiah 3:11). And further on he states, "I say unto you they [little children] are blessed; for behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins" (Mosiah 3:16).

Likewise the Lord has spoken in our day on this subject: "Every spirit of man was innocent in the beginning; and God having redeemed man from the fall, men became again, in their infant state, innocent before God" (D&C 93:38). Implicit in the foregoing passage is this: Every man upon being born into mortality is fallen through being a descendant of Adam, but because of the atonement of God (Christ) all little children in their infant mortal state are innocent before God.

In our sophisticated and "enlightened" age many religious people reject the idea of original sin and the guiltiness of little children. But they do it for the wrong reasons. They do not reject it because they have a better understanding of the atonement of Jesus Christ but because they have also rejected the fall of Adam and the fall of mankind. Taking a humanistic approach they have discarded the story of Adam and thus have dissolved the necessity for an atonement. Instead of being theologians, they are ecclesiastical sociologists and teachers of ethics. The gospel of Jesus Christ provides the only correct answers to the great questions and problems concerning life and death and sin and innocence. These answers are found in the true doctrine of the fall of Adam and the atonement of Jesus Christ.

We thus see the power and importance of the Book of Mormon and the other doctrinal revelations that were given to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith. Furthermore, we come to appreciate the energy with which Mormon testified against the baptism of little children, as recorded in the Book of Mormon. Having "inquired of the Lord" regarding this very practice, Mormon wrote to Moroni, his son:

"The word of the Lord came to me by the power of the Holy Ghost, saying:

"Listen to the words of Christ, your Redeemer, your Lord and your God. . . . Little children are whole, for they are not capable of committing sin; wherefore the curse of Adam is taken from them in me, that it hath no power over them; and the law of circumcision is done away in me.

"And after this manner did the Holy Ghost manifest the word of God unto me; wherefore, my beloved son, I know that it is solemn mockery before God, that ye should baptize little children. . . .

"But little children are alive in Christ, even from the foundation of the world. . . .

"Little children cannot repent; wherefore, it is awful wickedness to deny the pure mercies of God unto them, for they are all alive in him because of his mercy.

"And he that saith that little children need baptism denieth the mercies of Christ, and setteth at naught the atonement of him and the power of his redemption" (Moro. 8:7-9, 12, 19-20; italics added).

Mormon did not deny the effects and reality of the Fall; rather, he astutely placed the Fall and the Atonement in proper perspective.

Why the Lord Did Not Simply Create Man Mortal

Perhaps our treatment of the fall of man would not be adequate without an attempt to deal with a question often raised during discussions about the Fall: Why didn't the Lord simply create man mortal in the first place and avoid all the trauma and experience of a fall brought to pass through transgression and seemingly conflicting commands?

There are in the scriptures no one-sentence answers to this question, but we have been given enough knowledge concerning God's plan to think through a possible response. In the plan of salvation God does for mankind only what they cannot do for themselves. Man must do all he can for himself. The doctrine is that we are saved by grace, "after all we can do" (2 Ne. 25:23). We recognize this principle both in the salvation of the living and in the work for the dead. We must do all we can do for ourselves. If Adam and Eve had been created mortal, they would have been denied one of the steps in the process that they were capable of performing themselves. As we read in the Book of Mormon, man "brought upon himself" his own fall (Alma 42:12). Since the Fall was a necessary part of the plan of salvation, and since man was capable of bringing about the fallen condition himself, he was required—or rather it was his privilege—to take the necessary steps.

If God had created man mortal, then death, sin, and all the circumstances of mortality would be God's doing and would be eternal and permanent in their nature; whereas if man brings the Fall upon himself, he is the responsible moral agent and God is able to rescue and redeem him from his fallen state. Moreover, Adam and Eve's having brought about the Fall themselves made them subject to punishment or reward for their actions. A little reflection upon these matters leads one to conclude that the Fall was accomplished in the very best possible way. As Lehi said about the Fall and the Atonement, "All things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things" (2 Ne. 2:24). Furthermore, the Lord has explained to us that he does not create temporal or mortal conditions nor function on a mortal level (see D&C 29:34-35).

We can benefit from the observation of Elder Orson F. Whitney, who said, "The fall had a twofold direction—downward, yet forward." [^5] It is as the Prophet Joseph Smith said: "Adam was made to open the way of the world." [^6] Adam and Eve had the privilege of getting things under way by their own actions. This is far better than their being created mortal and sinful.

The Fall of Adam Was a Blessing

How should we regard the Fall? How did Adam and Eve feel about it? We do not know their immediate reaction, but after they were enlightened with the gospel and had eternal insight, they rejoiced in the Fall because of its ultimate benefits. Of Adam we read: "And in that day Adam blessed God and was filled, and began to prophesy concerning all the families of the earth, saying: Blessed be the name of God, for because of my transgression my eyes are opened, and in this life I shall have joy, and again in the flesh I shall see God" (Moses 5:10).

And of Eve it is written: "And Eve, his wife, . . . was glad, saying: Were it not for our transgression we never should have had seed, and never should have known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient. And Adam and Eve blessed the name of God, and they made all things known unto their sons and their daughters." (Moses 5:11-12.)

President Brigham Young spoke with much favor toward Adam and Eve and the Fall:

"Some may regret that our first parents sinned. This is nonsense. If we had been there, and they had not sinned, we should have sinned. I will not blame Adam or Eve, why? Because it was necessary that sin should enter into the world; no man could ever understand the principle of exaltation without its opposite; no one could ever receive an exaltation without being acquainted with its opposite. How did Adam and Eve sin? Did they come out in direct opposition to God and to His government? No. But they transgressed a command of the Lord, and through that transgression sin came into the world. The Lord knew they would do this, and He had designed that they should." [^7]

And again from President Brigham Young:

"Mother Eve . . . [partook] of the forbidden fruit. We should not have been here today if she had not; we could never have possessed wisdom and intelligence if she had not done it. It was all in the economy of heaven, and we need not talk about it; it is all right. We should never blame Mother Eve, not the least. I am thankful to God that I know good from evil, the bitter from the sweet, the things of God from the things not of God. When I look at the economy of heaven my heart leaps for joy, and if I had the tongue of an angel, or the tongues of the whole human family combined, I would praise God in the highest for His great wisdom and condescension in suffering the children of men to fall into the very sin into which they have fallen, for He did it that they, like Jesus, might descend below all things and then press forward and rise above all." [^8]

President Joseph Fielding Smith declared that the fall of Adam was a blessing: "When Adam was driven out of the Garden of Eden, the Lord passed a sentence upon him. Some people have looked upon that sentence as being a dreadful thing. It was not; it was a blessing. I do not know that it can truthfully be considered even as a punishment in disguise." He also explained that "the transgression of Adam did not involve sex sin as some falsely believe and teach. Adam and Eve were married by the Lord while they were yet immortal beings in the Garden of Eden and before death entered the world." [^9]

Again in praise of Adam and Eve, President Smith stated:

"Now, I can open the Bible, almost any Bible—maybe I can this one—and find written here [in the headings at the top of the page] that Adam, not the words of the scriptures but man's interpretation, that he committed a dreadful sin. No, he didn't. Adam did not commit a sin. He came to do the thing that he was called upon to do, that he was assigned to do before he ever came here. . . .

"I think I have said in this room before that I am very, very grateful for Mother Eve. If I ever get to see her, I want to thank her for what she did and she did the more wonderful thing that ever happened in this world and that was to place herself where Adam had to do the same thing that she did or they would have been separated forever. . . .

" . . . Adam and Eve did the very thing they had to do. I tell you, I take my hat off to Mother Eve and I rejoice and I want to read what she said. When Eve learned what the full condition was, the result of that fall, she preached this discourse. It is the first discourse ever recorded—that is, that we have [cites Moses 5:11]." [^10]

President Smith also gave an enlightening definition and application to the idea of the "forbidden fruit." He indicated that the "forbidden" aspect was not in the partaking but instead had reference to Adam and Eve's not being able to remain in the garden if they partook. This explanation suggests that the Lord wanted the Fall to occur. President Smith expressed these ideas as follows:

"Why did Adam come here? Not subject to death when he was placed upon the earth, there had to come a change in his body through the partaking of this element—whatever you want to call it, fruit—that brought blood into his body; and blood became the life of the body instead of spirit. And blood has in it the seeds of death, some mortal element. Mortality was created through the eating of the forbidden fruit, if you want to call it forbidden, but I think the Lord has made it clear that it was not forbidden. He merely said to Adam, if you want to stay here [in the garden] this is the situation. If so, don't eat it." [^11]

Conclusion

In this chapter we have presented some of the major doctrinal and historical factors relating to the fall of man. Because of the Fall, man and all created things became mortal and stood in need of a redemption. The Fall is an integral and necessary part of the plan of salvation, and Adam and Eve are heroes, deserving our praise. If the account of the Fall is correct as given in the scriptures, and we believe it is, then Adam could not have come into existence on this earth through the process of organic evolution from lower forms of life, for Adam and Eve were the first to become mortal and the first to have the power to reproduce.

Notes

FromJoseph Fielding McConkie and Robert L. Millet, eds., The Man Adam, (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1990), 37-64.

---
Notas:
[^1] Orson Pratt, "The Pre-existence of Man," The Seer, Apr. 1853, 54-56.
[^2] Ibid., 324-25.
[^3] Ibid., 197-98.
[^4] Ezra Taft Benson, The Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988), 28.
[^5] Orson F. Whitney, in Forace Green, comp., Cowley and Whitney on Doctrine (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1963), 287.
[^6] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 12.
[^7] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 10:312; Discourses of Brigham Young, sel. John A. Widtsoe (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1971), 103.
[^8] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 13:145; Discourses of Brigham Young, 103.
[^9] Doctrines of Salvation 1:113-15; italics in original.
[^10] Joseph Fielding Smith, Take Heed to Yourselves, comp. Joseph Fielding Smith Jr. (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1966), 291-92.
[^11] Joseph Fielding Smith, unpublished address given at the LDS Institute of Religion, Salt Lake City, Utah, 14 January 1961. Typescript approved by President Smith.
