Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 42

The Story of Jesus' Atonement Begins in Premortal Life

In order to understand why mankind's redemption was necessary and why only Jesus was qualified to bring about that redemption, we must first consider the events of the premortal life. In that life, we understand, the Savior was selected as our Redeemer. We knew him there; hence our first acquaintance with Jesus began many thousands of years before we were ever born into mortality.

Although scriptural accounts of the premortal life and the grand council are sketchy, they are nonetheless informative. When the selection of someone to become the future redeemer was being considered, we read that Satan said to the Father, "Behold, here am I, send me, I will be thy son, and I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost, and surely I will do it; wherefore give me thine honor" (Moses 4:1).

In contrast to Satan's proposal, the future Christ said, "Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever" (Moses 4:2).

It is evident that the foregoing exchange could not have taken place until after the Father's plan for his children had been presented and discussed and that the plan included the creation of the earth and the fall of man, and therefore a redeemer would need to be "sent" to fallen mankind. It is also evident that some souls would be lost, and hence Satan proposed a way that not even one would be lost. It is also evident that whoever the redeemer was, he would be known as the Son of God.

The Thrust of Satan's Proposal

I think we often miss the major issue of the contention in premortality that eventually led to the war in heaven. We talk about it as though Satan were going to force everybody to obey when he said, "I will redeem all mankind, that one soul shall not be lost"—we interpret that as meaning that he was proposing forced obedience.

It seems strange to me that a third of all the spirits that had the potential to be born into this world would have favored a proposal of forced obedience. Most of us do not like to be forced. As I see it, the issue was not so much one of force as it was that Satan said he would guarantee salvation for his spirit brothers and sisters. He promised salvation without excellence, without effort, without hard work, without individual responsibility, and without obedience to righteous laws. That is the lie he promulgated in the pre-earth councils.

That so-called shortcut to salvation captivated many gullible and lazy spirits. They wanted something for nothing. We have certain aspects of that in our society today: something is offered for nothing (a free lunch, we sometimes call it), and certain kinds of subsidies promise to guarantee the reward without the effort. Obedience is not necessary when "anything goes" and there is no divine standard. With his something-for-nothing offer Satan led away many spirits.

But individual progress does not come that way. Only by serious and strenuous exertion do we improve in character and in spiritual growth. In our society we still come in contact with many who are influenced by this erroneous philosophy advocated by the rebellious in the premortal life. They think they can achieve salvation and exaltation without a struggle. We are still fighting the war in heaven with the same participants and the same issues, but we are fighting it on new territory.

Having ascertained that the devil's program was based on a false promise of excellence without effort (that is, without obedience), we can better appreciate the plan of our Father and his Chosen Son—a plan that would require real struggle on our part in order to do our best in this world to overcome our weaknesses and to obtain redemption from the effects of mortality. Such a redemption would be made possible through the sacrifice and merits of our Redeemer, Jesus Christ. It is in view of the premortal life and the issues fought in the war in heaven that everything else in the ministry of Jesus and in the gospel must be understood. If we overlook the premortal life, we never get the clear perspective necessary in mortality to understand the gospel of redemption.

Salvation by Grace and Works

One point further: Due to the fall of Adam and also our own sins, mankind is unable to do all that is required for our redemption and exaltation. Salvation is available only by the grace of Jesus Christ. Grace consists of the "works" of Christ. What man does is called "works." What Christ does for us is called "grace." We are saved by works, but some of those works are the works of Jesus Christ. His works complete our struggles, which are wholly inadequate alone. Without Christ's works (grace) no one would even come close to being saved.

Upon learning in the premortal life about the plan of redemption, no doubt many of us labored as missionaries for the Savior, going among our brother and sister spirits to persuade them to choose the Savior and follow him in preparing for earth life. Elder Orson Pratt, discussing the conditions that existed in the premortal world that finally led to the war in heaven, the appointment of some to special callings, and also the expulsion of many spirits, has written:

"It is not likely that the final decision of the contending armies took place immediately. Many, no doubt, were unsettled in their views, unstable in their minds, and undecided as to which force to join: there may have been, for aught we know, many deserters from both armies: and there may have been a long period before the division line was so strictly drawn as to become unalterable. Laws, without doubt, were enacted, and penalties affixed, according to the nature of the offenses or crimes: those who altogether turned from the Lord, and were determined to maintain the cause of Satan, and who proceeded to the utmost extremities of wickedness, placed themselves without the reach of redemption: therefore, such were prohibited from entering into a second probationary state, and had no privilege of receiving bodies of flesh and bones. . . .

"Among the two-thirds who remained, it is highly probable that there were many who were not valiant in the war, but whose sins were of such a nature that they could be forgiven through faith in the future sufferings of the Only Begotten of the Father, and through their sincere repentance and reformation. We see no impropriety in Jesus offering himself as an acceptable offering and sacrifice before the Father to atone for the sins of His brethren, committed, not only in the second, but also in the first estate. Certain it was, that the work which Jesus was to accomplish, was known in the Grand Council where the rebellion broke out; it was known that man would sin in his second estate: for it was upon the subject of redemption that the assembly became divided, and which resulted in war. . . .

"If all the two-thirds who kept their first estate were equally valiant in the war, and equally faithful, why should some of them be called and chosen in their spiritual state to hold responsible stations and offices in this world, while others were not? If there were none of those spirits who sinned, why were the Apostles, when they existed in their previous state, chosen to be blessed 'with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ'? All these passages seem to convey an idea, that there were callings, choosings, ordinances, promises, predestinations, elections, and appointments, made before the world began." [^1]

We now have a veil of forgetfulness drawn over our minds, and we do not remember the details of those premortal events; yet the spiritual capacity we developed in the pre-earth life has come with us into mortality, and when we hear the gospel preached it strikes a familiar note. We are learning again principles we once knew. Our previously developed spiritual capacity responds to every true doctrine that is taught to us when the doctrine is properly presented. Our main business in this world is to continue that spiritual development we started so long ago, and this we will do by faith in that same Jesus whom we knew and loved and obeyed in our pre-mortal life.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] Men and women are the actual spirit children of heavenly parents. We have a Heavenly Father and a Heavenly Mother who are the parents of our spirits; thus all mankind are brothers and sisters. Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Charles A. Moore, A Source Book in Indian Philosophy (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1957), 154, 299.
