Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 43

The Hope for Immortality: A Desire of the Ages

Throughout history man has evidenced a desire to be remembered upon this earth and also to immortalize himself in an afterlife. There are various ways this hope for immortality has manifested itself. When a man has a son who looks, talks, or acts like his father, it is often said so-and-so will never be dead as long as his son is alive. Likewise, individuals live in the memories of friends and family. These are figurative types of immortality, or extensions of life through memory. Others live on through their monuments, poetry, literature, or music. This vicarious immortality may do something for the survivors, but it probably doesn't do much for the individual who is gone, unless he or she is aware of thus being remembered. Another and more satisfying kind of immortality is the expectation of personal, individual immortality with friends and family.

The very nature of religion is connected with the idea of an afterlife. The word religion means "to tie back to God," with the prefix re- meaning "back to" and ligio meaning the same as ligament. Having a "religion" means to be tied to God, as the ligaments tie the muscles to the bone. Several religious philosophies regard the intelligent part of man—the thinking, conscious soul—as eternal, but they are not so clear as to the body being of eternal value. To many, earth life is an entrapment wherein the spirit is imprisoned in this body of flesh, and to get rid of the body is an advantage. Most religions also carry the idea of the soul's accountability to a higher power. Immortality and accountability are common elements of the major world religions. The rules, commandments, and rituals of religion are usually designed to guide the individual through this earth life and beyond so that he or she will fare in the best possible way when the soul passes beyond this life and encounters the time of judgment. If the person has done right, he enters a realm of happiness and rest and is rewarded for his efforts. If he has done wrong, he is punished.

The pharaohs of Egypt erected statues, temples, and pyramids of stone as long-lasting monuments of their greatness. It almost seems that the minute a man became the pharaoh he began to plan his burial and his monuments. Some of the pharaohs even chiseled away the names of earlier rivals in the hope that they could erase the memory of their predecessors while they themselves would be remembered. It is evident that not only the pharaohs but all levels of Egyptian society believed in and hoped for personal immortality. That is, they believed they would continue to live and think and feel and have needs after this life. That is one reason they went to great expense in embalming and mummifying the body. They mummified not only humans but cats, bulls, crocodiles, and baboons. The paintings on burial chamber walls reflect the same activities in the afterlife as in this life. It was also common practice to include clothes, furniture, food, and jewelry in the burial chamber—for use in the life beyond. All of this speaks for a belief in the continuation of life for the servants and the animals, as well as for the king. Furthermore, the pharaoh not only desired to live forever, he also wanted to be pharaoh forever.

The religions of India and the Far East teach of the immortality of the soul of man (or as it is called, the "self"), even that it returns a number of times and is born to earth life again and again in a cycle of reincarnations until the soul reaches a level of perfection. At that point it is released from this series of earth experiences and it unites with God. It then apparently loses its individuality. Perfection seems to be the development of proper attitudes more than the attendance to rituals or performances. Earth life in a body is considered an essential experience, but salvation comes through eventual escape from the cycle of births and deaths and from the limitations caused by imprisonment in the physical body. [^1] It doesn't matter to them how many mortal bodies were used, since they have no belief in a resurrection of the body. The concept of "soul" is not well defined and means primarily a spiritual essence rather than a being of shape and size. [^2]

Christian denominations believe in immortality and that death has thereby lost its sting (see 1 Cor. 15:55). Death has captivated the whole world. Every living thing must die. But the great Christian message is that Jesus Christ conquered death and gave everlasting life to mankind. Paul calls this victory over death leading "captivity captive" (Eph. 4:8). Modern Christian sects do not agree on just what immortality means, what the conditions will be, and whether everyone will get it or only the obedient. Neither do they agree whether it is an immortality of the spirit only or whether it includes also the physical body in a resurrection. Some hold to the one idea, some to the other. Nevertheless, the paramount Christian doctrine is the hope of individual immortality and salvation because of Jesus Christ the Redeemer.

One difference between the Eastern religions and the Christian religions is that the Eastern religions sentence the imperfect self to another go-around of earth life—a reincarnation—in the hope the person will learn to do better next time and successfully pass the judgment. In contrast to this a major portion of traditional Christianity has a concept called "purgatory," where the spirit is purged of its earthly stains preparatory to being judged. This is quite different from reincarnation, but it serves some of the same purposes in preparing the spirit for eternity. Each is a sort of extension of earth life. The major difference, however, is that the reincarnated self is believed to come back to earth as another person and to gain a second or third or fourth earthly body, none of which he will have in eternity. In contrast, the purgatized person is preserved in his individual identity, having but one earth life and one physical body, which many Christians believe he will be resurrected with and then keep forever. The procedure is different, yet there is some similarity in the purpose, which is to prepare for the judgment. Both systems say that an earth-life experience is not enough for perfection. And both demonstrate a belief in immortality and in a time of judgment.

The religion of Islam, structured by Mohammed in the seventh century a.d. with a biblical background (and which now numbers so many adherents that it is said one of every six persons on the earth is a Muslim), has a strong concept of individual immortality. From my reading and conversations it seems that adherents may not be completely certain just what the soul of man is or what it will be. But they are certain in their belief that man's soul is conscious after the death of the body and will someday give an account of the type of life it lived while in the body, for which it will receive a reward or punishment. Islam teaches that there will be a resurrection of the body. Reward for a good life is to go to paradise—which is the word for garden—a place of green things, trees, flowers, shade from the hot burning sun, plenty of food, water, and enjoyable things, consisting of everything in abundance that was denied the soul in this desert of mortality. Islam has a strong code of behavior but is essentially a redeemerless religion. The person makes the necessary correction on his own. There is no concept of a redeemer, as is the case in Christianity.

Funeral services and burial customs of each religious persuasion usually reflect the beliefs about immortality held by those conducting such services. Sermons, rituals, clothing, ordinances, music, and burial reveal the attitude and hope of the particular society.

In the cemeteries of the American Indians in Arizona, I have seen bowls of corn and beans on the graves of children, placed there by their mothers, who evidently believed (or at least hoped) that somehow the food would be of service to their departed children. Obviously they felt the children were somewhere still alive and conscious, still had needs, and still ate food. While standing at these graves I found it very touching to feel for myself the tenderness, sympathy, and concern of those parents.

I have mentioned this background of religious belief to illustrate that both ancient and modern man have believed in and hoped for some form of personal immortality; both have had some kind of ritual and procedures designed to better their situation in the afterlife. The listing was not intended to be complete, only sufficient to illustrate the concept.

There is in each of us a desire for life, not only to live beyond this mortal life but also not to be forgotten. Even little children sometimes have these emotions and fears, as illustrated in an experience reported by Elder Boyd K. Packer:

"Some time ago I was counseling a woman who had joined the Church following the breakup of her marriage and the loss of her only child, a boy who was nine years old at the time he passed away. She told me something that I remember very well because it touched me deeply.

"After the separation in her marriage, while she was trying to make a living for herself and her son, he became afflicted with a terminal disease. Some time before he passed away, he became aware of the fact that he was not going to live. His mother said from that time on he had only one thing on his mind: over and over again he would say pleadingly, 'Mama, you won't forget me will you? I won't be forgotten, will I?'" [^3]

Accurate Information about the Afterlife Comes Only by Revelation from God

Of this much we can be certain: mankind has a manifest desire for immortality; most people believe there might be such a thing, and many of them want to do something about it. But they do not all go about it in the same way. There are sacred baths, rivers, washings, baptisms, prayers, candles, incantations, sacrifices, offerings, rituals, readings, oblations, repentance, and any number of things that have been done and are still being done by the people of the world. All are directed toward a belief and hope and sometimes a fear of immortality, of a conscious life beyond this life. If variety, which is said to be the spice of life, were also the guarantee of life, then certainly we would be assured that there is an afterlife.

In view of this earnest and diverse religious activity, we wonder how much of it actually originated in heaven. Not all of these systems can be equally beneficial, for they say different things about what man is, what he can become, and what he could be doing about it. Surely God, who is intelligent enough to create the orderly universe, would have preferences, ideas, and plans for the well-being of his own children because he loves them.

There is a story regarding Diogenes of ancient Athens, who after hearing a philosopher tell of the afterlife in definite and precise terms, asked him, "When did you get back from heaven?" [^4] What he meant, of course, is "How could you know so much about heaven without having been there?" The importance of reliable sources was also emphasized by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who is quoted as saying:

"Men of the present time testify of heaven and hell, and have never seen either; and I will say that no man knows these things without [revelation]." [^5]

"We never can comprehend the things of God and of heaven, but by revelation. We may spiritualize and express opinions to all eternity; but that is no authority." [^6]

Speaking at a funeral, the Prophet Joseph also said:

"All men know that they must die. . . . What is the object of our coming into existence, then dying and falling away, to be here no more? It is but reasonable to suppose that God would reveal something in reference to the matter, and it is a subject we ought to study more than any other. We ought to study it day and night, for the world is ignorant in reference to their true condition and relation. If we have any claim on our Heavenly Father for anything, it is for knowledge on this important subject." [^7]

Then, to emphasize that every person must learn these things for himself or herself, the Prophet added:

"Could we read and comprehend all that has been written from the days of Adam, on the relation of man to God and angels in a future state, we should know very little about it. Reading the experience of others, or the revelation given to them, can never give us a comprehensive view of our condition and true relation to God. Knowledge of these things can only be obtained by experience through the ordinances of God set forth for that purpose. Could you gaze into heaven five minutes, you would know more than you would by reading all that ever was written on the subject." [^8]

The Father's Plan of Salvation

Having referred to some beliefs and expectations that others have held about immortality and the afterlife, I want to present some basic things taught in latter-day revelation by the Prophet Joseph Smith and other latter-day prophets of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. In doing this we will see similarities between Latter-day Saint belief and that of other groups. This is not because the Prophet Joseph Smith borrowed from earlier sources but rather that the gospel of Jesus Christ (the plan of salvation) is older than the earth and was revealed to Adam and his immediate family. Ideas and traditions handed down from Adam's time contain traces of the original revelation and have filtered through all races and religions of mankind.

We will also see differences between Latter-day Saint doctrine and that of other groups. These can be viewed as the natural consequences of the changes, additions, adaptations, alterations, omissions, and inventions that man has introduced to his set of beliefs since the original revelation of the plan of salvation was given to Adam, to Enoch, to Noah, to Abraham, and so forth. The Prophet Joseph Smith received a new, independent revelation of the same gospel and the same plan of salvation—equal to, in the same way, and from the same source as the revelation first given to Adam. In other words Diogenes could say to Joseph Smith, "When did you get back from heaven?" and the Prophet could give him an authoritative, up-to-date, recent, first-hand, on-the-spot, unrehearsed, authentic answer. Joseph Smith "went to heaven" in the First Vision, when he talked with and saw the Father and the Son and again in the vision of the degrees of glory (D&C 76) and again in the vision of the celestial kingdom (D&C 137) and on numerous other occasions. He "came back" and told much, but he could not tell everything that he had learned. There are at least two reasons for the limitation of what he could tell. We read in D&C 76 that the Prophet and Sidney Rigdon were instructed to write only a part of what they saw in heaven:

"This is the end of the vision which we saw, which we were commanded to write while we were yet in the Spirit.

"But great and marvelous are the works of the Lord, and the mysteries of his kingdom which he showed unto us, which surpass all understanding in glory, and in might, and in dominion;

"Which he commanded us we should not write while we were yet in the Spirit, and are not lawful for man to utter;

"Neither is man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him" (D&C 76:113-16).

The Prophet later declared:

"I could explain a hundred fold more than I ever have of the glories of the kingdoms manifested to me in the vision, were I permitted, and were the people prepared to receive them.

"The Lord deals with this people as a tender parent with a child, communicating light and intelligence and the knowledge of his ways as they can bear it." [^9]

Four Stages of Existence

What is in the afterlife, according to the teachings of the Prophet Joseph and other latter-day prophets? What should we expect to find when we leave this world? Before taking a trip we look at a map and find the place where we are going. How far is it from where we are, and what are the conditions there? If available, a picture would help or at least a description. If we could find someone who had been there, all the better.

To a person informed and prepared, the journey into the afterlife would be like going to a land of which he had learned all the customs, the language, and the lifestyle—and maybe had even met a person from there. Thus he would not be a total stranger in the new land. He would, so to speak, be alerted as to what freeway to take—the on-ramps and the off-ramps, the speed limits, the conditions of the road, the weather, and so forth. Man does not want to take such an important trip into the next life without some preparation. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the preparation. The double value of gaining information from the scriptures for such a trip is that it is useful to us in this life and again in the next. The gospel of Jesus Christ brings the past, the present, and the future together into one and teaches us that there are four major stages in everyone's existence. These stages are premortal, mortal, postmortal spirit world, and resurrection.

The plan of salvation that has been revealed by God to the Prophet Joseph Smith and by him to the Church in our day includes the following:

Elder Orson Pratt, one of the original members of the Quorum of the Twelve in this dispensation, has written:

"The dealing of God towards his children from the time they are first born in Heaven, through all their successive stages of existence, until they are redeemed, perfected, and made Gods, is a pattern after which all other worlds are dealt with. . . . The creation, fall, and redemption of all future worlds with their inhabitants will be conducted upon the same general plan. . . .

"The Father of our spirits has only been doing that which His Progenitors did before Him. Each succeeding generation of Gods follow the example of the preceding ones. . . . [The same plan of redemption is carried out,] by which more ancient worlds have been redeemed. . . . Thus will worlds and systems of worlds . . . be multiplied in endless succession through the infinite depths of boundless space; some telestial, some terrestrial, and some Celestial, differing in their glory." [^10]

The Postmortal Spirit World: A Place of Activity

What is awaiting us in the spirit world, where we go immediately after we die? The revelations of the Lord and the teachings of the latter-day prophets give us the unmistakable understanding that the postmortal spirit world is a place of activity. Spirits have all the emotions, feelings, thoughts, and activities that we do here on earth with the exception that spirits cannot die. They experience love, hate, fear, joy, remorse, and happiness and have the capacity for memory, learning, intellectual advancement, and so on.

We have an account from President Wilford Woodruff, who while still living on the earth saw in vision the Prophet Joseph Smith several years after the Prophet's death. Joseph Smith was hurrying about with scarcely the time to stop and talk to Brother Woodruff. The Prophet Joseph explained to him that there was much work to do and so little time to do it to be ready for the Savior's Second Coming. President Woodruff said he believed what the Prophet taught him, and he caught a glimpse of the activity in the spirit world, at least among those who have the gospel, but said that it was a new concept to him to be so busy there. [^11]

President Brigham Young had an unusually clear understanding of the postmortal spirit world, and from him we learn that the spirit world is right here on this earth. He said that spirits are all around us, but being in a different sphere, they cannot ordinarily be seen. But they can see us. [^12] The Prophet Joseph Smith also taught that the spirits of the departed are not far away. At the funeral of Patriarch James Adams in Nauvoo, the Prophet explained:

["[Judge Adams] has had revelations concerning his departure, and has gone to a more important work. When men are prepared, they are better off to go hence. Brother Adams has gone to open up a more effectual door for the dead. The spirits of the just are exalted to a greater and more glorious work; hence they are blessed in their departure to the world of spirits. Enveloped in flaming fire, they are not far from us, and know and understand our thoughts, feelings, and motions, and are often pained therewith." [^13]

We learn from the writings of Peter (1 1 Pet. 3:18-20; 4:6) that while Jesus' body was in the tomb at the time of his mortal death, his spirit went to the world of spirits so that the gospel could be taught to those whom we call the dead. They are not really dead; they are alive on the other side of the veil. Happily, more information has been given about this. On 3 October 1918 in Salt Lake City, President Joseph F. Smith was shown in a vision how the preaching of the gospel is accomplished in the postmortal spirit world:

"I perceived that the Lord went not in person among the wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach them;

"But behold, from among the righteous, he organized his forces and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men; and thus was the gospel preached to the dead.

"And so it was made known among the dead, both small and great, the unrighteous as well as the faithful, that redemption had been wrought through the sacrifice of the Son of God upon the cross.

"Thus was it made known that our Redeemer spent his time during his sojourn in the world of spirits, instructing and preparing the faithful spirits of the prophets who had testified of him in the flesh;

"That they might carry the message of redemption unto all the dead, unto whom he could not go personally, because of their rebellion and transgression, that they through the ministration of his servants might also hear his words" (D&C 138:29-30, 35-37).

President Smith beheld in the vision that "the faithful elders of this dispensation, when they depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of the gospel" (D&C 138:57). He explained that women also teach the gospel in the spirit world. [^14]

I will now tell of an event that occurred in 1949, showing that those who have died are aware of what is happening here on earth. This is a true story that grew out of the death of a Lamanite member of the Church in Mesa, Arizona. I was not present on the occasion but have talked to those who were, and I have read written reports and diary entries on the matter.

The background is as follows: Mark Johnson Vest, a Lamanite of the Maricopa tribe, was an elder and president of the Cocopah Branch in Mesa, Arizona. He was the only one from his family who was a member of the Church. He was an active missionary and had brought some thirty to forty Lamanites into the Church. He was a very large man, 6'5" tall and nearly 300 pounds in weight. On 18 April 1949 he died unexpectedly of a heart attack in a bus depot. When arrangements were being made for the funeral, his family expressed the wish to have him cremated according to tribal custom, but members of the Church, including the district president, objected to this on the basis that the Church has traditionally disapproved of cremation. It was finally agreed that there should be two funerals, one in the Papago Ward chapel and the other on the Lehi Indian Reservation. The matter of cremation, however, was not resolved.

In those days Arizona was part of the California Mission. President Harold Wright, the district president, called Oscar W. McConkie Sr., president of the California Mission in Los Angeles, and arrangements were made for President McConkie to speak at the LDS funeral, which was to be held on 22 April. President McConkie had met Mark Vest previously. President Wright would conduct the LDS services.

As were the other members of the Church, President McConkie was uneasy about the plans for cremation. Brother McConkie was a very able and good man, well acquainted with the guidance that comes from the Spirit of God. Early on the day of the funeral, while pondering the matter and preparing what he would say, he began to have an unusual experience. He said he did not see with his natural eyes or hear any voices with his ears, but in his mind he became aware of a happening in the world of spirits with Mark Vest teaching the gospel. I quote from President McConkie's journal, which includes a report he made to the Brethren about the occasion:

"I could almost see Elder Vest towering above the crowd, standing and talking to a great congregation of his own people in the spirit world. . . . Some of the people cried out, saying, 'He is not a Lamanite. Give no heed to him. He is a Nephite.' . . . Elder Vest replied, 'I am a Lamanite. I observed the traditions of my people, and when I died my body was cremated according to the custom of my people.' Then he gained control of them by his words and preached the gospel with power unto those rebellious spirits and they quieted and listened and heard his words." [^15]

President McConkie explained further that Elder Vest's audience in the spirit world seemed to number twenty to thirty thousand. He said that the event was so clear in his mind that he saw one heckler rise and stretch forth his arm toward Elder Vest.

As a result of that spiritual communication, President McConkie assured the district president that in this case the restriction against cremation would be overruled for good. At the LDS funeral both President Wright and President McConkie spoke. President McConkie told about the spirit world and explained the role Mark Vest would have in teaching the gospel to his people in the world of spirits.

After the LDS services, President Wright and President McConkie attended the tribal funeral and the cremation. President Wright told me that the mourners brought food, new clothing, suitcases, shoes, pants, shirts, hats, and blankets and placed them on the heap of wood to be burned. President Wright said he talked to the tribal leader about the waste of so much new clothing and was told that "white men buy flowers; . . . we buy good clothes and useful things [and] the spirit carries them to be used in the heavens."

Another expression of the closeness of the spirit world has been given to us by President Joseph F. Smith:

"Sometimes the Lord expands our vision from this point of view and this side of the veil, that we feel and seem to realize that we can look beyond the thin veil which separates us from that other sphere. If we can see, by the enlightening influence of the Spirit of God and through the words that have been spoken by the holy prophets of God, beyond the veil that separates us from the spirit world, surely those who have passed beyond, can see more clearly through the veil back here to us than it is possible for us to see them from our sphere of action. I believe we move and have our being in the presence of heavenly messengers and of heavenly beings. We are not separated from them. We begin to realize more and more fully, as we become acquainted with the principles of the gospel, as they have been revealed anew in this dispensation, that we are closely related to our kindred, to our ancestors, to our friends and associates and co-laborers who have preceded us into the spirit world. We cannot forget them; we do not cease to love them; we always hold them in our hearts, in memory, and thus we are associated and united to them by ties we cannot break. . . . [They] can see us better than we can see them—that they know us better than we know them. They have advanced; we are advancing; we are growing as they have grown; we are reaching the goal that they have attained unto; and therefore, I claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous for our welfare, they love us now more than ever." [^16]

In view of these things we might ask: Does Caroline Hemenway Harman, who is now in the spirit world, know that a building is dedicated to her honor and memory at Brigham Young University? Using the principles enunciated by the latter-day prophets, we would cheerfully conclude that she does.

Elder Matthew Cowley reports that among the Maoris of New Zealand the hope and expectation of a next life is so strong that they gather around a dying person and send messages to their departed loved ones, much as we would send a message with someone going to another land. I quote Elder Cowley:

"I went into a hospital one day in New Zealand to bless a woman who didn't belong to the Church. She was dying. We all knew she was dying. Even the doctor said so. She was having her farewell party. Ah, that's one thing I like about the natives. When you go, they give you a farewell party. They all gather around. They send messages over to the other side. 'When you get over there, tell my mother I'm trying to do my best; I'm not so good, but I'm trying. Tell her to have a good room fixed for me when I get over there—plenty of fish, good meals.' My, it's wonderful how they send you off." [^17]

Wonderful as the spirit world may be, we are instructed in the revelations that a spirit alone cannot experience a fulness of joy and that long-range progress requires a physical body (see D&C 93:33-35). Consequently, the spirits in the postmortal spirit world look upon a long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage (see D&C 45:17; 138:50). This doctrine illustrates the importance of the resurrection and points up a major distinction between the belief of the Latter-day Saints, who cherish the body forever, and the Eastern philosophies, where escape from the body is the ultimate goal.

Life in the Resurrection: Continued Activity

We have talked briefly about the spirit world; now what about the resurrection? How will a resurrected person look in appearance, and what things will he do?

The Prophet Joseph Smith, who was visited by many celestial, resurrected beings, said that their beauty and glory "defy all description" (Joseph Smith—History 1:17), with countenances "truly like lightning" (Joseph Smith—History 1:32). Their clothing he described as "of most exquisite whiteness . . . exceedingly white and brilliant" (Joseph Smith—History 1:31). Seeing the resurrected Jesus, the Prophet wrote, "His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun" (D&C 110:3). Speaking of the glory to come in the celestial Resurrection, the Prophet said, "The old man with his silvery hairs will glory in bloom and beauty. No man can describe it to you—no man can write it." [^18]

What will life be like after we are resurrected? Activity continues. We started as members of a family, and a family we will always be if we follow the path of the gospel. We read in D&C 130:1-2:

"When the Savior shall appear we shall see him as he is. We shall see that he is a man like ourselves.

"And that same sociality which exists among us here will exist among us there, only it will be coupled with eternal glory, which glory we do not now enjoy."

Elder Orson Pratt, who understood the plan of salvation and who had an unusual gift for clear expression, explained this heavenly sociability this way:

"A Saint who is one in deed and in truth, does not look for an immaterial heaven, but he expects a heaven with lands, houses, cities, vegetation, rivers, and animals; with thrones, temples, palaces, kings, princes, priests, and angels; with food, raiment, musical instruments, etc., all of which are material. Indeed, the Saints' heaven is a redeemed, glorified, celestial, material creation, inhabited by glorified material beings, male and female, organized into families, embracing all the relationships of husbands and wives, parents and children, where sorrow, crying, pain, and death will be no more. Or to speak still more definitely, this earth, when glorified, is the Saints' eternal heaven. On it they expect to live, with body, parts, and holy passions; on it they expect to move and have their being; to eat, drink, converse, worship, sing, play on musical instruments, engage in joyful, innocent, social amusements, visit neighboring towns and worlds; indeed, matter and its qualities and properties are the only beings or things with which they expect to associate." [^19]

In other words, those who receive the full benefit of the atonement of Jesus Christ and of the gospel, rise in the resurrection to become gods and are still organized into families.

Where will this take place? The revelations teach us that this earth, in its final destiny and glorified state, will be a celestial kingdom whereon all those who have lived on this earth who receive celestial glory will dwell (D&C 88:17-26; 130:9).

Conclusion

There is a desire in everyone to achieve all that is possible, including immortality. We are, so to speak, strangers on this earth, with spirit echoes of our true origin. We are not simply mortals having an occasional spiritual experience. We are very old spirits, children of heavenly parents, having a mortal experience. We lived before we came here, and we yearn to continue to live after death. We yearn not to be forgotten. It has been the desire of the ages. Knowing what the Lord has said about premortal and postmortal life helps us give perspective and direction to our lives, have faith in Jesus Christ, and labor to build the kingdom of God on the earth. When we see the larger picture from premortal life, to mortal life, to postmortal spirit world, to Resurrection, we begin to realize that right now is our probationary time on earth, and we sense our current situation in God's eternal plan of salvation.

When we know these things we no longer speak simply of education but of "education for eternity." We do not think of having completed our education simply because we have graduated from a school, but we think in terms of "continuing education." The major world religions teach that every man has an immortal soul and will come to a day of accountability to a higher power. The plan of salvation as taught by The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints also teaches of the immortality of man and his accountability but defines much more clearly than does anyone else what a man is, why he is here, and what lies ahead after death. There is more emphasis on the individual and also on the importance of the physical body. The most unique LDS clarification is the emphasis on the family, not only the family of all mankind but the perpetuation of the individual family unit. When we have this additional knowledge, the hope for immortality becomes very strong, and we know that our relationship to Jesus Christ cannot be optional or casual. The gospel is not merely then a belief consisting of nice-to-do things, but these become critical, essential, necessary, and indispensable to the best interests and welfare of every individual.

Notes

From Seventh Annual Harman Lecture (Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1990), 1-22.

---
Notas:
[^1] The importance of teaching the doctrine of the resurrection Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149.
[^2] The relation between the fall of Adam and the resurrection Howard W. Hunter, in Conference Report, April 1986, 18.
[^3] Man's eternal need for a tabernacle Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 309.
[^4] "How are the dead raised up, and with what body do they come?" Doctrines of Salvation, 2:119.
[^5] The keys of the resurrection Mormon Doctrine, 730.
[^6] The resurrection of all living things. Ibid.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181.
[^8] Ibid., 297.
[^9] Ibid., 104-5.
[^10] History of the Church, 5:339.
[^11] Harold B. Lee, Youth and the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1955), 188-89.
[^12] Brigham Young, in Elders' Journal, 1 (1875): 153.
[^13] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 8:28.
[^14] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 18:333.
[^15] Joseph F. Smith, "Our Individual Immortal Identity,"Improvement Era 12 (June 1909): 592.
[^16] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 6:275; 15:136-39.
[^17] Erastus Snow, in Journal of Discourses, 25:34.
[^18] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 15:137.
[^19] Spencer W. Kimball, in Conference Report, Apr. 1977, 69.
