Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 44

The Doctrine of the Resurrection

There is so much information available about the resurrection that we could not possibly cover the entire topic in one chapter. However, we will consider significant points of doctrine.

In 3 Ne. 11:28, members of the Church are firmly commanded: "There shall be no disputations among you . . . concerning the points of my doctrine." And 3 Ne. 21:5-6 states that one of the great benefits of the scriptures is that["[from] these works . . . the Gentiles [can] know of the true points of my doctrine."

D&C 10:62 reminds us that the Book of Mormon "shall bring to light the true points of my doctrine."

Notice the emphasis on "points." A point is specific, the opposite of round, flat, dull, or indefinite. The following are some points of doctrine we will emphasize as we study the doctrine of the resurrection:

Meaning of the Word Resurrection

The term resurrection comes from two words: the prefix re-, meaning to repeat or do again, and surgere, meaning "to rise," as with a strong impulse or surge. A re-surrection is to be brought back to life; to have a resurge of life or power.

A resurrected person is one whose body was once alive, and which has died, and is filled again with a surge of power or life, which enables him to rise up again. A similar sounding term used to describe a political internal uprising is insurrection, and the participants are called insurgents.

The Resurrection Is among the First Principles

The Prophet Joseph Smith said, "The doctrines of the Resurrection of the Dead, and the Eternal Judgment are necessary to preach among the first principles of the Gospel of Jesus Christ." [^1] I take that to mean that one's understanding of the gospel would be incomplete and would lack substance if the teaching of the resurrection were not included.

The message of true Christianity is that Jesus conquered the grave not only for himself but for all mankind and for every living thing. The resurrection of Jesus from the tomb is the greatest event in history. When the first astronaut landed on the moon in July 1969, President Richard M. Nixon proclaimed it as "the greatest week in history." It is reported that the Reverend Billy Graham corrected him, and said that the resurrection of Jesus from the grave was the greatest week in history. President Howard W. Hunter declared the resurrection of Christ to be the "ultimate miracle," and the "single most crucial doctrine in the Christian religion." [^2]

To be a witness for the resurrection of Jesus is an apostolic thing. We read in Acts that when there was a vacancy in the Quorum occasioned by the death of Judas, Peter rose up and said there "must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his [Christ's] resurrection" (Acts 1:22).

A search of the first five chapters of the book of Acts indicates that the Twelve vigorously proclaimed the resurrection. We have already observed the passage in Acts 1:22. Note also the following scriptures.

On the day of Pentecost, Peter said to the multitude that David had prophesied of the resurrection of Christ, and now Peter and the Apostles were here to announce it had occurred: "This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses" (Acts 2:32).

In Acts 3:15 we read,["[Ye] killed the Prince of life, whom God hath raised from the dead; whereof we are witnesses."

And in Acts 4:1-2: "And as they spoke unto the people, the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees, came upon them,

"Being grieved that they . . . preached through Jesus the resurrection from the dead."

Add to that the affirmation of the Apostles' work in Acts 4:33: "And with great power gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus."

Finally, consider Acts 5:30-32: "The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye slew and hanged on a tree . . . and we are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God hath given to them that obey him."

The Resurrection Is One of the Mysteries of God

The idea of resurrection from the dead is contrary to what the natural man knows and sees in the natural world. The Prophet Joseph Smith said that the idea "that God should raise the dead" is "insoluble to the children of men in the last days." [^3] I understand that to mean that the world by its wisdom cannot accommodate belief in a resurrection. It is too "strait for them," and like the dove from Noah's ark, it finds no rest for the sole of its foot, and returns again to the sender (see Gen. 8:8-9). Alma indicates that a knowledge of the resurrection is one of the mysteries of God, knowable only by revelation (Alma 12:8-12; 40:3).

Paul experienced the worldly rejection of the resurrection when he stood before King Agrippa and said, "And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers . . . for which hope's sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead?" (Acts 26:6-8).

Later, in the same discourse, Paul says, "Having therefore obtained help of God, I continue unto this day, witnessing both to small and great, saying none other things than those which the prophets and Moses did say should come:

"That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that should rise from the dead, and should shew light unto the people, and to the Gentiles" (Acts 26:22-23).

At the mention of rising from the dead, Festus, the Roman governor, interrupted him and "said with a loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thyself; much learning doth make thee mad" (Acts 26:24).

Paul had experienced a similar rejection several years earlier in Athens, when "certain philosophers" hearing him preach called him a "babbler," and said, "He seemeth to be a setter forth of strange gods: because he preached unto them Jesus, and the resurrection" (Acts 17:18).

At that time, the people of Athens had taken him to Mars Hill and asked, "What new doctrine is this? For thou bringest strange things to our ears" (Acts 17:19-20).

Paul talked about the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man and then said that God had raised Jesus from the dead. "And when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked: and others said, we will hear thee again of this matter" (Acts 17:32).

Many Resurrected Beings Have Visited the Earth

The Prophet Joseph Smith is the greatest witness for the resurrection of Jesus Christ, and in that respect (as in many others) he stands ahead of all mankind who have lived on this earth in the past 1,900 years. He was visited by, and no doubt shook hands with, a great many resurrected beings, among them God the Father, Jesus Christ, Adam, Peter, James, John the Baptist, Moroni, Moses, Elijah, and a great many others. Moses and Elijah had been translated in their own day, but D&C 133:55 seems to say that they are now resurrected beings. Since resurrection is better than the translated state, it would seem appropriate that translated persons be resurrected as early as possible. President Joseph Fielding Smith interpreted D&C 133:55 in this way:

"When Elijah came to the Prophet Joseph Smith, he was not a translated being. He was a resurrected being. He had received his resurrection." [^4]

Elder Bruce R. McConkie also taught that those who were translated before the resurrection of our Lord "'were with Christ in his resurrection' (D&C 133:55). . . . It will be resurrected, not translated beings, who shall return with the city of Enoch."5

Whenever the Gospel Was Taught, the Resurrection Was Taught

Since the doctrine of the resurrection is a major cornerstone of the gospel of Jesus Christ, we can be assured that whenever the gospel was taught, the doctrine of the resurrection was taught. It was taught in the premortal life and was taught to Adam and to all of the prophets. It is taught in each of the standard works. Our present Old Testament doesn't contain much evidence that the Fall and the resurrection were taught by the ancients, but there are several New Testament and latter-day scripture indications that certify that once the Old Testament did teach the doctrine clearly.

For example, in Mosiah 13:33-35 we read from Abinadi:

"For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem his people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began—have they not spoken more or less concerning these things?

"Have they not said that God himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the earth?

"Yea, and have they not said also that he should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that he, himself, should be oppressed and afflicted?"

Note that Abinadi says that the ancient prophets of Old Testament times said that Christ should bring to pass the Resurrection. Several Book of Mormon prophets such as Nephi, Jacob, Lehi, Benjamin, Alma, and Amulek have said it, but our present Old Testament is relatively vague on this point. However, the Apostle Paul found it in his Old Testament, for as we noted earlier, Paul told Agrippa that he was held in court for teaching the resurrection, which was no more than Moses and the prophets had taught.

Resurrection is mentioned in Job 19:25-27, Hosea 13:14, Isa. 26:19, Ezek. 37, and Dan. 12:2, but not with the clarity we could expect or hope for, and probably not with the specific declaration that Paul and Abinadi found in their copies of scripture, specifying that the God of Israel would come down and become the Messiah and would bring to pass the resurrection.

The Book of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants on the Resurrection

Five thousand years ago the Lord revealed to the prophet Enoch what the fundamental message of the Book of Mormon would be. Neither history, culture, nor geography were mentioned. The book would testify of the Only Begotten and the resurrection. This prophecy is found in Moses 7:62 and is an excerpt from instruction about events to precede the second coming of the Lord in the last days: "And righteousness will I send down out of heaven; and truth will I send forth out of the earth, to bear testimony of mine Only Begotten; his resurrection from the dead; yea, and also the resurrection of all men."

Almost every prophet in the Book of Mormon makes some reference to the resurrection, although some say more than others. Jacob, Abinadi, Amulek, and Alma give the most detail, and of course Jesus himself gives the best demonstration. The word resurrection or resurrected occurs 83 times in the Book of Mormon and is used by many different speakers; and the phrase "raised from the dead," "rise from the dead," or some similar phrase occurs at least 13 times. The Book of Mormon uses the phrase "breaking the bands of death" at least 13 times; and something is said about the uniting of spirit and body at least 4 times. These various references to the doctrine of the resurrection add up to a total of at least 113 Book of Mormon references to the topic. By comparison, in the Doctrine and Covenants resurrection or resurrected occurs 30 times, "come forth from the dead" or some similar phrases occur 6 times, "rise . . ." or "rises from the dead" 3 times, making 39 total Doctrine and Covenants references to the resurrection. But remember that the revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants are given with the understanding that the reader has already studied the Book of Mormon.

The Book of Mormon is the best written source declaring the doctrine of the resurrection of Jesus Christ and of all mankind. It does not tell everything, but it is very effective in making known the basic principles of the resurrection. The Doctrine and Covenants extends our knowledge in greater detail.

We can put it down as a fact that whenever the gospel has been revealed, the fall of Adam has been proclaimed, and the resurrection of the dead has also been proclaimed with equal clarity. It is the Fall that makes the resurrection necessary. To deny the Fall is to deny the resurrection. Consequently we cannot understand the doctrine of the resurrection without having a correct understanding of the Fall.

The Fall Inherited from One's Mortal Parents

I suppose no active Latter-day Saint will question the reality of the fall of man, which is the direct result of the transgression of Adam and Eve. The Fall brought upon Adam and Eve two deaths: (1) the physical death of the body, and (2) spiritual death, which is to be shut out of the presence of God. To be cast out of the garden of Eden means to be shut out of God's presence. This apparently happened soon after they partook of the fruit, but physical death did not occur to Adam for hundreds of years.

When Adam and Eve became mortals, they were in the same condition as mankind is now. Each person born into the world has suffered the spiritual death and each will also suffer physical death. There are no exceptions—absolutely none. Even translated persons such as Enoch, Moses, Elijah, and those such as John the Beloved and the three Nephites will undergo the change called death, which means that the spirit separates from the physical body. Many have misunderstood this and have supposed that translated persons never die. The scripture says they will "not taste of death"—"never endure the pains of death." It does not say they will not die. In fact, John 21:21-23 endeavors to explain this: "Peter seeing him [John] saith to Jesus, Lord, and what shall this man do?

"Jesus saith unto him, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee? follow thou me.

"Then went this saying abroad among the brethren, that that disciple should not die: yet Jesus said not unto him, He shall not die; but, If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?"

This same distinction is given in 3 Ne. 28:8, which records the promise of Jesus to the three Nephites that they will be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality when the Lord comes again. Mormon asked the Lord if these three had "been cleaned from mortality to immortality," and was told "no, not yet." Mormon explains that these three underwent a change in their mortal bodies, so "that they might not taste of death," but would yet undergo "a greater change" at the "last day" (3 Ne. 28:36-40). I interpret that "greater change" as the actual permanent transition from death to resurrection, while their present condition—the lesser change—is the temporary state of translation. This is the same process I would conclude for all translated persons: Enoch, Moses, Elijah, and so forth. With reference to the change in "a twinkling of an eye," Elder Bruce R. McConkie has written, "All translated beings accordingly undergo what amounts to an instantaneous death and resurrection." [^5]

We took this excursion into the status of translated beings to underscore that there are none born into mortality who escape the experience of death. Death is universal because the Fall is universal. Our particular point is that the Fall is biologically inherited from our parents. It would be worth a few minutes to read what the scriptures say about this. King Benjamin, quoting the words of an angel, says, "For behold, and also his blood atoneth for the sins of those who have fallen by the transgression of Adam, who have died not knowing the will of God concerning them, or who have ignorantly sinned" (Mosiah 3:11).

Note the phrase "fallen by the transgression of Adam."

Speaking precisely of little children, king Benjamin said, "For behold, as in Adam, or by nature, they fall, even so the blood of Christ atoneth for their sins" (Mosiah 3:16).

Note the phrase, "as in Adam, or by nature, they fall." This passage seems to say that children inherit the Fall by the biological process of being conceived and born. They do not inherit the responsibility for the Fall, or become accountable for the sin that caused the Fall, nor do they have to pay for the Fall, but they inherit the Fall from their mortal parents.

We can illustrate this quite easily by reviewing what we already know. The fall of Adam brought death. Little children in their infant state are innocent of any sin, yet little children die every day. It cannot be for their own sins in mortality that they die, especially if they die when one day, one week, or one year old. It can only be that they have inherited death. This physical death is ingrained in their physical bodies, inherited from their mortal parents.

But what about the other death, the spiritual death? Do they inherit that also? I believe that they do, and there is a scripture that says so in Moses 6:55. But to get the proper flow of thought, we should begin with Moses 6:48 and read to verse 55.

"And [Enoch] said unto them: Because that Adam fell, we are; and by his fall came death; and we are made partakers of misery and woe.

"Behold Satan hath come among the children of men, and tempteth them to worship him; and men have become carnal, sensual, and devilish, and are shut out from the presence of God.

"But God hath made known unto our fathers that all men must repent.

"And he called upon our father Adam by his own voice, saying: I am God; I made the world, and men before they were in the flesh.

"And he also said unto him: If thou wilt turn unto me, and hearken unto my voice, and believe, and repent of all thy transgressions, and be baptized, even in water, in the name of mine Only Begotten Son, who is full of grace and truth, which is Jesus Christ, the only name which shall be given under heaven, whereby salvation shall come unto the children of men, ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, asking all things in his name, and whatsoever ye shall ask, it shall be given you.

"And our father Adam spake unto the Lord, and said: Why is it that men must reepent and be baptized in water? And the Lord said unto Adam: Behold I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden.

"Hence came the saying abroad among the people, that the Son of God hath atoned for original guilt, wherein the sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children, for they are whole from the foundation of the world.

"And the Lord spake unto Adam, saying: Inasmuch as thy children are conceived in sin, even so when they begin to grow up, sin conceiveth in their hearts, and they taste the bitter, that they may know to prize the good."

God tells Adam to repent of all his transgressions (note that the word is plural). For a remission of these transgressions committed in mortality, Adam must repent, be baptized, and have faith in Jesus Christ. When Adam asks why men must be baptized, the Lord says, "I have forgiven thee thy transgression in the Garden of Eden." This is before Adam is baptized, yet the "original sin" is already forgiven him. Adam didn't have to be baptized for forgiveness of the original sin, and neither do we, since the "sins of the parents cannot be answered upon the heads of the children." However, the propensity for sin, the ability to sin, is in the newborn babe by inheritance, just as the seeds of physical death are there by inheritance. That is the point that is being expressed in the words "conceived in sin."

The act of begetting children is not sinful, but little children come into the world "conceived in sin"—that is, subject to spiritual alienation—and are shut out of the presence of God. Most of us have reared children and have known that they are mentally capable of wrongdoing long before they are eight years old. Legally the little children are not held accountable, but they know how to devise plans; they experience jealousy and selfishness, all on their own; and they devise little ways to take advantage of other children by schemes. The way they manipulate one another in the exchange of toys is instructive. They are capable of devious behavior. When one of my daughters was about three years old, our family was having breakfast one morning, and she would not eat her cereal. The rest of the family was through eating, but we would not let her leave the table until she ate her cereal. We all went into the living room, leaving her alone in the kitchen. I watched her get up from the table, empty her cereal into the garbage can, return to her seat, and then say, "I'm through." She did not know I had seen her do this. I asked if she had eaten her cereal and she said she had. The Lord won't count that because she was only three, but she was capable of a deception and able to figure out how to pull it off. I think that fits under the statement that children "are conceived in sin," and as they grow up, "even so sin conceiveth in their hearts."

It is scripturally sound that children biologically inherit both deaths from their parents. That is the way the Fall has been perpetuated from Adam through the generations. Consider the expression of the brother of Jared, pleading with the Lord for mercy and saying that "because of the fall, our natures have become evil continually" (Ether 3:2).

The Resurrection Is As Universal and Comprehensive As the Fall

Since the Fall is universal and automatic, the redemption from the Fall must be equally universal and automatic—with no exceptions. Everybody, including the sons of perdition, will be resurrected. The resurrection must be as broad as the Fall. Not only the resurrection of the body from the physical death is universal, but all mankind, by the resurrection, will be returned to the presence of God. I would recommend the following passages of scripture on this point.

"And it shall come to pass that when all men shall have passed from this first death unto life, insomuch as they have become immortal, they must appear before the judgment-seat of the Holy One of Israel" (2 Ne. 9:15).

"Wo unto all those who die in their sins; for they shall return to God, and behold his face, and remain in their sins" (2 Ne. 9:38).

And from Alma 42:23: "The atonement bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead; and the resurrection of the dead bringeth back men into the presence of God; and thus they are restored in to his presence, to be judged according to their works."

Words could not be plainer that all mankind will be restored to the presence of God. The universal banishment from God that was brought about by the fall of Adam will be overcome in every person descended from Adam when that person is resurrected.

We read in Hel. 14:15-17 these words from Samuel the Lamanite:

"For behold, he surely must die that salvation may come; yea, it behooveth him and becometh expedient that he dieth, to bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, that thereby men may be brought into the presence of the Lord.

"Yea, behold, this death bringeth to pass the resurrection, and redeemeth all mankind from the first death—that spiritual death; for all mankind, by the fall of Adam being cut off from the presence of the Lord, are considered as dead, both as to things temporal and to things spiritual.

"But behold, the resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord."

Samuel points out that if they have not repented of their own sins they cannot stay in the Lord's presence and will be sent away a second time from the presence of the Lord, but they are there long enough for the judgment.

In Morm. 9:12-13 are these words of Moroni:

"Behold, he created Adam, and by Adam came the fall of man. And because of the fall of man came Jesus Christ, even the Father and the Son; and because of Jesus Christ came the redemption of man.

"And because of the redemption of man, which came by Jesus Christ, they are brought back into the presence of the Lord; yea, this is wherein all men are redeemed, because the death of Christ bringeth to pass the resurrection, which bringeth to pass a redemption from an endless sleep, from which sleep all men shall be awakened by the power of God when the trump shall sound; and they shall come forth, both small and great, and all shall stand before his bar, being redeemed and loosed from this eternal band of death, which death is a temporal death."

There can be no mistaking the fact that the resurrection package for every person includes not only a renewed and permanent life for the body but also an overcoming of the spiritual death (being shut out from the presence of God) for all persons, saints and unrepentant sinners alike. If this were not so, Christ's victory over the Fall would not be complete and total. Since the Fall brought two kinds of death to every person, the resurrection must overcome those two deaths for every person. Everyone will spend eternity in a body.

When we see this clearly, we are better able to understand Paul's statement, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive" (1 Cor. 15:22). Was Paul speaking only of the physical death? Of course not. Was he speaking only of the righteous? No, he said all men die, and all shall be made alive.

No Salvation without a Tabernacle

The resurrection is as necessary to the welfare of the spirit as it is to the body. This viewpoint deepens our appreciation for many other passages, such as D&C 45:17: "For as ye have looked upon the long absence of your spirits from your bodies to be a bondage, I will show unto you how the day of redemption shall come."

And 138:50: "For the dead had looked upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage."

And D&C 93:33-34: "For man is spirit. The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably connected, receive a fulness of joy;

"And when separated, man cannot receive a fulness of joy."

We gain much from these statements of the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"We came to this earth that we might have a body and present it pure before God in the celestial kingdom. The great principles of happiness consists in having a body. The devil has no body, and herein is his punishment. He is pleased when he can obtain the tabernacle of man, and when cast out by the Savior he asked to go into the herd of swine, showing that he would prefer a swine's body to having none." [^6]

"Perhaps there are principles here that few men have thought of. No person can have this salvation except through a tabernacle.

"Now, in this world, mankind are naturally selfish, ambitious and striving to excel one above another; yet some are willing to build up others as well as themselves. So in the other world there are a variety of spirits. Some seek to excel. And this was the case with Lucifer when he fell. He sought for things which were unlawful. Hence he was sent down, and it is said he drew many away with him; and the greatness of his punishment is that he shall not have a tabernacle. This is his punishment." [^7]

Millions of religious people hold to a doctrine of reincarnation, which is contrary to the concept of resurrection. That is, the idea that the spirit inhabits a series of physical bodies. Such believe is as opposite to the true meaning of resurrection as a doctrine can be. The Prophet Joseph said it was a doctrine of the devil. [^8]

With What Body Are the Dead Raised?

Paul's excellent exposition in 1 Cor. 15 is a remarkable statement on the resurrection and one of the great chapters of scripture. There are many significant points to be found in it, but for now let's look at verse 35: "But some man will say, How are the dead raised up? and with what body do they come?"

Paul uses the remainder of the chapter to answer these two questions, and he launches into a discussion of the degrees of glory and also refers to the resurrected body as a "spiritual" body (1 Cor. 15:44). It would help us as teachers and parents in the Church to be precise in terminology. The creation of our spirits would be best spoken of as a spirit creation, not a spiritual creation. Spiritual is a statement of condition. A resurrected body is a physical body in a spiritual condition, as contrasted to our mortal bodies, which are physical but are not in a spiritual condition, being subject to death, containing blood, etc.

Note Amulek's precise use of the word spiritual in a passage from Alma 11:45:

"Now, behold I have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. I say unto you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body, that is from death, even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more; their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see corruption."

This passage contains many answers: Resurrected persons never die again. The resurrected body is a "spiritual" body. The word spiritual is also used in D&C 88:27-28 in speaking of the physical resurrection:

"For notwithstanding they die, they also shall rise again, a spiritual body.

"They who are of a celestial spirit shall receive the same body which was a natural body; even ye shall receive your bodies, and your glory shall be that glory by which your bodies are quickened."

Two things of importance in the foregoing passage are (1) a resurrected body is a "spiritual" body (not a spirit body), and (2) in the resurrection one receives "the same body which was a natural body."

The Fundamental Parts of the Body

There was conversation among the Brethren in Nauvoo about whether or not a person received his same bodily elements in the resurrection. Elder Orson Pratt observed that a man's body is constantly changing, losing old cells and producing new ones, and in the course of seven years a complete change has taken place. This would seem to complicate the idea of a literal bodily resurrection and of one getting his own bodily elements in the resurrection.

In a conference session on Friday, 7 April 1843, the Prophet responded to this concept. The report reads as follows:

"In response to a comment by Elder Orson Pratt that a man's body changes every seven years, the Prophet replied:

"There is no fundamental principle belonging to a human system that ever goes into another in this world or in the world to come; I care not what the theories of men are. We have the testimony that God will raise us up, and he has the power to do it. If any one supposes that any part of our bodies, that is, the fundamental parts thereof, ever goes into another body, he is mistaken." [^9]

We have only scant background on the situation that prompted the Prophet's public statement on the matter. However, thirty-one years later Elder Pratt gave a lecture in Ogden, Utah, in which he discoursed at length on the theory of a man's body changing every seven years, and also the matter of a man eating meat for nourishment and both the man and the animal receiving their own bodies in the resurrection. Several other situations pertaining to the resurrection are also discussed in Elder Pratt's lecture, which is recorded in Journal of Discourses 16:353-59. I was pleased to see that Elder Pratt's conclusions were in harmony with the Prophet Joseph's statement.

Elder Harold B. Lee discussed the Prophet Joseph's statement about fundamental parts and cited an explanation from a Dr. Joseph A. Ammussen, who lived in Santa Monica, California:

"We have bodies that are composed of bone, muscle, fat, blood, lymph, nerve, and tissues. In all these tissues there is a building up and a breaking down of complex chemical compounds. These substances are made into tissues. They give form and beauty to the body, and also supply energy. They are derived from the elements in food, drink, and air. These are not the fundamental parts of the body, however, for they are used and then discarded, and new substances come to take their place. This is not true of the fundamental parts. They never change. A person may fast for a certain period of time, and become very emaciated, 'lose flesh' we say. People may live on their own tissues until they become almost 'skin and bone,' yet they live and can, when fed again, regain their former form and weight. During the fast, the fundamental parts of the body are not lost, but only the tissues that are taken into the body temporarily." [^10]

It would be helpful if we had a more extensive explanation from the Prophet Joseph on what he meant by "fundamental parts." I have interpreted this to mean that there was something in each cell of everyone's body that is precisely the property of the owner of the body and that no matter what I eat, nothing else's "fundamental parts" ever become my fundamental parts, and no matter what becomes of my body, my fundamental parts never become the fundamental parts of any other living organism.

Think of this in terms of baby teeth, or fingernails, toenails, whiskers, and hair we have cut off through a lifetime. We don't want those pieces of our body back; if so, we would be resurrected with four-foot-long fingernails, etc. But whatever it is in the last joint of my fingers and toes that can produce a nail, I want that back, and whatever it was on the top of my head that can produce hair, I want that fundamental part back, in good working order.

We each obtained our own body in our mother's womb, and that body is precisely and exclusively ours and there is something about it that is our sole ownership not only now, but through all eternity. To be denied a body—as is the case with Lucifer—is everlasting damnation. Or if there were not a resurrection, it would be everlasting damnation. We have barely begun to appreciate our mothers, and what birth into mortality means to us in terms of eternity.

President Brigham Young spoke of the resurrection in complete agreement with the Prophet Joseph:

"The question may be asked, do not the particles that compose man's body, when returned to mother earth, go to make or compose other bodies? No, they do not. . . . Neither can the particles which have comprised the body of man become parts of the bodies of other men, or of beasts, fowls, fish, insect, or vegetables. They are governed by divine law and though they may pass from the knowledge of the scientific world, that divine law still holds, governs and controls them. Man's body may be buried in the ocean, it may be eaten by wild beasts, or it may be burned to ashes, they may be scattered to the four winds, yet the particles of which it is composed will not be incorporated into any form of vegetable or animal life, to become a component part of their structure . . . at the sound of the trumpet of God every particle of our physical structures necessary to make our tabernacles perfect will be assembled, to be rejoined with the spirit, every man in his order. Not one particle will be lost."12

President Young also stated, "The very particles that compose our bodies will be brought forth in the morning of the resurrection." [^11]

And President John Taylor amplified our understanding in these words: "All must come forth from the grave, some time or other, in the selfsame tabernacles that they possessed while living on the earth." [^12]

Now I quote from President Joseph F. Smith:

"What a glorious thought it is . . . that those from whom we have to part here we will meet again and see as they are. We will meet the same identical being that we associate with here in the flesh—not some other soul, some other being, or the same being in some other form, but the same identity with the same form and likeness, the same person we knew and were associated with in our mortal existence, even to the wounds in the flesh. Not that a person will always be marred by scars, wounds, deformities, defects or infirmities, for these will be removed in their course, in their proper time, according to the merciful providence of God. Deformity will be removed; defects will be eliminated, and men and women shall attain to that perfection of their spirits, to the perfection that God designed in the beginning."15

President Smith's emphasis that the scars, wounds, and deformities are still present at the moment of resurrection is a strong argument in favor of the identical elements. There would be no need for such wounds and scars if a new body were fashioned from new materials.

Twenty-five years ago I was teaching an institute class at UCLA and I said that in the resurrection one receives the same body that he had as a mortal. One graduate student took strong exception to this and became quite exercised over the idea. He was a doctoral candidate in biology, and said that his studies had shown him that there is no way that the resurrection could include our present bodily elements. When I showed him the "fundamental parts" statement from the Prophet Joseph Smith, he was not convinced, and he finally said the only way he could accept it is if the "fundamental parts" were the person's spirit.

He did not tell me just what he had learned in biology that undercut his acceptance of the literal resurrection, but I have thought since that it may have been the discovery of what is now called DNA or RNA. I have talked to others who feel that had the early Brethren known about DNA or cloning and molecular structure, they might not have said what they said about the literal resurrection. The idea is that we will get "a" body, but not "the" body. Such a body will be composed, they say, of the same kinds of elements, but not of the very elements.

My reaction to this is that if we make our doctrine by the light of our own reasoning and knowledge, we might need to frequently revise our testimonies. If it isn't DNA, RNA, and molecular structure, it will be something else that bothers us. I don't know how these principles work. The Prophet Joseph's understanding of the resurrection and the fundamental parts was not derived from human reasoning and research, but by revelation, which transcends and endures beyond the shifting and temporary conclusions of human beings. Joseph Smith understood the law that governs the resurrection. Revealed knowledge may not be supported immediately by physical evidence, but it is the "pure knowledge" that "enlarges the soul" promised in D&C 121:42. If we do not get our same bodies in the resurrection and get other bodies instead, that is a type of reincarnation, which doctrinally we could not subscribe to. Such would also negate the concept of resurrection being a restoration, as in Alma 11:43-45; 41:2 (This topic receives additional treatment in chapter 35, "The Law of Restoration as Taught in the Book of Mormon.")

How Are the Dead Raised?

We have now talked about Paul's first question: "With what body do the dead come?" Now let's consider briefly the second: "How are the dead raised up?"

Both President Brigham Young [^13] and Elder Erastus Snow [^14] taught that the resurrection will be conducted much as other things are done in the kingdom, by those in authority and by delegation. The procedure is that as one cannot baptize himself, nor can he baptize others until he himself is baptized and ordained, so one cannot resurrect himself but will be called forth by someone in authority. Men will be given the keys of this ordinance after they are resurrected, and then they can resurrect others. Although these brethren do not say it, I expect that a man with the keys will resurrect members of his family; it is a patriarchal thing. President Young also indicates that Joseph Smith will be the first person resurrected in this dispensation, and this will extend back all the way to the meridian of time. Joseph Smith will receive the keys and give them to others.

In April Conference 1977, President Spencer W. Kimball quoted President Brigham Young, who said, "We are in possession of all the ordinances that can be administered in the flesh; but there are other ordinances and administrations that must be administered beyond this world. I know you would like to ask what they are. I will mention one. We have not, neither can we receive here, the ordinance and the keys of resurrection." [^15]

Continuing, President Kimball said: "Do we have the keys of resurrection? . . . We do not know of anyone who can resurrect the dead as did Jesus the Christ when he came back." [^16] President Kimball's thesis was that the world, by its wisdom, has not produced a resurrection.

Death and Resurrection of All Things

Latter-day scripture is clear and repetitive that death came by the fall of Adam, and that resurrection came by Jesus Christ. We learn that everyting dies—man, animals, fish, plants, even the earth itself—and everything that dies shall be restored to life. Perhaps the most comprehensive passages on this subject are D&C 29:23-25; 63:49; and 101:23-26.

D&C 77:2 states that animals as well as men have spirits that resemble the body and animals as well as men will enjoy eternal happiness. A resurrection is not specifically mentioned, but it is implied in light of all else we know.

The doctrine in relation to animals is easily determined. If they are the creations of God, and if they die, they are candidates for resurrection through the atonement of Christ. "And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand," says the Lord (D&C 29:25) in speaking of "men, beasts, fowls of the air, and fishes of the sea."

Jesus the Only Begotten Son of God in the Flesh

Since the Fall has captured all mankind in the grip of its two deaths, and there is none who escape, how was Jesus able to conquer both deaths? Paul says Jesus "led captivity captive" (Eph. 4:8). That is, he captured the captor. It is because Jesus is the "Only Begotten of the Father," the "Son of God in the flesh" (1 Ne. 11:18, 21) that he can do that. He had a special supernatural power "given him of the Father" (Hel. 5:11; Morm. 7:5-6), that other men do not have. He was not dominated by death as we are. Giving his life was "not a human sacrifice," nor the "sacrifice of man," but the infinite sacrifice of a god (Alma 34:10). Jesus, because of his paternity, had life in himself.

He spoke of this unique power over death. "For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself" (John 5:26). And "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father" (John 10:17-18).

If Jesus had been subject to death, and had to die anyway, eventually, then he wouldn't really be "giving his life" in the fullest sense. He was only giving time. However, since he did not have to die at all, when he laid down his life for the Atonement he did indeed give his life to pay the debt of sin.

Miscellaneous Observations

Studying the resurrection makes some things stand out that are passed over when viewed casually. Some semi-important things are as follows:

Â First and last resurrection. The scriptures speak repeatedly of the first resurrection and of the last resurrection, and of the just and the unjust, but the term "second" resurrection is not mentioned in scripture. (See D&C 76:15-17, 39, 50, 65; 76:85.)

Â "Morning of the first resurrection." This term has reference only to those who have a celestial resurrection, regardless of when they come up. This phrase does not appear in scripture. Joseph Smith used the term "in the morning of the resurrection." [^17] It is commonly used in patriarchal blessings. The term "morning of the first resurrection" might possibly have developed from D&C 43:18. (See also D&C 45:17.)

The scriptures show that the prophets in every age regarded the resurrection of the physical body as a reality, which would unconditionally occur to every person regardless of individual worthiness. It is declared to have coverage as broad as death. Although they explained much about the resurrection, the major effort was to get people prepared spiritually. Redemption from the spiritual death inherited from the fall of Adam will come to everyone. Redemption from the spiritual death that results from one's own sins is conditional and receives serious attention in the scriptures. The scriptures declare that redemption from the effects of Adam's fall (both the physical and spiritual death) is absolute, unconditional, and automatically assured to all mankind by Jesus Christ without man's effort. Redemption from man's own sins is available because of the atonement of Jesus Christ but requires individual repentance and obedience. Perhaps that is why the scriptures do not teach how to perform a resurrection but do teach how to repent.

In the scriptures we have been told many things about the resurrection, for which knowledge we are grateful. We are most grateful, however, to the Lord Jesus Christ, who made the resurrection and redemption possible. We praise him and thank him in every way we can.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] David B. Guralmik, ed. (New York: World Publishing Co., 1970), s.v. "miracle."
[^2] Mormon Doctrine, 506.
[^3] Man's eternal need for a tabernacle Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 309.
[^4] "How are the dead raised up, and with what body do they come?" Doctrines of Salvation, 2:119.
[^5] The keys of the resurrection Mormon Doctrine, 730.
[^6] The resurrection of all living things. Ibid.
[^7] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 181.
[^8] Ibid., 297.
[^9] Ibid., 104-5.
[^10] History of the Church, 5:339.
[^11] Harold B. Lee, Youth and the Church (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1955), 188-89.
[^12] Brigham Young, in Elders' Journal, 1 (1875): 153.
[^13] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 8:28.
[^14] John Taylor, in Journal of Discourses, 18:333.
[^15] Joseph F. Smith, "Our Individual Immortal Identity,"Improvement Era 12 (June 1909): 592.
[^16] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 6:275; 15:136-39.
[^17] Erastus Snow, in Journal of Discourses, 25:34.
