Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 45

Why Miracles Are Necessary for Man's Salvation

Unto every kingdom is given a law; and unto every law there are certain bounds also and conditions" (D&C 88:38).

Miracles are necessary for man's salvation because of the fall of Adam.

One dictionary definition of a miracle is: "An event or effect in the physical world deviating from the known laws of nature, or transcending our knowledge of these laws." [^1] That is, a miracle is a happening contrary to or independent of the usual law that operates in our natural world.

Miracles in a gospel sense are defined by Elder Bruce R. McConkie as "those occurrences wrought by the power of God which are wholly beyond the power of man to perform . . . [and] which cannot be duplicated by man's present powers or by any powers which he can obtain by scientific advancements." [^2]

All gospel miracles conform to law but not to the natural laws of the mortal fallen world on which we now live.

Our God and all other exalted celestial beings live in an environment that functions in the framework of celestial law, differing greatly from the law that governs our earth at this time. What celestial beings do is completely natural to their environment but not natural to our mortal environment. Thus the Lord, speaking to mankind through the prophet Isaiah said:

"For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.

"For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts" (Isa. 55:8-9).

This contrast of conditions is also referred to in D&C 29:34-45, in which the terms "spiritual" and "temporal" are used to designate the Lord's situation as compared to mortal man's situation. The Lord says, "All things unto me are spiritual" (v. 34), meaning that he is a celestial being and lives in a celestial environment, and he works by celestial law. The passage continues by explaining a distinction between the Lord's condition and Adam's condition after Adam fell:

"Wherefore, verily I say unto you that all things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; neither any man, nor the children of men; neither Adam, your father, whom I created.

"Behold, I gave unto him that he should be an agent unto himself; and I gave unto him commandment, but no temporal commandment gave I unto him, for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal, neither carnal nor sensual. . . .

"Wherefore, it came to pass that the devil tempted Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit and transgressed the commandment, wherein he became subject to the will of the devil, because he yielded unto temptation.

"Wherefore, I, the Lord God, caused that he should be cast out from the Garden of Eden, from my presence, because of his transgression, wherein he became spiritually dead" (D&C 29:34-41).

When Adam fell he moved away from the influence of a spiritual-type law, under which there was no death, sin, or remorse and in which he was in the presence of God, into a realm of mortal or temporal law, under which exists death, sin, and remorse and in which man is shut out from the presence of God.

The purpose of the gospel of Jesus Christ is to raise and rescue man from his fallen state and change him into a state of redemption. Fallen man cannot redeem himself because his abilities are limited to the mortal sphere in which he lives, and salvation is not a condition natural to mortal law. Only a God—one not limited by or subject to mortal law—could lift man to a higher level and thus to a better life.

When the foregoing is understood, it follows that unless a mortal human is influenced or delivered by a power that emanates from outside the mortal condition, he will remain without salvation. Everything about the gospel of Jesus Christ originated from a source beyond the bounds and conditions of mortality. Characteristics of the gospel are such things as divine priesthood authority, remission of sins, joy, revelation, spirit-born testimony, sanctification by the Holy Ghost, healings, callings, and resurrection of the dead—all of which originated in another world. Whenever any gospel power touches a human life, the process is a miracle because none of the gospel accoutrements or traits are natural to the mortal condition.

Since the devil lives in a nonmortal existence, he is able to perform signs and miracles. However, being limited to his own sphere and being unsaved himself, he has power to deceive but not to save or redeem. Thus the Lord warned us, "He that seeketh signs shall see signs, but not unto salvation" (D&C 63:7).

Is it not abundantly evident that without gospel miracles there can be no salvation? If remission of sins is necessary, it requires a miracle. If a testimony of Jesus through the Holy Ghost is necessary, it requires a miracle. If baptism by someone holding divine authority is necessary, it required a miracle for that authority to have been brought from heaven. Thus the prophet Mormon (cited by Moroni) exclaimed that gospel miracles are necessary "as long as time shall last, or the earth shall stand, or there shall be one man upon the face thereof to be saved" (Moro. 7:35-38).

The greatest and the ultimate miracle is the permanent victory over death, the resurrection of the dead body. Death reigns in mortality, indeed "mortal" means being subject to death. But God is the God of the living (see Matt. 22:32), for all live unto him. Man cannot resurrect himself, but God, who has power over death, will bring all men and all forms of animals, fish, and fowl to everlasting life (see D&C 29:24-25).

It is not necessary that every man calm a storm or walk on water or turn water into wine. But those miraculous things that cleanse a soul, give testimony of Christ, administer divine authority, call people to serve, give revelation, and resurrect a dead body from the grave are indispensable to man's individual salvation.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 197-98, 220, 324-25.
[^2] Mormon Doctrine, 506.
