Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 46

All Things Are Governed by Law

Most Latter-day Saints believe in divine revelation and are sure that the prophet receives guidance from the Lord for the direction of the Church and that individuals receive revelation and inspiration for the conduct of their personal lives. People in and out of the Church generally trust in an all-powerful, all-knowing, kind Providence who looks after the human family, rendering assistance and protection when needed, often without the recipients being aware of having received it. Many speak of the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man in general terms as a kind of ethereal relationship that somehow just exists.

While I believe that all of the above is true, I find in addition that the scriptures, especially the latter-day scriptures, teach of a far more direct and real association, with an actual parent-child relationship between God and man, and of live, personal heavenly beings having direct contact with mortals on the earth.

According to the scriptures all of these associations and contacts are governed by laws that are older than this earth. The Prophet Joseph Smith taught that God has a definite plan for man's salvation and that there are eternal laws, fixed, irrevocable, unalterable principles, and unvarying ways for mankind to reach perfection and become like God. [^1] According to these laws, salvation cannot be reached outside of the gospel of Jesus Christ and the plan of salvation. This plan includes the Creation of the earth and of man, the Fall of Adam, the atoning sacrifice of Jesus Christ, and the authority of the holy priesthood, which God has bestowed upon men on the earth.

We note the following instructions the Lord gave through the Prophet Joseph Smith: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—And when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated" (D&C 130:20-21).

Elsewhere the Lord spoke through the Prophet Joseph Smith:

"For all who will have a blessing at my hands shall abide the law which was appointed for that blessing, and the conditions thereof, as were instituted from before the foundation of the world. . . .

"Behold, mine house is a house of order, saith the Lord God, and not a house of confusion.

"Will I accept of an offering, saith the Lord, that is not made in my name?

"Or will I receive at your hands that which I have not appointed?

"And will I appoint unto you, saith the Lord, except it be by law, even as I and my Father ordained unto you, before the world was?

"I am the Lord thy God; and I give unto you this commandment—that no man shall come unto the Father but by me or by my word, which is my law, saith the Lord" (D&C 132:5, 8-12).

Jesus stated the same principles to the Jews when he said, "Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up" (Matt. 15:13). That is, only those things that God has appointed and approved of through his laws and the ordinances of the gospel will endure beyond mortality. This is true of concepts as well as of things. The Lord has further explained that the final destinies of mankind are determined by the laws that are obeyed or are broken. We read in D&C 88:21-24:

"And they who are not sanctified through the law which I have given unto you, even the law of Christ, must inherit another kingdom, even that of a terrestrial kingdom, or that of a telestial kingdom.

"For he who is not able to abide the law of a celestial kingdom cannot abide a celestial glory.

"And he who cannot abide the law of a terrestrial kingdom cannot abide a terrestrial glory.

"And he who cannot abide the law of a telestial kingdom cannot abide a telestial glory; therefore he is not meet for a kingdom of glory. Therefore he must abide a kingdom which is not a kingdom of glory."

The foregoing passages say at least this much: The laws of salvation and exaltation are eternal and therefore are older than the earth; there have been no additions or revisions in the requirements since the Creation of the earth; and it is designed that salvation is obtained only through the law of Christ and in no other way. The law of Christ, which is the gospel of Christ, was operable in the pre-earth sphere; is operable in the current mortal, fallen world; and will still be in force, affecting the destinies of the human family, in the eternities.

The gospel of Christ presents an eternal perspective of right and wrong and reveals the standard against which progress or failure will be measured in the long view and the long haul of eternity. Because the laws are eternal, the truths are absolute. The gospel of Jesus Christ and the laws of God are absolute truths. They do not change, and salvation is available to all on exactly the same principles. There are no bargain days or special sales. All who are saved must be saved on the same basis and by obedience to the same plan.

In the current mortal, fallen condition, death, sickness, and decay are paramount. Every living thing sooner or later will die. But the scriptures teach that death, sickness, and decay did not exist in the earth or among man and animals when they were first created (see 2 Ne. 2:22; Moses 3:9). Although the creation was physical, the conditions were spiritual and without sin or death. A spiritual law governed. With the Fall of Adam death entered the world and a different law began to operate in the earth. We can call it natural law, temporal law, mortal law, or whatever. And God, who knew of things before the Fall, promised to restore all things to their paradisiacal glory so that all life—people, animals, fowls, fish, and plants—shall once again be deathless, and life on this earth will again be immortal. Reference is made of this in the tenth article of faith: "The earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." The Lord also spoke on this topic in D&C 29:23-25:

"And the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth.

"For all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fulness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea;

"And not one hair, neither mote, shall be lost, for it is the workmanship of mine hand."

The idea of higher and lower laws is clearly expressed in the revelations. Paul affirms that the things of man are known by man in his natural frame of reference, but the things of God are known only by the aid of the Holy Spirit, and the natural man cannot know of the things of God except through the Spirit (1 Cor. 2:11-14). Likewise, the Lord said to Isaiah: "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways. . . . For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts" (Isa. 55:8-9).

This is evidently the same concept expressed by the Lord when he said, "All things unto me are spiritual, and not at any time have I given unto you a law which was temporal; . . . for my commandments are spiritual; they are not natural nor temporal; neither carnal nor sensual" (D&C 29:34-35). That is, the Lord in his redeemed and exalted condition does not operate in the natural law environment, for he is in a celestial environment. As noted earlier, the glory of a people's future inheritance and environment will depend on the type of law they obey, whether it be a celestial law, terrestrial law, telestial law, or law of perdition.

As mortals we are limited to working with and being subject to the laws of this mortal, fallen world, except as we are able to override the natural law by a divine or spiritual law acquired by faith and through the holy priesthood. Jesus was very adept at this, hence he could raise the dead, cast out devils, walk on water, multiply fishes and loaves, change water into wine, calm a storm on the sea, heal a crippled body, and forgive sins, none of which are typical of mortal, natural law. Many prophets also have performed similar miracles by the power and law of God. Such miracles are natural to a celestial law but are strangers to the mortal world because of a difference in the law that governs each sphere.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is not of mortal origin. If it were, it would be limited to the law of the mortal world and could not save anyone with an eternal salvation. The doctrines and laws of the gospel were literally revealed from another, higher and more exalted world. Thus the true priesthood was of necessity brought from another world, more righteous and perfect than ours, and literally conferred by the laying on of the hands by angelic beings—John the Baptist, Peter, James, John, Moses, Elias, Elijah, and so on, men who were once mortal but are now heavenly.

Without the operation of divine or spiritual law, the gospel, even with all its truths and principles intact, could not be spiritually effective in a mortal world. And without continued revelation the gospel and thus the Church would be only a benevolent, social, earthbound network of interesting ideas. It is priesthood, faith, revelation, and the ministration of the Holy Ghost that keeps the Church and its members from degenerating into an entity limited to mortal laws with mortal consequences. Because of faith and revelation there is a crossing through and a parting of the veil, with communication going in both directions between heaven and earth, between the spiritual realm and the mortal realm.

In the gospel of Jesus Christ the human family is at the pinnacle of dignity because the first man and the first woman, Adam and Eve, were the direct and first-generation literal offspring of heavenly parents both in the spirit body and in the physical body. The human family is literally, in every sense, the offspring of God. This is according to divine law, for the scriptural accounts state that living things reproduce and bring forth "after their kind" and that the "seed could only bring forth the same in itself, after his kind" (see Abr. 4:11, 12, 21, 24-25). Mankind, both male and female, were created in the image and the likeness of the Gods (see Abr. 4:26-27).

The writings of Moses, revealed to Joseph Smith, quote from "the book of the generations of Adam," saying that man's body in the beginning on the earth was made "in the likeness of God . . . [and] in the image of his own body" (Moses 6:8-9). There then follows a detailed listing of Adam's earthly family from generation to generation—not a pedigree of the spirits of men but of the physical body—and it lists Adam, Seth, Enos, and so on for seven generations down to Enoch (Moses 6:10-21). It is precisely stated that Adam begat a son "in his own likeness, after his own image" and called his name Seth. This is the precise and identical language by which Adam's own physical creation is spoken of. Since we know how Adam begat Seth's body, does not this say that the same process also applies to the way Adam's body was formed? This conclusion is reinforced by verse 22, which reads, "And this is the genealogy of the sons of Adam, who was the son of God."

Since these statements are in the context of fathers begetting the bodies of children on the earth, the consistent and plain reading of the scripture simply conveys the idea that just as Seth is the son of Adam and Eve, so also are Adam and Eve, in the physical body, the physical offspring of heavenly parents. Any other reading would be strained and artificial. This is a demonstration of the law that living things, including the Gods, reproduce "after their own kind." Thus the terms "fatherhood of God" and "brotherhood of man" are not simply figures of speech but are literal expressions when seen through the lens of latter-day revelation.

Mankind, being mortal and therefore governed by mortal law, cannot discover the person and character of God or even of the origin of man without the help of the gospel and its ordinances. Humans may study the works and the creations of God, but God must reveal himself or else his character and his nature will remain forever unknown to mortal man. The gospel law, being eternal and absolute, is the only means by which man can actually know God or know of the origin of man or the law by which any man or woman or all men and all women can be redeemed. The promises of God do not guarantee salvation by assimilation of cultural and mental accomplishments that result from the laws of the mortal world. The doctrine taught in the revelations is that man, being the literal offspring of God both in body and in spirit, can gain the fulness of salvation (which means to become like God) by obedience to the laws, ordinances, and ceremonies of the gospel and by being born again, redeemed, and sanctified through the Holy Ghost.

There is something comforting and reassuring in searching holy writ and knowing that man's pedigree chart runs back to God and not to animals and that the Father has provided for man's salvation through an eternal, immutable, absolute law guaranteed by the Father's own sovereignty and made effective by the Atonement of Jesus Christ.

Notes

From Religious Studies Center Newsletter (Brigham Young University), vol. 6, no. 2 (Jan. 1992): 2-4.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 197-98, 220, 324-25.
