Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 48

Joseph Smith on the Sacred Nature of a Burial Place

Death is a reality to all peoples, and every culture, ancient and modern, has feelings and traditions about the funerary procedures and burial locations for their dead. Such practices are generally closely related to and reflective of the religious beliefs of each culture. A belief in a literal resurrection of the body and a conviction that the body in its resurrected condition is important to the individual's eternal welfare and that the family is connected to one's everlasting happiness seems evident in several ancient cultures. This is especially so with the practices of ancient Israel as recorded in the Old Testament.

The ancient patriarchs and prophets desired to be buried in family groups, and their sepulchres were sacred. Not to have an honorable burial was considered a great misfortune, even a curse.

That which is so abundantly alluded to in the customs of the ancient world is made clear beyond any doubt in latter-day revelation, which gives us a key to the purposes and perceptions of the past. Those ancient people had a knowledge of and a hope in the literal resurrection of the body and of a reunion of the family.

This chapter examines primarily the evidences of burial practices and procedures in the Old Testament. [^1]

Teachings of Joseph Smith

My interest in the sacredness of burial places was sparked by reading a statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith, which he made on 16 April 1843 in a meeting at the temple in Nauvoo, Illinois. The Prophet had a letter from Elder Parley P. Pratt in England telling of the death and burial four months earlier of Lorenzo Dow Barnes, who was serving a mission. Since Elder Barnes was buried so far away from Nauvoo, the Prophet used the opportunity to address the Saints on his feelings about burial and resurrection. Following are excerpts from the report of that address:

[[It is a privilege to have] our dead buried on the land where God has appointed to gather His Saints together, and where there will be none but Saints, where they may have the privilege of laying their bodies where the Son of Man will make His appearance, and where they may hear the sound of the trump that shall call them forth to behold Him, that in the morn of the resurrection they may come forth in a body, and come up out of their graves and strike hands immediately in eternal glory and felicity, rather than be scattered thousands of miles apart. There is something good and sacred to me in this thing. The place where a man is buried is sacred to me. This subject is made mention of in the Book of Mormon and other scriptures. [^2] Even to the aborigines of this land, the burying places of their fathers are more sacred than anything else.

"When I heard of the death of our beloved Brother Barnes, it would not have affected me so much, if I had the opportunity of burying him in the land of Zion.

"I believe those who have buried their friends here, their condition is enviable. Look at Jacob and Joseph in Egypt, how they required their friends to bury them in the tomb of their fathers. See the expense which attended the embalming and the going up of the great company to the burial.

"It has always been considered a great calamity not to obtain an honorable burial; and one of the greatest curses the ancient prophets could put on any man, was that he should go without a burial.

"I have said, Father, I desire to die here among the Saints. But if this is not Thy will, and I go hence and die, wilt Thou find some kind friend to bring my body back, and gather my friends who have fallen in foreign lands, and bring them up hither, that we may all lie together.

"I will tell you what I want. If tomorrow I shall be called to lie in yonder tomb, in the morning of the resurrection let me strike hands with my father, and cry, 'My father,' and he will say, 'My son, my son,' as soon as the rock rends and before we come out of our graves.

" . . . Would you think it strange if I relate what I have seen in vision in relation to this interesting theme? . . . So plain was the vision, that I actually saw men, before they had ascended from the tomb, as though they were getting up slowly. They took each other by the hand and said to each other, 'My father, my son, my mother, my daughter, my brother, my sister.' And when the voice calls for the dead to arise, suppose I am laid by the side of my father, what would be the first joy of my heart? To meet my father, my mother, my brother, my sister; and when they are by my side, I embrace them and they me." [^3]

Let us now examine passages from the Old Testament that illustrate the principles of which the Prophet Joseph Smith spoke. First, concerning the patriarchs Jacob and Joseph.

Abraham Purchases a Sepulchre

The situation necessarily begins with Abraham, who purchased a cave in the field of Machpelah at Hebron in which to bury Sarah. Abraham bought the cave and some surrounding land from the children of Heth for four hundred shekels of silver. It is likely the cave was one among several that had already been prepared as burial places, as the following suggests:

"And the children of Heth answered Abraham, saying unto him,

"Hear us, my lord: thou art a mighty prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury thy dead" (Gen. 23:5-6).

Abraham selected a cave, some land, and trees belonging to a man named Ephron, and there he buried Sarah (see Gen. 23:1-20). Later Abraham, Isaac, Rebekah, Leah, and probably other family members were buried in this same cave (see Gen. 25:7-10; 35:29; 47:29; 49:29).

Jacob Desires to Be Buried with Family

When Abraham's grandson Jacob grew old in Egypt, he did not want to be buried there even though he had lived in Egypt for seventeen years and his son Joseph was the second-highest man in the government. Jacob's definite instructions to Joseph concerning his (Jacob's) burial are reported as follows:

"And he charged them, and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,

"In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace.

"There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah.

"The purchase of the field and of the cave that is therein was from the children of Heth" (Gen. 49:29-32).

After Jacob's death, Joseph arranged with the physicians to have him embalmed after the manner of the Egyptians, which required forty days and an additional thirty days of mourning. Then a "very great company" of chariots and horsemen escorted Joseph and his brethren with the body of Jacob in a funeral procession from Goshen in Egypt to the cave of Machpelah, a distance of at least three hundred miles. Thus Jacob was buried in the cave that had been purchased by Abraham some two hundred and fifty years earlier and in which his (Jacob's) parents, grandparents, and wife were buried (see Gen. 49:33; 50:1).

According to the chronology given in Genesis, Joseph was about fifty-six years of age when Jacob died at age one hundred forty-seven. Joseph lived another fifty-four years, dying at the age of one hundred and ten.

Joseph's Desire

Before Joseph died he gave his family definite instructions that he was not to be buried in Egypt. He knew by revelation that in the future the house of Israel would be led by Moses and Aaron (see Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 50:36-38) out of Egypt and return to the land of Canaan. He gave instructions that when such occurred they were to take his body with them and place it in the sepulchre with his father. The text of this passage as found in Gen. 50 is clarified in the Joseph Smith Translation, and hence is cited here:

"Therefore, Joseph said unto his brethren, God will surely visit you, and bring you out of this land, unto the land which he sware unto Abraham, and unto Isaac, and to Jacob.

"And Joseph confirmed many other things unto his brethren, and took an oath of the children of Israel, saying unto them, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

"So Joseph died when he was an hundred and ten years old; and they embalmed him, and they put him in a coffin in Egypt; and he was kept from burial by the children of Israel, that he might be carried up and laid in the sepulchre with his father. And thus they remembered the oath which they sware unto him" (Joseph Smith Translation, Gen. 50:36-38; italics indicate clarification in the JST).

The exact length of time from Joseph's death until the exodus led by Moses is not known, but it could be as many as three hundred years. In keeping with Joseph's desires, the book of Exodus reports: "And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him: for he had straitly sworn the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you; and ye shall carry up my bones hence with you" (13:19).

After another forty years, as Joshua took the children of Israel into Canaan, it is written:

"And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of Joseph" (Josh. 24:32).

It is to be noted in the foregoing passage that the Israelites did not deposit Joseph's body in the cave with his father as he had requested, which would have been at Hebron, at least forty-five miles to the southwest from Shechem. The reasons for this failure are not given in the record. Possibly there were political reasons, either due to conditions at Hebron, or perhaps the descendants of Joseph wanted his body in their own inheritance near Shechem as a matter of status.

Rachel's Burial

Notably missing in the list of occupants at the Machpelah cave is Rachel (see Gen. 49:30-32). The narrative states that Rachel died near Bethlehem while giving birth to Benjamin and was buried there with a monument erected over the site (see Gen. 35:16-20). The reason for burial at Bethlehem may have been expediency. Embalming in the Egyptian manner was not a Hebrew custom. The hot climate of the Middle East required that burial take place within a day. No doubt Jacob would have preferred to bury Rachel in the family cave, but it was at least eighteen miles away. That alone should not have been prohibitive, hence there may have been other reasons also.

Ruth's Desire

The desire to be with family even in burial, as demonstrated in the book of Genesis, is repeated throughout the remainder of the Old Testament. Thus, with the help of the foregoing emphasis about family burial plots, we obtain greater meaning from Ruth's eloquent profession of faith. Ruth was a Moabite, a distant relative of the Israelites, and no doubt had some of the same ancestral traditions. She said to her Israelite mother-in-law, Naomi, that she would not only go to the land of Israel with her but also, "Thy people shall be my people, thy God shall be my God: where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried" (Ruth 1:16-17). The strength of Ruth's conversion to the God of Israel is reflected in her glorious words, even to the express declaration of being willing to be buried with Naomi's people instead of her own.

Barzillai's Desire

As a favor King David offered to take the aged Barzillai away from his homeland of Gilead to the city of Jerusalem, where David would care for him in his old age. The elderly man went partway on the journey out of courtesy but ultimately refused David's kind offer. Barzillai gave some preliminary reasons by saying he must decline the offer because being eighty years old he was deaf, had lost his sense of taste, was losing his ability to discern (memory?), and did not wish to be a burden. But the main reason he did not want to be away from his native Gilead was "that I may die in mine own city, and be buried by the grave of my father and of my mother" (2 Sam. 19:31-37).

Gideon

Gideon, the mighty warrior, died "in a good old age" and was buried in the sepulchre of Joash, his father (Judg. 8:32).

Samson

When Samson died in the collapse of the Temple of Dagon, his family took up his body and placed it in the burial lot of his father (see Judg. 16:31).

Examples of the Kings of Judah and Israel

Many instances are found of the kings of Judah (in the city of David) and the kings of Israel (in Samaria) being buried in the sepulchres of their fathers or in a garden near their fathers' graves. Very clear descriptions are given in Josh. 24:33; 2 Sam. 17:23; 1 Kgs. 14:31; 15:24; 22:50; and 2 Kgs. 8:24. For example, Ahaziah, king of Judah, died in battle and was carried in a chariot so as to be buried in his sepulchre with his fathers in the city of David (see 2 Kgs. 9:28). Joash, king of Israel, was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel (see 2 Kgs. 13:13). (See also 2 Kgs. 12:21; 14:16, 20; 15:7, 38; 16:20; 21:18, 26; 2 Chr. 21:1; 25:28; 26:23; 32:33; 33:20; and 35:24.)

Denied Honorable Burial

The statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith was noted earlier that anciently it was considered a great calamity not to obtain an honorable burial, "and one of the greatest curses the ancient prophets could put on any man was that he should go without a burial." Among the Old Testament passages illustrating these thoughts are the following:

Elijah the prophet told Ahab that the dogs would eat Jezebel [Ahab's wife], and also unnamed others would be eaten by the dogs and the fowls of the air (see 1 Kgs. 21:20-24). It naturally follows that such persons would not have a burial. Jezebel was trampled to death by horses. When men came to bury her, "they found no more of her than the skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands" (2 Kgs. 9:35). Elijah's prophecy concerning the wicked Jezebel included the concept that there would be no place where people could mark her grave, "so that they shall not say, This is Jezebel" (2 Kgs. 9:37; see also vv. 30-36).

Several Old Testament passages reflect the concept that to be denied an honorable burial was a deplorable condition as a result of unrighteousness. Such are found in Isa. 14:20; 22:15; Eccl. 6:3; and Jer. 16:4, 6; 22:19; 25:33. Furthermore, unrighteous kings were sometimes not buried in the family sepulchre (see 2 Chr. 21:20; 28:25).

Joseph Smith's Family Burial Tomb

The Prophet Joseph Smith felt so keenly about being buried with his family that he made a stone sepulchre in Nauvoo and let it be known that he wished his family and himself to be buried therein. The place was near the temple area. Clear references to this historic place are presented in the following discussion.

On 22 August 1842, while reflecting on his father's death, which had occurred in September 1840, the Prophet said: "Sacred to me is his dust and the spot where he is buried. Sacred to me is the tomb I have prepared to encircle o'er his head." [^4]

On the same occasion, the Prophet wrote: "Let my father, Don Carlos and Alvin and children that I have buried be brought and laid in the tomb I have built. Let my mother and my brethren and my sisters be laid there also; and let it be called the tomb of Joseph, a descendant of Jacob; and when I die let me be gathered to the tomb of my father." [^5]

This utterance seems to say that the "tomb of Joseph" was already built but that none of those mentioned had been placed in it. Possibly the tomb was not finished.

At the beginning of this treatise the Prophet Joseph Smith was quoted as saying on 16 April 1843, that if tomorrow he were to be called "to lie in yonder tomb," he wanted to be close to his family. I had read that statement many times and had supposed that "yonder tomb" simply meant any place where he might be buried. But when read in the context of all else the Prophet said about a specific tomb for himself and family, it is clear that he had reference to that particular enclosure. The Prophet might even have gestured or pointed with his hand in the direction of the tomb from the temple area.

The Prophet Joseph and Hyrum were martyred on 27 June 1844 and were secretly buried in the basement of the unfinished Nauvoo House, not in the tomb of Joseph. A few weeks later on 18 August 1844 in Nauvoo, President Brigham Young, in urging the Saints to remain in Nauvoo and finish building the temple, said: "Let us stay here where the bones of Joseph, Hyrum, Samuel, Don Carlos, and Father Smith are. While Joseph was alive he said 'If I am slain in battle or fall by the hands of my enemies I want my body brought to Nauvoo and laid in the tomb I have prepared.'" [^6]

More than a year later, on 8 October 1845, during a conference in Nauvoo, while contemplating the trek to the Rocky Mountains, President Young asked Lucy Mack Smith, the Prophet Joseph's mother, to speak. Among other things she said she planned to go west with the Saints but with one stipulation: If she died in the West, the Brethren would bring her body back to Nauvoo for burial. Since the congregation could not all hear her words, President Young repeated them:

"Mother Smith proposes that she will go with us, if we will promise to bring back her remains in case of her death and deposit them with her husband's. Also Joseph once said, with outstretched arms, 'If I fall in battle in Missouri, I want you to bring my bones back, and deposit them in that sepulchre—I command you to do it in the name of the Lord.' And I pledge myself if Mother Smith goes with us and I outlive her, I will do my best to bring her bones back again, and deposit them with her children, and I want to know if this people are willing to enter into a covenant to do the same [unanimous vote]." [^7]

In reality, Lucy did not go west. She died in 1856 and was buried in Nauvoo.

President Young continued:

"We are determined also to use every means in our power to do all that Joseph told us. And we will petition Sister Emma in the name of Israel's God, to let us deposit the remains of Joseph according as he commanded us. And if she will not consent to it, our garments are clear. Then when he awakes in the morning of the resurrection, he shall talk with them, not with me; the sin shall be upon her head, not ours." [^8]

In Salt Lake City on 6 May 1870, Elder John Taylor, then a member of the Twelve, spoke about Joseph's tomb:

"I knew a man, whom many of you knew, who built a tomb for himself in the city of Nauvoo. His name was Joseph Smith, and many of you heard him say what I shall now relate. Said he, 'I expect when the time of the resurrection comes to rise up in my tomb there, and strike hands with my brethren, with my father and with my mother, and hail the day when we shall burst from the barriers of the tomb and awake to immortal life.' Have you never heard him talk thus? I have." [^9]

Elder Taylor spoke of Joseph's tomb again on 31 December 1876:

"I heard Joseph Smith say, at the time he was making a tomb at Nauvoo, that he expected, when the time came when the grave would be rent asunder, that he would arise and embrace his father and mother, and strike hands with his friends. It was his written request that when he died, some kind friends would see that he was buried near his bosom friends, so that when he and they arose in the morning of the first resurrection, he could embrace them, saying, 'My father! my mother!' etc." [^10]

In the 1880s Elder Franklin D. Richards, a member of the Twelve who had known the Prophet Joseph and had lived in Nauvoo, visited Nauvoo again. His written report included:

"It was within my recollection that the Prophet Joseph had caused the building of a stone burial vault at the south side of the Temple block where he wished to be interred with the bodies of his family. We sought out the spot and found the vault included within a building, where it is used for a wine cellar." [^11]

The location of the tomb has been a matter of speculation in recent years. It is very possible that it has now been identified. [^12]

It is clear from the many quotations that the motivating factor underlying the family burial was the knowledge of a literal, bodily resurrection and family togetherness in eternity. When applied to the Old Testament patriarchs, we can see such was their motivation also.

Although Joseph Smith was not buried in the tomb he had prepared, his sister-in-law, the wife of William Smith, was. She died in Nauvoo on 22 May 1845. Under the date of 24 May 1845, the record states: "Elder Orson Pratt preached the funeral sermon of Caroline . . . wife of Wm. Smith . . . , her remains were deposited in the tomb of Joseph." [^13] She is possibly the only one we know for certain who was buried in the tomb.

Subsequently the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints reinterred the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum and Emma (who died in 1879), and they are now in a private cemetery in Nauvoo near the Prophet's mother, father, and other family members. [^14] Although in close proximity to one another, none are in the tomb of Joseph, as had been planned and contemplated by the Prophet Joseph Smith.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] The allegory of Zenos uses different trees to represent Israel and the Gentiles, thus showing a uniqueness to Israel as the "tame" tree (see Jacob 5:3-7). Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365.
[^2] Nephi said that in the last days the descendants of Lehi will learn that they are "natural branches" of the house of Israel (see 1 Ne. 15:12-16). Ibid., 264.
[^3] Nephi repeatedly emphasized that the scattering, gathering, and restoration of Israel would all be literal, real, and tangible. He said those events would be "according to the flesh" (see 1 Ne. 22:2): "Behold these things are temporal; for thus are the covenants of the Lord with our fathers; and it meaneth us in the days to come, and also all our brethren who are of the house of Israel" (1 Ne. 22:6). "It must needs be upon the face of this earth; and it cometh unto men according to the flesh" (1 Ne. 22:18; see also v. 27). F. F. Bruce, The Books and the Parchments (Great Britain: Revell, 1955), 199.
[^4] Jacob insisted that the promises of the Lord about the restoration of Israel were literal, that they were "according to the flesh" (2 Ne. 10:2), and that Israel "shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance" (2 Ne. 10:7). Jacob quoted the Lord as saying that He will fulfill the covenants He has made "that I will do unto them while they are in the flesh" (2 Ne. 10:15; see also v. 17). J. R. Dummelow, One-Volume Bible Commentary (New York: Macmillan, 1960), 792.
[^5] The prophet Mormon, speaking to Lehi's descendants who would read the Book of Mormon in the last days, listed several things they ought to know for the salvation of their souls. The first thing he listed was "Know ye that ye are of the house of Israel" (Morm. 7:2). Mormon must have thought that being of Israel was important because he wrote to the Gentiles that they needed to repent and believe in Jesus Christ so that they could be "numbered with my people who are of the house of Israel" (3 Ne. 30:2). Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-50.
[^6] The Book of Mormon often repeats the statement that by accepting Christ the Gentiles can be "numbered among the house of Israel" (1 Ne. 14:2; see also 15:13-15; 2 Ne. 10:18; 3 Ne. 16:13; 21:6). John Taylor, "The Seer, Joseph, the Seer," Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1948), no. 296.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Patriarchal Order," address delivered to a religion class, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 8 August 1967.
[^8] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:289-90.
[^9] Ibid., 7:290.
[^10] Brigham Young, in Utah Genealogical Magazine 11:107-8.
[^11] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 2:268-69.
[^12] Ibid., 7:290.
[^13] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 600-601.
[^14] Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 5 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 4:1522.
