Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 49

The Role of the House of Israel in the Last Days

In a discussion of the role of the house of Israel in the last days, three distinct elements require some clarification. First, we must consider what is meant by last days; second, who and what is Israel; and third, what is meant by the word role. As I define these terms, it should be understood that I alone am responsible for the views presented in this chapter; however, I believe what I have written to be true and consistent with the scriptures and with the teachings of the Brethren. I lay claim to no insight or knowledge beyond what anyone could have who reads the scriptures and the words of the latter-day prophets with prayer, reverence, and a believing heart. It is my hope and desire that whoever reads this discussion will be edified spiritually and will have an increased appreciation for the latter-day work of the Lord and his purposes as they are presented in the scriptures and as they are unfolding daily among the nations of the earth.

The Last Days

The term last days, or latter days, refers to a time preceding the Second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ. How many years make up the last days? We don't know, but for the convenience of a working definition, we will say that the last days began with the First Vision of Joseph Smith in the spring of 1820. Even with that beginning date, we must understand that momentous changes had already begun taking place among the nations of the earth in preparation for the last days. The Renaissance, the Protestant Reformation, the Catholic Counter-Reformation, the invention of printing, the colonization of America, the American Revolution, and the drafting of the Constitution of the United States were all preparatory to fulfilling the purposes of the Lord in the last days.

In a sense the last days can be called the ending period of mortality on the earth, for when the Savior comes, a change will come over the earth, mankind, and also animal life. Many things typical of mortal life will cease: men shall not learn war any more; the wolf shall dwell peacefully with the lamb; instead of meat, the lion shall eat straw like the ox; the earth shall eventually be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea; and there shall not be death as we now experience it (see Isa. 2:4; 11:6; D&C 101:23-29).

The last days are a time of fulfillment, enlargement, and intensity. Not only are they a period of restoration and of building the kingdom of God on the earth but they are also a time of increased wickedness and tribulation. The Prophet Joseph Smith explained that whenever the Lord sets up his kingdom on the earth, the devil sets up his kingdom at the very same time in opposition to it. [^1] In the last days there is an increase of revelation and gospel knowledge, but at the same time, the devil rages in the hearts of mankind and seeks to destroy the kingdom of God. The devil has increased his efforts to oppose all righteousness and to deceive mankind "because he knoweth that he hath but a short time" left (Rev. 12:12; see also 13:1-18). Thus the purposes of the Lord will be accomplished in the midst of war, turmoil, persecution, distress of nations, and the false philosophies of men because of the devil's determined opposition to the Lord's prophets, apostles, and Church members. The Lord has promised that in the end, righteousness will triumph over wickedness, the Saints over their persecutors, and Christ over the devil. That is the message of all scripture and especially of such writings as the book of Isaiah, the book of Revelation, and the Book of Mormon.

Who and What Is Israel?

The word Israel is of Hebrew origin, first occurring in Gen. 32:28 and 35:10 as a change of name for Jacob. The meaning is not completely clear to linguists, but the context indicates that Israel connotes one who prevails with God or has power with God. It may mean being a soldier for God. The descendants of Jacob are literally the house of Israel and are primarily the posterity of Jacob's twelve sons. This posterity came to be known as the covenant people of the Lord because Jacob was a prophet and received every aspect of the covenant that had been given to his grandfather Abraham.

A few scriptures will quickly give an account of how the covenant that God made with Abraham was continued through his generations. The Abrahamic covenant is introduced in Gen. 17:1-17 and includes, among other things, a promise of a numerous posterity, a land inheritance, and a declaration that all the nations of the earth are to be blessed through Abraham's posterity. A more precise account of the provisions and stipulations of the covenant is given in Abr. 2:8-11 and shows that it also included obtaining the holy priesthood and a promise that the literal (biological) seed of Abraham's body would be natural heirs of that priesthood, having a right to bear the priesthood by virtue of their lineage, if they are worthy. Furthermore, persons who are not biologically descended from Abraham but who obey the gospel of Jesus Christ could be adopted into the family. It was also declared that it would be Abraham's seed who would carry the priesthood and the gospel of Christ and the name of the Lord throughout the whole world from that time forth:

"My name is Jehovah, and I know the end from the beginning; therefore my hand shall be over thee.

"And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee above measure, and make thy name great among all nations, and thou shalt be a blessing unto thy seed after thee, that in their hands they shall bear this ministry and Priesthood unto all nations;

"And I will bless them through thy name; for as many as receive this Gospel shall be called after thy name, and shall be accounted thy seed, and shall rise up and bless thee, as their father;

"And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee; and in thee (that is, in thy Priesthood) and in thy seed (that is, thy Priesthood), for I give unto thee a promise that this right shall continue in thee, and in thy seed after thee (that is to say, the literal seed, or the seed of the body) shall all the families of the earth be blessed, even with the blessings of the Gospel, which are the blessings of salvation, even of life eternal" (Abr. 2:8-11).

The significance of the Abrahamic covenant is that it is centered in Jesus Christ, the Messiah, the Holy One of Israel. The identical covenant made with Abraham, with all of its provisions, was passed on to Isaac (Gen. 17:19-21; 26:1) and later to Jacob (Genesis 28:10-17). Although the Bible does not say it, we know that all of the ancient patriarchs were baptized, received the Holy Ghost, and were ordained to the priesthood. [^2] Thus, all who receive the covenant at any time must obey the same ordinances. In every instance it was stated that through the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, all families of the earth would be blessed. Something about that covenant was desirable and would benefit all peoples, even those outside the biological family.

The Role of Israel: All Families of the Earth Will Be Blessed Through Abraham

The promise that all the people of the earth shall be blessed through Abraham's posterity is fulfilled in at least three ways. The ultimate expression of the promise is in Jesus Christ, the Savior of the whole world. The work of the Messiah is the reason the covenant was given. He conquered death for all mankind so that every man, woman, and child shall rise from the grave with everlasting life. That is a free gift from the Redeemer. In addition, every person who repents and obeys the gospel of Jesus Christ, including the ordinances of baptism, the laying on of hands, and so on, will be ransomed from the spiritual consequences of his or her own sins and be saved in the kingdom of God. All of that is possible only because Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Holy One of Israel, the Messiah was by divine decree a descendant of Abraham, and he made the Atonement for all the world and brought about the Resurrection. Every human being has been and will be greatly blessed by Jesus Christ, who was a child of Mary, who was a descendant of King David, who was of the tribe of Judah and was the son of Jacob, who was the grandson of Abraham. Paul, in his letter to the Galatian members of the Church, uses the foregoing application to show that it was directly through Christ that all the families of the earth would be blessed, even benefiting the Galatians, who were not biologically of Israel but were Gentiles (see Gal. 3:14-16).

A second aspect of the promise is specified in Abr. 2:8-11, showing that Abraham's biological seed has a natural inherited right to the priesthood, the gospel, and the Abrahamic covenant. This particular lineage also has the serious responsibility and privilege of taking the gospel of Jesus Christ to all nations of the earth. Thus through Abraham's ministry and the ministry of his descendants the name of the true God shall "be known in the earth forever" (Abr. 1:19).

A third aspect of the promise is that Abraham's seed, that is, the house of Israel, has been scattered throughout the world and has mixed itself through marriage with the other nations. This process has been going on for thousands of years since the ten tribes were taken captive (about 700 b.c.) and the Jews were taken to Babylon (about 600 b.c.) Hence, in the last days almost all peoples of the earth have the blood of Israel in greater or lesser amounts in their veins and are thereby heirs of the covenant.

Gentiles

Because it is impossible to read about Israel in the scriptures without encountering the word Gentile, a brief explanation of this term is necessary. Gentile first appears in the Bible at Gen. 10:5 to designate the descendants of Japheth, the son of Noah. Gentile is a Hebrew word meaning "the nations," or more precisely, "the other people," they who are not of Abraham's lineage. Biblically speaking, to an Israelite a Gentile was someone not biologically of Israel. To a Jew, a Gentile is someone not a Jew.

These two words, Israel and Gentile, began as biological identifications but have acquired cultural and political connotations as well. Therefore, a person with some Israelite blood could live in a nation that is politically non-Israelite and thus be considered a Gentile politically or culturally. Such is the thought expressed in D&C 109:60, wherein the early Brethren (although actually having Israelite blood) are "identified with the gentiles." It has also become traditional in modern Christianity and in Judaism to call anyone a Gentile who is not Jewish. In a unique manner the Book of Mormon uses Gentile to identify those nations who are neither Jewish nor descendants of Lehi. Thus in the Book of Mormon the European and North American peoples are identified as Gentiles, meaning "the other people." We know from patriarchal blessings and other revelations that Church members from Europe and North America have much of the blood of Israel in their veins (see, for example, D&C 86:8-10), but their Israelite connection and identity is not evident except by revelation. Thus in the twentieth century the identification of Israel and of Gentile are not as easy or as simple as it was in the earlier stages of the world because both terms, which began as biological distinctions, have acquired cultural, political, geographical, and racial meanings. These terms have to be identified in the context where each is used.

Special Blessings for Israel

A discussion of the house of Israel would not be adequate without attention to the question "Are there special blessings for Israel that others do not have?" The answer can best be found in the scriptures. Peter discovered by revelation and by experience with Cornelius that "God is no respecter of persons: but in every nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousness is accepted with him" (Acts 10:34-35). And Nephi wrote, "Behold, the Lord esteemeth all flesh in one; he that is righteous is favored of God" (1 Ne. 17:35). Nephi also said that the Lord "doeth that which is good among the children of men; . . . and he inviteth them all to come unto him and partake of his goodness; and he denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile" (2 Ne. 26:33). And Paul told the Athenians on Mars Hill that God "hath made of one blood all nations of men" (Acts 17:26).

If we were to consider only the foregoing passages, it would indeed seem that there is no difference whatever between Israel and all other peoples. But to stop at this point would be to stop short of recognizing other things that have been revealed concerning the role of Israel in bringing about the Lord's purposes on the earth.

We noted earlier that the Lord promised Abraham that all who were not of his biological seed but who accepted the gospel of Christ would be counted as his seed and rise up and bless Abraham as their father. They would also become heirs of the promises given in the Abrahamic covenant (see Abr. 2:10; Gal. 3:27, 29). The very nature of such a promise indicates that there must be some kind of favored status in being of Abraham's family; otherwise, why would others (and especially the righteous) be adopted in? Moreover, when Paul spoke of one blood for all nations, he knew that the matter was not so simple and one-dimensional and that there were other factors to be considered: again, for emphasis and for convenience, the "God that made the world and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwelleth not in temples made with hands; neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he giveth to all life, and breath, and all things; and hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation" (Acts 17:24-26).

There must be some reason why Paul pointed out that God, who made all men, also "determined the times before appointed" and "set the bounds of their habitation." This passage points toward a premortal appointment or at least a premortal decision for mankind and is the basis for the doctrine of election. It also is a reminder of Moses' declaration that the arrangement of the nations of mankind on the earth was done by the Lord himself with consideration for the number there would be of the children of Israel: "When the most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel. For the Lord's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his inheritance" (Deut. 32:8-9).

The message of these passages from Paul and Moses is that the particular construct of the nations as to time, place, and race is the Lord's doing, based on a premortal knowledge and determination of how many persons there would be of each race and so on. An acceptance of this truth gives the Lord a role in the development of history and leads one to believe that life is not left to mere chance.

We further note Paul's words in Rom. 3:1-2, as recorded in the Joseph Smith Translation:

"What advantage then hath the Jew over the Gentile? or what profit of circumcision, who is not a Jew from the heart?

"But he who is a Jew from the heart, I say hath much every way; chiefly, because that unto them were committed the oracles of God."

Unbelieving Jews had no particular advantage for salvation, but the Jews who did believe had an advantage because to them had been given the "oracles of God" (priesthood, gospel ordinances, covenants, and so on). The Gentiles could have those same blessings and were invited to join in, but they had to get them from the Jews because the Jews, being of Israel, were literal descendants of Abraham and natural heirs to the covenant and so had the blessings first. It is a matter of the Lord's timetable. As Paul also said, "To the Jew first, and also to the Greek [Gentile]" (Rom. 1:16; see also 2:9-10). Whenever Gentiles did come into the gospel by baptism, confirmation, and so forth, they were not to remain Gentiles but were to become Israel.

An interesting working demonstration of this principle as it concerns Israel and the Gentiles is seen in the ministry of Jesus in the Holy Land, a land of varied racial backgrounds. While Jesus was in the vicinity of Tyre and Sidon (which are in Phoenicia) a non-Israelite woman (Mark 7:26 says she was Greek) approached him, desiring a blessing for her afflicted daughter. The account in Matt. 15:22-28 is as follows:

"And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a devil.

"But he answered her not a word. And his disciples came and besought him, saying, Send her away; for she crieth after us.

"But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

"Then came she and worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me.

"But he answered and said, It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it to dogs.

"And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall from their masters' table.

"Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from that very hour."

Jesus did not at first respond to the woman except to ignore her, and when his disciples pressed him to do something about the situation, he told them that he was sent only to the house of Israel, of which she was not (vv. 23-24). Then when she approached Jesus the second time, he said, in effect, it is not your time; now is the time for the "bread" to be given to the children of Israel. (Bread in this instance represents the blessings of the gospel which Jesus was able to give.) When the woman acknowledged the fact and was willing to eat only the crumbs, he gave her the blessing because of her faith. This event could not have taken place in the way that it did and most likely this account of it would never have been entered into the record had it not demonstrated that Jesus' personal ministry on earth was limited to those of biological Israel. We know that the long-term effects of Jesus' Atonement are given to all mankind, but we cannot overlook the fact that his personal contact was by his own choice almost exclusively with those of Israelite blood.

There is, moreover, much additional evidence bearing on this matter from latter-day revelation. Readers of the Book of Mormon know that the "other sheep" of whom Jesus spoke (see John 10:16) were the Nephites and Lamanites in the Western Hemisphere. Jesus explained that truth in 3 Ne. 15:12-21 and then announced a significant doctrinal concept that sheds much light on the subject of Israelite-Gentile privileges. We read in 3 Ne. 15 that the Jews in Palestine did not understand who the "other sheep" were because they did not know the rules and procedures that governed the Lord's ministry. As a consequence of their ignorance, the Jews incorrectly thought that the "other sheep" were the Gentiles. Let us now read carefully Jesus' precise words, recorded in 3 Ne. 15:21-24:

"And verily I say unto you, that ye [the Nephites] are they of whom I said: Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd.

"And they [the Jews] understood me not, for they supposed it had been the Gentiles; for they understood not that the Gentiles should be converted through their preaching.

"And they [the Jews] understood me not that I said they shall hear my voice; and they understood me not that the Gentiles should not at any time hear my voice—that I should not manifest myself unto them save it were by the Holy Ghost.

"But behold, ye [the Nephites] have both heard my voice, and seen me; and ye are my sheep, and ye are numbered among those whom the Father hath given me."

This explanation by the Savior is tantamount to saying that the wonderful experience of the Lord's personal ministering, speaking audibly, showing his resurrected body, and doing all else that was recorded in 3 Ne. 11-28 could not and would not occur to a Gentile nation. When we accept this principle, we are given a key that unlocks a door of understanding to several other passages of scripture. For example, Jesus told the Nephites that after he left them he would go personally to the lost tribes of Israel, show them his body, and let them see him and hear his voice (see 3 Ne. 16:1-3; 17:4). The lost tribes, being Israelites, would be granted the same type of glorious experience as were the Nephites. Still further, we learn from Matt. 28:10, 18 and 1 Cor. 15:6 that Jesus, after his Resurrection, appeared in Galilee to more than five hundred persons in a group, and they saw him and heard his voice. Of course, they were Israelites. To the three major branches of scattered Israel—the Jews, the Nephites, and the lost tribes—Jesus appeared publicly after his Resurrection, showed them his body, and spoke with them. He will also appear personally to the Jews on the Mount of Olives in the future (see D&C 45:48-53; Zech. 12:10; 13:6). According to the Lord's own explanation, such events are not available to Gentile nations. If we believe the scriptures, we see that both before and after his Resurrection, Jesus regarded his personal ministry to be primarily among those who were biological Israel.

The ancient Jews are not the only ones who have misunderstood Jesus' statement about the "other sheep." One who does not know the principles that govern such things is likely to make the same mistaken interpretation. For example, current biblical scholars who do not have the key of interpretation provided by Jesus in the Book of Mormon have thought that the "other sheep" were the Gentiles. That was the conclusion of the great British theologian F. F. Bruce [^3] and the well-known and often-quoted J. R. Dummelow. [^4]

Further evidence of the principles that govern the Lord's ministry is seen in the story of Cornelius, a Roman and thus a Gentile, to whom an angel appeared and told him to send for Peter, who would teach him the gospel (see Acts 10:1-6). In the ensuing meeting the Holy Ghost came upon Cornelius and his family of Gentiles, and they were baptized. In contrast, the Lord himself appeared to Paul, a Jew, on the road to Damascus (see Acts 9:1-6). These two incidents illustrate the Israelite-Gentile privileges that we have examined from the scriptures.

The principle that Jesus manifests himself to Gentile nations only through the Holy Ghost is alluded to in 1 Ne. 10:11, which states that after Jesus had risen from the dead, he would "make himself manifest, by the Holy Ghost, unto the Gentiles." Nothing is said in this passage about a personal visit to the Gentiles. When we apply Jesus' explanation of 3 Ne. 15, we can see why: there isn't going to be any such visit. If we as Latter-day Saints do not accept the information on this matter that is available to us from both the Bible and the Book of Mormon, then we are like the Jews and the non-LDS scholars who also have not understood this principle.

Perhaps another illustration is Joseph Smith's vision in the grove when the Lord appeared personally to the Prophet. Joseph Smith both saw him and heard his voice. Even if we did not know it from other scriptures, we could confidently conclude that Joseph Smith is therefore a biological Israelite, for otherwise the First Vision could not have happened as it did.

The question that introduced this discussion is whether an Israelite has any advantages or blessing over one not of Israel. It seems to be so, for the scriptures speak of blessings and privileges and responsibilities in the Lord's timetable that favor those who are of Israel. So the answer is yes. In the ultimate sense, however, in the Final Judgment, those of all nations will be saved precisely by how well they have obeyed the gospel of Jesus Christ, and in this way all are equal. But the way by which the gospel is brought to earth, to whom it is first revealed, and the timetable and sequence by which it is disseminated and administered among the nations shows a priority for those of Israelite lineage. The Gentiles will hear the gospel and receive the ordinances and the Abrahamic covenant from the preaching of Israelite prophets. That is a consequence no doubt determined by the Lord in our premortal state.

We must not overlook the important fact that when a Gentile joins the Church, he or she is adopted into the house of Israel by baptism and by the workings of the Holy Ghost and so becomes an Israelite. Such individuals may then receive a personal visit (the Second Comforter) from the Lord, as would any natural Israelite. The Prophet Joseph Smith spoke of the adoptive process thus:

["[The Holy Ghost] is more powerful in expanding the mind, enlightening the understanding, and storing the intellect with present knowledge, of a man who is of the literal seed of Abraham, than one that is a Gentile, though it may not have half as much visible effect upon the body; for as the Holy Ghost falls upon one of the literal seed of Abraham, it is calm and serene; and his whole soul and body are only exercised by the pure spirit of intelligence; while the effect of the Holy Ghost upon a Gentile, is to purge out the old blood, and make him actually of the seed of Abraham. That man that has none of the blood of Abraham (naturally) must have a new creation by the Holy Ghost. In such a case, there may be more of a powerful effect upon the body, and visible to the eye, than upon an Israelite, while the Israelite at first might be far before the Gentile in pure intelligence." [^5]

Whatever else this explanation by the Prophet may mean, it clearly distinguishes between the natural inheritance of an Israelite and that of a Gentile, while at the same time it does not prohibit the non-Israelite from receiving the promised blessing.

Literal or Figurative Interpretation?

The most compact and yet detailed treatment in scripture of the scattering, gathering, and restoration of Israel is the allegory of Zenos (see Jacob 5), in which Israel is a tame olive tree and the Gentiles a wild olive tree. The scattering, gathering, and adoption are accomplished by cutting off branches of the natural tree and replanting them in distant lands. The wild branches are adopted through being grafted into the "mother" tree. Even the tame branches are grafted back into the original trunk of Israel, signifying its centrality. All this activity indicates a long-term, worldwide project. Although exact historical dates and geographic places are not always definable in the allegory, the overall plan and method of operation are clear: the house of Israel is to be preserved as a people and blessed as they become fruitful in righteousness, and other lineages are able to partake by being grafted in, thus becoming Israelites themselves.

Although the process described in the allegory could be interpreted figuratively rather than literally, such would be out of synchronization with the rest of the Book of Mormon, which uses very definite language to convey a literal, down-to-earth meaning. Following are a few examples:

Surely such statements from the Book of Mormon are persuasive that the prophecies of a restoration of Israel in the latter days are literal and real, not merely symbolic and figurative. If the membership of the Church today is not biological Israel, then a restoration has not occurred, because restoration means "bringing something back which once was in place." This meaning should serve as a guide and a control in our accepting the literal meaning of the scriptures.

The Restoration of All Things

It is a cardinal doctrine of the Church that the God of heaven has established the dispensation of the fulness of times through the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors. It is a time in which everything will be restored and accomplished that was spoken of by all the holy prophets since the world began (see Acts 3:21). The fulness of times is the dispensation of all dispensations; it is a time of restoration, a time of fruition, accomplishment, completion, and fulfillment of the Lord's purposes for the redemption of mankind and the earth. The fulness of times began with the First Vision of Joseph Smith and shall continue through the Millennium and on to the time when the earth is made celestial. The fact of its being the last dispensation may mean it will never end. As rivers flow into the sea, all dispensations flow into the dispensation of the fulness of times.

The concept of the restoration of all things is far more extensive than one might at first suppose. It includes a restoration of priesthood power, of the true Church organization, of ancient ordinances and covenants, and of much more. All of these are necessary to bring about the other things that are to be restored. The plan of God which the ancient prophets knew is the same plan that is to bring about the final conditions of redemption. The concept of restoration as taught in the Book of Mormon is holistic and worldwide and includes, among other things, the resurrection of the body, the Judgment, and the redemption of the earth and everything that pertains to the earth (see Alma 40:22-26; 41:1). This restoration includes the gathering together and bringing home of the scattered tribes of Israel.

The scriptures compare the gathering of Israel and the resurrection of the body. Through the process of death the elements of the physical body are scattered in the dust, yet these elements shall come together again and the body shall be restored to the spirit in the Resurrection. Even so will the scattered remnants of Israel be restored to the "true church and fold of God" and be "gathered home" to the lands the Lord has given them. We see this parallel spoken by Jacob in 2 Ne. 9:1-2, 4:1

"And now, my beloved brethren, I have read these things that ye might know concerning the covenants of the Lord that he has covenanted with all the house of Israel—

"That he has spoken unto the Jews, by the mouth of his holy prophets, even from the beginning down, from generation to generation, until the time comes that they shall be restored to the true church and fold of God; when they shall be gathered home to the lands of their inheritance, and shall be established in all their lands of promise. . . .

"For I know that ye have searched much, many of you, to know of things to come; wherefore I know that ye know that our flesh must waste away and die; nevertheless, in our bodies we shall see God."

The comparison of reclaiming the body in the Resurrection with reclaiming the scattered remnants of Israel and gathering them to their homeland is quite clear in the foregoing passage. The resurrection of the body and its restoration to the spirit—each body to its own spirit, the same spirit that inhabited the body in mortality—is real, authentic, individual, and literal. The literal and authentic gathering and restoration of Israel to their own lands is just as real. Such a comparison can hardly be missed in Ezek. 37:12: "I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel."

In describing what was necessary to establish the dispensation of the fulness of times, the Prophet Joseph Smith wrote: "It is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fulness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time. And not only this, but those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and prudent, shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings in this, the dispensation of the fulness of times" (D&C 128:18).

To further delineate what actually took place in the founding of this last dispensation, the Prophet told of "divers angels, from Michael or Adam down to the present time, all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their priesthood; giving line upon line, precept upon precept; here a little, and there a little; giving us consolation by holding forth that which is to come, confirming our hope!" (D&C 128:21).

Among the great angels who came to the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery to bestow the necessary keys and to inaugurate the special work of the last days were Moses and Elias, who conferred the keys for the gathering of Israel and the gospel (covenant) of Abraham. That was done on 3 April 1836, in the Kirtland Temple, and the report reads as follows: "Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. After this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, saying that in us and our seed all generations after us should be blessed" (D&C 110:11-12).

Thus to the Prophet Joseph were given the keys, and therefore today in the hands of the First Presidency and the Twelve rest those same keys and the authority and the commission for gathering and restoring the house of Israel. The restoration would not be complete if the keys for gathering Israel and the keys for Abraham's covenant had not been given along with the keys of sealing and all other keys of the fulness of times. That these keys were restored so dramatically by the personal ministration of Moses himself and Elias shows that there is something eternally significant and very necessary about them.

The gathering and restoration of Israel are the work of Jesus Christ. It was for this very purpose that the covenant was given to Abraham in the first place. That was certainly the understanding of Nephi and Jacob. It is eye-opening to note Nephi's explanation of why he quoted so much of Isaiah: "I did read many things unto them which were written in the books of Moses; but that I might more fully persuade them to believe in the Lord their Redeemer I did read unto them that which was written by the prophet Isaiah" (1 Ne. 19:23). The passages of Isaiah cited by Nephi all have to do with the restoration and future glory of Israel (Isa. 48; 49:14). Does not this fact inform us that Nephi believed the redemption of Israel to be the work of Jesus Christ?

For exactly the same reason we must realize that scattered Israel will be restored to its ancient homeland and live in peace and security only when Israel accepts and obeys the gospel of Jesus Christ, including the ordinances of baptism, the laying on of hands, and so forth. Anything less would contradict the purpose and nature of the Abrahamic covenant.

Gathering and Restoration Are Not Interchangeable Terms

Although we customarily speak of the gathering of Israel in an all-inclusive way, it is clear, with a little thought, that gathering alone is not adequate. A group of Israelites could be gathered into a geographic area and yet not be restored in a gospel sense. Restoration is more comprehensive than gathering. A complete restoration would activate every aspect of the Abrahamic covenant: a gathering to a promised land, the priesthood, the gospel, the ordinances, temples, consecration, stewardship, and the rest of the entire plan of the Lord, including security in the land.

The current nation of Israel is a case of gathering without restoration. Upwards of three million people of Jewish descent are situated in the ancient homeland of their ancestors, but they are without the kingdom of God, the priesthood, the ancient covenant, and all that those entail; consequently, they are also without physical security. All that is necessary will come in its time, but the conditions for a peaceful occupation of the land have been established by the Lord and require that the inhabitants must "hearken to my voice" (Abr. 2:6), which means to accept and live by the gospel of Jesus Christ. That day has not yet arrived in the Holy Land, but a gathering of a preliminary sort has been going on there for many years.

Israel in Latter-day Saint Hymns

The hopes, aspirations, and religious beliefs of a people are generally found in their music. What people sing about reflects what they feel. In Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, I discovered four hymns with the word Israel in the title: "Redeemer of Israel" (no. 6); "Israel, Israel, God Is Calling" (no. 7); "Hope of Israel" (no. 259); and "Ye Elders of Israel" (no. 319). Furthermore, at least thirty-nine hymns contain expressions about the gathering of Israel, the mission of Israel, the role of Israel in building Zion in the latter days, and other related topics. Frequently, the hymns call for Israel to believe the gospel of Jesus Christ and come "home" from her long dispersion.

The hymns also speak of the descendants of Judah and of Joseph and of Ephraim and of the "remnant" of Israel. Likewise the Lord Jesus Christ is often identified as the "God of Israel." The concept of the restoration of Israel and Israel's glorious future permeates the message of those thirty-nine hymns. The word Gentile also occurs a number of times, sometimes in a less-favorable context, although several hymns speak of the Gentiles bringing their silver and gold to assist in building Zion and of the Gentiles finding peace through accepting the gospel of Christ.

"The Morning Breaks" (no. 1) speaks of "The dawning of a brighter day," which now has arrived, and says that "Zion's light is bursting forth." "The Gentile fulness now comes in, / And Israel's blessings are at hand. / Lo, Judah's remnant . . . / Shall in their promised Canaan stand."

The Gentiles, too, can "turn and live" if they obey Jehovah, who is making bare his mighty arm to receive his covenant people.

"Now Let Us Rejoice" (no. 3) expresses the belief that now is the day of salvation. The last days are characterized by "trouble and gloom," but the gospel brings hope and joy. All God's promises will be fulfilled, and "Jesus will say to all Israel, 'Come home.'"

"Israel, Israel, God Is Calling" (no. 7) declares: "Israel, Israel, God is speaking / Hear your great Deliverer's voice! / Now a glorious morn is breaking / For the people of his choice. / Come to Zion, . . . / And within her walls rejoice."

"An Angel from on High" (no. 13) refers to the Book of Mormon, which "speaks of Joseph's seed / And makes the remnant known / Of nations long since dead, / Who once had dwelt alone. / . . . Lo! Israel filled with joy / Shall now be gathered home."

"Now We'll Sing with One Accord" (no. 25) testifies that the Lord has raised up the Prophet Joseph Smith and brought forth the Book of Mormon, the priesthood, and the covenant so that the righteous can "gather home." It specifically mentions that the covenant and the gathering are offered to both Jew and Gentile.

"Like Ten Thousand Legions Marching" (no. 253) emphasizes the missionary effort of the last days, which is conducted by many youthful persons who are "sons of Joseph, Israel's band." They are the "seed of Abraham and Jacob."

"Ye Elders of Israel" (no. 319) tells of preaching the gospel in all the world, gathering the wheat at the harvest, and bringing it to Zion, the place of rest. The chorus declares: "O Babylon, O Babylon, we bid thee farewell; / We're going to the mountains of Ephraim to dwell."

"Come, All Ye Sons of God" (no. 322) addresses "all ye sons of God who have received the priesthood; / Go spread the gospel wide and gather in his people. / The latter-day work has begun, / To gather scattered Israel in, / And bring them back to Zion to praise the Lamb." Later verses speak of the gathering of Israel as the fulfillment of the words of the prophets, with great joy and blessings to follow.

"Go, Ye Messengers of Heaven" (no. 327) speaks of the divinely chosen messengers of the Lord who will go to "island, vale, and mountain" to "gather out the sons of Jacob / To possess the promised land."

Many other hymns refer directly or allude to Abraham, Israel, the noble birthright, David's seed, the Jews, the Lamanites, the Gentiles, Old Jerusalem, New Jerusalem, the promised land, and so on (see nos. 2, 5, 8, 16, 17, 32, 34-35, 38-42, 50, 54, 59, 63-64, 71, 74, 112, 211, 255, 259, 262, 265, and 299).

Another hymn of the Restoration that is not in the 1985 hymnbook is "The Seer, Joseph, the Seer," written by Elder John Taylor in memory of Joseph Smith, whom it designates as being of "noble seed." [^6] That designation evidently refers to his lineal descent through Ephraim.

Isaiah, the great prophet whose writings we are commanded to search and who "spake as touching all things concerning . . . the house of Israel" and the Gentiles (3 Ne. 23:2), said that the redeemed of the Lord shall come to Zion with songs of everlasting joy (see Isa. 35:10; 51:11). With the realization that the Latter-day Saints are of Israel comes the recognition that the very hymns we have discussed may be among those to which Isaiah referred.

Frequently Asked Questions about Latter-Day Israel

The scriptures and numerous statements of the Brethren bear on aspects of the role of the house of Israel in the last days. Those sources help to answer many frequently asked questions about latter-day Israel.

Are Latter-day Saints literally descended from ancient Israel, or are they members of the house of Israel only by adoption and "assignment" to a tribe?

As a teacher in the Church Educational System for forty years, I have heard this question asked many times. Some passages of scripture pertaining to the subject of lineage are as follows:

D&C 86:8-11. The Lord said to the leaders of the Church in 1832 that they had the priesthood because of "the lineage of your fathers" and because "ye are lawful heirs, according to the flesh"; furthermore, the priesthood must "remain through you and your lineage."

D&C 96:7. John Johnson "is a descendant of Joseph and a partaker of the blessings of the promise made unto his fathers."

D&C 132:30-31. The Lord told Joseph Smith that the promises made to Abraham were also his because he was of Abraham, and in this manner the promise is continued.

D&C 113:6-8. Israel has a right to the priesthood because of lineage.

Abr. 2:11. Abraham's descendants (seed) have the right to have the priesthood.

Elder Bruce R. McConkie vigorously answered the question this way:

"We are literally of the seed of Abraham. Let's just drill it into ourselves! We are literally of the seed of Abraham. We are natural heirs according to the flesh. We are not adopted nor anything else. I don't know how there could be language more express than these revelations, 'natural heirs according to the flesh,' 'the literal seed of the body.' You see [the Lord] just goes out of his way to make it literal. The literal seed of your body has the right to the priesthood and the gospel, and that is us. Now, granted that somebody can be adopted in but they are so few and far between up to now, that we can just about forget about them." [^7]

Considering that the title page of the Book of Mormon says it will come forth "by way of the Gentile" and that Joseph Smith brought it forth, doesn't that mean that he and the other Church members are actually Gentiles?

Because Gentile means "the other people," a Gentile in the Book of Mormon sense can be someone who is not of Lehi's lineage and who is not a Jew. In that sense the United States is called a mighty Gentile nation in the land of promise (see 1 Ne. 22:7), even though we know there is a lot of Israelite blood in the veins of the people. This distinction is clarified in D&C 109:60, which says that the Church is "identified with the Gentiles." Thus the title page of the Book of Mormon, which says that the Book of Mormon will "come forth by way of the Gentile," means that neither the Nephites nor the Lamanites nor the Jews will bring it to light.

We know from scripture that Joseph Smith was a descendant of Joseph who was sold into Egypt (2 Ne. 3:6-16). Joseph Smith was a Gentile of Israelite blood lineage, and so are a lot of other people: the Smiths, the Cowderys, the Youngs, the Kimballs, the Richardses, the Woodruffs, the Goddards, the Taylors, the Snows, the Whitneys, the Pratts, and other early families in the Church were descended from common ancestors and thus were genealogically related. In other words, Joseph Smith was of the same bloodlines as Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow, Heber J. Grant, Harold B. Lee, and many others. Moreover, Joseph Smith is linked genealogically with Grover Cleveland, Ulysses S. Grant, Patrick Henry, Winston Churchill, and other prominent persons. Because Joseph Smith was biologically of Ephraim, so are they.

Leaders of the Church have had something to say about Joseph Smith's lineage. President Brigham Young said: "It was decreed in the counsels of eternity, long before the foundations of the earth were laid, that he [Joseph Smith] should be the man, in the last dispensation of this world, to bring forth the word of God to the people, and receive the fulness of the keys and power of the Priesthood of the Son of God. The Lord had his eye upon him, and upon his father, and upon his father's father, and upon their progenitors clear back to Abraham, and from Abraham to the flood, and from the flood to Enoch, and from Enoch to Adam. He has watched that family and that blood as it has circulated from its fountain to the birth of that man." [^8] President Young also said: "Joseph Smith, junior, was fore-ordained to come through the loins of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and so on down through the Prophets and Apostles; and thus he came forth in the last days to be a minister of salvation, and to hold the keys of the last dispensation of the fulness of times." [^9]

And President Young further declared: "You have heard Joseph say that the people did not know him; he had his eyes on the relation to blood-relations. Some have supposed that he meant Spirit, but it was the blood-relation. This is it that he referred to. . . . He had the right and the power and was the legal heir to the blood that has been on the earth and has come down through lineage. The union of various ancestors kept the blood pure. . . . That blood has been preserved and has been brought down from father to son, and our Heavenly Father has been watching it all the time." [^10]

Even if Joseph Smith and the early Saints were of Joseph, does that mean that the Church membership today is still primarily of that lineage?

President Brigham Young spoke a great deal about the lineage of the Latter-day Saints. In 1855 he said:

"Ephraim has become mixed with all the nations of the earth, and it is Ephraim that is gathering together.

"It is Ephraim that I have been searching for all the days of my preaching, and that is the blood which ran in my veins when I embraced the Gospel. If there are any of the other tribes of Israel mixed with the Gentiles we are also searching for them. Though the Gentiles are cut off, do not suppose that we are not going to preach the Gospel among the Gentile nations, for they are mingled with the house of Israel, and when we send to the nations we do not seek for the Gentiles, because they are disobedient and rebellious. We want the blood of Jacob, and that of his father Isaac and Abraham, which runs in the veins of the people. There is a particle of it here, and another there, blessing the nations as predicted. . . .

" . . . It is the house of Israel we are after, and we care not whether they come from the east, the west, the north or the south; from China, Russia, England, California, North or South America, or some other locality; and it is the very lad on whom father Jacob laid his hands, that will save the house of Israel. The Book of Mormon came to Ephraim, for Joseph Smith was a pure Ephraimite, and the Book of Mormon was revealed to him, and while he lived he made it his business to search for those who believed the Gospel." [^11]

The years since President Young's statement have shown that it is indeed among people from China, England, North and South America, and many other countries that Israel has been found.

President Young told the Latter-day Saints in 1859 that they had a mission similar to that of Joseph of old because they were Joseph's seed:["[God] foreknew what Joseph, who was sold into Egypt, would do. Joseph was foreordained to be the temporal saviour of his father's house, and the seed of Joseph are ordained to be the spiritual and temporal saviours of all the house of Israel in the latter days. Joseph's seed has mixed itself with all the seed of man upon the face of the whole earth. The great majority of those who are now before me are the descendants of that Joseph who was sold." [^12]

The special mission of Joseph's seed to nourish the remainder of the family of Israel is also spoken of in a blessing that the patriarch Jacob gave to his son Joseph, as recorded in the Joseph Smith Translation of Gen. 48:8-11:

"Therefore, O my son, he hath blessed me in raising thee up to be a servant unto me, in saving my house from death;

"In delivering my people, thy brethren, from famine which was sore in the land; wherefore the God of thy fathers shall bless thee, and the fruit of thy loins, that they shall be blessed above thy brethren, and above thy father's house;

"For thou hast prevailed, and thy father's house hath bowed down unto thee, even as it was shown unto thee, before thou was sold into Egypt by the hands of thy brethren; wherefore thy brethren shall bow down unto thee, from generation to generation, unto the fruit of thy loins for ever;

"For thou shalt be a light unto my people, to deliver them in the days of their captivity, from bondage; and to bring salvation unto them, when they are altogether bowed down under sin."

This blessing was given to Joseph while he was in Egypt, before the Israelites became slaves to the Egyptians. The famine spoken of in verse 9 we are familiar with, but please note that the bondage spoken of in verse 11 cannot be the bondage of Egypt, for it was Moses who freed Israel from Egyptian bondage, and Moses was not a descendant of Joseph. The prophecy speaks of Joseph's seed delivering Israel from "the bondage of sin," so that must be a latter-day bondage of apostasy and false philosophy; Joseph's seed will rescue and reclaim many of the house of Israel from this apostasy by declaring the gospel of Jesus Christ among them.

That mission is also referred to in Gen. 49:24 in Jacob's blessing of Joseph, which includes the statement: "From thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel." That passage may seem puzzling because Christ, the Shepherd and the Stone (see D&C 50:4), was not of Joseph's lineage but of Judah's. Knowing the lineage of the Prophet Joseph Smith and most of the Latter-day Saints, however, we can see that through Joseph's lineage Christ and his gospel have been made manifest to the rest of Israel in the last days. There is harmony among all these passages and complete accord with President Young's statements.

In 1977 President Spencer W. Kimball proclaimed the blood descent from Joseph of current Church members:

"The Lamanite is a chosen child of God, but he is not the only chosen one. There are many other good people, including the Anglos, the French, the German, and the English, who are also of Ephraim and Manasseh. They, with the Lamanites, are also chosen people, and they are a remnant of Jacob. The Lamanite is not wholly and exclusively the remnant of Jacob which the Book of Mormon talks about. We are all of Israel! We are of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and Joseph through Ephraim and Manasseh. We are all of us remnants of Jacob." [^13]

Why the emphasis on Ephraim?

In the Church today it is a special time of Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons of Joseph. Ephraim was given the birthright in the house of Israel (see 1 Chr. 5:1-2; Jer. 31:9), which is the right of presidency. It was necessary that he have the gospel first in this last dispensation because he must teach it to all others. The Church today is growing more rapidly than ever before in this dispensation, but where are the converts coming from? Statistics published in 1989 show that from among the then most recent one million converts to the Church, approximately 65 percent had come from the countries of Mexico, Central and South America, and the Pacific Islands. [^14] These are descendants of Lehi. Patriarchal blessings declare many of them to be of Manasseh (as was Lehi himself), whereas others are from Ephraim (as was Ishmael). [^15]

Through the extensive scattering of Israel during the past twenty-seven hundred years, the house of Israel is now found among all nations. Nephi said that "the house of Israel, sooner or later, will be scattered upon all the face of the earth, and also among all nations" (1 Ne. 22:3). That means not only that they are situated all over the earth but also that they have intermarried with all peoples. It is likely, of course, that intermarriage has taken place more completely among some peoples than among others, so that all nations are not a uniform mixture.

Because the tribe of Ephraim has the birthright in Israel, it was and is Ephraim's responsibility to have the priesthood, the covenant of Abraham, and the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ first in the last days, which is the time of restoration. This responsibility requires Ephraim to extend that same covenant and priesthood to the other tribes of Israel and thus to the world. Moses referred to that privilege when he said that Joseph's family would prevail in Israel generation after generation and would "push the people together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh" (Deut. 33:17). "Pushing together" sounds like a gathering. The Lord speaks of Ephraim's special situation in D&C 133:34, where after recounting the doctrine of the gathering, he says, "This is the blessing of the everlasting God upon the tribes of Israel, and the richer blessing upon the head of Ephraim and his fellows."

Church Patriarch Hyrum G. Smith, speaking in general conference on 7 April 1929, explained the role of Ephraim:

"It is the policy and order of the Church at the present time to have at least one patriarch, who is authorized to bless the members of the stake, and in so doing, declare their lineage, in a similar way to the manner in which Jacob blessed his grandsons, and his own sons. At the present time in the Church the great majority of those receiving their blessings are declared to be of the house and lineage of Ephraim, while many others are designated as members of the house of Manasseh; but up to the present time we have discovered that those who are leaders in Israel, no matter where they come from, no matter what nation they have come out of, are of Ephraim; while the blood of Manasseh is found in the tribes and nations of the Indians of North and South America. They are great, they are wonderfully blessed, but Ephraim seems to prevail in the greater blessings, greater in responsibility, and in faithfulness to the Lord's work. And so people have wondered about it. Why do the patriarchs declare that most of us are of Ephraim?

"It is my testimony that 'today' is the day of Ephraim. It is the day which the Lord has set to fulfil his promises made in the times of the ancient patriarchs, when he said that he would scatter Israel to the four corners of the world, and that Ephraim should be scattered in all the nations, and then in the 'last days' be gathered out again. Many are being gathered out by our missionaries, as 'one of a family and two of a city'; and they are found here, gathered into a gathering place appointed of the Lord, and they are receiving his blessings. This is why so many of us are declared to be of Ephraim. If there were time I would like to speak further about our blessings. The Prophet Joseph Smith, was declared to be of this house of Joseph, a chosen vessel. . . .

" . . . the Prophet Joseph Smith was a prophet in very deed, the descendant of Joseph who was sold into Egypt, through the lineage of Ephraim, a promised vessel in the hands of the Lord." [^16]

It is a matter of interest that Patriarch Hyrum G. Smith gave blessings to more than twenty-two thousand people, all of whom were of Ephraim, Manasseh, or Judah. [^17]

What do patriarchs say about Israel in various countries?

There are representatives in the Church from all twelve tribes of Israel; however, most members are from Ephraim, many from Manasseh, and a few from Judah and the other tribes.

A list was prepared by Elder Mark E. Petersen of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles to illustrate what lineages patriarchs have been declaring. The context of the list shows clearly that Elder Petersen regarded these as declarations of biological inheritance, not merely assignments to a tribe. Here are his words, showing the role of Joseph's seed in the Church today:

"For example, three different patriarchs in Great Britain report that of their blessings, very few indeed show a lineage other than that of Ephraim. One of those patriarchs has given more than six hundred blessings, another five hundred, and the third more than three hundred. Each reports that of all his blessings, not more than half a dozen declare lineage other than of Ephraim.

"This clearly shows that Great Britain is a land of Ephraim. But the same thing may be said of other European countries. They too are Ephraim. Converts by the thousands have come from there. It is not expected, of course, that all of the millions in Europe will join the Church. The scripture says that the way is strait and narrow 'and few there be that find it.' (Matt. 7:14.) But those who do come are primarily of Ephraim. And Ephraim is a son of Joseph.

"Throughout the Polynesian islands and Latin America the blood of Manasseh is dominant.

"In Mexico, patriarchs report that 75 percent of the blessings indicate the lineage of Manasseh and 25 percent, of Ephraim. Only two or three blessings out of hundreds given mention any other tribe.

"In Peru one patriarch in a given period gave 95 blessings, of which 90 indicated the blood of Manasseh, 3 of Ephraim, and 2 of Abraham.

"Another patriarch in the same area gave 347 blessings in a given period, of which 122 were of Ephraim, 130 of Manasseh, 90 of Joseph, 2 of Asher, 2 of Benjamin, and 1 of Levi.

"Another patriarch in that land has given over nine hundred blessings, of which 90 percent are of Manasseh and the rest of Ephraim, except for a half dozen referring to other tribes.

"In New Zealand virtually all of the Europeans are declared to be of Ephraim and the Polynesians of Manasseh, with a few declared simply to be of Joseph.

"In Tonga the patriarchs report that 75 percent of their blessings show a lineage of Manasseh and 25 percent of Ephraim. Out of many blessings given, only 4 were related to other tribes.

"It is interesting to see how the blessings occur in still other lands. In Hong Kong, out of 326 blessings, 323 were of Ephraim and 3 of Manasseh.

"In Taiwan, out of a group of 210 blessings, all were of Ephraim. In the Philippines every blessing given by the patriarchs there declared a lineage of Ephraim.

"In Japan, out of 2,641 blessings, 1,326 were shown to be of Joseph, 444 specifically of Ephraim, and 871 of Manasseh. No other tribes were mentioned.

"In Italy, out of 150 blessings, all were declared of Ephraim. No exceptions.

"In France one patriarch reported on 300 blessings of which 280 were of Ephraim and the rest of Manasseh except a few of Judah.

"Another French patriarch gave 94 blessings, all showing a line of Ephraim except one of Judah. A third French patriarch just beginning his work said that all of his blessings thus far showed the line of Ephraim.

"In Argentina, out of 100 blessings given, 66 were of Ephraim and 33 of Manasseh, with one from another tribe.

"Out of 100 blessings in Chile, 60 were of Ephraim and 40 of Manasseh. From 100 blessings given in Uruguay, 21 were of Ephraim, 76 were of Manasseh, and 3 from other tribes. In North America nearly all Indians are shown to be of Manasseh. The sifting of the blood of Joseph and his sons Ephraim and Manasseh to all parts of the world is nothing short of miraculous. And it is likewise obviously an act of Providence that the Latter-day Saints being brought into the Church in all parts of the world are overwhelmingly of the blood of Joseph.

"It is highly significant in the light of the prophecies concerning Joseph and his latter-day mission." [^18]

Why is a gathering necessary? Why cannot the Lord save the righteous individually wherever they are?

The gathering and restoration of Israel is the work of Jesus Christ; it is his work as the Savior and Redeemer. The Prophet Joseph Smith declared that the gathering is a matter "of the greatest importance" and "one of the most important points" of our faith. [^19] He explained that one main purpose of the gathering is so that temples can be built in which necessary ordinances for the living and the dead can be administered.20 He also explained that the gathering of the faithful has been an activity of all of the prophets in every age of the world and that greater blessings can be achieved through group, rather than individual, effort. [^20] Furthermore, the gathering is for the protection and preservation of the Saints in the time that burning and destruction are sent forth upon the world (see D&C 115:6). [^21]

How long will it take to gather Israel in the last days?

The gathering began with the beginning of this last dispensation and will continue through the Millennium. The gigantic proportions of the gathering are startling. Jeremiah stated (16:14-21) that the gathering of Israel in the last days will be so dramatic, extensive, and miraculous that it will greatly overshadow the much smaller and quicker rescue of Israel from Egypt by Moses. Moses led more than one million Israelites out of Egypt; the gathering in the last days could involve billions of people.

What kind of individual traits or callings are found within the house of Israel?

Although each of the tribes has its own individuality, as noted in Jacob's blessings recorded in Gen. 49 and in Moses' blessing recorded in Deut. 33, three seem to have particular callings in the last days: Judah, Levi, and Ephraim. The promise was that from Judah would come most of the kings of Israel, and King David received the assurance that Israel would never fail of a king from his line (see Gen. 49:8-10; 1 Chr. 5:2; Micah 5:2; 2 Sam. 7:13; Ps. 89:4; 132:11, 17; Jer. 33:15). That promise has been perfectly fulfilled in Jesus Christ as the King of Kings.

The tribe of Levi, and more particularly the sons of Aaron, were given a priesthood "throughout all their generations" (D&C 84:18) to minister in temporal things and arrange the land inheritances both anciently and in the fulness of times (see D&C 58:17; 68:14). [^22] That is the work of the bishop. Thus far in the current dispensation the Lord has not identified a person of Aaron's lineage to fill the office.

The tribe of Ephraim was given the birthright and the keys of presidency in Israel, a calling fully manifested in the person of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his successors.

In the restoration of all things we shall no doubt see the complete fulfillment of all these ancient appointments.

What is the situation of persons of other tribes of Israel who come into the Church now, during the special time of Ephraim and Manasseh?

Help in answering this question may be found in the Prophet Joseph Smith's answer to a question Elder Orson Hyde asked him in 1840 about whether a converted Jew should gather to Jerusalem or to Zion in America. The Prophet declared that such are to come to Zion. [^23] It would seem, therefore, that individuals of other tribes who have the courage and inspiration to join the Church in our day shall inherit the blessings of Ephraim, which are the richer blessings (see D&C 133:34).

Are other descendants of Abraham, who are not of Isaac and Jacob, also heirs of the blessings of Abraham?

Elder Bruce R. McConkie responded to this question thus:

"Yes, . . . I think every one of Abraham's descendants would have it. Now, there is this statement: 'In Isaac shall thy seed be called' [Gen. 21:12; see also 17:19], where one of Abraham's descendants is involved. That is, there were special blessings to him. But the language here is that all of Abraham's descendants are going to have the right to the priesthood. Everybody that was married to him in celestial marriage, and that was Hagar and all the rest, . . . [including] Keturah. They all are inheritors of the blessings of Abraham." [^24]

We remember also that Moses received the priesthood from Jethro, his father-in-law, who was apparently not an Israelite but a Midianite (see D&C 84:6-7; Ex. 3:1). Whether Jethro was a descendant of Abraham is not clear, but he was certainly not an Israelite.

In the early days of the Church there was considerable emphasis on gathering. Has that emphasis ended?

The gathering develops in various phases. In the days of Joseph Smith, gathering was centered on Missouri and the site for the New Jerusalem. Later it was focused on the Rocky Mountains. The Holy Land in the Near East is also a place for gathering. Today converts stay in their home countries and gather to stakes of Zion. Surely other phases will be inaugurated in their time. Missouri is still the place of the New Jerusalem, and the gathering to the Old Jerusalem has hardly even begun, at least according to the description in Ether 13:1-12.

On the Pathway to Eternal Fame

Ancient Israel was scattered because of willful disobedience to the commandments of the God of Israel as delivered by holy prophets. That God was Jehovah, who is also Jesus Christ. To be scattered was a punishment to Israel, but it has been a blessing to the nations because it has infused the natural inheritance to the priesthood and the covenant among all peoples. The Lord has informed us that "the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim" (D&C 64:36). He who scattered Israel (Jesus) is now gathering them. The Lord is putting forth his hand "the second time" to restore the house of Israel to their promised blessings and lands. The first time was the restoration of the Jews to Palestine from Babylon. The second and latter-day restoration is an undertaking of worldwide proportions that will require centuries of time and involve billions of people. The gathering and restoration of Israel is one of the great projects of the dispensation of the fulness of times, overshadowing any previous gathering in the world. It is going to happen because the Lord has not forgotten his covenant to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Great interest arises in our hearts as we contemplate the enormous scope of the task and the privilege that is ours to be on the Lord's errand to assist in the work. The Lord has called prophets and apostles of Ephraim's lineage, given them authority, and commissioned them to inaugurate the work. From the time of the first vision of Joseph Smith in 1820 to the present, the foundation has been laid. Church statistics show that the work of the gathering and restoration is going forward with ever-increasing momentum. The Prophet Joseph Smith knew that this is the work of God, and he gave encouraging counsel to Elder Orson Hyde and John E. Page as they continued on their mission to Palestine in 1840:

"Although it appears great at present, yet you have but just begun to realize the greatness, the extent and glory of the same. If there is anything calculated to interest the mind of the Saints, to awaken in them the finest sensibilities, and arouse them to enterprise and exertion, surely it is the great and precious promises made by our heavenly Father to the children of Abraham; and those engaged in seeking the outcasts of Israel, and the dispersed of Judah, cannot fail to enjoy the Spirit of the Lord and have the choicest blessings of heaven rest upon them in copious effusions.

"Brethren, you are in the pathway to eternal fame, and immortal glory; and inasmuch as you feel interested for the covenant people of the Lord, the God of their fathers shall bless you. Do not be discouraged on account of the greatness of the work; only be humble and faithful, and then you can say, 'What art thou, O great mountain! before Zerubbabel shalt thou be brought down.' He who scattered Israel has promised to gather them; therefore inasmuch as you are to be instrumental in this great work, He will endow you with power, wisdom, might and intelligence, and every qualification necessary; while your minds will expand wider and wider, until you can circumscribe the earth and the heavens, reach forth into eternity, and contemplate the mighty acts of Jehovah in all their variety and glory." [^25]

Although the foregoing was said in the context of the gathering of the Jews, equal interest and importance is attached to the restoration of all the house of Israel, such as the descendants of Lehi and the lost tribes. It will go forward until the Lord says the work is done.

Summary

The discussion in this chapter may be condensed into several fundamental concepts: Israel is covenant-founded, temple-based, and Christ-centered. The work of Jesus Christ is the reason the covenant of Abraham exists. The Abrahamic covenant, which is the covenant of Israel, is in every way as significant in the last days as it was in any age of the past.

Jesus Christ is the Savior of all nations, yet by heavenly design and divine intent, he was born into the lineage of Israel through the house of David. Although he is God of the whole earth, he is precisely the Holy One of Israel.

The arrangement of nations and races is the work of the Lord, according to his foreknowledge and our own premortal existence. Thus God has a hand in the development of history.

The Abrahamic covenant is a prototype or manifestation of the work and mission of Jesus Christ. Just as Jesus was an Israelite but extends his Atonement to all nations, so also the Abrahamic covenant is centered in Israel but has provisions for reaching out to all nations. The covenant incorporates priesthood, the Holy Ghost, baptism, eternal marriage, posterity, land, and a blessing for all nations.

The literal, biological descendants of Abraham have a natural right to the priesthood and the fulness of the gospel of Christ. Ephraim holds the birthright, or keys of presidency, in the last days.

Jesus deliberately limited his personal ministry, both before and after his Resurrection, to those nations biologically of Israel. Jesus manifests himself to the Gentiles through the Holy Ghost, as they are taught the gospel by prophets who are of the house of Israel.

The Gentile nations can obtain the blessings of the gospel through the preaching of the prophets of Israel. Whether one is Gentile or Israelite, the only way to obtain the blessings of the Abrahamic covenant is by faith in Jesus Christ, repentance, baptism, receiving the Holy Ghost, priesthood, and so forth.

The house of Israel has been scattered over all the world, among all nations; therefore, most nations today have the blood of Israel in their veins to some extent or another.

Latter-day Saints are for the most part biologically descended from Joseph through Ephraim and Manasseh. As descendants of Joseph, the members of the Church have a responsibility in the last days to feed the world the bread of life, that is, the gospel of Jesus Christ.

Joseph Smith was a legal heir to the priesthood and the keys of presidency through his lineage of Ephraim.

As far as individual salvation is concerned, a Gentile can be saved in the celestial kingdom as an Israelite can, but the process for the Gentile is to obtain the gospel through the agency of Israelite prophets and teachers.

A primary purpose of the gathering is for building temples so that sacred ordinances essential for salvation may be administered. The building of temples is an indication that the blood of Israel is present in the land. That truth is especially noteworthy in view of the temples being built in Asia (Japan, Taiwan, Korea, Hong Kong, the Philippines, and so forth).

The holy scriptures are Israel's witness for Jesus Christ and will eventually consist of records of the Jews, the Nephites, and the ten tribes.

The tribes of Judah, Joseph, and Levi were each given special responsibilities of long-lasting significance, which will be fulfilled when Israel is restored to the lands of their inheritance.

The restoration of Israel in the last days is much more extensive than a mere gathering and is a work many times larger than the exodus from Egypt in Moses' time. The promises of restoration are beginning to be fulfilled even now but will not be fully accomplished until well into the Millennium.

The gathering progresses through various phases. The first phase was to midwestern America and then to the Rocky Mountains. Currently the gathering is to the stakes of Zion wherever they may be. Other phases will come in their time.

To be engaged in the gathering and restoration of Israel was described by the Prophet Joseph Smith as being on the "pathway to eternal fame and immortal glory."

Annotated Bibliography

Anderson, James H. God's Covenant Race. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1941. Broad historical treatment but poorly documented.

Ballard, Melvin J. In Conference Report, 4 Apr. 1938, 42. Statement about "the times of the Gentiles."

Benson, Ezra Taft. Teachings of Ezra Taft Benson. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1988, 94-98. Specifically discusses the restoration of Judah.

———. A Message to Judah from Joseph. Address delivered at Jubilee Auditorium, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, 2 May 1976. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Burton, Theodore M. In Conference Report, 5 Apr. 1975, 103. States that Ephraim has an inherited right to the priesthood.

Cowdery, Oliver. In Messenger and Advocate, vol. 1 (1835), nos. 5-7. Many Old Testament passages the angel Moroni quoted to Joseph Smith about Israel. Includes Ps. 100; 107; 144; Isa. 1:2; Jer. 31.

Dunn, Loren C. In Conference Report, Apr. 1981, 27. Israel's blood is believing blood.

Encyclopedia of Mormonism. Edited by Daniel H. Ludlow. New York: Macmillan, 1992. "Temple Dedicatory Prayers (Excerpts)." 4:1741-49, appendix 11, identifies the people of the Pacific Islands as descendants of Lehi. 2:705 references articles on Israel.

Grant, Heber J. In Conference Report, Apr. 1930, 3. Official statement of the First Presidency on the one-hundredth anniversary of the organization of the Church. Much information about the gathering of Israel and such terminology as "our father Jacob." Page 7 suggests descent from Jacob is literal.

Hymns. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1948.

Hymns of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1985. Index of topics, 415-28, is helpful but not complete.

Information and Suggestions for Patriarchs. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, n.d. [1980s, R, 10].

Ivins, Anthony W. In Conference Report, Apr. 1930, 13. Extensive discussion of the actual blood relationship of Latter-day Saints to ancient Israel.

"Jews in China." Millennial Star. Liverpool. 13 (15 June 1851): 185. Reports isolated colonies of Jewish people in China.

Kimball, Spencer W. Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball. Edited by Edward L. Kimball. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982, 600-601. States that we are all of Israel. Lamanites are only one part of the remnant. Israelite blood is believing blood.

———. In Conference Report, Apr. 1949, 106. The blood of Israel is believing blood.

Ludlow, Daniel H. "Of the House of Israel." Ensign, Jan. 1991, 51-55. Discussions of the terms Israel and Gentile and also the history and mission of the house of Israel.

Ludlow, Victor L. "Jeremiah's Prophecies Concerning the Gathering of the Jews in the Last Days." Sperry Lecture Series, Brigham Young University, 28 Mar. 1974, 2-6.

McConkie, Bruce R. "The Patriarchal Order." Address delivered to a religion class, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 8 Aug. 1967. Audiocassette is in author's possession. Very specific about Israel, the Abrahamic covenant, and Latter-day Saints being of Israel.

———. "Households of Faith." In Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, 1 Dec. 1970, 3. Latter-day Saints are of the blood lineage of Abraham.

———. "Come, Let Israel Build Zion." Ensign, May 1977, 115-18. Originally an address delivered at an area conference in South America. Printed at the request of President Spencer W. Kimball. Outlines the development of this dispensation in three phases. Emphasizes the current gathering to the stakes of Zion.

———. "To the Koreans and All the People of Asia." Address delivered 5 Mar. 1971. Published as chapter 15 in Spencer J. Palmer, The Expanding Church, Deseret Book, 1978. Emphasis on the growth of the Church in Asia.

———. The Promised Messiah. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1978. Index is helpful in locating statements about Israel.

———. The Millennial Messiah. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1982. Excellent source on all aspects of Israel and the Gentiles.

———. A New Witness for the Articles of Faith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985. Excellent chapters defining the role of Israel in the latter days.

Millet, Robert L., and McConkie, Joseph Fielding. Our Destiny: The Call and Election of the House of Israel. Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1993. Extensive treatment of Israel's history, including the Millennium and the promises given to Israel.

Nelson, Russell M. "Thanks for the Covenant." In Brigham Young University Speeches of the Year, 1988-89. Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University, 1989, 53-61. Very informative discussion of our heritage from Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Joseph.

Nyman, Monte S. "The Second Gathering of the Literal Seed." In Doctrines for Exaltation. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1989, 186-200. From an address delivered at the Nineteenth Annual Sperry Symposium. Excellent evidences showing Latter-day Saints to be of Israel by literal descent.

Penrose, Charles W. In Conference Report, Oct. 1922, 21-23. Israel has a special mission. Believing blood. Ephraim to be first in the last days.

———. "Lost Tribes and the Restoration." Millennial Star 71 (1909): 696-701.

Petersen, Mark E. Joseph of Egypt. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981, 11-17. Excellent treatment of the role of Joseph anciently and his posterity today.

Pratt, Orson. In Journal of Discourses. 26 vols. London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86. 19:168-73 speaks of records of the lost tribes. 18:296 addresses land inheritances on the earth for restored Israel.

Proclamation of the Twelve Apostles. 1845. New York City and Liverpool. Many strong statements about the restoration of Israel.

Romney, Marion G. "The Restoration of Israel to the Lands of Their Inheritance." Ensign, May 1981, 16-17. The restoration of Israel to their promised lands depends on their acceptance of Jesus Christ as their Redeemer.

Smith, Eldred G. Improvement Era, June 1960, 417-18. Patriarchal blessings.

Smith, Hyrum G. In Conference Report, Apr. 1929, 122-25. This is the day of Ephraim. Also discusses the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh.

Smith, Joseph. Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Selected by Joseph Fielding Smith. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938, 14-15, 102. Only a relatively few Gentiles will be gathered, compared to the many who are literally of Israel. The seed of Joseph is now spreading the gospel inthe earth.

Smith, Joseph F. Gospel Doctrine. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1946, 115. The Church is almost universally of Ephraim.

Smith, Joseph Fielding. Address delivered at the dedication of the Joseph Smith Memorial Building, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 16 Oct. 1941. Typescript in Harold B. Lee Library, BYU. Quotes President Brigham Young on the lineage of Joseph Smith.

———. Answers to Gospel Questions. 5 vols. Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1957-66, 3:63-64. Nearly all persons are of mixed lineage. Discusses being of two or more tribes of Israel and also of Gentile blood.

Snow, Erastus. In Journal of Discourses. 26 vols. London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86, 23:181-87. Ishmael of Ephraim; Ephraim heir to holy priesthood. Traits of blood Israel. Ephraim inherits keys of presidency; a kingdom of priests.

Taylor, John. In Journal of Discourses. 26 vols. London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86, 18:324-25. Future land inheritances on the earth.

———. "The Seer, Joseph, the Seer." In Hymns. Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1948, no. 296. States that Joseph Smith was of noble seed.

Whitehead, E. L. The House of Israel. Provo, Utah, 1955. A wide treatment of Israel, historically but poorly documented.

Woodruff, Wilford. In Journal of Discourses. 26 vols. London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86, 2:191-201. Latter-day Saints are Gentiles by political identification even though actually of Israel. Meaning of the phrase "fulness of the Gentiles."

Young, Brigham. In Journal of Discourses. 26 vols. London: Latter-day Saints' Book Depot, 1854-86. 2:268-69, 10:288 identify Ephraim as the Anglo-Saxon race. 7:290 discusses mission of the seed of Joseph of Egypt in the last days.

———. In Utah Genealogical Magazine, 11:104-17. Address originally delivered in 1845 in Nauvoo, Illinois. Lineage of Joseph Smith. Early Church families are closely related. Ephraim is heir to the priesthood because of lineage.

Notes

From Watch and Be Ready: Preparing for the Second Coming of the Lord (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1994), 63-104.

---
Notas:
[^1] The allegory of Zenos uses different trees to represent Israel and the Gentiles, thus showing a uniqueness to Israel as the "tame" tree (see Jacob 5:3-7). Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 365.
[^2] Nephi said that in the last days the descendants of Lehi will learn that they are "natural branches" of the house of Israel (see 1 Ne. 15:12-16). Ibid., 264.
[^3] Nephi repeatedly emphasized that the scattering, gathering, and restoration of Israel would all be literal, real, and tangible. He said those events would be "according to the flesh" (see 1 Ne. 22:2): "Behold these things are temporal; for thus are the covenants of the Lord with our fathers; and it meaneth us in the days to come, and also all our brethren who are of the house of Israel" (1 Ne. 22:6). "It must needs be upon the face of this earth; and it cometh unto men according to the flesh" (1 Ne. 22:18; see also v. 27). F. F. Bruce, The Books and the Parchments (Great Britain: Revell, 1955), 199.
[^4] Jacob insisted that the promises of the Lord about the restoration of Israel were literal, that they were "according to the flesh" (2 Ne. 10:2), and that Israel "shall be restored in the flesh, upon the earth, unto the lands of their inheritance" (2 Ne. 10:7). Jacob quoted the Lord as saying that He will fulfill the covenants He has made "that I will do unto them while they are in the flesh" (2 Ne. 10:15; see also v. 17). J. R. Dummelow, One-Volume Bible Commentary (New York: Macmillan, 1960), 792.
[^5] The prophet Mormon, speaking to Lehi's descendants who would read the Book of Mormon in the last days, listed several things they ought to know for the salvation of their souls. The first thing he listed was "Know ye that ye are of the house of Israel" (Morm. 7:2). Mormon must have thought that being of Israel was important because he wrote to the Gentiles that they needed to repent and believe in Jesus Christ so that they could be "numbered with my people who are of the house of Israel" (3 Ne. 30:2). Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 149-50.
[^6] The Book of Mormon often repeats the statement that by accepting Christ the Gentiles can be "numbered among the house of Israel" (1 Ne. 14:2; see also 15:13-15; 2 Ne. 10:18; 3 Ne. 16:13; 21:6). John Taylor, "The Seer, Joseph, the Seer," Hymns (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1948), no. 296.
[^7] Bruce R. McConkie, "The Patriarchal Order," address delivered to a religion class, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah, 8 August 1967.
[^8] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 7:289-90.
[^9] Ibid., 7:290.
[^10] Brigham Young, in Utah Genealogical Magazine 11:107-8.
[^11] Brigham Young, in Journal of Discourses, 2:268-69.
[^12] Ibid., 7:290.
[^13] Spencer W. Kimball, The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 600-601.
[^14] Daniel H. Ludlow, ed., Encyclopedia of Mormonism, 5 vols. (New York: Macmillan, 1992), 4:1522.
[^15] See Alma 10:3; see also Erastus Snow, in Journal of Discourses, 23:184-85.
[^16] Hyrum G. Smith, in Conference Report, April 1929, 123-25.
[^17] Letter of Eldred G. Smith, 1 Feb. 1994.
[^18] Mark E. Petersen, Joseph of Egypt (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1981), 15-17.
[^19] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 83, 92.
[^20] Ibid., 308.
[^21] Ibid., 83, 183, 208.
[^22] Ibid., 101.
[^23] Ibid., 112.
[^24] Ibid., 180.
[^25] 8 August 1967.
