Robert J. Matthews, Selected Writings of Robert J. Matthews: Gospel Scholars Series ( 1999)

Chapter 52

Thoughts about Truth

The Fall and the Atonement Are Historical Events

In order to be of value, it is essential that the fall of Adam and the atonement of Jesus Christ be historical events that actually happened at a time and at a place. We accept Adam and Eve as real persons who lived, transgressed, and brought about their own fall and the consequent fall of all mankind. If we had a complete record it would be possible to mark on the calendar the time when the Fall occurred. Likewise, if we had an adequate map, and someday I expect we will, it would be possible to mark the exact spot where the Fall occurred. The Fall is just that real and absolute. A real man and a real woman did at a time and at a geographical location bring about the fall of man, which has affected all of mankind.

In like manner, the birth of Jesus Christ, his miracles, the shedding of his blood in Gethsemane, his death on the cross, and his resurrection from the tomb could be, each one, marked on a calendar and also on a map with perfect accuracy if we but had the detailed information. These are historical facts, absolute truths, not simply philosophical, moral, or so-called "religious" truths.

The Wisdom of the World Compared to the Revelations of God

Jacob stoutly denounces trusting in the wisdom and the learning of the world, especially if it prevents a person from coming to the gospel or distracts those who already have the gospel. It is a frequent topic in the Book of Mormon that there is an antagonism between the learning of the world and the things of God (for example, see 2 Ne. 26-29; Jacob 4:14). Jacob is not shy in perpetuating such a distinction. It is not the worldly learning alone but also man's pride in his learning, trusting in the arm of flesh, that makes the barrier. A specific contribution of the Book of Mormon is that it explains what the gospel is, but it does much more than that. It also tells what the gospel of Christ is not. No one who understands the Book of Mormon could miss this point because the Book of Mormon draws a wide distinction between the secular and the spiritual and exposes the false concepts so prevalent in the world in the form of secularism, humanism, materialism, organic evolution, and the like.

The scriptures place a high premium on the acquisition of truth, but they also show that certain kinds of learning matter more than other kinds. Since Jacob deals with this subject, we will pursue this theme briefly.

Truths Vary in Value and Nature

In one sense all truth is of the same nature, for "truth is knowledge of things as they are, as they were, and as they are to come" (D&C 93:24). Jacob defines truth as "a knowledge of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be" (Jacob 4:13). However, not all truths are of the same worth. Knowing that a bare wire six inches from your foot is carrying two hundred thousand volts of electricity is a far more important truth at the moment than to know that Australian white rabbits have pink eyes. Truths that cause people to change their lifestyles are more significant to society than truths that are mere facts, such as knowing that your shoelaces are tied in a bow.

But there is an even more marked, pronounced, and significant difference between various types or levels of truth than simply their relative importance. There is a difference as to how truths are comprehended by the mind of man. Most truths that we deal with in mortality are perceived through our natural senses, but there are certain truths necessary to the redemption of one's soul that are perceived only by revelation through the Holy Ghost. These truths are not perceived by intellectual activity alone but are spiritually discerned. They are, in the language of the Lord, "hidden treasures" of knowledge (D&C 89:19). Or as Paul said, "If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost," that is, hidden to those without the Spirit (2 Cor. 4:3).

And again in the words of Paul, speaking of spiritual truths:

"God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God.

" . . . Even so, the things of God knoweth no man, except he has the Spirit of God. . . .

"But the natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned" (JST, 1 Cor. 2:10-11, 14).

Note that Paul does not say that the natural man simply does not know the things of God, he says the natural man cannot know them. The things of the Spirit are just as real as are the things of the earth, but they are in a different sphere, and fallen man's ability to perceive and understand them is so limited that only by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost can he perceive them.

This same principle is taught in D&C 76:115-17, wherein Joseph Smith and Sidney Rigdon explain why they did not write more of what they saw in the vision. In the first place, they said they were forbidden to do so (see v. 115). Secondly, they explained:

"Neither is a man capable to make them known, for they are only to be seen and understood by the power of the Holy Spirit, which God bestows on those who love him, and purify themselves before him.

"To whom he grants this privilege of seeing and knowing for themselves" (vv. 116-17).

This principle is also illustrated in the Savior's words to Peter. When Jesus asked the Twelve who men said that he was, they replied, "Some say you are Elijah or John or Jeremiah or one of the prophets." But Peter said, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God" (Matt. 16:16). Jesus' response illustrates these two categories of truth: "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is heaven" (Matt. 16:17). These passages of scripture seem to create a hierarchy of truths and to say that not all truth is available to all persons just for the asking. This stratification may be the meaning of D&C 93:30, wherein the Lord says: "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has placed it, to act for itself." Does this passage suggest that there are different categories (spheres) of truth and that each is independent of the other? In other words, are there truths common to our mortal, fallen world and other truths peculiar to the spiritual things? We have already learned that there are some areas of truth that the natural man can't know because he does not have the mechanism for acquiring them. Spiritual truth is made known only by the Spirit to those who believe, repent, and prepare themselves to obtain it.

Gaining the particular knowledge that saves is so important that "it is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance" (D&C 131:6). Consequently, "a man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge" of these special truths. [^1] The knowledge that a person possesses is fundamental to his thinking and his state of mind. What he doesn't know can't help him. And contrary to a popular saying, what he doesn't know can hurt him. Without knowledge he is lacking in the conviction and the determination that the right knowledge would have given to him. Even the approach of great danger, if it is not perceived, has no effect on the consciousness or emotion of the individual. We see millions of people in the world today unaware and unconcerned about their relationship to God. We read in the third Lecture on Faith that it is impossible for a person without a correct knowledge of God and his attributes to exercise the degree of faith necessary for life and salvation. [^2] A person cannot have perfect faith in something he knows nothing about. Since this is true and the scriptures say it is true, we are all obliged to learn some spiritual truths if we want to be saved in the celestial kingdom. We cannot even have a testimony that Jesus is the Christ, except by the revelation of the Holy Ghost. Saving truths are divine, not natural knowledge.

Since all truths are not of equal value and since those truths most necessary in the process of salvation are gained only through the Holy Spirit of God, one obviously stands in jeopardy if he is not gaining those particular truths through that particular spirit while in this particular life. Job said that the things of God are "past finding out" (Job 9:10), and his "friend" Zophar asks, "Canst thou by searching find out god?" (Job 1:7). Obviously, the correct answer to Zophar's question is "No! The things of God do not yield themselves to searching alone." No one can obtain the things of God except by revelation to himself, and God must reveal himself or else he remains forever unknown. Jacob wrote: "How unsearchable are the depths of the mysteries of him. . . . And no man knoweth of his ways save it be revealed unto him; wherefore, brethren, despise not the revelations of God" (Jacob 4:8).

A description of the different kinds of truth could be placed in a paraphrase to the words used by Paul when he was writing about the different kinds of flesh and the different degrees of glory (see 1 Cor. 15:39-44). Hence, we could say: "All truth is not the same truth, for there is one kind of truth common among men, and another kind that pertains to God. There is also a truth that is gained through the mortal senses, and another that is gained only through the Spirit. There is one kind of truth that comes from God, and another kind that comes from men, for one truth differeth from another truth in glory. So also is the truth that is had in the earth. There is a natural truth and there is a spiritual truth."

But truth of a spiritual nature is also different in yet another way. Spiritual truth is not simply bare fact or mere information. The scriptures speak of light and truth as companions. The glory of God, which is his intelligence, is spoken of as both light and truth, not just truth alone (see D&C 93:36). The presence of light in company with knowledge seems to be an essential quality that distinguishes God's truth (that is, the knowledge that saves), from the type of truth that is mere fact and intellect, which even a natural or a wicked man can gain by research and study.

The Miraculous Is Essential to the Gospel

There has to be a miraculous character to the gospel or it would be only an earthly philosophy. The ideas, the concepts, the doctrines, the truths thereof need to have come from a source beyond mortality or the gospel would be earthbound because it could not rise above its source.

In short, based on the scriptures we see at least five distinctions between what we call natural (or secular) truth and spiritual truth: (1) Spiritual truth is indispensably essential for the redemption of the soul; secular truth is an aid, not a necessity; (2) Spiritual truth is perceived only by revelation through the Holy Ghost, spirit to spirit, whereas natural truth is learned through the five senses; (3) Spiritual truth is revealed only to those who seek to obey the commandments of God, whereas secular truth can be gained without regard to moral status; (4) Spiritual truth does not consist of fact alone but is accompanied by light, whereas secular truth might lack such light; and (5) Spiritual truth is ultimately more important than any other truth.

Spiritual Learning Should Have Primacy in Mortality

Now do not misunderstand. I am not opposed to secular learning, but I am making a plea that we not use up our time and the students's time on the peripheral concepts instead of the unique and basic message of the plan of salvation and the Restoration of the gospel through the Prophet Joseph Smith.

I quote from a statement by President J. Reuben Clark Jr., given on this campus on 21 June 1954 at a gathering of seminary and institute faculty. The message, however, is applicable to all of us at any time:

"Only the Prophet, Seer, and Revelator of the Church, the Presiding High Priest, the President of the Church, has the right to receive revelations for the church or to declare the doctrines of the Church. No other member of the Church has any such right or authority. It is well that we all remember this. It is particularly important that you teachers instructing our youth should keep this constantly in mind. In matters of Gospel doctrine there is no such thing as academic freedom in your teaching of youth. You declare the Word of God as written in the scriptures, and as interpreted by his Prophet, Seer, and Revelator. Otherwise there is chaos and apostasy, and we shall follow the route of the primitive, post-Apostolic Church." [^3]

In several different sources President Spencer W. Kimball had some things to say along these same lines:

"The secular knowledge is to be desired; the spiritual knowledge is a necessity."4

"We understand as few people do, that education is a part of being about our Father's business and that the scriptures contain the master concepts for mankind." [^4]

"Man cannot discover God or his ways by mere mental processes. One must be governed by the laws which control the realm into which he is delving.

"Peter was said to be ignorant and unlearned, while Nicodemus was, as the Savior said, a master, a trained one, and educated man. And while Nicodemus would in his aging process gradually lose his prestige, his edge, Peter would go to his reputed crucifixion the greatest man in all the world, perhaps still lacking considerably in secular knowledge (which he would later acquire), but being preeminent in the greater, more important knowledge of the eternities of God and his creations and their destinies." [^5]

"Even in the spirit world after death our spirits can go on learning the more secular things to help us create worlds and become their masters. . . .

"Secular knowledge, important as it may be, can never save a soul nor open the celestial kingdom nor create a world nor make a man a god, but it can be most helpful to that man, who placing first things first, has found the way to eternal life and who can now bring into play all knowledge to be his tool and servant." [^6]

"Peter and John had little secular learning, being termed ignorant. But Peter and John knew the vital things of life; that God lives and that the crucified, resurrected Lord is the son of God. They knew the path to eternal life. This they learned in the few decades of their mortal life. This exaltation meant Godhood for them and creation of worlds with eternal knowledge of the sciences. But this fact escapes many: Peter and John had only decades to learn to do the spiritual but have had already about nineteen centuries in which to learn the secular or the geology of the earth, the zoology and physiology and psychology of the creatures of the earth. But mortality is the time to learn of God and the gospel first and to perform the ordinances, then to learn what can be secured of the secular things. Here are the so-called ignorant Peter and John heirs to exaltation. Accordingly the ignorance the Lord speaks of when he says 'One cannot be saved in ignorance' is the lack of knowledge of the really first things—the kingdom of God and his righteousness." [^7]

President J. Reuben Clark Jr. had spoken on this same theme years before, emphasizing that all knowledge is useful but that there is a priority to learning spiritual truths while in mortality:

"There is spiritual learning just as there is material learning and the one without the other is not complete. Yet, speaking for myself, if I could have only one sort of learning, that which I would take would be the learning of the spirit, because in the hereafter I shall have the opportunity in the eternities which are to come to get the other, and without spiritual learning here my handicaps in the hereafter would be all but overwhelming." [^8]

We have such little time with the students that we ought to give them the point of view expressed by Presidents Kimball and Clark and not use the valuable, sacred teaching time on matters of secondary importance.

Notes

This is a previously unpublished paper.

---
Notas:
[^1] Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, 217, 301, 304, 331-32.
[^2] Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith, comp. N. B. Lundwall (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, n.d.), 33, paragraphs 1-4.
[^3] J. Reuben ClarkJr., Man—God's Greatest Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1956), 5-6.
[^4] Spencer W. Kimball, Faith Precedes the Miracle (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1972), 280.
[^5] The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball (Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982), 387.
[^6] Ibid., 389.
[^7] Ibid., 390-91.
[^8] Spencer W. Kimball, in "Beloved Youth, Study and Learn," Life's Directions (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1962), 178.
