Table of Contents

Introduction

PREFATORY NOTE

Note to the Earl of Warwick

TO THE READER.

BOOK I

CHAPTER 1 - The Purpose of the Death of Christ

I. The intent in the death of Christ

II. The Effect of the Death of Christ

First, Reconciliation with God

Secondly, Justification

Thirdly, Sanctification

Fourthly, Adoption

Fifthly, Glorification

III. The Intent and Effect is Limited

CHAPTER II – The General Nature of any Purpose

I. The Distinction between End and Means

II. The Relation of End to Means

III. The Ends are either of the Work, or of the Worker

IV. The End is either the Benefit, or the Beneficiary

V. Means are either innately good, or they are conducive to the end

VI. Applying the Propositions

CHAPTER III - The Authority of the Father

I. The Joint Effort of the Trinity

II. The Role of the Father

(1.) The Father imposes the Office of Mediator

(2.) The Father Furnishes the Son for his Office

(3.) The Father establishes a Covenant with the Son

The Father promises to protect and assist the Son

The Father promises success

CHAPTER IV – The Redeeming Work of the Son

First, His incarnation

Secondly, His Oblation

Thirdly, His Intercession

CHAPTER V – The Actions of the Holy Spirit

First, The incarnation of the Son

Secondly, In the Son’s oblation

Thirdly, In the Son’s resurrection

CHAPTER VI – The Means Used

I. Christ’s Dispensation as Mediator

First, His Oblation

Second, His Intercession

II. Oblation and Intercession as a Single Means

First, they both have the same end

Secondly, they both have the same object

Thirdly, His Oblation is the Foundation of His Intercession

CHAPTER VII –Proofs for a Single Means

I. Scripture Joins Them

II. They are both Acts of the Priestly Office

III. The Nature of Intercession requires it

IV. The Covenant Specifies it

V. Christ united them

VI. Our Consolation Depends on it

CHAPTER VIII – Objections to a Single Means

General Arguments in favor of Universal Redemption.

II. Christ died for all, that some Sinners may be Persuaded

First, the proposed universal intercession is unclear.

First, is this intercession accidental or intentional?

Secondly, is it by his oblation or not?

Thirdly, is it to instill belief?

Fourthly, is his intercession for the world, or only the church?

Fifthly, is it absolute or conditional?

Secondly, His Intercession is Limited and Conditional

First, he intercedes only for some transgressors

Secondly, he prays only for his crucifiers

Thirdly, his prayer is only for forgiveness, not belief

Fourthly, he prays only for those at his death

Fifthly, it is unlikely he prayed for the impenitent

Sixthly, his prayer was effectual – but not all believed

Seventhly, he prays for his enemies as a duty, not as a Mediator

John 17 confirms his intercession is limited, not universal

First, he did not grant means of grace to all

Secondly, John 17:9 precludes a larger object

Thirdly, “world” does not mean all men

Fourthly, believing here only means acknowledgement

Matthew 5:15-16 addresses witnessing, not intercession

John 1:9 only speaks of illumination, not intercession

III. As Priest, his sacrifice is for one end, and all men

First, the language of the proposition is unclear

Secondly, if Christ is Priest for all, it can only be for some ends

BOOK II

CHAPTER I – Purpose and Effect of Christ’s Death

CHAPTER II – Refuting Mistaken Purposes of Christ’s Death

I. It was not for Christ’s own good

II. It was not for his Father’s good.

First, God was not restricted to this solution

Secondly, it would be wishing, not willing

Thirdly, it would liberate the Father, not us

Fourthly, despite his sacrifice, some would not be saved

CHAPTER III – Scriptures Asserting the Immediate End of Christ’s Death

I. Those which show the intent of God

First, the parable of the lost sheep

Secondly, the angel’s declaration of Christ’s purpose

Thirdly, Paul’s declaration of his purpose

Fourthly, the declaration in Hebrews

Fifthly, the declaration in Ephesians

Sixthly, Christ’s own declaration recorded in John

Seventhly, the declaration in Galatians

Eighthly, the declaration in 2Corinthians

II. Those which lay down the actual effect of his oblation

First, sanctification

Secondly, freedom from punishment

Thirdly, peace and reconciliation with God

Fourthly, life and eternal glory for his sheep

III. Those which show for whom Christ died: the elect

Moore’s Objections:

The word “many” means all men.

Christ’s death is for more ends than propitiation

Scripture does not say the ransom is paid only for his sheep

CHAPTER IV – Distinction between Impetration and Application

FIRST, universalists insist that impetration and application are separate.

I. impetration is for all, application is for believers

First, Christ reconciled all, but only believers benefit.

Secondly, Christ died for all, but only believers are reconciled.

Thirdly, Reconciliation is twofold: paid for all, but worked in some.

II. The True Nature of the Distinction

First, impetration is purchase, application is enjoyment.

First, The distinction regards what is procured, not Christ’s intent.

Secondly, what is purchased is not purchased conditionally.

Thirdly, what is purchased is not bestowed conditionally.

Fourthly, impetration and application have the same objects.

Secondly, what is obtained is applied by nature.

Thirdly, Christ intercedes for those for whom he died.

SECONDLY, universalists say Reconciliation is only Applied to Some.

First, Because of God’s universal love, He desires all to be saved.

Secondly, God’s love has no effect unless satisfaction is made for all.

Thirdly, He sent Christ to fulfill his universal love, and satisfy his justice.

Fourthly, the purpose of Christ’s death was to obtain the power to save.

Fifthly, Christ satisfied God’s justice, allowing conditional salvation.

III. Summation

First, God sent his Son for the elect alone.

Secondly, the ransom was sufficient for all those intended.

Thirdly, those intended were the elect.

Fourthly, what was purchased is necessarily bestowed.

CHAPTER V – Further Distinctions

Impetration and Application may be distinct, but they cannot be separate.

First, what is obtained is certainly possessed.

Secondly, if Christ died for them, the benefit belongs to them.

Thirdly, if a ransom is paid for them, the captives must be freed.

Fourthly, Scripture ties Application to Impetration.

What is obtained is not obtained conditionally.

First, such a condition ought to be revealed.

Secondly, such a condition must be within our power to perform.

Thirdly, the condition of faith is procured by Christ.

Fourthly, if it were conditional, then Christ would only be half a mediator.

BOOK III

CHAPTER I – Arguments against Universal Redemption

ARGUMENT 1. The Covenant is not universal but particular.

ARGUMENT II. If the intent was universal, it must be known universally.

CHAPTER II – Three More Arguments

ARGUMENT III. If the ransom is universal, any condition is paid for too.

First, such a condition must be made known to all (Arg. II).

Secondly, all men must be able to believe.

That is contrary to the Scriptures.

ARGUMENT IV. Men are two sorts; Christ died for one, not for both.

First, Scripture identifies two sorts of men.

Second, Christ died only for the one sort.

ARGUMENT V. Scripture nowhere says that Christ died for all men.

CHAPTER III – Two Other Arguments from the Person of Christ

ARGUMENT VI. Christ died as a Surety for those he represented.

First, He endured the penalty due others to free each from it.

Secondly, satisfaction was made for each person Christ died for.

Christ did not make satisfaction for all men.

First, if he satisfied for all, then all are saved.

Secondly, he did not intend to satisfy for more than could be saved.

The exception that its application was conditional has no force

First, the condition was unknown by all.

Secondly, Christ knew whoever failed the condition would be lost.

Thirdly, conditional redemption is rejected.

Asserting that Christ satisfied for both damned and saved is valueless.

First, Christ was required to die for those who would be saved.

Secondly, Christ’s intent was to free those for whom he died.

Thirdly, if Christ satisfied for all sin, the sin of unbelief was paid for.

ARGUMENT VII. Christ died as a Mediator, a Priest for his own people.

CHAPTER IV – Procurement of Sanctification and Faith

ARGUMENT VIII. Christ’s blood is effectual to wash, purge, and sanctify.

First, the Scriptural type of sacrifice legally sanctifies.

Secondly, Scripture says blood sacrifices are intended to sanctify.

Scripture Proofs

The Death of Christ is the sole cause of Redemption

First, the paid ransom is the sole cause of redemption.

Secondly, faith itself is procured by Christ’s death

ARGUMENT IX. Faith is procured by Christ’s Death

Premises:

First, if it is, then was it absolute or conditional?

If absolutely, then surely, if he died for all, they must all believe.

If conditionally, and the condition is our faith, then this faith is of ourselves and not of Christ.

Secondly, if it is not, then it is an act of will and we save ourselves

Proofs:

Conclusion: If what he procured is not common to all, he did not die for all

ARGUMENT X. The Antitype of the People of Israel as God’s Elect

CHAPTER V – The Nature of Redemption

ARGUMENT XI. First: by its nature, Redemption is not Universal.

Spiritual Redemption differs from temporal redemption.

First, the one who receives the ransom also gives it.

Secondly, we are not freed from God, but brought near to Him.

Thirdly, the Jailer was conquered to satisfy the Judge

Redemption means to free a person by paying a ransom for him

Conclusion: If there is a universal redemption, all men are redeemed.

CHAPTER VI – The Nature of Reconciliation

ARGUMENT XII. Second: by its nature, Reconciliation is not Universal.

Reconciliation is ascribed to the Death of Christ

Both parties must be reconciled, not just one.

If reconciliation was purchased by the Death of Christ, all are reconciled.

If both parties are reconciled, how can one remain under God’s wrath?

Conclusion: Christ died only for those who are reconciled.

CHAPTER VII – The Satisfaction of Christ

ARGUMENT XIII. Third: Christ’s Satisfaction was not Universal.

The Nature of Legal Satisfaction

First, satisfaction may be made by paying exactly what is owed

Secondly, satisfaction may be made by substituting an acceptable value

The Nature of Christ’s Satisfaction

First, the debtor is man;

Secondly, The debt is sin;

Thirdly, what will satisfy is death;

Fourthly, the obligation is obedience to the law;

Fifthly, the creditor is God;

Sixthly, what intervenes is the ransom paid by Christ’s Death;

Two things must be cleared:

First, that Christ made the required satisfaction.

Was the satisfaction of Christ solutio ejusdem, or solutio tantidem?

Arguments against solutio ejusdem, by Grotius

Arguments for solutio ejusdem, refuting Grotius:

Conclusion: Christ’s satisfaction was solutio ejusdem for those he represented.

Secondly, what response God ought to have to this satisfaction.

First, with regard to us, he is considered a creditor;

Secondly, with regard to Christ, he is considered supreme Lord and Lawgiver;

Therefore, two acts are eminent in God’s response to Christ’s Death:

A Comparison of these inferences with Universal Redemption

CHAPTER VIII – The Substance of the Satisfaction of Christ

First, any objection to Christ’s satisfaction is Pelagian or Arminian heresy.

Secondly, the Elect and the Reprobates are separate camps by nature.

Thirdly, the Eternal Love of God is an act of will, not passion.

First, God willfully chooses to act in behalf of His elect.

Secondly, no act of God changes the nature its object.

Thirdly, the wrath of God is also not passionate, but willful.

Fourthly, God’s love does not remove any conditions for His elect.

Conclusion: Election does not remove the need for Christ’s satisfaction.

CHAPTER IX – Arguments proving the Satisfaction of Christ

I. From Christ bearing our sin, and the punishment for it

First, he took and bore our sins.

Secondly, he underwent the punishment for our sins

Thirdly, he did this in our stead

II. From Christ paying the ransom for our sins as our surety

First, Christ paid the price and ransom for our sins.

Secondly, He paid this price into the hands of his Father.

Thirdly, he did this as our surety.

Fourthly, he did this for our freedom.

III. From Christ making an atonement and reconciliation

IV. From the Nature of his Priestly Office

First, The punishment due to sin is the wrath of God:

Secondly, The curse of the law is the wrath of God taken passively,

Thirdly, The death that sinners are to undergo is the wrath of God.

V. From the necessity of his satisfaction to our faith and consolation

VI. From his being made sin for us, and bruised for our iniquities

Objection 1: The Son is punished despite pleasing the Father.

Objection 2: The Elect are not punished for their sin.

CHAPTER X – The Merit of Christ

ARGUMENT XIV. Fourth: the Merit ascribed to Christ is not Universal.

ARGUMENT XV. Fifth: Specific phrases preclude Universal Redemption.

CHAPTER XI – Last General Argument

ARGUMENT XVI. Sixth: Scriptures that preclude Universal Redemption.

First, the seed of the woman.

Secondly, the seed of the serpent.

First, all men are not the sheep of Christ,

Secondly, the sheep that are his elect are called by God

Thirdly, Christ says that he laid down his life for his sheep,

First, if Christ died for all out of love, then God loves those who perish.

Secondly, God freely gives all good things to those he loves, including faith.

Thirdly, those he died for are freely justfied.

BOOK IV

CHAPTER I –Considerations prior to Answering Objections

First, the dignity of the person that offered it, and was offered.

Secondly, the greatness of the pain he endured,

The worth of the Death of Christ is undervalued by Universal Redemption.

First, is the word “world.”

Second, is the word “all”

First, we cannot save ourselves.

Secondly, Salvation is found in the promised seed only.

Thirdly, Jesus was this promised seed, the Savior.

Fourthly, the Gospel requires us to rely on Christ as the Redeemer.

Fifthly, we must individually believe in the efficacy of Christ’s blood.

CHAPTER II – Answer to Objections from Scripture

I. Passages that affirm Christ died for the “world”- John 3:16

First, alleged proof by reason

Second, consideration of specific Scriptural passages

FIRST, the cause for sending Christ is Love.

SECOND, the object of this love is the “world”

THIRD, the intent of God in sending his Son is to save believers

CHAPTER III – Other texts produced by Universalists

(1.) To whom the Apostle writes

(2.) The aim and intention of the apostle

(3.) The meaning of the words “propitiation” and “whole world”

First, the meaning of the word “propitiation”

Secondly, the meaning of the phrase “of the whole world”

CHAPTER IV – Answer to Second Argument for Universalism

II. Passages that signify Christ died for all, or God wills salvation for all.

CHAPTER V - Answer to Last Argument for Universalism

III. Passages which affirm Christ bought, or died for, those who perish

CHAPTER VI – Answer to Chap. 20 of Universality of Grace

Arguments made by Thomas Moore:

I. Scripture declares that Christ gave himself a ransom for every man.

II. Christ came to save all sinners, not just some of them.

III. The purpose of Christ’s death and exaltation is to be Lord of all.

IV. Christ is the Savior of the whole world, but only believers receive life.

V. Christ gave himself for all, to gain the right of Lordship over all.

VI. The plain meaning of Scripture is that Christ died for all men.

Proof 1 of argument 6 – God gave his Son to be Savior of the world.

Proof 2. Christ came to take away the sins of the world, a propitiation for all.

Proof 3. Christ invites all to repent and believe through his Spirit.

Proof 4. The Holy Ghost will judge all as to the sin of not believing in Christ.

Proof 5. God testifies that he wants his Son to redeem all men.

Proof 6. The very words and phrases of Scripture imply no less than all men.

Proof 7. The unique privileges of believers do not exclude ransom for all.

Proof 8. As in Adam all fell, in Christ all are redeemed.

Proof 9. The gospel is to be preached to all, therefore all are capable of belief.

Proof 10. Believers are to pray for all, therefore all may be saved.

Proof 11. Christ will always be with his people, preaching to and praying for all.

Proof 12. Christ made good his word to all, that none would exclude themselves.

Proof 13. The blessing of life extends to all mankind, overcoming God’s chosen.

Proof 14. Those who reject the gospel “choose” darkness and destruction.

Proof 15. God’s good intentions in pleading with all men requires that Christ saved all men.

Proof 16. Scripture says it is sin to refuse grace, indicating it belongs to all.

Proof 17. If some are judged to a second death, Christ first died for them.

Proof 18. Believers may contend for, and lose, a common salvation.

CHAPTER VII – Removing Remaining Objections

OBJECTION I. Each must believe Jesus died for him; ergo he died for all.

Assumptions of this Objection:

first, “believing”, both as to its obligation and the truth, means the same.

secondly, “believing” means Christ is savingly applied to the soul.

thirdly, “believing” refers to the purpose of the Father and the intent of Jesus.

fourthly, the condition of everyone for whom Christ died is the same

Minor Proposition: Everyone is bound to believe that Jesus Christ died for him.

First, if it were so, then some must be bound to believe what is false.

Secondly, men would be bound to believe what is not revealed.

Thirdly, the objects of faith are God’s commands, promises, and threats.

Fourthly, any command to believe cannot be interpreted by God’s intent.

Fifthly, unless he hears, how can anyone be bound to believe?

OBJECTION II. Particular redemption causes doubt whether one is saved.

OBJECTION III. Universal Redemption better represents the Love of God.

OBJECTION IV. Universal Redemption better exalts the Merit of Christ.

OBJECTION V. Universal Redemption offers greater Consolation.

ANSWER:

Conclusion -

A FEW TESTIMONIES OF THE ANCIENTS.

I. CHURCH of SMYRNA,

II. The witness of holy IGNATIUS,

III. CLEMENS,

IV. CYPRIAN,

V. CYRIL

VI. ATHANASIUS,

VII. AMBROSE

VIII. AUGUSTINE,

IX. PROSPER

X. CONCIL. VALENTINUS, can. 4:

APPENDIX

A Reply to Mr. Joshua Sprigge
