READER,

If you intend to go any further, I would entreat you to stay here a little. If you are, like many in this pretending age, a sign or a title gazer, and you come into challenges like Cato into the theater, only to go out again, then you have had your entertainment; farewell! But if you are someone resolved to take a serious view of the following discourse, and who really desires satisfaction from the word and Christian reason about the great things it contains, then I desire a few words in the doorway. There are various things affecting the business we have in hand, which I am persuaded you cannot be unacquainted with. Therefore I will not trouble you by needlessly repeating them.

I only crave your permission to preface this undertaking with the results of some of my thoughts after more than seven years of serious inquiry into the mind of God about these things. I hope, on Christ’s strength, that they are grounded and guided by his Spirit. I will include a serious perusal of all I could attain that the wit of man, in former or latter days, has published in opposition to the truth. I would like the reader to observe some things concerning the main point.

First, the assertion of universal redemption, or general ransom, cannot reach its intended end alone. If it is accepted, then the election of free grace must also be removed. That is because election is the source of all resulting dispensations, and all selective purposes of the Almighty that depend on his own good pleasure and will. There are those who desire to retain the notion of eternally selective free grace, for the moment. But if they do, then they raze the whole imaginary fabric of general redemption that they erected, in respect to its fruit or profitable issue.

Some say there is a decree of election “prior to the death of Christ.” What they frame, then, is a twofold election of some to be sons, and others to be servants. Yet, electing some to be servants is what the Scripture calls reprobation. It speaks of it as the consequence of hatred or rejection, Romans 9:11-13.2 To be a servant, as opposed to having the liberty of children, is as high a curse as can be expressed (Genesis 9:25).3 Is this Scriptural election? Besides, if Christ died to bring those for whom he died into the adoption and inheritance of children, then what good could possibly redound to those who were predestined only to be servants?

Others say there is a general conditional decree of redemption that precedes election. They assert that this is the first selective purpose concerning the sons of men, and that it depends on the good pleasure of God alone. They deny that anyone other than the elect will partake of the death of Christ or its fruits, whether grace or glory. Now, to what end? What purpose does a general ransom serve, except to assert that Almighty God would have the precious blood of his dear Son poured out for countless souls whom he will not allow to benefit from a single drop of it? And so, in respect to them, his blood is spilt in vain, or it is shed for them only to damn them more deeply.

This fountain, then, of free grace, this foundation of the new covenant, this bottom of all gospel dispensations, this fruitful womb of all eternally selective mercies, this purpose of God according to election, must be opposed, slighted, and blasphemed, so that a figment of men may not appear to be nonsense. And all the thoughts of the Most High, which differentiate between man and man, must accommodate their holy, self-spiritual endeavors. This is a savory sacrifice to the Roman Belus,4 a sacred orgy to the long-bewailed manes of St. Pelagius.

Secondly, free-will (which is corrupted nature’s deformed darling, the Pallas,5 or the beloved self-conception of darkened minds) finds open hearts and arms for its adulterous embraces. The die is cast is and the Rubicon has been passed over.6 Free-will advances itself by opposing the free selective grace of God as its sole sworn enemy. It presents itself as an inbred native ability in everyone to take a portion of general mercy, under the name of free grace. This, this, is the universalists’ free grace, which the Scripture calls our cursed, corrupted nature. It cannot be otherwise. A general ransom without free-will is only “a burdensome fancy.” The merit of the death of Christ to them is like ointment in a box. It has no value or power to apply itself to anyone in particular. It is placed in everyone’s view by the gospel, so that those who lay hold of it, and apply it to themselves by their own strength, may be healed. That is why this old idol named free-will has attained so dear an esteem and high valuation these days. The theory of a general ransom cannot live without it.

If what the Scripture affirms is true, that by nature we are “dead in trespasses and sins,” then not a shred would be left of general ransom to take fire from the hearth. Like the wood of the vine, it would not yield a pin to hang a garment on.7 You will find all of this fully declared in the ensuing treatise. But here, it is as though all the efforts and Babylonian attempts of the old Pelagians, along with the late Arminians (their varnished offspring), were mild and easy. I will show you greater abominations than these, and further revelations of the imagery that exists in the hearts of men.

In supporting universal redemption, a number have come to deny the satisfaction and merit of Christ, as the theory naturally leads them to do. Witness P – H – , who being unable to untie it from free-will, boldly cut this Gordian knot, only to make both ends of the chain useless. To the question whether Christ died for all men or not, he answers, “He died neither for all nor any, so as to purchase life and salvation for them.” If you ask for proofs of this assertion, you might justly expect Achillean arguments. Indeed, what you will hear are great swelling words of vanity, drum-like expressions, and noise from the emptiness. This is the usual language of men who do not know what they speak of, nor what they affirm. These are poor creatures, whose souls are merchandised by the painted faces of novelty and vanity. While these Joabs salute you with kisses of free grace, you do not see the sword that is in their hands, and with which they stab you under the fifth rib, in the very heartblood of faith and all Christian consolation.

Our blessed Redeemer’s deep humiliation consists in a number of things: in bearing the chastisement of our peace and the punishment of our transgressions; being made a curse and sin; deserted under wrath and the power of death; procuring redemption and the remission of sins through the spilling of his blood; offering himself up as a sacrifice to God to make reconciliation, and to purchase an atonement; and pursuing this undertaking with continued intercession in the holy of holies, with all the benefits that flow from his mediation. It seems, according to the universalists, that all of this did not in any way procure life and salvation or remission of sins for us. It only served to declare that we are not what his word actually affirms we are – namely, cursed, guilty, defiled, and not yet cast into hell. “Judas, do you betray the Son of man with a kiss?” See this confuted at large, lib. 3.

Now, this last assertion that we are not cursed and corrupt, thoroughly fancied, has opened a door to all those pretended attainments of the human soul which have metamorphosed the person and mediation of Christ. His work has become an imaginary all-inclusive goodness and love, communicated from the Creator to the new creation. Cerdon’s fables could not be more absurd. The Platonic numbers, and the Valentinian Eons were more intelligible than this. The corrosion of the Scriptures by that Pontic vermin Marcion could not equal the contempt and scorn that are cast on them by these impotent impostors. They exempt their whispered discoveries from their trial, and exalt their revelations beyond their authority. Nor do some stop here. Heaven itself is broken open for all to enter. From universal redemption, and through universal justification in a general covenant, they have arrived at universal salvation, whose purchased inheritance cannot be forfeited.

“March on, brave youths, in the praise of such free grace,

Surround your locks with bays; and full cups place

In your right hands: drink freely on, then call

On the common hope, the ransom general.”8

I am not opposed to what motivates the pursuit of these and similar persuasions. They are wholly new to the men of this generation. Every age is engaged in the discovery of truth. We have not come to the end of vice or virtue. The whole world has practiced iniquity five thousand years and more, and yet “aspice hoc novum,” behold this novelty, may be set on many crimes. It is no wonder, then, that we hear such debates, if all truth is not yet discovered. Still, something may be revealed to those who have not made up their minds. Do not be shocked to find Saul among the prophets, for who is their father? Is God not free in his dispensations? Are all the depths of Scripture, where the elephants may swim, fathomed to their bottom? If anyone were to observe the progress of the last century in unfolding the truths of God, he would hardly claim that no more is left to be discovered.

I only desire to oppose the itching of corrupted fancies, the boldness of darkened minds, the lascivious and wanton wits, that invent newly created nothings that are insignificant vanities, mixed with a dash of blasphemy. And I especially oppose them considering the penchant among us these days, by one means or another, to be distracted by novelty. “Some are credulous, some negligent, some fall into errors, some seek them.” A great suspicion grows in me every day that pride of spirit, with a Herostratus-like design to ensure their fame,9 has prompted many to conceive and publish some easily invented false opinions. And I might also think that this is the reason they strive to outdo their companions in framing some unique and clever device. To be a follower of others is too lowly an undertaking for them, and so we hear these desperate engagements.

What attracts the eyes of poor deluded souls must of course be glorious attainments, beyond the understanding of men, and above the wisdom of the word. May the great shepherd of the sheep, our Lord Jesus Christ, restore his poor wanderers to his own fold! This theory is a fatal Helena:10 a useless, barren, fruitless fancy, whose enthronement has caused such irksome, tedious contentions to the churches of God. It is a mere Rome: a desolate, dirty place of cottages, until all the world is robbed and spoiled to adorn it.

Let us suppose that Christ died for all. If God in his free purpose has chosen some to obtain life and salvation, and has passed by others, will it profit only the chosen, or all? Surely the purpose of God must stand, and he will do what he wants. Therefore, either election, as Huberus says11 with wild contradiction, must be universal, or the thoughts of the Most High depend on the free-will of man. If the free grace of God works effectually in some, but not in others, then can those others, whom this powerful grace has passed over, have any benefit by universal redemption? No more than the Egyptians had when the angel passed over those houses whose doors were not sprinkled with blood, leaving them dead behind him. Almighty, powerful, free grace, then, must drop its sail, so that free-will, like the Alexandrian ships coming into the Roman harbors, may come in with top sail unfurled and gallant. Without free-will, the whole territory of universal redemption will certainly be famished. But let these doctrines of God’s eternal election, the free grace of conversion, perseverance, and their necessary consequences be asserted, and free-will becomes laughable. The only profit or consolation that free-will has is what it robs from the sovereignty and grace of God. But more about these things later.

Some pretences are usually made by those who advocate general ransom. With your patience, courteous reader, we will examine them a little at the start, to remove any prejudice that may lie in the way of truth:

First, they say that the glory of God is exalted by a general ransom; his good will and kindness towards men are abundantly shown by enlarging the extent of the ransom. And his free grace, which is restrained by others, is presented as a powerful endearment. They say, in effect, “All things will be well when God is content with that portion of glory which we ourselves assign.” The princes of the earth consider it their greatest wisdom to make their favors sound better than they are, to describe with a full mouth what they have done with half a hand. Is it acceptable to lie for God by extending his bounty beyond the marks and eternal bounds assigned to it in his word? Change a hair on your own head, or add a cubit to your own stature, before you add some glory to the Almighty that he does not claim. But, for the most part, this is how the corrupted nature treats all such mysterious things, revealing its own baseness and vileness.

They say that if God’s grace extends to all offenders, though his grace is free, and he does what he wills with his own, then all shall be well – he is gracious, merciful, etc. But if the Scripture is once found to present his sovereignty and free selective grace according to election, then he is monstrous, mean, evil, and dreadful. Such pride is inbred; it is a part of our corruption to want to defend it. If we seek to uphold the glory of God, then let us speak in his own language, or be forever silent. What is glorious in him is what he ascribes to himself. Our inventions, as splendid as they may be in our own eyes, are an abomination to him, an attempt to pull him down from his eternal excellence, and to make him completely like us. God would never allow the will of the creature to be the measure of his honor. The obedience of paradise was a regulated obedience. God’s prescription has been the basis for accepting any duty ever since he had a creature to worship him. Even the heathen knew that the only service welcome to God was what he himself required, and the only glory he would accept was what he himself revealed, so that he would appear glorious in it. Hence, Epimenides advised the Athenians in a time of danger to sacrifice “to him to whom it was acceptable and due.”12 This resulted in the altar which Paul saw bearing the inscription, “To the unknown God.” Socrates tells us in Plato,13 that every god will be worshipped “in that way which pleases best his own mind.” And in Christianity, Jerome 14 sets it down as a rule that God is dishonored by any honor which is ascribed to him beyond his own prescription. It is based wittily on the second commandment. Assigning anything to God that is not assigned by him is making to ourselves an idol; we are deifying our own imaginations. Men should cease squaring the glory of God by their own corrupted principles and more corrupted persuasions. The word alone is the arbitrator in the things of God. I hope that the following treatise will present nothing contrary to those natural notions of God and his goodness that have been retained in the sad ruins of our innocence. On these grounds, we affirm that any of that glory of God which a general ransom pretends to assert, however glorious it may seem to our purblind nature, is indeed a sinful flourish; for it obscures that glory in which God is delighted.

Secondly, it is pretended that the worth and value of the satisfaction of Christ are magnified by extending them to all. I can only desire the reader’s sincere consideration of what was said before, as this matter is of no small importance. Besides extending the things of God beyond the bounds which he himself set for them, the merit of the death of Christ is robbed of its strength and overthrown by it. It is made meaningless, as if it never produced the least good to anyone. The merit of Christ consists of its own internal worth and sufficiency, along with that obligation which, because of his obedience unto death, calls upon the justice of God for its application to those for whom he died. This is fully manifested in the following treatise.

Thirdly, There is a seeming warrant for universal redemption by many texts of Scripture. The words of these texts are ambiguous. Although they are figurative or indefinite, they still seem to indicate a universal extent. This makes the supporters of universalism rejoice. Now, concerning this apparent Scruptural foundation, I only desire that the reader not be startled at the many passages which have been gathered by some lately (especially Thomas Moore, in his “Universality of Free Grace”), as though they prove the point. Rather, prepare to admire the confidence of men like Mr. Moore, who make such a flourish with their colors and drums, but have no soldiers at all. For, notwithstanding all their pretences, it will become apparent that they hang the whole weight of their building on three or four texts of Scripture (1Tim. 2:5, 6; John 3:16, 17; Heb. 2:9; and 1Jn. 2:2). And the use of those hangs on the ambiguity of two or three words, which they must agree are variously understood. Not one passage has been presented by our adversaries, in their own defense, that can show the least grounds for opposing the effectual redemption of the elect only. Thomas Moore’s book will be fully addressed, and robbed of all its own strength.

Fourthly, some men have been persuaded that the opinion of the universalists serves to present the love and free grace of God. They make that glorious expression, “free grace,” the only thing that is being couched in universalism: “God loves all alike, gave Christ to die for all, and is ready to save all, if they will lay hold on him.” We experience daily how greedily the hook and bait of this notion is swallowed by many. The truth is, universalism completely destroys the free selective grace of God in all its dispensations and workings. It obviously opposes God’s free grace of election, as declared, and so too the very love from which God sent his Son. The free grace of God’s Effectual calling must also give way to nature’s darling, freewill. Indeed, the whole covenant of grace is voided by universalism’s general removal of the wrath due to the breach of the covenant of works. What else could they imagine is granted to those “all” with whom they assert this covenant was made? They certainly have not imagined John 3:36.15 Notwithstanding their flourish of free grace, they are forced to grant that despite all that Christ’s death effected, it is still possible that no one will be saved. So I hope I have clearly proved that if he accomplished no more by his death than what they ascribe to it, then it is utterly impossible for anyone to be saved.

Fifthly, the opinion of universal redemption has an advantage by presenting a ready way for convinced men to extricate themselves from all their doubts and anxieties. It gives them all the comfort that the death of Christ can afford before they actually feel the power of that death working within them. They do not need free grace to effectually draw their hearts to embrace Christ in the promise, nor do they need to obtain a particular interest in him. These are tedious things for flesh and blood to confront and await. Some boast that, by using this approach in evangelism, they have effected in an hour what they formerly waited seven years for without success. To dispel this empty flourish, I will show that this opinion is apt to deceive multitudes with a plausible delusion. But in reality, it undermines the very foundations of that strong unfailing consolation that God has abundantly shown he wants the heirs of the promise to receive.

These and similar falsehoods are the general pretences with which the promoters of general ransom commend themselves and their opinion to the emotions of credulous people. They use them to make an open and easy passage into their belief, to have them swallow and digest that bitter potion which lurks in the bottom of their cup. I thought it appropriate to give the reader a brief view of them in the introduction, to get beyond empty generalities, so that he might be better prepared to weigh all these things carefully in an equal balance. Later, the reader will come to consider those things in which the great strength of our adversaries lies. It only remains for me to give the Christian reader a brief account of why I have undertaken this work, and thus close this preface.

First, may I assure you that it was not my desire to drink the waters of Meribah,16 or share in Ishmael’s portion,17 to put my hand against others, or to have theirs placed against me, that put me on this task. I never like myself worse than when I am faced with the role of disputing in controversies. The complexion of my soul is much more pleasant to me in the waters of Shiloah:18

Eccl 2:25, “For who can eat, or hasten more to this than I?”

I do not know what attraction there can be to visit, much less stay, in this quarrelsome, struggling territory, where, as Tertullian says of Pontus, “no wind blows but what is sharp and keen.”19 There is little pleasure in taking walks beside dangerous precipices with unpleasant difficulties on every side:

NO quiet nor peace in these things and ways, but continual brawls and dissensions: 20

The strongest bonds of our nearest relations are too commonly broken by such quarrels. I could willingly resolve to flee all wordy battles and paper combats for the remainder of my days except for two things: the precept of Jude 3 to “contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints,” and the soundings from my depths for the loss of poor seduced souls.

It is not, then, any salamandrian complexion21 that motivated this undertaking. Nor was it any conceit of my own abilities for this work, as though I were the best qualified to undertake it. I know that, as in all things, I am “less than the least of all saints.”22

Abler pens23 in the last few years have discussed and aired out some of these questions in our own language. Some of these writings have come to my hands, but none of any weight before I had nearly finished this heap of my own. That was some twelve months ago or more. I was fully satisfied that they all answered parts of the controversy, especially objections, but none encompassed the whole. I discerned the things underlying the debate, such as satisfaction, reconciliation, and redemption, were left in the dark; the strong foundation of the whole was missing. It was always my desire that someone would undertake the main part of the debate, and unfold from the word the foundation of the whole dispensation of the love of God to his elect in Jesus Christ. I hoped they would include its conveyance through the promises of the gospel, which are all the fruits of that love, purchased and procured by the oblation and intercession of Jesus Christ. From this, the great design of the blessed Trinity in this great work of redemption would become apparent. It would also become clear how vain and fruitless it is to extend this love and its fruits beyond the bounds assigned to it by the principal agents involved. I very much wished that arguments might also be produced to confirm the truth we assert, and oppose the errors, thus establishing the weak and convincing the dissenters. The doctrine of the satisfaction of Christ, his merit, and the reconciliation which results, are correctly understood by few, and lately opposed by some. Because these things are closely related to redemption, I also desired to see them clarified, unfolded, and vindicated by an able pen. After waiting a long time, I have found none to answer my expectations.

Looking to Him who supplies seed to the sower, and does all our works for us, I suffered myself to undertake the work I expected of another. “I would rather it be done by any than myself, but rather myself than none.” This is especially true considering the industrious diligence of those who oppose truth these days.

Add to these considerations the frequent conferences I have been invited to about these things, the daily spreading near my home of the opinions that I oppose here, an increasing noise as they prevail in other places, the advantage they have gained through some military supporters, and the agitation of various eminent and learned friends, and you have the reasons for my undertaking this task. What the Lord has enabled me to do in this endeavor must be left to the judgment of others. I am not entirely hopeless of success, but I am fully resolved that I will not live to see a solid answer given to it.

If anyone tries to pluck some of the branches, torn from the roots and principles of the whole discourse, I freely give them leave to enjoy their own wisdom and imaginary conquest. If anyone seriously undertakes to debate the whole cause, if I live to see it effected, I will engage myself, by the Lord’s assistance, to be their humble convert, or their fair antagonist. In what has already been accomplished by the good hand of the Lord, I hope the learned may find something for their contentment, and the weak for their strengthening and satisfaction. In all of this, may some glory redound to the One who owns it, and whose truth is unfolded here by the unworthiest laborer in his vineyard.

J.O.
