FIRST, do you want to know the purpose for and intent with which Christ came into the world? Let us ask the One who knew his mind and all the secrets of his Father’s heart. He will tell us that the “Son of man came to save what was lost,” Matt. 18:11, to recover and save poor lost sinners. That was his intent and his design, as it is again asserted in Luke 19:10. Ask also his apostles, who know his mind, and they will tell you the same. So Paul says in 1Tim. 1:15, “This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.” Now, if you ask who these sinners are towards whom he has this gracious intent and purpose, Christ himself tells you in Matt. 20:28, that he came to “give his life a ransom for many.”

In other places, these sinners are called believers, as distinguished from the world. For he “gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us from this present evil world, according to the will of God and our Father,” Gal. 1:4. That was the will and intention of God, that Christ would give himself for us, that we might be saved, being separated from the world. They are his church: Eph. 5:25-27, “He loved the church, and gave himself for it; that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it would be holy and without blemish.” These last words also express the very aim and end of Christ in giving himself for anyone. He did it so that they may be made fit for God, and brought near to him. A like assertion is made in Tit. 2:14: “He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a special people, zealous of good works.” Thus the intention and design of Christ and his Father in this great work are clear and apparent. We know what it was, and towards whom it was directed, namely, to save us. It was to deliver us from the evil world, to purge and wash us, to make us holy, zealous, fruitful in good works, to render us acceptable, and to bring us to God. For through him “we have access into the grace in which we stand.” Rom. 5:2.
