Thus the expressions in the Scripture concerning the ends and effects of the death of Christ are so full, clear, and evident, that a man would think everyone might run and read it. But we must pause: among all things in Christian religion, scarcely anything is more questioned than this seemingly fundamental principle. There is a spreading persuasion that a general ransom was paid by Christ for all; that he died to redeem everyone. He did not die only for his church, the elect of God, but for all of Adam’s posterity. Now, the masters of this opinion see full well that if that is the end of the death of Christ, and the effects mentioned are the immediate fruits and products of that death, then one of two things will necessarily follow:

Either, first, that God and Christ failed to accomplish what they intended; the death of Christ was not a fit means to attain that end. To assert such a thing seems blasphemously injurious to the wisdom, power, and perfection of God. And it is likewise derogatory to the worth and value of the death of Christ;

Or else, second, that all men, the entire posterity of Adam, must be saved, purged, sanctified, and glorified. Surely these advocates of universal redemption will not maintain that, because the Scripture and the woeful experience of millions will not allow it. Therefore, to cast a tolerable color on their persuasion, they must deny that God or his Son had any such absolute aim or end in the death or blood-shedding of Jesus Christ. They must deny that any such thing was immediately procured and purchased by his death, as we recounted before. Instead, they assert that God intended nothing, nor was anything effected by Christ. No immediate benefit arises to anyone by his death except what is common to all and every soul, no matter how cursedly unbelieving here and eternally damned hereafter. No benefit arises until an act of faith, not procured for them by Christ, distinguishes them from others. For if it were procured for them by Christ, why would they all not have it alike?

Now, this seems to me to enervate the virtue, value, fruits and effects of the satisfaction and death of Christ. Besides that, it serves as a basis and foundation for a dangerous, uncomfortable, and erroneous persuasion. Therefore, by the Lord’s assistance, I will declare what the Scripture holds out related to both the assertion they make, and what they present to prove it. I desire the Lord to lead us into all truth by his Spirit, to give us understanding in all things, and if anyone thinks otherwise, to reveal that to him also.
