Observe that the Scripture often speaks of things and persons according to the appearance they have, and their account or esteem among men. Frequently it speaks of men’s condition according to their outward appearance (on which human judgment is based), and not what they are indeed. Thus, many are called wise, just, and righteous according to how they are esteemed by men, though the Lord knows they are foolish sinners. Jerusalem is called “The holy city,” Matt, 27:53, because it was holy in esteem and appearance; but indeed it was a “den of thieves” (Matt. 21:13). In 2Chron. 28:23, it is said of Ahaz, that wicked king of Judah, that “he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus that struck him.” It was the Lord alone that struck him. Those idols to which he sacrificed were but sticks and stones, the work of mens hands. They could in no way help themselves much less strike their enemies. Yet the Holy Ghost uses an expression that addresses his idolatrous persuasion and says, “They struck him.” Is it not said of Christ in John 5:18, that he had broken the Sabbath? Yet he only did that in the corrupt opinion of the blinded Pharisees.

Moreover, add to what has been said what is no less an undeniable truth, namely, that many things which are proper and specific to the children of God are often and frequently assigned to those who live only in outward communion with them, and who have partaken of the same external privileges, though indeed they are aliens with regard to their participation in the grace of the promise. Put these two things which are most evident together, and it will easily appear that those passages which seem to express a possibility that those who are said to be redeemed by the blood of Christ will perish and suffer eternal destruction, are in no way advantageous to the adversaries of the effectual redemption of God’s elect by the blood of Christ. This is because they may be said to be redeemed κατὰ τὴν δόξαν, not κατὰ τὴν ἀλήθειαν,206 — κατὰ τὸ φαίνεσθαι, not κατὰ τὸ εἷναι,207 — it is in respect to appearance, not reality, as used in Scripture in various other things.
