The infallible connection of faith and salvation according to God’s purpose and will must be considered. It is frequently the thing intended in gospel proposals. The Lord has established it in his counsel, and revealed it in his word, that there is an indissoluble bond between these two things, so that “the one who believes shall be saved,” Mark 16:16. This, indeed, is the substance of the gospel in its outward promulgation. This is the testimony of God, that eternal life is in his Son. Whoever believes this sets his seal to it that God is true. Whoever does not believe it makes God out to be a liar, 1Jn. 5:9-11. Now, this connection between the means and the end, faith and life, is the only thing which is meant and what is offered to countless people to whom the gospel is preached. All the commands, proffers, and promises that are made to them intimate no more than this will of God: that believers shall certainly be saved. This is an unquestionable divine truth, and it is a sufficient object for supernatural faith to rest upon. If it not accepted as true, it is a sufficient cause for damnation. John 8:24, “If you do not believe that I am he,” (that is, “the way, the truth, and the life”) “you shall die in your sins.”

It is a vain imagination of some that, when the command to believe and the promise of life are presented to someone, even if he is one of those who will certainly perish, yet somehow the Lord’s will is conditional as to this man’s salvation. They imagine the Lord intends this man will be saved on condition that he will believe, when that condition does not at all lie in the will of God, which is always absolute. The condition exists only between the things proposed to these people, as declared before.208 And those poor deluded things, who stand on their own legs before they are able to crawl, who might justly be persuaded to hold onto men of more strength, greatly betray their own conceited ignorance by this assertion. With great pomp, they show the broken pieces of an old Arminian sophism with acclamations of grace to this new discovery (for that is how they think of all that is new to them). They say, “As is God’s proffer, so is his intention; if he calls all to believe and be saved, then he intends all to believe and be saved.”

First, God does not proffer life to all upon the condition of faith, passing by a great part of mankind without any such proffer being made to them at all.

Secondly, if by God’s proffer they understand his command and promise, who told them that these things declared his will and purpose, or intention? He commands Pharaoh to let his people go; but did he intend Pharoah to do so according to his command? Had he not foretold that he would so order things that Pharoah would not let them go? I thought that God’s commands and promises always revealed our duty, and not his purpose; they revealed what God would have us do, and not what he will do. Indeed, his promises as particularly applied reveal his mind to the persons to whom they are applied; but when they are indefinitely proposed, they reveal no other intention of God but what we discovered before: they concern things, not persons; they concern his determinate purpose to infallibly connect faith and salvation.

Thirdly, if the proffer is universal (as they say), and the intention of God is bound to the offer – that is, he intends the salvation of those to whom the tender offer is made, upon their profession of faith – then,

First, what becomes of election and reprobation? Neither of them, certainly, is consistent with this universal purpose of saving us all.

Secondly, if he intends it, then why is it not accomplished? Does his purpose fail? “Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt.”209 Is this certain Scylla not worse than the feared Charybdis?210

They say, “He intends salvation only on condition. The condition not being fulfilled, he does not fail in his purpose, though the thing is not conferred.” But did the Lord foreknow whether the condition would be fulfilled by those to whom the proposal was made, or not? If not, where is his prescience, his omniscience? If he did, then how can he be said to intend their salvation when he certainly knew that they would never fulfill the condition on which it was to be attained? Moreover, he knew that the condition was not to be attained without his bestowing it, and he had determined not to bestow it.

Would they ascribe such a will and purpose to a wise man as they ignorantly and presumptuously ascribe to the only wise God? Would a wise man intend to have a thing done upon the performance of a condition that he knew full well could never be performed without him, and that he had fully resolved not to effect? For instance, would he intend to give his daughter in marriage to a man upon condition that this man would give him a jewel he does not have, nor can obtain, unless the father bestows it on him, but which he is resolved never to bestow? Where will blindness and ignorance, thought to be light and knowledge, carry such poor deluded souls?

This, then is the main thing demonstrated and held out in the promulgation of the gospel: the strict connection between the duty of faith assigned to them, and the benefit of life promised to them. This has a truth of universal extent, grounded upon the complete sufficiency of the death of Christ towards all who will believe. And I see no reason why this should be termed part of the mystery of the universalists, that the gospel could not be preached to all unless Christ died for all. With what was mentioned before concerning another part of it, this is an old, rotten, carnal, and long-since-confuted sophism, arising out of the ignorance of the word and right reason, which are no way contrary to one another.
