Another ground for holding out a tender of the blood of Jesus Christ to those for whom it was never shed, is the mixed distribution of the elect and reprobates, believers and unbelievers, according to the purpose and mind of God, through-out the whole world and in its several places, in all or most of the single congregations. The ineffectualness of the proposal that we cannot preach to all unless Christ died for all is apparent in this mixed distribution. The ministers of the gospel, who are stewards of the mysteries of Christ, and to whom the word of reconciliation is committed, are bound to admonish and warn all men to whom they are sent. That is because they are acquainted only with revealed things. The Lord lodges his purposes and intentions towards particular persons in the secret ark of his own heart, which is not to be pried into. Ministers give the same commands, propose the same promises, make tenders of Jesus Christ in the same manner, to all. This is done so that the elect, whom they do not know but by the event of their conversion, may obtain the promises, while the rest are hardened.

Now, these things are thus ordered by Him who is supreme over all. Namely, that there should be such a mixture of elect and reprobate, of tares and wheat, to the end of the world; and, secondly, that Christ, and reconciliation through him, should be preached by men ignorant of his eternal discriminating purposes. As such, there is an absolute necessity for two other things. First, the promises must have a kind of unrestrained generality in order to be suitable to this dispensation that was recounted before. Secondly, they must be proposed to those towards whom the Lord never intended the good things of the promises; they have a share in this proposal only by their mixture in this world with the elect of God. So from the general proposition of Christ in the promises, nothing can be concluded concerning his death for all those to whom it is proposed; it has another reason and occasion.

The sum is this: the word of reconciliation is committed to men unacquainted with God’s distinguishing counsels. It is to be preached to men of a varied and mixed condition with regard to his purpose. The way by which he has determined to bring his own home to himself is by exhortations, entreaties, promises, and like means, accommodated to the reasonable nature of which all to whom the word is sent are partakers. These means are also suited to the accomplishment of other ends towards the rest, such as conviction, restraint, hardening, inexcusableness. It can only be that the proposal and offer must necessarily be made to some upon condition, who intentionally, and with regard to the purpose of God, have no right to it in the just aim and intent of it. To close, observe two things. First, the proffer itself neither is, nor ever was, absolutely universal to all; it is only indefinite, without respect to outward differences. Secondly, Christ is not to be received without faith, and God gives faith to whom he pleases; it is therefore clear that he never intends Christ for those on whom he will not bestow faith.
