An introduction to the answer to particular arguments.

Now we come to consider the objections with which the doctrine we have undeniably confirmed from the word of God is usually assaulted, and with great noise and clamor. I must give you these three cautions before I come to lay them down:

The first is that, for my own part, I would rather they were all buried than brought to light. They are in opposition to the truth of God, which they seem to deface. Therefore, were it left to my choice, I would not produce any of them. It is not that there is any difficulty or weight in them which would make their removal laborious or burdensome. It is only that I am not willing to be instrumental in giving any breath or light to what opposes the truth of God. But because, in these times of liberty and error, I suppose the reader has already heard or is likely to hear most of them from men lying in wait to deceive, I will therefore show you the poison. Thus I may furnish you with an antidote against the venom of such self-seekers who abound in our days.

Secondly, I must desire that when you hear an objection, you would not be carried away with the sound of its words, nor allow it to make an impression on your spirits. Remember how many demonstrations and countless passages of Scripture have confirmed the truth opposed by them. Rest yourselves until the passages are well-weighed, the arguments pondered, and the answers set down. Then the Lord direct you to “prove all things, and hold fast what is good” 1Thes. 5:21.

Thirdly, I ask that you diligently observe what comes near the crux of the controversy, the thing in which the difference lies. Leave behind all other flourishes and swelling words of vanity as of no weight, and no importance.

Now, the objections laid against the truth maintained are of two sorts. The first sort is taken from scripture that is perverted; the other is taken from reason that is abused.

We begin with the first, the OBJECTIONS TAKEN FROM SCRIPTURE; all the passages which may in any way seem to contradict our assertion are offered by our strongest adversaries in their great strength (Remon. Scripta Synod).212 They are referred to in three parts:

First, those passages that affirm that Christ died for the world, or that otherwise make mention of the word “world” in redemption.

Secondly, those which mention all and every man, either in the work of Christ’s dying for them, or where God is said to will their salvation.

Thirdly, those which affirm Christ bought, or died for, those who perish.

Hence they draw out three principal arguments or sophisms on which they greatly insist. All of which we will, by the Lord’s assistance, consider in their respective order, with the passages of Scripture brought to confirm and strengthen them.
