“Any doctrine which fills the minds and souls of poor miserable sinners with doubts and misgivings whether they ought to believe or not, when God calls them to it, cannot be agreeable to the gospel. But this is what the doctrine of particular redemption does. It fills the minds of sinners with misgivings and fears as to whether they should believe it or not; and that is because they are uncertain whether it was the intention of God that Christ died for them in particular or not, seeing that he supposedly did not die for all, but only for his elect. Thus when a soul is called upon to believe, he may justly begin to question whether it will be available for him to do so or not, and whether it is his duty or not, seeing that he does not know whether Christ died for him or not.”

ANSWER:

(1.) Which asserts the certainty of salvation by the death of Christ to all believers;

(2.) That affirms the command of God and the call of Christ to infallibly declare that duty which is required of the person commanded and called, which, if it is performed, will assuredly be acceptable to God;

(3.) That holds out purchased free grace to all distressed and burdened consciences;

(4.) That reveals a fountain of blood, all-sufficient to purge all the sin of everyone in the world that will use the appointed means for coming to it;

That doctrine, I say, cannot possibly be the cause of any doubt or misgiving in the minds of convinced, burdened sinners, whether they ought to believe or not. Now, all this is presented by the doctrine of particular effectual redemption, in the dispensation of the gospel which is suitable to it.

I will, then, let this objection go without further pursuit, only attended with this query: “What is it, according to the authors of universal redemption, that men are bound to believe, when they know beforehand that Christ died for them in particular?” Is it a persuasion of the love of God and good will of Christ? It cannot be; they have that beforehand, John 3:16;371 Rom. 5:8;372 nor is it coming to God by Christ to enjoy the fruits of his death. For what is that, I ask? There are no fruits of the death of Christ, according to the universalists, except what are common to all –which might be damnation as easily as salvation, for more are damned than saved; which might be infidelity as well as faith, for most are unbelievers. The immediate fruits of the death of Christ can be nothing but what they hold in common with those who perish. Plainly, their faith in Christ will at length appear to be Socinian obedience.373

There are two things that remain, about which there is no small contention. Both things, in themselves, are excelling and valuable; both are laid claim to by the several persuasions concerning the topic we address. But they are expressed with such an unequal plea, that an easy judgment might serve to decide the controversy. Now, these are, first, the exaltation of God’s free grace (the merit of Christ), and secondly, the consolation of our souls. Let us consider them in order, and let each persuasion take its due.
