Each party contests about the exaltation of the merit of Christ; making their mutual pretences. Something has been said about this before, so I will be brief. Take, then, only a short view of the difference that exists between them, where each pretends to exalt the merit of Christ in what is denied by the other, and this plea will suddenly be at an end.

First, there is only one thing that concerns the death of Christ by which the authors of the general ransom pretend to set forth the excellence of his death and oblation; namely, that the benefits of that death are extended to everyone. By contrast, their adversaries restrict it to a few, a very few, in fact, to none but the elect. This, the authors of the general ransom say, is derogatory to the honor of the Lord Jesus Christ. And in this alone they pretend to so exceedingly advance his name and merit above the pitch of those who assert the effectual redemption of the elect only. The truth is, the measure of the honor of Jesus Christ is not to be assigned by us, poor worms of the dust; what he takes to be honor is what he gives and ascribes to himself, and nothing else. He has no need of our lie for his glory: so that if this did seem for the exaltation of the glory of Christ in our eyes, yet, arising from a lie of our own hearts, it would be an abomination to him.

Secondly, we deny that this serves in any way to set out the nature and dignity of the death of Christ; because the extent of his efficacy to all (if true) does not arise from its own innate sufficiency, but from the free pleasure and determination of God: how that is enervated by a pretended universality was declared earlier.

Thirdly, the value of a thing arises from its own native sufficiency and worth for any purpose to which it is to be employed; those who maintain effectual redemption assert that the sufficiency of the death of Christ is much above what any of their adversaries ascribe to it.

If I were now to declare in how many things the honor of Christ, and the excellence of his death and passion, along with the fruits of it, are contained in that doctrine we have sought to propound from the Scriptures, and compare them with those that are agreeable to the principal maxims of universal redemption, I would be forced to repeat much that has already been spoken. So it will suffice to present the reader with this following comparison between the two:

### Universalists

Scriptural Redemption.

Various other instances of a similar nature might be easily collected which, upon first viewing, the differences would quickly be determined. These few, I have no doubt, are sufficient in the eyes of all experienced Christians, to evince how little conducive the general ransom is to the honor and glory of Jesus Christ, or to setting forth the worth and dignity of his death and passion.
