There is a such a relationship between end and means that (in various ways) they are mutual causes of one another. The end is the first, principal, moving cause of the whole. That is, the whole work is for the sake of the end. No agent applies himself to action without an end in mind; and were he not determined to produce some certain effect, he would not choose to do one thing more than another. The inhabitants of the old world, intending to produce unity and a common habitat, and perhaps to provide for their safety against a second storm, cry, “Go to, let us build us a city, and a tower whose top may reach to heaven; and let us make a name for ourselves, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth,” Gen. 9:4. First, they lay out their aim and design, and then they determine the means that are conducive to attaining it. It is manifest, then, that the reasoning and method a wise worker or agent uses, and executes according to a plan of action, is taken from the end that he aims at. That is, the beginning of that work, in his intention and methodology, is its end.

Now, the means are all those things which are used to attain the end proposed, such as meat to preserve life, sailing in a ship to pass over the sea, or laws to quietly continue human society. They are the procuring cause of the end, in one kind or another. They exist for the end’s sake, and the end is motivated by them. The end follows them either morally as their desert, or naturally as their fruit and product.

First, in a moral sense. When the action and the end are to be measured or considered in reference to a moral rule, or a law that is prescribed to the agent, then the means are the deserving or meritorious cause of the end. If Adam had continued in his innocence, and done all things according to the law given to him, then the end procured by his obedience would have been a blessed life to eternity, just as now the end of any sinful act is death, the curse of the law.

Secondly, when the means are considered only in their natural relation, then they are the efficient instrumental cause of the end. So Joab, intending the death of Abner, “smote him with his spear under the fifth rib, so that he died,” 2Sam. 3:27. And when Benaiah, by the command of Solomon, fell on Shimei, the wounds he gave him were the efficient and instrumental cause of his death, 1Kings 2:46. In this regard, there is no difference between murdering an innocent man and executing an offender. But under a moral consideration, their ends will only follow what they deserve with regard to their conformity to the rule. And so there is chasma megas [a large gap] between them.
