de Cor. et Grat. cap. 40: [A.D. 420]: – “Per hunt Mediato-rem Deus ostendit eos, quos ejus sanguine redemit, facere se ex malis in aeternum honos.” – “By him the Mediator, the Lord declares himself to make those whom he has redeemed with his blood, of evil, good to eternity.” “Vult possidere Christus quod emit; tanti emit ut possideat.” – “Christ will possess what he bought; he bought it with such a price that he might possess it.”

Idem, Serm. 44: de Verbis Apost.: – “Qui nos tanto pretlo emit non vult perire quos emit.” – “The one who bought us with such a price will have none perish whom he has bought.” Idem, Tract. lXXXvii, in Johan.: – “Ecclesiam plerumque etiam ipsam mundi nomine appellat; sicut est illud, ‘Deus erat in Christo mundum reconcilians sibi;’ itemque illud, ‘Non venit Filius hominis ut judicet mundum, sed ut salvetur mundus per ipsum;’ et in epistola sua Johannes ait, ‘Advocatum habemus ad Patrem, Jesum Christum justum, et ipse propitiator est peecatorum nostrorum, non tantum nostrorum sed etiam totius mundi.’ Totus ergo mundus est ecclesia, et totus mundus odit ecclesiam. Mundus igitur odit mundum; inimicus reconciliatum, damnatus, salvatum, inquinatus mundatum. Sed iste mundus quem Deus in Christo recon-ciliat sibi, et qui per Christum salvatur, de mundo electus est inimico, damnato, contaminato.” – “He often calls the church itself by the name of the world; as in, ‘God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself;’ and, ‘The Son of man came not to condemn the world, but that the world through him might be saved.’ And John in his epistle says, ‘We have an Advocate, and he is the propitiation for [our sins, and not for ours only, but also for] the sins of the whole world.’ The “whole world”, therefore, is the church, and the world hates the church. Does the world then hate the world? What is at enmity with God? Is it the reconciled? Is it the condemned, or the saved? Is it the polluted world, or the cleansed world? And that world which God in Christ reconciles to himself, and which is saved by Christ, is chosen out of the opposite, condemned, defiled world.”

Much more to this purpose might be easily cited out of Augustine, but his judgment in these things is known to all.
