On the occasion of a recent book published by Mr Joshua Sprigge containing erroneous doctrine.

READER,

I do earnestly entreat your serious perusal of this short appendix. The total finishing and printing, not only of the body of the discourse, but also the preface, before occasion was given to those thoughts which I now desire to communicate, is the rise of this ataxy.416 This, being irrecoverable, requires no further apology. In the third division of this treatise there are various chapters, namely, 7–9, etc., about the satisfaction of Christ, in which the doctrine is cleared and vindicated from the objections of some. The first aim I had in those chapters was to show the inconsistency of that satisfaction with the general ransom, principally now opposed. In handling it, my eye was chiefly on the Socinians, the known opposers of the person, grace, and merit of Christ. They are the most wretched prevaricators in Christian religion which any age ever yet produced. In the manner of asserting my opposition, I did not look outside the scriptural proposal of Christ’s satisfaction, nor did I turn to any controversies, except to remark concerning some parora~mata and (I fear willful) failings and mistakes of Grotius in stating this business.417 His wretched apostasy into the very dregs of the error (in the judgment of some) strongly opposed even by himself now, sufficiently authorizes anyone to lay open his treacherous handling of these matters in his first undertaking.

If the reader has any doubt of this, let him compare the exposition of various texts of Scripture in Grotius’ book against those of Socinus, which Grotius has since given in his so much admired (indeed, in very many things, is so much to be abhorred) Annotations on the Bible; and, by their inconsistency the reader will quickly perceive the steadfastness of that man to his original principles of apostasy. Great as he was, he was not big enough to contend with truth. Moreover, I had it in my thoughts to endeavor to remove (as I then thought) a scruple418 from the minds of some well-meaning persons, who weakly apprehend that the eternal love of God toward his elect was inconsistent with the satisfaction of Christ; and who therefore began to apprehend, and to instantly to divulge abroad that Christ came only to declare the love of the Father, and to make it manifest to us, so that we, in the apprehension of it, might be drawn to him. That is the manner of doing things in our days; everyone casts upon others the crudities of their own stomach, and scatters abroad undigested conceptions, waiting for someone to lick their deformed offspring, and to see what other capricious brains can make of what they themselves do not know how to improve. So that, as regards personal satisfaction and merit, these become but empty terms, obscuring the true gospel which holds out no such things. Now, concerning this I know the following:

But now, some few days ago (to come to the occasion of this appendix), there came into my hands a book written by Mr Sprigge who, both in his preface to the reader and in various passages in the treatise itself, labors to commend to the world this “glorious discovery”, that Christ did not purchase peace for us but only preached peace to us; that he came only to reveal and declare the love of God, not to procure it; that we only are reconciled to God by him, which he proves from Romans 5:11,425 but that no reconciliation with God is procured; that this discovery, and the like, are what we have prayed for all this while – his Preface to the Reader.

So it is also asserted in many places of the treatise itself, pp. 65,101. Indeed, everywhere it is his main scope. He bids us not to think that the heart of God was set on having a little blood (see Eph 5:2) 426 for the sins of his people, p. 59. These things are but pleasant tales and childish things with which to allure us, p. 46. In short, one main aim of the book is to make the whole ministration of Christ out to be the discovery of a mystery that is nowhere revealed in the word. It is not my purpose here to view the whole, or to separate the chaff from the wheat in it, or to distinguish between the spiritual truths and smoky vapors that are interwoven in it, but only to caution the reader a little about that one thing I intimated before, with some brief expostulations about it.

Let me inform you, as well, that my motive here flows not only from the book itself, but also from the pretended “imprimatur” 427 annexed to it. You will find the truth itself, in opposition to this dangerous notion and the whole fallacy of it, sufficiently confirmed from the Scripture in the foregoing treatise. Christians will not, I hope, be easily shaken from the truth of the word by any pretended revelations whatever. Only, because the greater reputation of the reverend and learned licenser is affixed to the treatise (I know not whether duly), and until he has vindicated himself lest it insinuate itself by the help of his name, I desire to give you these few observations here as a foretaste, reserving you for full satisfaction to what is held out from the word herein in the foregoing treatise.

First, then, observe the absurd consequence, deduced from this position, that Christ is not the cause but the effect of love – namely, that he did not purchase life, peace, and salvation for us. This consequence flows merely from ignorance of the love of God, and it confounds those things which ought to be distinguished. Some look upon love in God as an unchangeable affection, when the truth is, as an affection or passion, it has no place in God at all. All agree that love in spirits, and partly in men, is in appetitu intellectivo, in the will, the intellectual appetite; and there it is defined to be qe>lein tini< to< ajgaqo>n, “to will good to any one.” Certainly, then, in God his love is but a pure act of his will. That love which was the cause of sending his Son is, I say, an act of his will, his good pleasure, – not a natural affection reserved to the creature. There is no such affection in God, as I have abundantly proved in this treatise.

Now, as to his assertion that this love, this act of God’s will, was not purchased, not procured by Christ: very true; who ever was so mad as to affirm it? Can a temporal thing be the cause of what is eternal? This is not at all the meaning of those who affirm that Christ procured the love of his Father for us. No; but the effects of this purpose, the fruits of this love, are commonly called “love” in the Scripture, because affections are ascribed to God in respect to their effects. Now, for the proof that Christ purchased these fruits for us, see afterward. This eternal act of God’s will, this love, which was the impetus to send Jesus Christ, tended to his glory in these two acts:

first, by removing the wrath, death, curse, and guilt from those for whom Christ was sent, by the satisfaction of God’s vindicating justice;

secondly, by the actual procuring of grace and glory for them, by merit and impetration. These things, though they are not the love of God, which is immanent in Himself, yet they are those things alone by which we enjoy his love, and are purchased by Christ; which I must not prove here, lest I should actum agere. 428

Secondly, An eternal act of God’s will, immanent in himself, puts no change of condition into the creature. See what the Scripture says of the elect notwithstanding this, Ephesians 2:3; John 3:36. Let not the word be despised nor corrupted. Do not be wise above what is written. “Though an angel,” etc., Galatians 1:8. Until he draws us, the fruit of his death is kept for us in the justice and fidelity of God.

Thirdly, These things being premised, and to clear the truth in this point, I desire a fair and candid answer to these queries:

First, What is the meaning of that phrase in Hebrews 2:17, Eijv to< iJla>skesqai ta<v aJmarti>av tou~ laou~, “To make reconciliation for the sins of the people,” and this being done as a priest towards God, Hebrews 5:1, – is the meaning of it a declared love from God to man?

Secondly, Is not the purpose of various typical sacrifices to make an atonement with God on behalf of those for whom they were sacrifices? Exodus 29:33,36; 30:10,15,16; Leviticus 6:7; Numbers 16:46, and many other places; – is this to turn away the wrath of God, or to reconcile men to him?

Thirdly, Is not the death of Christ a proper sacrifice? Ephesians 5:2; Hebrews 9:26,28; John 1:29; is it not the antitype of all sacrifices, in which they find their accomplishment? And did it not really effect what they carnally and typically figured? Hebrews 9:11-14, etc., 10:1-7, etc. And was it not offered to God?

Fourthly, Was not Jesus Christ a priest for his people, to deal with God on their behalf, Hebrews 2:17, 5:1,2, 7:26,27; was he not as well a prophet, to deal with them on behalf of God? Do not all the acts of his priestly office immediately tend towards God to procure good things for those in whose behalf he is a priest?

Fifthly, Does not Christ, by his intercession, appear before God to declare the love of God toward His people? Or is it to procure further fruits of love for his people? Romans 8:34; Hebrews 7:25, 9:24.

Sixthly, Did not Christ, by and in the oblation of himself, through the eternal Spirit, pay a ransom, or a valuable price of redemption, into the hand of his Father for the sins of the people? Matthew 26:28; Mark 10:45; 1Timothy 2:6; Ephesians 5:2; Job 33:24. And is a ransom not the price of deliverance, which argues for a commutation? Exodus 21:30, 30:12. Or did Christ pay a ransom to his Father for the souls and sins of his people, thereby declaring to his people that there was no need of any such thing? And what do you think of the old saying of Tertullian, “Omnia in imagines vertunt, imaginarii ipsi Christiani?”429

Seventhly, Did not Christ in his death bear our sins? John 1:29; 1Pet.2:24; Isaiah 53:6,11; 2Corinthians 5:21. And does “bear sin” in the Scripture not mean to bear the punishment due to sin? Leviticus 5:1, etc. And is not undergoing the punishment due to sin, making satisfaction for sin?

Eighthly, Did not Christ, as our surety, undergo all that is anywhere threatened for sin, and due for sin by the justice of God? Hebrews 7:22, 4:15; Galatians 3:13; 2Corinthians 5:21; Hebrews 5:7; Luke 22:44, etc.

Ninthly, Are not the purchase and procurement of good things assigned to the death of Christ? Isaiah 53:5; Hebrews 9:12; Acts 20:28; 1Thessalonians 5:9; Luke 1:74; Romans 5:10; Ephesians 2:16, etc.

Tenthly, Seeing that Romans 5:11, “By whom we have now received the atonement,” is urged to disprove the purchase of peace and reconciliation with God for us, does “the atonement” there mean our reconciliation to God? And is it proper to say that we have received or accepted our conversion or reconciliation?

Eleventhly, He asserts that all that was done in and by Christ was but a sign and representation of what is done spiritually in us; does that not destroy the first promise, Genesis 3:15, indeed, the whole gospel, and make it, as it is called, a “childish thing?”

Twelfthly, Is it fair and allowable for men professing the name of Christ, in the trial of truth, to decline the word of God? Is not such a declension an invincible demonstration of a guilt of falsehood? Deuteronomy 4:2, 12:32; Joshua 1:7; Psalm 19:7; Proverbs 30:6; Isaiah 8:20; Luke 1:4, 16:29; John 5:39, 20:30,31; Galatians 1:8,9; 2 Thessalonians 2:2; 1Timothy 6:20; 2Timothy 3:16,17; 2Peter 1:19, etc.

This much, courteous reader, I thought good to premise to you, though it is out of order after discovering a new opposition made to a precious truth of God, which you will find explained and asserted in the foregoing treatise. And I hope I have assumed this liberty without offending any. It is not about trifles that I contend (I abhor such ways), but for the faith once delivered to the saints. Now, “Peace be to the brethren, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. Amen.” 430

COGGESHALL, APRI 25, 1648.
