His oblation is “offering himself up to God for us without spot, to purge our consciences from dead works,” Heb. 9:14. “For he loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood,” Rev. 1:5. “He loved the church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it,” Eph. 5:25, 26. He took the cup of wrath, due to us, from his Father’s hands, and drank it all, “but not for himself,” Dan. 9:26. “For our sakes he sanctified himself,” John 17:19, to be an offering, an oblation for sin. For “when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly,” Rom. 5:6. This is what was typified by all the institutions, ordinances, and sacrifices of old. When they were at an end, Christ said, “Behold, I come to do your will.” Now, the perfecting or consummating of this oblation is set out in the Scripture chiefly with regard to what Christ suffered, and not so much with regard to what he did. This is because it is considered chiefly as the means used by these three blessed agents to attain a further end. Yet without voluntarily giving himself up to be an oblation and sacrifice, it would not have had any value. For if the will of Christ had not been in it, it could never have purged our sins. Therefore, in regard to his oblation, I refer to his actions.

He was the “Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world,” John 1:29. He was the Lamb of God that he himself had provided for a sacrifice. And how did this Lamb behave himself? With unwillingness and struggle? No. He did not open his mouth: “He was brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is silent, so he did not open his mouth,” Isa. 53:7. He says of this, “I lay down my life. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it up again,” John 10:17, 18. He might have been cruciated on the part of God, but his death could not have been an oblation and offering had not his will concurred in it. “He loved me,” says the apostle, “and gave himself for me,” Gal. 2:20. Now, that alone deserves the name of a gift which comes from a free and willing mind, as Christ’s was when “he loved us, and gave himself for us; an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour,” Eph. 5:2. He does it cheerfully: “Behold, I come to do your will, O God,” Heb. 10:9. And so “he bore our sins in his own body on the tree,” 1Pet 2:24.

Now, I would not tie this oblation or offering of Christ to any one thing, whether action, passion, performance, or suffering. Instead, it comprises the whole economy and dispensation of God manifested in the life lived among us. It includes all those things that he performed in the days of his flesh, when he offered up prayers and supplications, with strong cries and tears. He continued in this way until he had fully “by himself purged our sins, and sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high,” Heb. 1:3. He waited “until his enemies were made his footstool,” Heb. 10:13. He waited to complete the whole dispensation of his coming and ministering, until he had given his soul as the price of redemption for many, Matt. 26:28.

His entering into the holy of holies, sprinkled with his own blood, and appearing for us before the majesty of God, considered by some as the continuation of his oblation, we may assign to his intercession instead.
