His intercession is for everyone of those for whom he gave himself as an oblation. He did not suffer for them, and then refuse to intercede for them. He did not do the greater, and omit the lesser. The price of our redemption is more precious in the eyes of God and his Son than to throw it away on perishing souls, ignoring what becomes of them afterward. This care is imposed on Christ, with a promise annexed: “Ask of me,” says the Lord, “and I will give you the nations for your inheritance, and the furthest parts of the earth for your possession,” Ps. 2:8. Accordingly, Christ tells his disciples that he has more work to do for them in heaven. “I go,” he says, “to prepare a place for you, that I may come again and receive you to myself,” John 14:2, 3. Just as “the high priest went into the holy of holies alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself and the errors of the people,” Heb. 9:7; so “Christ having become a high priest of good things to come, by his own blood entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us,” Heb. 9:11,12.

Now, what was this holy place into which he entered, sprinkled with the blood of the covenant? And for what purpose did he enter it? “He has not entered the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but heaven itself, to appear now in the presence of God for us,” Heb. 9:24. And what does he appear there for? To be our advocate, to plead our cause with God, to apply the good things procured by his oblation to all those for whom he was an offering. As the apostle tells us, “If any man sins, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous,” 1Jn. 2:1. How does that come to pass? “He is the propitiation for our sins,” 1Jn. 2:2. Being a propitiatory sacrifice for our sins is the foundation of his intercession. Therefore, both propitiation and intercession belong to the same person.

Now, by the way, we know that Christ refused to pray for the world, in opposition to his elect. “I pray for them,” he says: “I do not pray for the world, but for those you have given me,” John17:9. Thus there was no foundation for interceding for others, because he was not a propitiation for them. Again, we know the Father always hears the Son (“ I knew,” he says, “that you hear me always,”John 11:42). And he hears in order to grant his request, according to the fore-mentioned engagement, Ps. 2:8. Therefore, if Christ interceded for all, then all would undoubtedly be saved. For “he is able to completely save those who come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them,” Heb. 7:25. Hence, the apostle is confident in that intercession of Christ. “Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect? It is God who justifies. Who is the one who condemns? It is Christ who died, rather, who is risen again, that is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us,” Rom. 8:33, 34.

We cannot help but observe that those for whom be died may assuredly conclude that he makes intercession for them, and that none will lay anything to their charge. This breaks the neck of any theory of a general ransom. For, according to that theory, he died for millions who have no interest in his intercession. They will have their sins laid to their charge, and they will perish under them. This may be further cleared up by the very nature of this intercession. It is not a humble, dejected supplication, which does not befit the glorious state of someone who sits at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Instead, Christ authoritatively presents himself before the throne of his Father, sprinkled with his own blood, to make out to his people all the spiritual things that are procured by his oblation. He says, “Father, I will that those whom you have given me be with me where I am,” John 17:24. He appears in heaven on behalf of whomever he suffered for, with his satisfaction and merit. Here we must call to mind what the Father promised his Son upon undertaking this employment. There is no doubt that this alone is what Christ intercedes with him about: in sum it is that he might be the captain of salvation to all who believe on him, and effectually bring many sons to glory.

Hence, having such a high priest over the house of God, we may draw near with the full assurance of faith. For by one offering he has perfected forever those who are sanctified, Heb. 10:14. But more of this must be said later.
