Our first reason is taken from the perpetual union which the Scripture makes of both of these, almost always joining them together. It presents those things that are considered the distinct fruits and effects of each as most inseparable: “By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities,” Isa. 53:11. The actual justification of sinners, which is the immediate fruit of his intercession, certainly follows his act of bearing their iniquities. And in the next verse they are put together by God in a way that surely none should put asunder: “He bore the sins of many” (behold his oblation!) “and made intercession for the transgressors.” He intercedes for those transgressors whose sin he bears. And there is one expression in 53:5 that makes it evident that the immediate effect of his passion is the complete application of all good things for which he intercedes: “With his stripes we are healed.” Our total healing is the fruit and procurement of his stripes; the oblation is consummated by it. So also in Rom. 4:25: “He was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification.” He rose to justify those for whose offenses he died. Therefore, if he died for all, all must be justified. Otherwise, the Lord failed in his aim and design, in both the death and the resurrection of his Son. Though some have boldly affirmed this, for my part I abhor accepting so blasphemous a fancy.

Rather, let us embrace that doctrine of the apostle which grounds the assurance of our eternal glory, and our freedom from all accusations, upon the death of Christ. This is so because his intercession for us inseparably and necessarily follows his death. “Who,” he asks, “shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect?” It seems that Christ died only for the elect. “It is God that justifies. Who is the one who condemns? It is Christ that died.” Will no one be condemned for whom Christ died? What, then, becomes of this proposed general ransom? “Rather, it is him who is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us,” Rom. 8:33, 34. Here is the equal extent of the one and the other; those who are concerned in the one are the same ones concerned in the other. That he died for all, and intercedes only for some, can scarcely be squared with this text. This is especially true considering the foundation of all this, which is found in verse 32. “He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?” The love of God moved him to give up Christ to death for us all. From this, the apostle infers a kind of impossibility in not giving us all good things in him. How can this be reconciled with the opinion of those who assert that he gave his Son for millions to whom he will give neither grace nor glory? I cannot see it. But we rest in the assertion of the apostle: “When we were still without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly,” so that, “being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him,” Rom. 5:6, 9. This same inseparable bond between the oblation and the intercession of Christ, with their fruits and effects, is intimated in many other places.
