To offer and to intercede, to sacrifice and to pray, are both acts of the same sacerdotal office. They are both required in anyone who is a priest. If he omits either of these, he cannot be a faithful priest for those he represents. If he either does not make an offering for them, or he does not intercede for the success of his oblation on their behalf, then he is lacking in the discharge of the office. But we find both of these united in Jesus Christ (as I said before): 1Jn. 2:1, 2, “If any man sins, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitiation for our sins.” If he is to be such a merciful high priest over the house of God, that the children are encouraged to go to God by him, then he must be an advocate both to intercede, and to offer a propitiatory sacrifice.

The apostle makes this exceedingly clear, and he evidently proves this in the Epistle to the Hebrews. There he describes the priesthood of Christ. The execution of that office consists of these two acts: offering up himself in and by the shedding of his blood, and interceding for us completely. Upon performing both, he exhorts us to draw near with confidence to the throne of grace, for he “came a high priest of good things to come, not by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us,” Heb. 9:11, 12. His bloody oblation gave him entrance into the holy place not made with hands. There he accomplished the remaining part of his office. The apostle compares his entrance into heaven for us with the entrance of the high priest into the holy place, with the blood of bulls and goats upon him, verses 12, 13. Doubtless, this was to pray for those in whose behalf he had made the offering, verse 7. He so presented himself before his Father that his former oblation might be efficacious. Hence he is said to have “an unchangeable priesthood,” because he continues forever, Heb. 7:24. He is “able to completely save those who come to God by him,” verse 25. Therefore, we have “boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus,” Heb. 10:19-22.

So, then, it is evident that both of these are acts of the same priestly office in Christ:. If he performs either of them for anyone, then he must of necessity perform the other one for them also. For he will not exercise any act or duty of his priestly function in behalf for anyone for whom he is not a priest. And for whom he is a priest, he must perform both, because he is faithful in the discharge of his function in the behalf of the sinners for whom he undertakes that office. These two, then, oblation and intercession, must be of equal extent with regard to their objects. They can by no means be separated. And here, by the way, I must ask those who oppose us about the death of Christ, whether they will agree that he intercedes for all or not. If not, then they make him only half a priest. If they will, then they must either defend their error that all will be saved, or they must own the blasphemy that Christ is not heard by his Father. Nor can Christ prevail in his intercession, which even the saints on earth are sure to do when they make their supplications according to the will of God, Rom. 8:27; 1Jn. 5:14. Besides that, it is expressly said that the Father always hears him, John 11:42. That was true when he was still in the flesh, and had not finished the great work he was sent to do. How much more is that true now, having done the will and finished the work of God? He now sits at the right hand of the Majesty on high! He desires and he requests that the promises that were made to him upon undertaking this work be accomplished.
