The nature of the intercession of Christ will prove no less than what we assert. It requires an inseparable conjunction between itself and its oblation. For as it is now perfected in heaven, it is not a humble dejection of himself, with cries, tears, and supplications. No! It cannot be conceived as a mere vocal entreaty. It is real. He presents himself, sprinkled with the blood of the covenant, before the throne of grace in our behalf. “For Christ,” says the apostle, “has not entered into the holy places made with hands, but into heaven itself, now appearing in the presence of God for us,” Heb. 9:24. His intercession there is an appearance for us in heaven in the presence of God. It is a demonstration of his sacred body, in which he suffered for us. For in Hebrews (as we said before), the apostle compares his entrance into heaven for us to the entrance of the high priest into the holy place, with the blood of bulls and goats upon him, Heb. 9:12, 13. Our Savior is there with his own blood. He is presenting himself so that his former oblation might have its perpetual efficacy, until the many sons given to him are brought to glory. His intercession consists in this: it is nothing more than a continuation of his oblation, as it were. He was a “Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,” Rev. 13:8.

Now, before his actual oblation was completed, his intercession was simply an engagement for the work that would be accomplished in due time. And so, certainly what follows his oblation is nothing more than presenting what was fulfilled according to that engagement. That is, his intercession continues his oblation by laying claim to those things that were procured by his oblation, by a remembrance and declaration of it. How, then, is it possible for his oblation to have a larger compass and extent than his intercession? Can he be said to make an offering for those for whom he does not intercede, when his intercession is nothing more than presenting that offering in behalf of those for whom he suffered? His intercession bestows those good things that were purchased by his oblation.
