Again: if the oblation and death of Christ procured and obtained every good thing so that it would be bestowed, and if Christ’s intercession actually bestowed every good thing, then both the oblation and the intercession have the same aim. They are both means leading to one and the same end. Now, for the proof of this supposition, we must remember what was said earlier concerning the agreement between the Father and the Son. Upon voluntarily engaging himself in this great work of redemption, the Lord promised the Son as the end of his sufferings, the reward of his labors, and the fruit of his merit, everything that he afterward intercedes for. There must be a foundation for our Savior’s intercession. It is an entreaty, whether virtual or formal, real or oral, that is made to obtain something. Must it not rest on some promise that was made to him? Is there any good bestowed that is not promised? Is it not apparent that the intercession of Christ rests on a promise such as the one in Ps. 2:8, “Ask of me, and I will give you the heathen for your inheritance,” etc?

Now, why was this promise and engagement made to our savior? Was it not for undergoing what “the kings set themselves, and the rulers took counsel together, against him,” Ps. 2:2? The apostles interpret this to refer to Herod, Pontius Pilate, and the people of the Jews, who persecuted him to death, and did to him “whatever the hand and counsel of God had before determined to be done,” Acts 4:27, 28. The intercession of Christ, then, is founded on promises made to him. And these promises are nothing but an engagement to actually bestow on those for whom he suffered, all the good things which his death and oblation merited and purchased. It can only be that he intercedes for all those for whom he died. His death procured all and every thing that his intercession bestows; and until they are bestowed, his oblation does not have its full fruits and effects. As for whether the death of Christ procures what is never granted, we will see later whether that contradicts Scriptures, and common sense.
