Lastly, separating and dividing the death and intercession of Christ, in respect to their objects, cuts off whatever consolation anyone might have from the assurance that Christ died for him. The doctrine of general ransom is not a comforting doctrine. It cuts all the nerves and sinews of that strong consolation which God so abundantly wants us to receive. I will say more about that later. For the present, I will only show how it severs our comfort in one particular aspect. The main foundation of all the confidence and assurance we have in this life, “joy unspeakable, and full of glory” 1Pet. 1:8, arises from this strict connection of the oblation and intercession of Jesus Christ. By the one he has procured all good things for us, and by the other he will actually bestow them. He never leaves our sins, but follows them into every court, until they are fully pardoned and clearly expiated, Heb. 9:26. He will never leave us until he has completely saved those who come to God by him. His death without his resurrection would have profited nothing for us; all our faith in him would have been in vain, 1Cor. 15:17.

So if separated, it yields little consolation. But if connected, it is a sure foundation for a soul to build upon, Heb. 7:25: “What good will it do me to be persuaded that Christ died for my sins, if, notwithstanding that, my sins may appear against me for my condemnation, where and when Christ will not appear for my justification?” If you ask, along with the apostle, “Who is the one who condemns?” it may easily be answered. Rom. 8:34, “Why, God by his law may condemn me, notwithstanding that Christ died for me!” Indeed, says the apostle, but “He is risen again, and sits at the right hand of God, making intercession for us.” He does not rest in his death. He will certainly make intercession for those for whom he died, and this alone is what gives firm consolation. Our sins dare not appear, nor any of our accusers against us, where he appears for us. Quibbling objections against this text will be considered afterward. I hope I have sufficiently confirmed and proved what I proposed in the beginning of this chapter, about the identity of the object of the oblation and intercession of Jesus Christ.
