A more specific inquiry into the proper end and effect of the death of Christ.

The main thing on which the whole controversy about the death of Christ turns, and on which the great weight of the business depends, is next for our consideration. It is what we have prepared the way for by what has been said already. It is about the proper end of the death of Christ. Whoever can rightly and clearly demonstrate this issue may well be made an umpire in this contest. For if the end of Christ’s death is what most of our adversaries assign to it, then we will not deny that Christ died for everyone. And if it is what we maintain, then our adversaries must not extend it beyond the elect, beyond believers. This, then, must be fully clarified and solidly confirmed by those who hope for success in this undertaking.

A brief summary up to this point:

In the beginning of our discourse, we asserted that the purpose of Christ’s death is to draw near to God. That is a general expression for everything involved in the recovery of sinners from their state of alienation, misery, and wrath, into grace, peace, and eternal communion with God. There is a twofold end in these things. One end is for the worker (what he intends), and the other is for the work that is wrought (what is accomplished). The worker (or agent) may lack wisdom and certitude in choosing suitable means to attain the proposed end. Or he may lack skill and power in rightly using appropriate means to his best advantage. And so, we showed how these things are always coincident: the work effects what the workman intends by his selection and use of means.

In the business in hand, the agent is the blessed Three in One. And the oblation and intercession of Jesus Christ were the means by which they aligned with and aimed at their proposed end. Oblation and intercession are united. They intend the same object, as was established. Now, unless we blasphemously ascribe lack of wisdom, power, perfection, and sufficiency to the agent, or we assert that the death and intercession of Christ was inappropriate to attain the proposed end, we must grant that the worker and the work have the same end. Whatever the blessed Trinity intended by them was effected; and whatever we find in the result ascribed to them is what the blessed Trinity intended. So we have no reason to consider these separately, unless to argue from one to the other. That is, where we find anything ascribed to Christ’s death (as its fruit), we may conclude that God intended to effect that fruit by his death, and vice versa.

Now, the end of the death of Christ is either supreme and ultimate, or it is intermediate and subservient to that ultimate end.
