There is an end of the death of Christ which is intermediate and subservient to the end of God’s glory. It is the last and most supreme end with regard to us. That is what we now address. It is bringing us to God. Now, in reference to the oblation and intercession of Christ, both aim at this same end. Yet, bringing us to God has two distinct parts: the end, and the means to attain that end. With regard to us, both the end (bringing us to God) and the means used (Christ’s oblation and intercession), are the ultimate end of the mediation of Christ. The cause is the Lord’s appointment of a coherent connection between the acts and the things purchased for us by Jesus Christ. The one should be a means to attain the other. The one is the condition, and the other is the thing promised upon that condition. Both have been equally and alike procured for us by Jesus Christ. For if either is omitted in his purchase, the other would be in vain and fruitless.

Now, both of these consist in a communication of God and his goodness to us. This is for purposes of grace or glory, holiness or blessedness, faith or salvation. Using this last one as an example, faith is the means, and salvation the end; faith is the condition, and salvation is the promised inheritance. Under the name of faith is included all the saving grace that accompanies it; and under the name of salvation is included the whole “glory to be revealed,” the liberty of the glory of the children of God, Rom. 8:18,21, and all the blessedness of an eternal enjoyment of the blessed God. With faith go all the effectual means of that faith, both external and internal: the word and the almighty sanctifying Spirit. It includes all the advances in our condition, such as justification, reconciliation, and adoption into the family of God. It includes all the fruits that flow from it in our sanctification and universal holiness. And it includes all the other privileges and enjoyments of believers here, which result from the redemption and reconciliation purchased for them by the oblation of Christ.

We maintain that the end proposed and effected by the blood-shedding of Jesus Christ is a real, effectual, and infallible. It bestows and applies all these things to everyone for whom he died. It includes the means as well as the ends, the condition as well as the result, faith and grace as well as salvation and glory. And it includes those other acts of his mediation which are inseparably joined. Thus, everyone for whom he died and offered himself, by virtue of his death or oblation, has a right to all these things that were purchased for him. In due time, he will certainly and infallibly enjoy them. In the same way, the purpose of Christ’s obtaining grace and glory with his Father was so that all these things would certainly be bestowed on all those for whom he died. Some of them would be bestowed on condition that they believe, but faith itself is absolutely bestowed without any condition. We will further illustrate and confirm this after we remove some false ends that have been assigned to his death.
