It is very apparent that the end was not merely his own good. For in his divine nature, he eternally and essentially partakes of all the glory that belongs to the Deity. With regard to us, that glory is variously manifested, but in itself it is always eternally and absolutely perfect. At the close of all, he desires and requests no other glory than what he had with his Father “before the world was,” John 17:5. With regard to his human nature, he was eternally predestined to be personally united with the second person of the Trinity. There was no foresight of doing or suffering anything from the instant of his conception. Therefore, while he was in his humanity, he did not merit anything for himself by his death and oblation. He did not need to suffer for himself, because he was perfectly and legally righteous. The glory he aimed at by “enduring the cross, and despising the shame,” was not so much to exalt his own glory, as it was to bring many children to glory. This was in the promise made to him, as we declared before. His own exaltation, his power over all flesh, and his appointment to be Judge of the quick and the dead, was a consequence of his deep humiliation and suffering. But we deny that it was the effect and product of his death, that it was procured meritoriously by it, or that it was the end aimed at in his making satisfaction for sin.

Christ has power and dominion over all, but the foundation of this dominion is not his death for all. He has dominion over all things, because he has been appointed “heir of all things, … upholding them all by the word of his power,” Heb. 1:2, 3. “He is set over the works of God’s hands, and all things are put in subjection under him,” Heb. 2:7, 8. And what “all things” are, or include, may be found in Ps. 8:5-8,44 the passage cited by the apostle. And did he die for all these things? No. Does he not have power over the angels? Are not principalities and powers made subject to him? Will he not judge the angels at the last day? Even the saints will do it with him, by attesting to his righteous judgments, l. Cor. 6:2, 3. And yet, it is expressly said that the angels have no share in the whole dispensation of God demonstrated by Christ’s dying for the saints to redeem them from their sins. The angels had no need, and any others are eternally excluded: “He did not help angels; but the seed of Abraham,” Heb. 2:16. God made him “king upon his holy hill of Zion,” to spite his enemies, to bruise them, and to rule them “with a rod of iron,” Ps. 2:6, 9. Yet these things are not the immediate effect of his death for them. Rather, all things are given into his hand because of the immediate love of the Father for his Son, John 3:35; Matt. 11:27.45 This is the foundation of the sovereignty and dominion he has been given over all creatures, and his power to judge.

Besides, even if it were granted that Christ procured this power to judge by his death (which cannot be proved), would anything follow from that to prove a general ransom for all? Undoubtedly not. This dominion and power to judge is a power to condemn as well as to save. “All judgment” is committed to him, John 5:22. “He has authority given to him to execute judgment, because he is the Son of man.” He will execute it at that hour “when all who are in their graves hear his voice and come out; those who have done good, to resurrection of life; and those who have done evil, to resurrection of condemnation,” Jn. 5:27-29; 2Cor. 5:10. Now, can it be reasonably asserted that Christ died for men to redeem them, so that he might gain the power to condemn? No. These two things defeat one another. If he redeemed you by his death, then his intent was not to obtain the power to condemn you. If it was, then your redemption was not his intent.
