The first argument may be taken from the nature of the covenant of grace, which was established, ratified, and confirmed in the death of Christ. It was the testament of which Christ was the testator. That is why his blood is called “The blood of the new testament,” Matt. 26:28. No effects of that covenant can be extended beyond its scope. And this covenant was not made universally with all, but particularly with some. Therefore only those with whom it was made were intended to benefit from the death of Christ.

This assumption appears from the nature of the covenant itself, described clearly in Jer. 31:31, 32, “I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah: not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt; for they broke my covenant, though I was a husband to them, says the LORD.” We find this repeated in Heb. 8:9-11, “Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; because they did not continue in my covenant, and I did not consider them, says the Lord. For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord; I will put my laws in their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be a God to them, and they shall be a people to me: and every man shall not need to teach his neighbor and his brother saying, ‘Know the Lord’: for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest.”

For this reason, the condition of the covenant is not said to be required, but is absolutely promised: “I will put my fear in their hearts.”88 This is the main difference between the old covenant of works and the now one of grace. The Lord not only requires the fulfilling of the prescribed condition, but he promises to effect it in those with whom the covenant is made. Without this spiritual efficacy, the truth is, the new covenant would be as weak and unprofitable as the old one. The purpose of the covenant is to bring us to God and bind us to him. The weakness and unprofitableness of the old covenant, and the reason why God in his mercy abolished it, was because our sin made us unable to fulfill its condition that we, “do this, and live.”89 Otherwise the connection is still true, that “the one who does these things shall live.”90 Are we any more able to fulfill the condition of the new covenant by ourselves? Is it not as easy for a man by his own strength to fulfill the whole law, as to repent and savingly believe the promise of the gospel? This, then, is one main difference of these two covenants: in the old one, the Lord only required the condition; now, in the new one, he also effects it in all those to whom the covenant is extended. If the Lord only exacted the obedience required of us in the covenant, and he did not also work and effect it in us, then the new covenant would only be for show, increasing our misery. It would not seriously impart and communicate grace and mercy to us. If this is the nature of the new testament, as it appears to be from its very words, and the condition of the covenant will certainly be worked in all those who are included in the covenant by free grace, then only those who are included this covenant will have its conditions effected in them.

It is apparent that the covenant is not made with all, for “all men do not have faith.”91 It is the “faith of the elect of God.”92 Therefore, the covenant is not made with all, nor is its scope extended beyond the remnant of the elect. Indeed, every blessing of the new covenant is certainly common, and is to be communicated to all the covenantees.93 If the covenant is general, then either faith is not one of the blessings, or all must have it. Some may say that, while it is true that God promises to write his law in our hearts and put his fear in us, it is on condition. Give me that condition, and I will yield. Is it if they believe? Nothing else can be imagined. That is, if they have the law written in their hearts (as everyone who believes has), then God promises to write his law in their hearts! Is this probable, friends? Is it likely? I cannot be persuaded that God has made a covenant of grace with all, especially those who never heard a word of covenant, grace, or its condition, nor have received the grace to fulfill that condition. Without that grace, the whole thing is useless.

The covenant is made with Adam, and he is acquainted with it, Gen. 3:15. It was renewed with Noah and not hidden from him.94 It was again established with Abraham, accompanied with a full and rich declaration of its chief promises, Gen. 12. It is most certainly not effected towards all, as will afterwards be apparent. That first distinction, between the seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent, is enough to overthrow the pretended universality of the covenant of grace. Who dares affirm that God entered into a covenant of grace with the seed of the serpent?

It is most apparent, then, that the new covenant of grace, and its promises, are distinguished in their mercy, restricted to the people whom God foreknew, and so they are not universally extended to all. The blood of Jesus Christ is the blood of this covenant. His oblation is intended to procure the good things the covenant promised, for he was the surety of the covenant, Heb. 7:22. It is inconceivable that his oblation was made for anyone but those intended in this covenant.
