If the Lord intended to procure pardon of sin and reconciliation with God for everyone, to be enjoyed on the condition that they believe, then this good will of God ought to be made known to all by the word so that they might believe. “For faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God,” Rom. 10:17. If these things are not made known to those for whom the Lord has procured so great a good, then one of these things will follow: either they may be saved without faith in or knowledge of Christ, or else this purchase by Jesus Christ and the good will of God is plainly in vain.

The first is false, and proved so. Those for whom he died cannot have knowledge of Christ unless he is revealed to them. The second will only frustrate them; in fact, it plainly mocks them. For his purchase will not help them out of misery, nor will it serve the justice of God to leave them inexcusable. What blame can be put on them for not embracing and using a benefit which they never heard of?

Does it become the wisdom of God to send Christ to die for men so that they might be saved, declaring that unless they hear and believe they cannot be saved, and then not cause them to hear about it? What wise man would pay a ransom to deliver captives, upon their acknowledgement of his payment, when he is sure they will never know the payment was made, and so will never be freed? Does this reflect the goodness of God, to deal with his poor creatures in this way? Would he demonstrate the most intense love imaginable for them by sending his Son, a love beyond all compare and illustration, and yet never let them know of it? And then, in the end, damn them for not believing it? Does it reflect the love and kindness of Christ, to assign to him at his death this resolution: “By this oblation, I will obtain for everyone peace and reconciliation with God, redemption and everlasting salvation, and eternal glory in the high heavens. I will do so even for all those poor, miserable, wretched worms, those condemned prisoners, who should expect the sentence of condemnation every hour. All of this will be bestowed on them, if they will only believe. Yet, I will arrange things in such a way that countless souls will never hear one word of all that I have done for them. They will never be persuaded to believe. They will never learn of me as the object of their faith, that by believing in me they might indeed partake of these things.” Was this the mind and will, the design and purpose, of our merciful high priest? God forbid.

It is like a prince proclaiming that there are a number of captives held in bondage below, and having an immense treasure, he is resolved to redeem every one of them. And so, every one of them who comes out of prison will thank him for his good will. In the meantime, he never takes care to let these poor captives know his mind and pleasure; yet, unless he effects it himself, it will never be done. Would this not be thought a vain and ostentatious flourish, without any good intent towards the captives?

Or it would be like a physician saying that he has a medicine that will cure all diseases. He says that he intends to cure the diseases of everyone, but he lets only a few know his mind, or anything of his medicine. And yet, without relating this information, it will be known to very few. Will he be thought to desire, intend, or aim at, the recovery of everyone?

Now, it is clear from the Scripture, and from our experience in all ages, under both old and new covenants, that countless men and whole nations have been passed by in the declaration of this mystery. The Lord does not effect that it will, by any means, or in the least measure, be revealed to all. They do not hear so much as a rumour or a report of any such thing.

Under the Old Testament, “In Judah God was known, and his name was great in Israel; his tabernacle was in Salem, and his dwelling-place in Zion,” Ps. 76:1, 2. “He showed his word to Jacob, and his statutes and his judgments to Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his judgments, they have not known them,” Ps. 147:19, 20. There are also those passages naming and cursing the heathen, such as Jer. 10:25, “Pour out your fury on the heathen who do not know you, and on the families who do not call on your name.” You have a full description of them in Eph.2:12. They are those “without Christ, aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world.”

Under the New Testament, the church has indeed “lengthened her cords, and strengthened her stakes.”95 “Many nations have come up to the mountain of the Lord.”96 In fact, there are so many as to be called “all people,”97 “all nations,”98 indeed, the “world,”99 and the “whole world,”100 at least by comparison to the small precinct of the church of the Jews. Yet the Scripture and our own experience make it clear that many are passed by, millions of souls, who have never heard a word of Christ, nor of reconciliation by him. For this, we can give no other reason but this: “Even so, Father, it seemed good in your sight,” Matt. 11:26. The Holy Ghost expressly forbids the apostles to go to various places, sending them another way, Acts 16:6, 7, 9, 10. This is a reflection of the former dispensation in some respects. God “in times past suffered all nations to walk in their own ways,” Acts 14:16. And as for our experience, not to be specific, ask any of our brothers who have spent any time in the Indies, and they will easily convince you of the truth of that.

The exceptions made against this argument are poor and frivolous, and we reserve a full reply for later. In brief, how is it to be revealed to the thousands of offspring of infidels, whom the Lord cuts off in their infancy, so that they may not pester the world, persecute his church, nor disturb human society? How is it revealed to their parents? Paul affirms that they may be led to the knowledge of God’s eternal power and Godhead by his works, but it is utterly impossible for them to know anything of redemption or a Redeemer.101
