We argue from the type to the antitype, from what stands for something to what it stands for. This will clearly restrict the oblation of Christ to God’s elect. The people of Israel were certainly typical of the church of God in all the remarkable things that happened to them, as declared in 1Cor. 10:11.138 Their institutions and ordinances were especially representative of the spiritual things of the gospel. Their priests, altar, and sacrifices, were all shadows of the good things to come in Jesus Christ. Their Canaan was a type of heaven, Heb. 4:3, 9,139 as was Jerusalem or Zion, Gal. 4:26,140 Heb. 12:22.141 The people of Israel as a whole were a type of God’s church, his elect, his chosen and called people. That is why believers are called a “holy people, a royal priesthood,” alluding to the people of Israel, 1Pet. 2:5, 9.142 In fact, God’s people are called his “Israel” in countless places, as further expounded in Heb. 8:8.143 A true Israelite is the same as a true believer, John 1:47;144 One is a Jew who is so in his heart. I hope it does not need not be proved that the people delivered from bondage, preserved, taken near to God, and brought into Canaan, are typical of God’s spiritual church, of elect believers. From this type of Israel, we argue the following for the church:

Only those who are really and spiritually redeemed by Jesus Christ are typified by the physical redemption of the people of Israel. Only the elect, the church of God, was typified by the Jewish people being delivered from Egypt and brought into Canaan with their ordinances and institutions. It is senseless to imagine that the Jews were a type for the whole world, or for any but God’s chosen ones, as proven in Heb. 9,10.145 Were the Jews and their ordinances types for the seven nations whom they destroyed and supplanted in Canaan? Were they types for the Egyptians, or for those who were infidels and haters of God and his Christ? We conclude, then, from the types and the things which they typify, that only the elect of God, his church and chosen ones, are redeemed by Jesus Christ.
