A digression containing the substance of a conference concerning the satisfaction of Christ.

About the time I was composing that part of the last argument which is taken from the satisfaction of Christ, someone came to the place where I live (whose name and everything else concerning him will be concealed out of respect for his modesty). To those who heard him in a private exercise about the sufferings of Christ, he seemed to enervate, indeed to overthrow, the satisfaction of Christ. Apprehending that to be a dangerous consequence, and to prevent further difficulty, I set myself briefly and plainly to oppose it. A little after, I willingly entertained a conference and debate (desired by the gentleman) about the point in question. Being carried along with that quietness and sobriety of spirit which befitted lovers of and searchers after truth, I easily perceived not only what his persuasion was in the thing in hand, but also the ground and sole cause of his misapprehension. It was briefly this:

The eternal, unchangeable love of God for his elect actually instated them in such a condition that they were incapable of having any satisfaction made for them. The result of that was to remove the wrath they were due, and to make atonement for their sins. Because it was an eternal pre-existing love, they only lacked a clear manifestation of it to their souls. By such a manifestation they might be delivered from all that dread, darkness, guilt, and fear which was in and upon their consciences by reason of not understanding this love. That misapprehension came upon them through the fall of Adam.

Now, to remove this misapprehension, Jesus Christ was sent to manifest and declare the eternal good will of God towards them. Thus he bore and took away their sins by removing from their consciences this misapprehension of God and their own condition which they had by reason of sin. He did not satisfy the justice of God for their sins, for God was eternally well-pleased with them. The sum is this: election is asserted here to the overthrow of redemption.

What followed in our conference with whatever success it obtained by God’s blessing will, for my part, rest in the minds and judgments of those who heard it; it was intended for their sake alone. The things themselves are first, of great weight and importance and of singular concern to all Christians. Secondly, they contain a mixture of undoubted truth and no less undoubted errors, true propositions and false inferences, and assertions of necessary verities to the exclusion of others which are no less necessary. And thirdly, they directly belong to the business in hand. I will briefly declare and confirm the whole truth in this business so far as opportunity was given by the exercise and debate before mentioned. I will begin with the first part of it concerning the eternal love of God for his elect, along with the state and condition they are placed in by it. Concerning this, you may observe,
