Consider what it means to lie under the effects of God’s wrath according to the declaration of the Scripture. Then see whether the elect are delivered from it before their actual calling. Now, this consists in a number of things:

(1.) To be in such a state of alienation from God that none of their services are acceptable to him: “The prayer of the wicked is an abomination to the LORD,” Prov. 28:9.

(2.) To have no outward enjoyment sanctified, but all things are unclean, Tit. 1:15.

(3.) To be under the power of Satan who rules at his pleasure in the children of disobedience, Eph. 2:2.

(4.) To be in bondage to death, Heb. 2:15.

(5.) To be under the curse and condemning power of the law, Gal. 3:13.

(6.) To be liable to the judgment of God, and to be guilty of eternal death and damnation, Rom. 3:19.

(7.) To be under the power and dominion of sin reigning in them, Rom. 6:19.

These and similar things are what we call the effects of God’s anger.

Let anyone now tell me what the reprobates in this life lie under more than these? And do not all the elect, until their actual reconciliation in and by Christ, lie under the very same things?

(1.) Are not their prayers an abomination to the Lord? Can they please God without faith? Heb. 9:6. And we suppose them not to have faith, for if they have it, they are actually reconciled.

(2.) Are their enjoyments sanctified to them? Does anything have a sanctified relation without faith? See 1Cor. 7:14.

(3.) Are they not under the power of Satan? If not, then how does Christ come in and for them to destroy the works of the devil? Did not he not come to deliver his own from the one who had the power of death, that is, the devil? Heb. 2:14; Eph. 2:2,

(4.) Are they not under bondage to death? The apostle plainly affirms that they are, all their lives, until they are actually freed by Jesus Christ, Heb. 2:14, 15.

(5.) Are they not under the curse of the law? How are they freed from it? By Christ being made a curse for them, Gal. 3:13.

(6.) Are they not liable to judgment and guilty of eternal death? How is it, then, that Paul says that there is no difference, that all are subject to the judgment of God and are guilty before him? Rom. 3:9; and that Christ saves them from this wrath which was to come upon them with regard to merit? Rom 5:9; 1Thes. 1:10.

(7.) Are they not under the dominion of sin? “God be thanked,” says Paul, “that you were the servants of sin, but you have obeyed,” etc., Rom. 6:17.

In brief, the Scripture is more plentiful in nothing else than in laying and charging all this misery and wrath upon the elect of God, due to an unreconciled condition, until they actually partake in the deliverance by Christ.

But now some men think to wipe away all that has been said in a word. They tell us that all this is only in their own apprehension, that these things are not so in themselves. But if these things are so only in the apprehension of the elect, why are they otherwise to the rest of the world? The Scripture makes no difference or distinction between them. And if it is so with all, then let all get this apprehension as fast as they can, and all will be well with the whole world, which is now miserably captived under a misapprehension of their own condition. That is, let them say the Scripture is a fable, and the terror of the Almighty is only a scarecrow to frighten children, that sin is only in conceit, and so square their life to their blasphemous fancies. Some men’s words eat like a canker.
