No doctrine can be true or agreeable to the gospel which strikes at the root of gospel faith, and plucks away the foundation of all that strong consolation which God is so abundantly willing that we should receive. But such is that which denies the satisfaction made by Christ, which denies his answering the justice and undergoing the wrath of his Father. It makes the poor soul like Noah’s dove in its distress, not knowing where to rest the soles of her feet. When a soul is turned out of its self-righteousness, it begins to look abroad, and view the heaven and earth for a resting place. It perceives an ocean, a flood, an inundation of wrath, to cover all the world. This is the wrath of God revealing itself from heaven against all ungodliness, so that the soul can obtain no rest or abiding. It cannot reach heaven by its own flight, and it is unwilling to fall to hell. If now the Lord Jesus Christ does not appear as an ark in the midst of the waters, upon whom the floods have fallen, and yet has gotten above them all as a refuge, then alas! What will the soul do? When the flood fell there were many mountains glorious in the eye, far higher than the ark. But yet those mountains were all drowned, while the ark still kept on top of the waters. Many hills and mountains of self-righteousness and general mercy, appearing at the first view, seem to the soul much higher than Jesus Christ. But when the flood of wrath once comes and spreads itself, all those mountains are quickly covered. Only the ark, the Lord Jesus Christ, though the flood falls on him also, yet he gets quite above it, and gives safety to those who rest upon him.

Let me now ask any of those poor souls who have been wandering and tossed with the fear of the wrath to come, whether they ever found a resting-place until they came to this: God did not spare his only Son, but gave him up to death for us all; that he made him to be sin for us; that he put all the sins of all the elect into that cup of which he was to drink; that the wrath and flood which they feared fell upon Jesus Christ (though now, as the ark, he is above it), so that if they could get into him they should be safe. The storm has been his, and the safety will be theirs. As all the waters which would have fallen upon those who were in the ark fell upon the ark while they remained dry and safe, so all the wrath that should have fallen upon them fell on Christ. What alone causes their souls to dwell in safety? Has this not been your bottom, your foundation, your resting-place? If not, I fear you have only rotten bottoms. Now, what would you say if a man should come and pull this ark from under you, and give you an old rotten post to swim on in the flood of wrath? It is too late to tell you that no wrath is due to you; the word of truth and your own consciences have given you other information. You know the “wages of sin is death;” in whomever it is found, he must die. So the soul may well say, “Deprive me of the satisfaction of Christ, and I am bereaved. If he did not fulfill justice, I must; if he did not undergo wrath, I must undergo it to eternity. O rob me not of my only pearl!” Denying the satisfaction of Christ destroys the foundation of faith and comfort.
