A fourth thing180 ascribed to the death of Christ is merit, or that worth and value of his death by which he purchased and procured for us all those good things which we find in the Scripture for his death, to be bestowed upon us., I will not speak much of this, having considered it under the notion of impetration already. I will only add a few observations proper to that particular of the controversy which we have in hand. The word “merit” is not found at all in the New Testament, nor in any translation of the original that I have seen. The vulgar Latin reads promeretur once, in Heb. 13:16; and the Rheimists, to preserve the sound, have rendered it “promerited.” But these words in both languages are uncouth and barbarous. Besides that, they do not in any way correspond to euaresteo (NT:2100), which is the word in the original. It gives no color to merit, whether by name or aspect.181 No, I suppose it will prove a difficult thing to find any one word, in either of the languages in which the holy Scripture was written, that properly and immediately signifies merit in its first native importance.

So we will not trouble ourselves about the name if what is intended by it is made apparent. And it is apparent in both the Old and New Testaments, such as Isa. 53:5, “The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.” The procurement of our peace and healing was the “merit” of his chastisement and stripes. So too in Heb. 9:12: “Obtaining eternal redemption by his blood.” This is as much as we intend to signify by the merit of Christ. The word which comes nearest in meaning is found in Acts 20:28, peripoieo (NT:4046), “Purchased with his own blood;” purchase and impetration, merit and acquisition, which are equivalent terms in this business. Peripoieo is used in a number of other passages, such as 1Thes. 5:9; Eph. 1:14; and 1Pet 2:9. Now, what we understand by this word is performing an action by which the thing aimed at by the agent is due him, according to the equity and equality required in justice. For example, “To the one who works, the reward is not reckoned of grace, but of debt,” Rom. 4:4. From what was said before, it is apparent that such a merit attends the death of Christ. The weight of laboriously proving it is not imposed on us by our adversaries, who seem to acknowledge it no less themselves. So we may take it for granted (until our adversaries close ranks with the Socinians in this as well).

Christ then, by his death, merited and purchased for all those for whom he died, all those things which the Scripture assigns to the fruits and effects of his death. These are the things purchased and merited by his blood-shedding and death. These may be grouped in two parts:

First, those which are privative182 such as,

Secondly, positive, such as,

By his death, our Savior has merited and purchased all these for all those for whom he died. That is, he has so procured them from his Father that, with regard to that merit, and according to the equity of justice, they ought to be bestowed on those for whom they were purchased and procured. It was absolutely of free grace that God would send Jesus Christ to die for anyone; it was of free grace for whom he would send him to die; it is of free grace that the good things procured by his death should be bestowed on any person. But considering his own appointment and constitution, it is of debt with regard to Jesus Christ that by his death he should merit and procure grace and glory for those for whom he died, and that these things be communicated to them. Now, what is thus merited, is to be bestowed out of debt. We do not say that it may be bestowed, but that it ought to be bestowed, and it is injustice if it is not.

Having said this little of the nature of merit, and of the merit of Christ, and of what his death procured for those in whose stead he died, it will quickly be apparent how irreconcilable general ransom is with these things. To demonstration this, we need only propose this one question, namely, “If Christ has merited grace and glory for all those for whom he died, and if he died for all, then how can it come to pass that these things are not communicated to and bestowed upon all?” Is the defect in the merit of Christ, or in the justice of God? How vain it is to say that these things are not bestowed upon us absolutely, but only upon condition. The very condition itself is also merited and procured, as Eph. 1:3-4,183 and Phil. 1:29,184 which has been already declared.
