The very phrases “dying for us,” “bearing our sins,” being our “surety,” and the like, by which the death of Christ for us is expressed, cannot be reconciled with the payment of a ransom for all. To die for another is, in Scripture, to die in that other’s stead so that he might go free. Judah begged his brother Joseph to accept him for a bondman instead of Benjamin so that Benjamin might be set free, Gen. 44:33. That was to make good the engagement in which he stood bound to his father to be a surety for Benjamin (Gen. 43:9). The one who is surety for another (as Christ was for us, Heb. 7:22), undergoes the danger so that the other may be delivered from it. So David, wishing that he had died for his son Absalom, 2Sam. 18:33, doubtless intended a commutation, substituting his life for Absalom’s so that he might have lived. Also in Rom. 5:7, Paul intimates the same thing, supposing that such a thing might be found among men, that one person should die for another. He was no doubt alluding to the Decii, Menoeceus, Euryalus, and such others, whom we find mentioned in the stories of the heathen. They voluntarily cast themselves into death to deliver their country or friends, thus allowing others to continue their liberty and life, which they were due to lose. Instead, they took the loss upon themselves, to whom it was not directly due. And this plainly is the meaning of that phrase, “Christ died for us.” That is, in undergoing death there was a subrogation of his person in the place and stead of ours.

Some, indeed, object that where the word huper (NT:5228 “for”) is used in this phrase, as in Heb. 2:9, “That by the grace of God he should taste death for every man,” only the good and profit of those for whom he died is intended. It does not require any commutation. But I see no reason why this exception should prevail, for the same preposition is used in the same way in other cases where it does confessedly intimate a commutation, such as Rom. 9:3. There Paul affirms that he “could wish himself accursed from Christ, for his brethren,” that is, in their stead so that they might be united to him. So also, 2Cor. 5:20, “We are ambassadors for Christ… in Christ’s stead.” In 1Cor. 1:13 he asks and strongly denies, “Was Paul crucified for you?” plainly showing that the word huper does argue a commutation or change. It refers to crucifying Christ for his church. Paul does not mean the good of those for whom he died, for plainly Paul might have been crucified for the good of the church. But instead of that, he abhors the least thought of it. But concerning the word anti, which is also used, there is no doubt or exception. It always signifies a commutation and change, whether it is applied to things or persons. Luke 11:11, “A serpent instead of a fish;” Matt. 5:38, “An eye for an eye;” Heb. 12:16, “for a morsel of meat”; and for persons, Archelaus is said to reign “instead of his father,” Matt. 2:22.

Now, this word is used of the death of our Savior, Matt. 20:28, “The Son of man came to give his life a ransom for many.” These words are repeated in Mark 10:45. That is, he gave his life a ransom in the stead of the lives of many. Plainly, Christ is dying for us as a surety (Heb. 7:22), and thereby he is “bearing our sins in his own body,” 1Pet. 2:24. He was being made a curse for us, and was undergoing death, punishment, curse, and wrath not only for our good, but directly in our stead. It is a commutation and subrogation of his person in our place, being allowed and accepted by God.

This being cleared, I demand,

First, did Christ die thus for all? That is, did he die in the stead of all so that his person was substituted in place of theirs? Did he die for Cain and Pharaoh and the rest who long before his death were under the power of the second death, never to be delivered?

Secondly, is it justice that any of those in whose stead Christ died, bearing their iniquities, should themselves also die and bear their own sins to eternity?

Thirdly, what rule or example of equity is there, when the surety has answered and made complete satisfaction of what was required in the obligation in which he was a surety, that those for whom he was a surety would afterwards be proceeded against?

Fourthly, did Christ hang upon the cross in the place of reprobates?

Fifthly, did he undergo all that was due to those for whom he died? If not, how could he be said to die in their stead? If so, why are they not all delivered?

I will only add this: to assert that Christ died for all men is the readiest way to prove that he died for no man, in the sense that Christians have believed he died for men till now. It rushes poor souls into the pit of Socinian blasphemies.185
