A second thing to be considered is the economy or administration of the new covenant in the times of the gospel. The kingdom and dominion of Christ are amplified and enlarged after his appearance in the flesh. All external differences are taken away, the name of Gentiles removed, the partition wall broken down, the promise to Abraham that he should be heir of the world, as he was father of the faithful, was now to be fully accomplished. Now, this administration is opposite to that dispensation which was restrained to one people and family, which was uniquely God’s. All the rest of the world had been excluded, and it did not comprehend all individuals. But the new covenant denotes a removal of all those restraining exceptions that were in force before. So considering the end to which these general expressions are used in Scripture, and what they aim at, will clearly manifest their nature, how they are to be understood, and who is intended and comprehended in them. For if what is meant by them is only this enlargement of the visible kingdom of Christ to all nations with regard to right, and to many with regard to fact, then it is evident that they refer only to a collection of men without any differences, and not a universal collection of everyone; the thing meant by them requires the one and not the other. God has elect in all those nations, produced in several generations, in which the means of grace are employed.

Hence, those objections that are made against the particularity of the ransom of Christ and restricting it only to the elect, and which are based on the terms “all”, “all men”, “all nations”, “the world”, “the whole world”, and the like, are all exceedingly weak and invalid. They twist the general expressions of the Scripture beyond their aim and intent. That is because these terms are being used by the Holy Ghost only to evidence the removal of all personal and national distinctions, breaking up all the narrow bounds of the Old Testament, enlarging the kingdom of Christ beyond the bounds of Jewry and Salem, abolishing all old restrictions, and opening a way for the elect among all people to come in (called “the fullness of the Gentiles”). There is now “neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ is all, and in all,” Col. 3:11.

Hence the Lord promises to “pour out his Spirit upon all flesh,” Joel 2:28. Peter interprets this to be accomplished by filling the apostles with the gifts of the Spirit, that they might be enabled to preach to several nations, Acts 2:17, “having received grace and apostleship for obedience to the faith among all nations” Rom. 1:5. This is not the Jews only, but some among all nations, “the gospel being the power of God unto salvation for everyone that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek,” verse 16. As to salvation, it intends only those specifically bought by Christ, which he “redeemed out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation,” Rev. 5:9. There you have a specific distribution of what is generally set down in other passages; the gospel is commanded to be preached to all these nations, Matt. 28:19, so that those bought and redeemed among them all might be brought home to God, John 11:52. And this is what the apostle so largely sets forth in Eph. 2:14-17.

Now, this is the sense, and no other, in which those many passages usually urged for universal grace and redemption are to be taken, as we have explained.
