There being no connection between man’s duty and God’s purpose, we must exactly distinguish between them. The purpose and decree of God is not the rule of our duty; nor is the performance of our duty to do what we are commanded, any declaration of what God’s purpose is, nor his decree as to what should be done. This is especially seen and considered in the duty of the ministers of the gospel to dispense the word, exhort, invite, give precepts and warnings, all of which has been committed to them. All of these are perpetual declarations of our duty, and they manifest the approval of the things exhorted and invited to, along with the truth of the connection between one thing and another. But these are not from the counsel and purpose of God with regard to individual persons in the ministry of the word. A minister is not to inquire after nor trouble himself about those secrets of the eternal mind of God; namely, whom he purposes to save, and whom in particular he has sent Christ to die for. It is enough for them to search out his revealed will, and from there take their directions, from which they have their commissions.

Therefore, there is no sequel between the universal precepts from the word concerning the things to be done, to God’s purpose in himself concerning specific persons. They command and invite all to repent and believe. But they do not know in particular on whom God will bestow repentance unto salvation, nor in whom he will effect the work of faith with power. And when they make proffers and tenders in the name of God to all, they do not say to all, “It is the purpose and intention of God that you should believe.” Who gave them any such power? It is his command that makes it their duty to do what is required of them. But they do not declare his mind, that is, what he will do in particular. The external offer is one from which every man may conclude his own duty; none may conclude God’s purpose, which yet may be known upon performing his duty. It is in vain to say that God has given Christ for all to whom he offers Christ in the preaching of the gospel. For his offer in the preaching of the gospel is not a declaration to anyone in particular either of what God has done for him, or will do in reference to him, but of what that individual ought to do if he wants to be approved by God, and obtain the good things that are promised. From this, it follows,

First, God always intends to save some among those to whom he sends the gospel in its power. Ministers of the gospel are unacquainted with God’s particular purpose; they are bound to seek the good of everyone; and they are to hope and judge well of all, as befits them. Thus, they may offer Jesus Christ to all, with the life and salvation that is in him, notwithstanding the fact that the Lord has given his Son only to his elect.

Secondly, this offer is neither vain nor fruitless. If it is performed as it ought to be, and as it is required, then it declares their duty, and what is acceptable to God. If anyone asks, “What is declared and made known of God’s mind and will when men for whom Christ did not die are commanded to believe?” I answer, first, they are commanding what ought to be done if someone would be acceptable to God; secondly, they are declaring the sufficiency of salvation that is in Jesus Christ for all who believe on him; thirdly, they are declaring the certain, infallible, inviolable connection between faith and salvation, so that whoever performs the one will surely enjoy the other; for whoever comes to Christ he will in no way cast out (Jn. 6:37).
