There was an ingrafted and erroneous persuasion of the Jews that restricted salvation and deliverance by the Messiah (or promised seed) to themselves alone. For awhile it had a strong influence on the apostles themselves, who were the offspring of Abraham according to the flesh. This must be considered the basis for many of the general expressions and expansions of the objects of redemption in Scripture. Yet, their presence gives no plausibility to unlimited universality. It is very apparent that the Jews were generally infected with this proud opinion, and that all the promises belonged only to them and theirs. These were universally theirs, exclusive of all those others whom they called “dogs, uncircumcised,” and on whom they poured out curses. Hence, when they saw the multitudes of Gentiles coming to the preaching of Paul, they were “filled with envy, contradicting, blaspheming, and stirring up persecution against them,” Acts 13:45-50. The apostle again speaks of these proud Jews in 1Thes. 2:15, 16. “They do not please God,” he says, “and are opposed to all men; forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they might be saved.” What most enraged them in the preaching of our Savior was his prediction of letting out his vineyard to others (Matt. 21:41).

It is apparent that the apostles themselves had deeply drunk in this opinion, learned by tradition from their fathers, not only in their questioning about the restoration of the kingdom to Israel, Acts 1:6, but it is also evident in their understanding of the Great Commission. They had received their commission to teach and baptize all nations, Matt. 28:19, and every creature, Mark 16:15, and they were endowed with power from above to do it, Acts 1:8. Yet they seem to have understood their commission to extend only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, for they went about preaching only to the Jews, Acts 11:19. When the contrary was evidenced and demonstrated to them, they glorified God, saying, “Then God has also granted repentance unto life to the Gentiles” Acts 11:18. They admired it as something they were not acquainted with before. And it is no wonder that men were not easily or soon persuaded of this, because it was the great mystery which was not made known in former ages. It was then revealed to God’s holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit: “That the Gentiles should be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in Christ by the gospel,” Eph. 3:5, 6.

Now, this being made known to them by the Spirit, and the time having come in which the little sister was to be considered (So 8:8), the prodigal brought home (Lk. 15:11+), and Japheth persuaded to dwell in the tents of Shem (Gen. 9:27), they labored by all means to root it out of the minds of their brethren according to the flesh,193 those for whom they especially cared. They also labored to leave no thought in the mind of the eunuch that he was a dry tree, nor in the mind of the Gentile that he was cut off from the people of God. To this end, they used various general expressions to directly rebut that former error which was absolutely destructive to the kingdom of Jesus Christ. Hence we find the terms “the world”, “all men”, “all nations”, “every creature”, and the like, used in the business of redemption and preaching the gospel. These things were not restricted to one certain nation and family (as was supposed), but they extended universally to God’s people scattered abroad in every region under heaven. This is especially true of those expressions used by John. He lived to see the first coming of the Lord in that fearful judgment and vengeance which he executed upon the Jewish nation some forty years after his death.194 He frequently asserts that Christ benefits the world in contrast to the Jewish nation, as I said before. He gives us a rule for understanding such phrases and locutions. John 11:51-52: “He signified that Jesus should die for that nation; and not for that nation only, but that he should also gather together into one the children of God that were scattered abroad.” To this end, he tells the believing Jews that Christ is not a propitiation for them only, “but for the sins of the whole world,” 1Jn. 2:2, or the people of God scattered throughout the whole world. It is not tied to any one nation, as they sometimes vainly imagined. And this shines much light on the sense and meaning of those passages where the words “world” and “all” are used in the business of redemption. They do not show a collective universality, but a general distribution to men of all sorts, in opposition to the erroneous persuasion recounted before.
