Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

Foreword

Nobody is better equipped to write about a marriage of equals than is my brother, Dennis L. Lythgoe. Not only does he live in one now, but he was also reared in one. I know because I was there.

Our parents—Leo and Lavinia Lythgoe—weren't perfect, and we knew it. We—Dennis, Tom, Gaye, and I—didn't mind, though, because we somehow understood that the love they showed us was firmly built on the love they shared with each other. Though they didn't talk much about equality in marriage, we daily witnessed the strength of their commitment to each other. They were victims of the Great Depression, and even sometimes of depression with a small d, but their Mormon pioneer blood urged them to "keep on keeping on."

Our father was a nurturing man who cooked breakfast, read to us, sat up in the night with us, let us ride on his hayrack, and taught us to work. He liked to laugh and tell stories about his early life on an alkali-covered farm in Wyoming. He was not afraid to cry or to let us see him cry. He never struck us. He didn't have to, because we were afraid to disappoint such a gentle man. He was a workaholic, not because he was driven, but because he was energetic and vital. He liked to serve—especially his family. No matter how late it was or how far away we were, he was ever ready to come for us, first in his '28 Chevrolet coupe and then in his truck. He was always ready to "doctor" us with his special remedy—hot towels, cold cloths, and oranges. Dad was as uncomplaining a nurse as any nurse or mother ever was. Finally he became Mother's nurse, on call day and night until she left us early this year. He sometimes hears her calling in the night. Now eighty-nine, he looks forward to joining her again to resume the romance that is their marriage.

Mother was a talented woman who counted the milestones of her life by the birthdays and accomplishments of her children and grandchildren. A historian at heart, she kept track of dates and places, both in the past and in the present. Her fifty-year diary records her delight in visits from family, neighbors, home teachers, and visiting teachers. Until the very moment of her passing, she was clear on the state of her family's health and on her family's whereabouts. Throughout her life she remembered them and countless others with the works of her hands—colorful paintings and handwork that she kept up until her sight was almost gone.

The most striking passages in her diary, however, are her references to her love for Dad—always in the same excited tones of her courtship days. In the last year of her life, she recorded: "Leo came to me and said 'I love you, Sweetheart! Oh, how I love you!' This was our fifty-third wedding anniversary, and we still love each other!"

Dennis is a lot like our father, and he has formed a marriage patterned after his father's. Marti Sorensen grew up in a similar marriage, just a few blocks away from us on 20th East in Salt Lake City. Her mother taught us in MIA; her father became our bishop. Because Dennis and Marti settled within a day's drive from me and my family, I have had the privilege of sharing in the exciting laboratory and the refuge that is their home. Dennis has our father's nurturing soul and our mother's romantic spirit. He cooks breakfast, reads to his children, takes them on rounds, teaches them to work. He shares the duties of parenthood equally with his talented schoolteacher wife. He also likes to laugh and tell stories about his early years on an acre of fruit trees and alfalfa in Salt Lake City. He is not afraid to cry and to share both his joys and his sorrows with his family.

In writing this book, Dennis has used his own marriage as a kind of Urim and Thummim to help him translate the languages of the many people who have sought his counsel. As a bishop, he has learned techniques that good bishops acquire through some miracle when the souls of a ward are given to them for safekeeping. In that role he was humble and seeking, calling on the advice of experts and the guidance of prayer and blessings. In many ways his style, both in life and in his writing, resembles that of a great teacher, bishop, and marriage counselor, Lowell L. Bennion. Brother Bennion taught the Lythgoe children at the Institute of Religion at the University of Utah where we went to school. We all tried to apply his principles to our own marriages. Dennis has used the same modest yet laserlike beam to prod others to good works and to write this book, a book that is offered in the spirit of giving and forgiving. It is a layman's voice that I believe will help others to build marriages like those of my parents and my brother.

Mary Lythgoe Bradford
