Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

Preface

I have profound faith in the value of a happy marriage. I am not presumptuous enough to consider myself an expert on either marriage or marriage counseling. I am merely a layman who has been blessed with a good marriage and has had the opportunity to glimpse into the lives of a variety of married couples. For almost six years I served as a bishop. In that capacity, a surprisingly large number of people approached me for advice about their marital problems. In all honesty, I tried to help, fully realizing my limitations. The cases I considered difficult I referred to qualified marriage counselors and social service agencies. I refrained from grappling with problems I knew nothing about or felt peculiarly unable to solve. I merely offered spiritual counsel and practical advice based on my own experience. Most Latter-day Saints seem to expect that much from their bishops.

In the process of counseling, I discovered two factors of importance: (1) Many problems that came to me were practical enough that I felt comfortable dealing with them and thought they were in the realm of a bishop's authority, provided I approached them carefully and prayerfully. (2) In spite of the plethora of marriage books on the market, none that I examined seemed to be the definitive, precise book to help me understand most of the problems I was meeting. Nor could I recommend one to the people who approached me.

I do not pretend to have written a definitive work on marriage; but because I have treated here many of the common problems that I witnessed, I hope the book is of value to a diverse group of married people who want their marriages to be happy and to endure.

I have chosen to draw on selected experiences both from my own marriage and from people I have known privately or during my tenure as bishop. Because some of them were being counseled on a confidential basis, I have purposely assigned them fictitious names. I do not regard the sum of these experiences as a balanced or unbiased picture of marriage. It may be that the people I have known are not representative of the larger population. For some problems, it may be that I have pointed the finger too much at one sex. But my experience has suggested to me concepts and ingredients that could help people throughout the Church to enjoy a happier, more fulfilling married life. It is in that spirit that I offer them to the reader. Finally, I would suggest that the title I have chosen serves as the underlying theme of every chapter. I really believe in a marriage of equals.
