Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

1

Commitment

When Marti and I were married in August, 1965, in the Salt Lake Temple, Marion D. Hanks officiated. After giving us some thoughtful advice about relationships with in-laws, he settled his gaze on me. I was a bundle of nerves, and my stiff appearance obviously disturbed him. "I'd feel much better if you'd hold her hand. You'll have many opportunities to cherish that privilege—under the table at dinner, and a lot of other places."

While we were holding hands, he gave us eloquent instructions about fidelity in marriage. "Be faithful to each other. The little flirtations that might have been all right before marriage are out of place now. Be completely loyal and true to each other."

Carlfred Broderick, noted marriage counselor, has echoed the importance of fidelity from a professional viewpoint. He says, "I am impressed with the genuineness of the pain involved in marital boredom. But I am more impressed with the pain, the mistrust, the hurt, the shame, the guilt and the feeling of being torn apart which are nearly always associated with the discovery of infidelity. There is no more distressing and divisive event in the relationship between a man and a woman than the disclosure that one partner has betrayed the trust of the other." (Couples, p. 158.)

In a forceful 1952 General Conference address, Elder Matthew Cowley chose as his theme the symbol of clasped hands over the long narrow window on the east and west ends of the Salt Lake Temple. As a couple kneel over the altar at the temple, they clasp hands as they pledge eternal fidelity. Speaking of his own wife, Elder Cowley said, "I thank God for a hand which will always reach out and grasp mine." He remembered a man who was incapacitated, who could not move his limbs, but whose wife held his hand "in a grasp as strong as life itself." Elder Cowley continued, "The clasp of the hand, brothers and sisters—it has meaning! And when you are away from one another, if you don't feel a spiritual clasp stronger than the physical clasp, rush back to one another as quickly as you can." (Matthew Cowley Speaks, pp. 11-15.)

Over the years the clasp of the hand has remained a strong symbol for me. In a relationship the language of holding hands provides a zest not available through words alone. I have noticed that to some people the clasp of the hands means nothing, symbolic perhaps of society's lack of commitment to the marriage relationship.

Elder Marvin J. Ashton once told the story of a five-year-old boy who fell out of bed during the night and came crying to his mother. She asked why he fell out of bed, and he replied, "I fell out because I wasn't in far enough." Elder Ashton's example could be aptly applied to marriage, implying that those who fall out of marriage may not have been in far enough. As Elder Ashton said, "the word is commitment." (Ensign, November 1983, pp. 61-63.)

Today a man and a woman who fall in love often assume that they will not be faithful. Instead of getting married, they live together with the understanding that their relationship can be ended quickly and easily if either decides to bail out. They may live together to test their relationship—to see if they love each other enough to take the more legally binding step of marriage. Experimental relationships do not engender loyalty. To protect the magic of love, a couple need both to make a decision to be loyal to each other and to promise to make their union work.

As a bishop, I tried in several different meetings to persuade one young couple that a sexual relationship prior to marriage was wrong. Accepting the arguments of the world, Vickie and Keith were convinced that marriage itself was of little importance. They said they loved each other, but considered it inconsequential whether their love was expressed in or out of marriage.

First, I argued that the Lord had forbidden them to engage in a sexual relationship outside of marriage, and I referred to modern scripture to support the point. Then I suggested some of the practical reasons that I thought the Lord had given the commandment: a covenant or promise to be faithful to each other would inspire confidence and increase love and respect, whereas living together without marriage would encourage promiscuity and lack of commitment; a conscious, careful decision to make the union work would create a greater likelihood of success; sexual relations are a natural and exciting capstone to a sincere love that has been well grounded and demonstrated in other ways, but sexual experimentation is dangerous and unnecessary to determine sexual compatibility; sexual compatibility is only one facet of a successful union.

They had a very difficult time understanding those reasons as opposed to the points of view of the world. Finally, more in a spirit of cooperation than of conviction, they agreed to repent of their sexual indiscretion. Over the next several months as they planned for marriage, Vickie and Keith realized the validity of the goal they were pursuing. It was as if living righteously opened their minds and hearts to the truth. They began their marriage in total commitment to each other and to the Church.

On the other hand, another young woman, Helen, was so caught up in contemporary society's idea that living together without marriage is perfectly acceptable that she chose to sever her relationship with the Church rather than give up her life-style. She genuinely liked the convenience of just living together and cynically considered marriage to be a false facade of commitment.

Some young people have difficulty with the concept of marriage because of the way it is practiced around them. They have observed in their parents and friends a lack of commitment that appears to be the norm. They have known married couples who fail to keep each other's confidences. When intimate stories about life and love are shared with friends or relatives, the sense of loyalty is shattered and the intimacies lose some of their value. Intimate acts and words shared with others often come back to haunt the teller, usually in embarrassing situations.

Even if the stories are told in a humorous vein, they are not usually regarded that way by the persons involved. Loyalty is not demonstrated by joking in public about each other's personal habits or actions. Consider the husband who publicly recounts his wife's recent auto accident in the supermarket parking lot, told with gusto, exaggeration, and comic flair. Or consider the wife who disgustedly describes a recent romantic encounter in which her husband is portrayed as love starved and awkward.

The immediate effect for the person who is the butt of the story is a feeling of rejection and betrayal by the person he or she loves most. Betrayal can bring extraordinary soul-searching and terrible feelings of depression often leading to separation. If people believe themselves to have been ridiculed in public by their mates, they are usually left with deep-seated bitterness and continuing antagonism.

I have known several couples who have struggled with such a problem. Ted and Audrey had every promise of a durable, energetic relationship. They were both highly intelligent, witty, and ambitious. They had a very high regard for each other and always tended to speak of the other reverentially in absentia. But when they were together in public in a variety of situations, they would resort to arguing about petty matters. Each would become so angry that the climax would be a shouting match. Nothing is more uncomfortable for a friend under those conditions than to awkwardly wait for a resolution.

Audrey and Ted were converts to the Church. Marti and I accompanied them when they traveled to the Salt Lake Temple to have their marriage sealed for eternity. During the trip we often wondered if they were doing the right thing. They bickered loudly on several occasions prior to the day of the ceremony, saying unkind things to each other.

Throughout their marriage, they often quarreled about politics and economics, matters far removed from their day-to-day relationship, and they invariably ended up insulting each other. Some of their arguments were actually amusing. They often bickered about whether his work was secure enough for their long-term needs. Finally he agreed to give up his career and go to work for a small business. They moved to another state to be near her parents, and it was there that their marriage dissolved.

As well suited as they seemed for each other in background, intelligence, and interests, they could not overcome the conflict arising from their basic disrespect for each other. They matched wits endlessly, and their commitment faded as they advertised their problems to their friends. Had they realized that they were destroying each other's personal image in front of their peers, a marriage of real worth might have been salvaged.

Eleanor and Larry continually berated each other for years. Early in their marriage they achieved notable wealth, which allowed them a luxurious life-style. Unfortunately, Larry brooded over the most nonessential parts of life and blamed everything on Eleanor.

He would come home from work exhausted after a high-pressure day in high finance and immediately find things at home that irritated him. One day, as he drove into the garage, he noticed that the lawn mower was missing. Once inside, he asked Eleanor where it was. When she told him that she allowed a neighbor to borrow it, he exploded, insisting that he had carefully warned her never, under any circumstances, to loan the lawn mower to anyone! Unlike Audrey and Ted, the overt anger was one-sided. Eleanor cowered before Larry's anger. She was incapable of screaming anger herself and quietly waited for his to subside. Her passivity made him even more furious.

Later, they took the car for an errand, and he exploded again when he examined the fuel gauge and found it almost empty. He had left it with her and asked her pointedly to take it to a service station during the day and fill it. He was unable to believe or accept the fact that she had failed him in such a "simple request." He screamed for several minutes, in the process remembering old hurts, which he dredged up even though they had nothing to do with the current problem.

This was the predictable life-style of a couple with a volatile spouse—one berating, the other submitting, almost continually. Periodically, Eleanor cracked under the strain and called me up or came to see me, her eyes fogged over with tears. The three of us had many long discussions about his tendency to berate and belittle her. Logically we were able to sort out the reasons why it was a destructive process that would keep them from ultimate marital happiness. In conversation, Larry seemed to realize that he would have to extend the same courtesy to Eleanor that he extended to his business associates. He admitted to being overwrought about many tiny matters that were of no importance next to his marriage. Several times he agreed to harness his anger and recommit himself to her happiness and well-being, but each time he ended in the same repetitious, belittling temper tantrums that finally destroyed their love for each other. This uncertain union simply could not endure under Larry's constant frustrating lapses of human decency and commitment.

Louise and Philip had a different but equally important problem. Philip was so completely immersed in his work, which he considered all important, that he had no time for work in the home. He refused to expend energy to accomplish the simplest task, often insisting that his young children bring him desired objects so that he could remain in his chair. When Louise complained that she was overcome by the workload in their cavernous home, he told her that she could hire a housekeeper. Although she finally agreed to use one on a part-time basis, she was frustrated and angry by what she regarded as his refusal to be involved in activities that were important to both of them. In a very real sense, she felt rejected. Commitment to each other involves helping each other in a variety of ways. A husband who will not devote some attention to household tasks invariably offends his wife, who interprets his decision as arrogance or as a desire to leave all the unsavory work to her.

We are all capable of appreciating other people of both sexes without falling romantically in love with them. Friendships between men and women before marriage can help promote healthy relationships later between husbands and wives. After marriage, strangely enough, many men and and women avoid any interaction with the opposite sex except in official church capacities. This sometimes results in increased awkwardness and lack of empathy between the sexes. It is much more desirable for us to learn to establish a variety of friendships without the threat of sexual or romantic involvement.

At the same time, it is vital that the sexual relationship be reserved for marriage. According to one recent survey, 30% of men and 22% of women have had at least one extramarital experience. (Phillip Blumstein and Pepper Schwartz, American Couples: Money, Work, and Sex, p. 274.) George and Celia had been growing more distant from one another for several months. When they came to me to talk, it was at Celia's insistence. She was feeling anger and resentment toward him because he was showing her steadily less attention. When confronted with her feelings, he seemed shocked and professed the same love for her as he had always felt.

When I talked with George alone, however, I learned something important. While Celia was at home caring for their two little children, he was exhibiting increasing interest in the younger women he encountered at school where he was pursuing an advanced degree. Although he had never considered a sexual relationship with any of these young women, he definitely had a roving eye. He was impressed with some women whom he considered to be more attractive than his wife, and he engaged in flirtations with them. George was not an outgoing man who sought healthy nonsexual relationships with a variety of people; he was attracted by the romantic situations and responded to them the way he did before he was married.

Clearly George was on a collision course that was destined to threaten his marriage. His intentions to improve his marriage, however, were sincere. When, through counseling, I explained his wife's feelings to him along with his own feelings toward the opposite sex, he reacted positively. He began to change his habits and attitudes and to spend his nonstudying time with his wife and family instead of with single women. He had regarded his flirtations as harmless friendships that presented no threat to his marriage while his wife had been practicing absolute fidelity. Gradually their marriage improved and disaster was averted, proving that sexual fidelity must remain the foundation of marital commitment. Moreover, counseling and sound communication can help many couples understand that commitment.

Quinn was a happily married man who had occasion through his work to meet Eileen, an inactive Mormon. They struck up a friendship and sometimes talked about their interests and problems. Eileen eventually developed enough confidence in Quinn to confide in him some of her feelings about the Church. She explained to him how she had become inactive and some of the spiritual problems she had encountered since joining the Church several years earlier. During some later discussions, Quinn tried to help Eileen work out her problems. Finally, she became convinced that she should return to the Church. Quinn encouraged her to do so, introduced her to his wife, and they all became close friends. Soon Eileen was spending considerable time with Quinn's wife, Marcia. The friendship continued without any threat whatsoever of sexual involvement. Quinn and Eileen admired one another as close friends, without any romantic implications. All of us could become more empathetic by having good nonromantic friendships with members of the opposite sex, making sure, however, that the parameters of those friendships are clearly defined and adhered to.

Commitment is especially important when people grow older and begin to change. Most people develop new interests, change professions, adapt to older children or children leaving home, return to school, or in other ways redirect their lives. If the couple has not been spending time together and devoting themselves to each other primarily, the marriage may be threatened.

Flexibility to adapt to new conditions can help a couple through these changes. Julie and Wade's marriage changed totally after their children reached the teenage years. Julie achieved a lifelong dream of returning to school, spending almost four years finishing a college degree, then obtained a teaching position in the local school system. The process changed many of her attitudes and interests, which became a considerable burden on Wade, who was accustomed to the stereotype of being sole breadwinner in a home where the wife was a typical homemaker.

Actually, their marriage had never been ideal, and they had always had great difficulty communicating their needs. With Julie's education and newly acquired job, she developed new self-confidence. Wade reacted defensively, withdrawing further into himself. He not only remained outside the realm of her new accomplishments, he took the opposite direction and took early retirement from his job. Instead of reeducating himself or looking for a new professional interest, he puttered aimlessly around the house. He seemed to be gravitating backward while she was at her peak of accomplishment. Almost inevitably the marriage dissolved, leaving Wade a very unhappy man indeed. He had lacked flexibility at the time of his life when he needed it most, and he had taken Julie for granted.

Stan and Catherine had a different problem. Stan was a long-time professional person with conservative attitudes and friendships. In the early part of their marriage, Catherine shared most of those. But the women's movement inspired her to develop her own interests, resulting in a business of her own and even frequent local television appearances, giving her a new image and visibility as well as increased self-confidence.

Although Stan loved her and admired her accomplishments, his own security and self-confidence suffered. He felt as though she had taken over much of the leadership and drive in the family. Finally, this conservative, formerly predictable man of fifty-three had an affair with a much younger woman. In the aftermath, he came close to losing not only his wife but his church and everything he valued. She offered him love and support as he struggled to achieve his former self-assurance and to recapture the formerly devoted relationship they had enjoyed.

In some ways, this story is familiar: middle-aged man suffering from midlife crisis has affair with younger, more attractive woman in an effort to prove that he is still young and attractive. But there is another dimension to the story—Stan's inability to accept and appreciate Catherine's changing interests and to support her in cultivating them.

Another familiar story is that of the husband with a history of alcoholism who tests his wife's endurance to the limit. Mel and Amy's commitment to each other has allowed them to overcome serious problems, among them Mel's frequent temptations to drink during crises. In each case, his personality changed because of the effect of alcohol, the children were shocked, and Amy suffered depression. But she believed strongly in the marriage. She remained understanding but firm in her desire that he overcome this serious problem. She sought counseling and then did everything possible to provide encouragement for him and constant reassurances of her love and support. It worked. Although initially angry with her over her attempts to get help from Church leaders and professionals, Mel was realistic enough to realize that she was right and to be impressed with her commitment to their marriage and to him.

Alice and Brian had a similar problem, but in this case Alice was the alcoholic, who gradually had taken refuge in a make-believe world that was costing her her health and her husband's love. Brian never knew when he came home from work if Alice would be rational enough to carry on a conversation. Often she was not even home and had left their small children on their own. Brian endured tremendous mental suffering as he tried in vain to convince her that alcohol was ruining their life together. After years of struggle, he was finally able to convince her to be institutionalized for a long enough period to "dry out." Unfortunately, by this time he had developed serious doubts that he still loved her. Her disappearances, her screaming, and her acts of violence had taken their toll on their precarious relationship.

President Spencer W. Kimball made this memorable statement about adjustment in marriage:

Two people coming from different backgrounds soon learn after the ceremony is performed that stark reality must be faced. There is no longer a life of fantasy or of make-believe; we must come out of the clouds and put our feet firmly on the earth. Responsibility must be assumed and new duties must be accepted. Some personal freedoms must be relinquished and many adjustments, unselfish adjustments, must be made.

One comes to realize very soon after marriage that the spouse has weaknesses not previously revealed or discovered. The virtues that were constantly magnified during courtship now grow relatively smaller, and the weaknesses that seemed so small and insignificant during courtship now grow to sizeable proportions. The hour has come for understanding hearts, for self-appraisal, and for good common sense, reasoning, and planning. (Marriage & Divorce, pp. 12-13.)

Marti and I have changed a great deal in our nineteen years of marriage, but because we have continued to communicate regularly about the matters we care most about, we have managed to grow together and to accommodate change. We remain committed to each other and to a marriage we want to endure eternally, but we know that there is no guarantee. We will have to work at it every day, and so must every other married couple. The clasp of the hand has meaning. It is symbolic of an underlying commitment and determination to stick by each other in the midst of crisis and change.
