Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

2

Communication

Silence. For a young unmarried couple immersed in dating, silence can be deadly. There is a constant need to say something interesting, to keep the conversation going, to fill in the gaps. A person facing silence in dating usually decides that the other person is wrong for him or her or that dating is just very difficult. Every married person remembers the delicious discovery that often follows falling in love—that two people who love each other and enjoy being together can accept or even enjoy periods of silence together. Because they are comfortable with each other, they need not struggle to keep a constant patter going. This is one of the most interesting signs of a maturing relationship.

Nevertheless, a couple in the first year of marriage usually finds a great many things to talk about. They are, after all, planning their future. So they discuss children, professional concerns, houses, friends, and a host of other common interests. But many couples find that as they progress in their marriage they talk less and less. Professional and community activities and Church callings often interrupt conversation. The phone rings for a variety of reasons, and one person stays on it too long. Most familiar is the little child who constantly interrupts, firing questions at parents. Couples invariably tire of beginning again where they left off. Often couples will go to bed exhausted, with no desire to resume conversation. As families increase in size, there are more fires to put out and the problem is further complicated.

Regular conversation in an honest effort to communicate and empathize is one of marriage's most important challenges. Every couple face pressures and interruptions but should be determined to protect their talking time. Some of the best talks any couple can have are over dinner at a restaurant away from regular pressures. Many people do some of their best planning in that favorable environment. Others profit greatly from "pillow talk," the conversation after retiring that sometimes extends late into the night. Some people with flexible work schedules and children in school have good talks over lunch at home. Sunday afternoons or evenings can be very productive for planning and problem-solving. Some couples talk Sunday evenings about the major plans for the week, try to work out any schedule conflicts, and assign responsibility for key events.

My mother kept numerous journals of her life. My favorite is her 1928 diary in which she recorded her numerous rides to work in Salt Lake City on the streetcar and her many rides with Dad in his new 1928 Chevrolet coupe. All through my growing years I remember my mother's continuing fondness for going for rides as a way of releasing pressures, soothing nerves, and making good conversation possible. This may be one of the reasons that my parents had a durable, happy marriage.

People often allow the fast pace of their lives to rob them of this invaluable means of communicating and growing together. It takes work and planning to keep conversation alive in a marriage. There are practical reasons to communicate: for instance, both persons need to know what is going on. Bill and Norma suffered through much of their married life from communication gaps. They never planned together or discussed regularly the week's activities. Usually, they found themselves in a crisis, and then they would discuss it with elevated blood pressure and approaching panic. The result for Norma was hurt feelings, frustration, and deepening depression. Bill simply never thought about talking. He intended no malice. He had just never been in the habit of planning. He was forever throwing surprises in Norma's way—bringing home unannounced a fellow worker to dinner, going to a meeting after dinner when Norma had an engagement, working late without informing her. Not surprisingly, she took it all personally. She assumed that his thoughtlessness was a signal of his apathy or even hostility toward her, and so she purposely avoided discussing it with him.

When I talked to them, crisis was flirting with disaster. She announced that she intended to leave him and end the marriage. He appeared shocked and hurt. I suggested some simple techniques: that he carry an appointment book constantly and religiously write down every appointment and event in his life, and that they set a regular weekly time to discuss those appointments. She agreed to remind him to take the book in the mornings and to keep writing in it in the evenings until he became accustomed to it. He agreed to try not to get angry when she reminded him.

Bill was in the habit of making decisions on his own. He had not seen marriage as a constant give-and-take, and so our discussion of the need to change his style helped him. In the ensuing weeks, there was noticeable improvement in their relationship, but they had some setbacks. The process worked well for two or three weeks, and then reverted to the same old pattern. We agreed to meet weekly so they would know that there was an outside check on their communication—and it worked. Their marriage has taken on new vitality, and they have increased their respect for each other.

Many couples suffer from lack of communication because of a cultural belief that the husband should make the decisions and announce them to the wife. In some cases, he does not even announce them—he just proceeds with life and assumes that she understands. He has grown up with the traditional idea of woman as homemaker, mother, companion, but not an equal to consult with regularly. Actually, many husbands would probably give up or share this responsibility, but they have not considered the possibility. For years Jeff kept all financial problems and decisions to himself, causing him to become worried and depressed. Nedra had no knowledge of his worries, and so she had a difficult time offering comfort. Instead, she developed feelings of hostility toward him. When they finally decided to talk about their finances openly and regularly, he felt remarkably unburdened and liberated.

Jim and Susan were not so fortunate. Jim was significantly older than Susan, which probably added to his tendency to make all decisions and to talk to her about nothing. She took it silently for the first several years of their marriage but increasingly resented it. Then one day she made her own decision—to end the marriage. When she announced it, he was astounded. Because they had never really talked, he had no idea that she had been suffering. He resolved to change his ways, but it was too late for her. So much hostility had developed inside her that it had effectively killed the relationship.

Church leaders themselves are vulnerable to communication problems too. A bishop or stake president becomes accustomed to long hours away from home, making confidential decisions, and being perceived by Church members as an authority figure. When he talks to members about matters that must be kept confidential, he is unable to share these with his wife. His wife may resent the long hours he spends away from her, as well as his secrecy. He might develop a secretive style of living his own life. He may fail to tell his wife even those little details that she must know to function effectively as his wife.

Lorraine was a former bishop's wife. Although Don, her husband, had been released, he was highly secretive, very authoritarian, and disinterested in conversation with her. When she threatened him with divorce and left the state to stay with relatives, he became responsive. But when they reconciled, he soon lapsed back into his former behavior. The habits had become so deeply entrenched that it had become very difficult for him to change. Yet if he fails to realistically address this problem and develop a more intimate, satisfying relationship with his wife, his marriage may not survive.

Ironically, some people communicate more with Church leaders than they do with each other. There is an important difference between seeking advice and actually using a Church leader as a pawn, an authority figure expected to fix the marriage. Sam was becoming steadily more disenchanted with Jean, who was very busy with their children. They had both gained weight since they got married, and her weight bothered him greatly. He spoke candidly about it to me. She was no longer attractive to him. I had already observed that he was exhibiting an unhealthy interest in several women who were slimmer and more physically attractive than Jean. Sam found that he enjoyed traveling in his work more than he used to because he wanted to escape from the unpleasant home situation. I worried that his times away could result in infidelity.

I asked him if he had discussed his wife's weight with her. Incredibly, he had mentioned it only obliquely, and apparently she had no notion of its importance to him. I talked to him about the importance of communication, and then made a specific suggestion. He should propose to Jean that they both diet together to recapture the figures of their courtship. In doing so she might find him more attractive, and the result could energize their marriage. If he agreed to do so, he would have a better chance of solving the problem without offending her. He willingly accepted the challenge, and their relationship began to improve as they counted calories together.

Harriet outlined her husband's long unhappy employment history. She had been less than candid in telling Mike of her feelings, but she was pouring them out to me. She was angry with some of his employers too, but she was deeply disappointed in Mike's seeming inability to develop a stable, productive career. When I suggested that we talk about it with him, she became alarmed. She seemed to want to get the problem off her chest but had not seriously considered discussing it with Mike. Finally, she relented. When I talked with him, I discovered, not surprisingly, that his perceptions of his employment history were far different from hers. In his mind their problems were not nearly so serious. Mike was, it seemed, much more self-confident and competent than she had thought. We talked about it extensively, then brought Harriet into the conversations. When we all sat down together, there seemed to be some new understandings as the communication lines opened. Each expressed thoughts that they had never expressed privately. They enthusiastically agreed to be more open with each other in the future and to regularly converse about their fears and aspirations. Since then there has been a noticeable improvement in their marriage, their employment, and their life-style. She has gained greater faith in his abilities, and he has become more trusting in her.

Dwight and Diane were the most tragic example of failing to communicate that I have encountered. Diane had grown up in the East, was a convert to the Church, and had met Dwight, a Westerner and life-time Mormon, while they were attending school at Brigham Young University. Dwight had led a relatively sheltered life and was a quiet, conservative person. Diane was a very social, outgoing young woman but unsure of her potential career interest. Her college career lacked direction. When they married, she decided to live mostly for him, working to put him through school. For a while, they continued to have some social life, occasionally inviting other couples to double date and to have dinner. But they saw increasingly less of each other because she worked and he studied. Eventually they stopped communicating daily about most matters in their life. Yet they were both changing in many ways. He was becoming more serious and directed toward his career, and she was becoming disenchanted with the Utah culture and with child rearing; she began mapping out her own career options.

Diane became convinced that their Utah friends were snobs with different values from hers, but she failed to convey this to Dwight. Correspondingly, she was becoming critical of the Church. When Dwight finished his degree, Diane informed him that she intended to return to the East to live with the children. She said that she wanted a divorce. He was devastated. He was deeply in love with her and regarded her as his eternal companion. He was so dedicated to the Church that he had not even considered divorce as a remote possibility in his life. As they finally began to communicate, it became evident that she had become a different person during their years in school, and he had failed to recognize it.

Dwight prevailed on her to give the relationship more time, and she agreed half-heartedly that if she could go to Massachusetts, they could stay together. Once back in Massachusetts she enrolled in college with an eye on a professional career. He picked up a job in his field and spent time with the children while she was in school. There were predictable strains in the marriage, and her life in the world took her even farther afield from him. Soon she began to date other men and told Dwight that she no longer loved him. He sank into severe depression.

I spent long hours with both of them, individually and together, and referred them to a marriage counselor. No matter how much we all tried, it seemed apparent that this marriage was unlikely to be saved. Her values were probably somewhat different from his when they had married, but the disparity had increased. The undeniable fact that they had allowed the first crucial years of their marriage to go by without effective communication damaged the relationship. Finally he accepted her desires, and a divorce was granted. The adjustment of their lives and the impact on their young children was very severe.

Some people are simply not as talkative as others. When a very talkative person marries a quiet person, communication becomes especially challenging. John and Mary have had difficulties in their marriage because she is extremely talkative, one of those rare people who thinks so rapidly that she can hardly keep the words coming fast enough to deal with daily conversation. Words come to Mary easily, and if she becomes nervous, she talks even faster. Her friends find this an endearing quality. Anyone who worries about what to say in a given situation loves her. In contrast, John is by nature shy and chooses his words carefully and deliberately. He would rather be silent than say something that should have never been said.

Although they love each other deeply, they are constantly frustrated by each other's habits. She worries that she cannot get him to talk. When they discuss an issue together, she often takes the lead; yet when the conversation is over, she is unsure about his feelings or opinions. He finds her rapid-fire style intimidating, and he talks less around her than is his normal inclination. Since words come more slowly to him, he often relinquishes the right to speak altogether, especially when he and Mary are in a group. As a result, she is forever trying to find out what he is thinking; or she is presumptuously explaining their plans to a friend when in fact they have never been worked out together.

Their challenge in communication is great, but it seems important that he assert himself in expressing his feelings and thoughts to her regularly and that she exercise patience and long-suffering. Otherwise, the marriage is bound to be dominated by her loquacious style. It is doubtful that either of these personalities will change markedly. They love each other and were in part attracted to each other because of their differences.

Marva and Charles have been generally happily married for many years. By nature she is outgoing and talkative, while he is inward and quiet. Because their children are grown, they are having new opportunities to spend time together. Marva has looked forward to these times to talk and be together that were denied them when their children were young. She came to me to explain her disappointment that Charles will not talk. She wants to discuss issues and ideas, and he insists on the mundane. I encouraged them to work more at their relationship, pointing out that many couples have to readjust after the children leave. I suggested that they plan many activities together that will produce a relaxing atmosphere allowing them to talk.

After a few weeks of following this advice, she came back to me bewildered. "I talk and I talk, and he just sits there. He talks about the weather!" This relationship will be hard to change. They are older now and have established their life's patterns. Charles is by nature a quiet, gentle man. He loves her greatly, enjoys spending time with her, and is satisfied with their conversation. I suggested that he work a little harder at talking to Marva, and that she be a little less insistent and a little more satisfied with the loving, caring husband she has. Not only have they not cultivated communication until very late in life, but her personality is vastly different than his. If she persists in her determined effort to transform him, she may cause him to feel frustrated and hostile toward her.

Some married people talk with each other mostly when they are angry. They argue and bicker, sometimes in public places. This is not communication and is often destructive to a marriage. People who bicker are usually guilty of exaggeration of their problems. Communication must take into account the feelings of both people. It must be thoughtful, gentle, and careful, and yet candid and regular. A person who nurses a grudge for six weeks and then gets it off his chest to his partner will probably end up with a quarrel. If a couple regularly communicates, the sensitive issues can be more easily addressed.

A couple should commit themselves to doing a great many things together. Instead of announcing plans, each should discuss them with the other and work them out together. Even if you assume that your partner will agree, you will be better off not to take it for granted. Consult your partner first, then make the decision a joint one. When you discuss important matters, ask leading questions such as "Why do you feel this way?" and "What do you think we should do?"

Any relationship can be threatened by a hidden agenda. If your partner hears accidentally of a decision you made secretly six weeks earlier, he or she will be hurt, left out, frustrated, angry, and more inclined to treat you the same way. The resulting lack in trust can drive you apart. If you feel insecure enough about a decision that you want to bypass your partner, then the decision is probably ill advised. Every decision bears scrutiny and profits from careful consideration by two minds.

A few years ago, Marti and I carefully considered an unusual professional opportunity. The Deseret News, for whom I had written free-lance articles, offered me an opportunity to work full-time during the summer. For financial reasons, it seemed clear that if I did, Marti and the family would have to remain in Massachusetts. We questioned whether the family sacrifice would be so great as to make it unwise for me to spend that time in Utah. It was a temporary assignment and did not involve moving our family permanently. Marti and I made a list together of possible pros and cons and discussed them at length. Although I was hesitant to leave her on her own, she was excited about the possibilities the job offered to me. She mentioned my love of writing and thought I would find it exciting to mix with different people and to experiment with journalism full-time. She argued that time would go quickly and that we would be reunited afterward with my broadened experience and opportunities. I had to admit that I thought it was one of those opportunities that come to all of us when we say, "If we don't do this now, we may regret it later." Feeling that the initial signs were positive, we prayed about it, discussed it with our children, and finally decided to do it.

It was not an easy experience. I flew to Utah at the start of the national air controllers strike, and we had huge delays and a near-miss landing in Denver. I missed my connection, waited several hours in Denver, then caught a "red-eye" special into Salt Lake City, only to find that my luggage was still in Denver. My first day at the newspaper was frightening. I had to adjust to a different professional life without my family. But by the time I had worked for two or three days, I had caught the spirit and loved it. When I returned, my family was secure, although Marti was exhausted. Later, the newspaper offered me a regular column. The experience was invigorating to my professional life; yet it had been a risk that Marti and I had had to carefully evaluate. She was wonderfully supportive, and we were happy about it as a family; but if I had just decided to announce unceremoniously the project without any discussion, it could have been a bust.

Communicating with your partner goes beyond making plans and consulting about decisions. Regular discussion can cause two people to blend—not because they are identical personalities, but because they are working at communication in an honest effort to fill each other's needs. A couple's individual knowledge and interests should be complementary as they continue to learn from each other. Marriage is a meeting of the minds.
