Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

3

Romance

Happily married couples work regularly at cultivating the little romantic nuances they loved when they were dating. It may be something as simple as a telephone call to carry on a whimsical conversation. Sensitive conversations may take place on the telephone. When you are traveling away from home, a telephone conversation with your spouse can provide an exciting lift. Joe was left with the burden of the home and family chores while Karen attended a family wedding out of state. He received three romantic telephone calls from her during the week away, producing enough excitement to boost his morale. Instead of being jealous of her trip, he found himself anxious for its success and for her happiness.

Many people who live a great distance from friends and family find that telephone calls make satisfying gifts. When you haven't seen a loved one for a long time, there is no substitute for a good conversation. Verbal expressions of love are a tonic for both women and men. President David O. McKay used to tell the story of the Scotsman who was saddened by the passing of his wife and said, "I loved her very much—I almost told her once." Most of us need to practice telling each other of our love much more than we do.

Some of the most happily married couples I have known have felt a desire to express their love for each other every day. Some of them have said they express their love for each other every night before going to sleep and again every morning when they wake up. Differences in personality make such a practice uncomfortable or unnatural for some people, but all couples need to work at expressing their love often. Many of the activities of everyday life become mundane, but love between husband and wife cannot become mundane and remain viable. Everyone who loves someone else enjoys hearing that person express love. It is a simple but necessary way of feeding the marriage.

Another is the sincere compliment. In Camelot King Arthur said: "Proposition: If I could choose, from every woman who breathes on this earth, the face I would most love, the smile, the touch, the voice, the heart, the laugh, the soul itself, every detail and feature to the smallest strand of hair—they would all be Jenny's." (Alan Lerner, Camelot, p. 69.) Psychologists assert that women enjoy being told they are beautiful and that men enjoy being told they are handsome, especially by their mates. Admittedly, every husband does not consider his wife to be the world's most beautiful woman, and vice versa. On the other hand, a man sincerely in love is apt to consider his wife more beautiful than the rest of the world does.

Dick, married for many years and with teenaged children, claims that he still catches his breath when Jennifer emerges ready for an evening out looking radiant, and he can't resist telling her. Moreover, he is anxious for her to repay the compliment. If she says something simple, such as "I really like you in that suit," or "You smell good—what is that cologne?" he feels energized, even buoyant. We all need compliments to feed our self-esteem, but there is an even greater need to receive them from the one you love. Such compliments inspire people to try to stay physically attractive for their mates. If a man enjoys having his wife remain trim and attractive, he should be willing to work at keeping trim himself, and will be more willing to do so if his wife compliments his appearance.

Compliments about accomplishment serve an equally important purpose. When a person lands an important contract, makes an important sale, writes a well-received article, receives a promotion, or receives some other professional accolade, the compliment from the spouse is what means the most. The same person may also appreciate a compliment about the quality of his or her chocolate chip cookies, a good family night lesson, or especially effective play with the children. A compliment on the performance of a Church calling is equally important in maintaining romance in marriage.

Jane was asked to plan and direct a short sing-along following a Hawaiian luau at our ward. In spite of the fact that it was a last-minute invitation, she applied her most creative abilities to the task. Instead of passing out mimeographed song sheets so that the people in attendance could perfunctorily go through two or three songs, she assembled numerous props and then systematically taught the audience the words of the songs. The result was a very entertaining, even hilarious fifteen minutes that many viewed as the highlight of the evening. When someone complimented her husband on Jane's accomplishment, Bill enthusiastically agreed. When the tongue-in-cheek reply was "I know her personally—I'll introduce you!" he realized that he had worn his affection on his sleeve. But he felt keenly the pride in Jane's accomplishment, and he rushed over to express the same feelings to her. She was surprised but delighted.

Some happily married couples are consistent about giving each other personal gifts to commemorate birthdays, anniversaries, Christmas, or Valentine's Day. It need not always be personal. Last year, Marti and I gave each other a finished basement, complete with family room and two bedrooms, for Christmas. We wrote each other mushy sentiments to go with it. Many people find it exciting to shop for a spouse, to work hard to find the right kind of gift to make a statement about their feelings. Guy told me that he had a hard time choosing gifts for Mona—jewelry, perfume, a dress, or some other thing—but when he chose one, he had a more difficult time than his children waiting for Christmas. Valentine's Day seems a natural for flowers, a singing valentine, an ad in the paper, or a skywriter outrageously expressing love. Even better is a surprise gift given for no particular reason, indicating that you are continually thinking of your spouse and the relationship. Yet people should also be realistic enough to realize that when finances are tight, a gift out of the blue may cause distress. The timing must be right, or the gift may not be appreciated.

Although they may seem out of fashion for some people, the little acts that express affection and respect not only build a relationship, but allow children to share the affection. I am talking about gestures such as men opening doors for their companions and pulling out chairs for women before dinner. These are more than just gestures of respect. A couple should not hesitate to give each other hugs and kisses in front of their children—not the passionate embrace, but the spontaneous show of affection.

One of the simplest and most romantic prescriptions for a happy marriage is a regular date. A couple that continue to date prove to themselves and to their children that their love is important enough to cultivate. Dating not only gives them a chance to be together regularly, but it recalls their romantic beginnings by putting them in the environment that helped them to fall in love. The major difference is that dating when married is better than dating before marriage because the games are gone and security has taken their place. An intimate, romantic relationship can and should be enjoyed at greater depth than it could be enjoyed before marriage. Couples who neglect dating miss a rare opportunity to enjoy intimacy at its best. People frequently make the mistake of allowing professional interests or religious duties to interfere with that regular time together. I am convinced that every couple needs to escape at least once a week to be with each other, to cultivate the things that they both enjoy, to talk, to relax, and to have fun together.

When Marti and I were both attending the University of Utah and living in married student housing, we determined that we would go out regularly, in spite of a hectic schedule and financial pressures. We didn't spend very much money, but we kept our morale high, relaxed, and cultivated our relationship when it needed it the most.

I have known many couples who have made unfortunate choices early in their married life. There is this common situation, for instance: The young man is going to school, and the young woman is working for the income to make it possible. They both work very hard, and see each other less and less. He is determined to get the best grades and knows she is counting on him, so they decide to forgo the simple pleasures for a four-year period, just until he gets the degree and a good job. In the meantime, he is being stimulated by constant learning and accomplishment while she is being frustrated by drudgery and fatigue. Their relationship is not being cultivated because he is spending evenings and weekends at the library while she takes care of the everyday responsibilities.

The result can be disaster. By the time the schooling is finally completed, this couple have grown away from each other. She has become steadily disenchanted with the rigors of homemaking and breadwinning. He has become steadily more entranced with his career and accustomed to his wife bearing the daily burdens. After he gets the coveted new job, he may expect her to continue the sacrifice. He may find that she is not as interesting to talk to when they have time together. She may find, because he has been having the fun while she has been doing the work, that she views him with jealousy and antagonism. Divorce may be just around the corner, or they may settle for a boring and unfulfilling marriage.

Dating, then, is not just a romantic activity, but a practical need. If dating is ignored in marriage, many couples find that after the birth of their first child, they become accustomed to staying home evenings. Many people fear that no one else is capable of caring for their children, so they don't even try to get baby-sitters. Devotion to children is admirable, but it should never destroy the quality of a marriage that must remain intact after the children have grown up and launched their own lives.

Children often say things like this: "We never get to go to movies! You go to movies all the time! Are you leaving us again?" Some of these statements are designed to produce guilt in parents' minds. The couple should keep perspective on their own needs as well as their children's needs. It is desirable and possible to take children to the movies at other times and to spend time with them doing a variety of activities, but not at the expense of the marriage itself. In the process, children will become more self-sufficient, knowing that they can get along with baby-sitters and that they do not have to be with their parents at all times. They will become more independent and successful personalities.

Small children invariably cry when parents leave them in the evening with a baby-sitter and they are not yet accustomed to it, but they cry very little after the parents leave. Shortly, they come to understand that dating parents are a desirable and natural part of life. Children can sense that when their parents go out they are much happier after they return.

The date we enjoy most is going to dinner—when we can afford it. We have a few favorite restaurants, and we like to try new ones. Going to dinner has an obvious advantage: it allows whoever cooks to enjoy someone else's cooking for a change. More importantly, it creates an atmosphere for a couple to sit across from each other, look into each other's eyes, and talk. Going to dinner is usually more intimate and more likely to increase a couple's knowledge of each other than is going to a movie, for example. Marti and I often discuss the next five years of our lives while we are sitting in the romantic atmosphere of the Barnside Tavern in Hanover, Massachusetts, or GuadalaHarry's in Boston. A certain relaxing sense that inspires us to appreciate our children's development and to analyze our hopes and goals seems to come from being secluded in comfortable surroundings. We seem to do our best and most optimistic thinking at these times.

Movies (especially the cheaper suburban fare), shopping, and going for a walk or drive are enjoyable in different ways. One date I remember with particular fondness was a Saturday Marti and I spent in Boston to celebrate an anniversary. We walked, shopped, and spent a leisurely afternoon, then topped it off with dinner at a restaurant overlooking the harbor. We were able to get release from usual pressures and to feel that we were devoting complete attention to each other. I have heard it said that one of the myths of a happy marriage is that "quality time" is better than "quantity time." I agree. There is no substitute for regular time together.

There is a lot to be gained from making plans. It isn't good enough to say, "Let's go out tonight," because the same impromptu date will become stale after a few weeks. Rather, it is more exciting to plan a date several days ahead. Make a reservation at a restaurant, invite another couple to go to a movie, get tickets for a play, or do whatever else is desired.

As young children grow into teenagers, planning becomes more complicated. Claude has two teenage children who like to go out, and he and Kitty are determined to protect their regular time together. They discovered the hard way that definite plans are the best means of competing on firm ground with the plans of teenagers. One weekend Claude and Kitty stayed home on Friday evening because one of their young children was having a birthday party that included friends sleeping over until Saturday morning. Claude and Kitty decided, instead, to go out on Saturday evening, and they mentioned this in advance to the children. A teenage friend, however, sprang an impromptu party, and the daughter implored the parents to take her and her friend to the party some distance away. Since their oldest son agreed to baby-sit the younger children while the daughter attended the party, Claude and Kitty agreed to do it. Unfortunately, it took so long to travel to the party that they missed the movie they had planned to see. They did a little shopping instead, then headed back to pick up the daughter before going home. There they waited for several minutes, concluding what should otherwise have been an important date together. Claude and Kitty's evening had been effectively ruined, and they vowed to plan further ahead in the future. If they had said to the daughter, "But we have reservations at 8 P.M. at a restaurant downtown," or "We promised the Smiths that we would pick them up for the movie at 7:30, " teenagers' impromptu plans would be less likely to interfere.

Besides the practicality of planning, there is the undeniable advantage of having something to look forward to. If the event is not on the calendar, it is easy to let some other obligation displace it. Professional, church, and community obligations regularly interfere with that evening out if you let it. If a ward dinner or an emergency plumbing job or a professional commitment displaces a regular evening out, you could benefit by an impromptu evening of your own in the middle of the week.

Sometimes thinking about doing something together is as important as doing it. A person who plans an evening out in advance will often find that he or she is more enthusiastic and optimistic about problems that have to be solved during the week. People often become more energetic and creative about their work and enjoy it more when they have something interesting to look forward to. Before marriage, an important date can mean everything to the morale of an infatuated couple—so why not after marriage?

Romance is that indefinable magic that continues to make a marriage exciting even after a couple have been married for twenty-five years or more. It is an exchange of glances in a public setting that no one else can read, but that the couple immediately understand. It is responding to each other's needs without any words at all. It is holding hands at a movie or under the table and feeling a sense of unity and warmth that can't be described. It is holding each other close and realizing that there is no one else. It is using a sense of humor in playful but thoughtful ways. It is loving each other enough to be unpredictable. It is finding new and interesting things to do together. It is talking for a long time with no one to interrupt. It is just being together, quietly, comfortably, without any fear of saying the wrong thing. Romance is a gift that must be cultivated.
