Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

4

Sharing the Load

Ours is a liberated household. It started when Marti attended a weekend retreat with other board members of the Mormon women's journal, Exponent II. She was always rejuvenated by this annual respite from domestic hassles. I had endured it twice previously, so it was not new; but she had always been gone only part of the weekend, sparing me the full impact.

This time, she was gone from Thursday evening until Sunday afternoon, and I was left with all the responsibilities of home, including five kids, at the time aged one to fourteen. At the end of the second full day, I was exhausted. By the time all the work was done and all the kids were in bed, I could hardly find mine, and I seemed to be getting some kind of message. I lay in bed, staring with glazed eyes at the ceiling, and realized that something had gone awry.

Something had to be wrong for me to be so incredibly tired. Using all the logic I could muster, I reasoned that if I was flattened after only two days at the helm, Marti might be that way all the time. It was a frightening thought. My fuzzy mind considered alternatives and finally focused on a crazy one. What if I were to share the load with her, 50-50? It was a radical but intriguing thought.

When Marti returned, she was stunned to hear my proposal, but she enthusiastically agreed to it. We scheduled a weekly planning session to determine what each of us would cook on alternate nights. We worked out a system of sharing the laundry: she would initiate the washing, but I would check the dryer as a matter of course to retrieve clothes and put them away. If she were slowed down by other problems during the day, I would take up the slack and initiate some laundry loads of my own. I would change and dress the baby every morning while she was working on breakfast. I would vacuum the carpets regularly. Actually it was not total equality, but I was employed full-time and was also a bishop.

The first three weeks were invigorating. Marti felt more cheerful and less tired, and I was exhilarated as a result. Then it happened. She received a job offer from a good friend of ours. He proposed that she work from 1 to 5 P.M. as an administrative aide at his retailing firm. We had considered the possibility of her going to work sometime in the future, but not this soon. After a couple of sleepless nights, we decided that she should take it, even though it meant some more alterations of our life-style. We seemed on the eve of a revolution.

Since all my classes were in the morning, I would arrange to be home by 12:30 so that Marti could reach her job by 1 P.M. Although I still had class preparation for the next day as well as research and writing to do, I would try to do them while simultaneously functioning as a father.

We had a family council to solicit the full support of the children. We proposed that Darrin, fourteen, and Kelly, twelve, each take ninety-minute shifts of responsibility for Spencer, one. Eight-year-old David would have a forty-five-minute commitment, and Charlie, five, would get off the hook but would help in other ways.

At 12:30, Spencer would take a nap (hopefully), and Charlie would go to kindergarten, leaving me with some quiet time to eat lunch, throw in some laundry, and get some schoolwork done. At 2 P.M., I would greet the older children when they returned from school, listen to the experiences of their day, occasionally make an after-school snack, and try to solve problems. David and Charlie did not come until 3:30 P.M., at which time I would greet them.

After 2:15 I would be available, but the older children would have immediate supervision responsibilities while I did my work in the middle of chaos, a little like a city editor. I would retrieve laundry from the dryer when it buzzed and take phone calls, all with breakneck speed. It sounded scary, but we all agreed that it was something we should try.

We grew into this life-style with interesting results. I became domestically independent and felt much closer to the kids. I saw them more, they depended on me more, and they all shared much more of their lives with me. I enjoyed being the greeter after school. I developed an increased ability at cooking, and the kids were never quite sure who was responsible for which meal. It added a little zest and unpredictability to the day. They found that they had to ask "Who cooked dinner?" before they could express any thanks. The kids were no longer disposed to put women and men into neat stereotypes, and they accepted Marti's work schedule without rancor. However, I noticed that they still smothered her with their problems, the activities of their day, and a multitude of requests reserved, it seemed, for a mother the minute she entered the door.

The kids gained valuable experience in the home and benefited from responsibility, yet they still had time for their own work and play. Little Spencer was getting more attention than ever, and his brothers and sister taught him a great deal. His older brother taught him the rudiments of basketball, and he could soon recognize all the members of the Boston Celtics team on sight and identify them individually. No one seemed neglected, although we were all more hassled.

Marti was happier because she could escape some of the tedium of homemaking and put variety into her life and brain. She came home feeling stimulated and enthusiastic. Our husband-wife relationship was invigorated, and we noticed that we had much more to discuss each night, albeit less time to do it. The family, believe it or not, was healthier, and we had fewer medical bills.

There were bad days, of course, and it was often hectic when I was preparing a lecture or writing an article and some emergency interrupted. The kids tended to direct requests at me in the afternoons that we had not previously discussed—"You've got to take me to the library." "Can I get out of baby-sitting today and go to a friend's?" "I have to bring two dozen cookies to the party tonight!" But I noticed that I was more efficient in the time that I had, and my morale (most of the time) did not suffer.

All of this happened three years ago. The kids are older now with some different needs and responsibilities, and Marti is working a different schedule, still part-time. She works less than she used to and therefore spends most of her time at home with the usual child-care and homemaking responsibilities. In spite of these changes, we all became converted to the concept of sharing the load. Marti and I have decided that we want to continue to do so, despite any future work changes for either of us. All the children share in household and yard work, and we post job charts to help us keep track of them. The kids play a role in cleaning bathrooms, setting and clearing the table, loading and unloading the dishwasher, sweeping, vacuuming, and putting their own laundry away. I am convinced that every married couple should find ways to share the load that fit their own needs and schedules. It is an exciting idea whose time has come.

I have taken occasion to advise people selectively on the benefits of sharing the load. Unfortunately, most men seem to be fearful that their roles or their masculinity may be in danger, when, in fact, it would give them an increased opportunity to cultivate their marriages and nurture their children.

It may seem to a busy lawyer, or physician, or corporate executive that participating in domestic responsibilities is impossible, but doing even a few token tasks makes an incredible difference. A wife is usually impressed with the sacrifice that her husband is willing to make, even if it is initially small. As a result, the wife's morale is boosted, and the husband may discover that helping is contagious. Both immediately feel better about each other.

The wife who works outside the home shares the provider's load and gains new insights into her husband's problems. The husband gets a glimpse of the gravity of domestic responsibilities and gains new respect for his wife. At the same time, he is broadened as he develops new domestic skills. If his wife ever has to travel and leave him and the children on their own, he gets an opportunity to test his new self-sufficiency. Practically speaking, there are enormous benefits for a husband who is knowledgeable enough about home and family that he can take over all major responsibilities in a crisis. He is a more well-rounded person; his children entertain greater respect for him; family life proceeds more efficiently and more smoothly; and husband, wife, and children have more time to cultivate their relationships with each other.

A husband who experiments with sharing the load will find that as time passes, he will steadily increase his role because the dividends are so evident. A little extra work is always worth the increased amiability of the people around you.

Domestic responsibilities can easily become tedious, which is why one person saddled with most of them will often become frustrated, burdened, or depressed. Moreover, if the mate goes into the world daily to exercise initiative and accomplish tasks he has been trained to do, he can return exhilarated. If his wife has been trapped in tedium while he has been conquering, jealousy is added to frustration. It seems vital that husband and wife both partake of the tedium of marriage as well as its joys and rewards. I realize that there are many women who sincerely enjoy all aspects of housekeeping, but even they need help after the hour of 5 o'clock. Since housekeeping is a repetitive, round-the-clock responsibility, any tedium associated with it seems unending.

In marriages where the husband carries heavy work responsibilities and the wife carries most of the domestic responsibilities, it is also wise for the husband to provide the wife a regular opportunity to escape. Again, token efforts are better than nothing. Even two hours a week can be valuable in helping an overworked housewife to regain her equilibrium.

In fact, before we shared the load equally, Marti and I experimented with such a plan. We tried it after hearing a friend tell us how it had saved her life under stressful circumstances. At the time, Marti was feeling burdened with the ongoing problems of very young children. She suggested we experiment. We agreed that I would consider my professional work day completed as of 3 P.M. on Mondays, and I would take over the household and prepare dinner for that one day only. Marti in turn would go out and shop, go upstairs and prepare a church lesson, go off in a corner and read, write letters, or do whatever else she wanted. From 3 P.M. until bedtime, I was technically in charge of all domestic matters. It was a small step for us, and for that time in our lives, it worked. And, of course, it led to increased sharing. For those whose schedules make anything else impossible, this plan could provide a wonderful time for refreshing the marriage.

One of the most important aspects of sharing the load is child care. A mother and a father need to share the responsibility for rearing the children. Ideally, this would extend from changing diapers to consulting each other about life's most important decisions. I have known countless husbands who shrink from changing diapers, regarding the process with disdain and considering it the inherent responsibility of women. Many husbands purposely refuse to learn how to change diapers so that there is no way their abilities can be employed in an emergency.

Many of these men accept the traditional belief that women are nurturing and men are the ones who earn the living. The fact is that all children need to feel the nurturing love of the father as much as that of the mother. Moreover, men are just as capable of exhibiting such love.

Mothers who do all the unsavory work as children grow up will also find that their children will come to them for advice and trust their relationship more than the absentee father who is on the executive fast track. I have discovered that children who grow up with absentee fathers remember their absences indelibly—from sports events, plays, graduations, and other events in which their children took part. Society is beginning to adjust to the suggestion that fathers should be closer to their children. Although "paternity leave" is becoming more common, the more recent innovation of "flex-time," which allows employees more freedom in choosing their hours, probably is potentially more valuable. Many employers still have trouble thinking in terms of "working fathers" who need time with their children.

A while ago U.S. Senator Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts announced his retirement from the Senate after discovering that he was suffering from a mild form of lymph cancer, a slowly growing affliction that could still allow him to live a productive life. Tsongas, who was in his forties, had been discouraged by the press of responsibilities in the Senate that regularly took him away from his young children. When traveling from Massachusetts to Washington, he often brought his little daughter along in an effort to get some "quality time."

Tsongas was completing his first term and had been considered an able politician with a bright future. He had even been mentioned as a future candidate for president. When he realized that his years might be limited, he decided that he wanted to spend the time that he had with his children. The U.S. Senate and any future political career, as well as fame and accomplishment in the world, suddenly became secondary to him. Tsongas said, "None on their death bed ever said, 'I didn't spend enough time with my business."' (The Boston Globe, March 27, 1984, p. 24.) It would be fortunate if Tsongas's idealism rubbed off on other ambitious absentee fathers whose time would be better spent nurturing and guiding their children.

One opportunity I have taken for nurturing is playing a weekly basketball game with my four sons, though they span thirteen years in age from youngest to oldest. We drive to the church and spend about an hour and a half in the gymnasium. Originally I thought of it as exercise only, since we all love basketball; but I have discovered that it is a terrific chance to cultivate our family relationships.

Because we are the tallest, Darrin, my oldest son, and I never play on the same team. We rotate the next two oldest boys from my team to his, and Spencer, the youngest, plays on whichever team he chooses. He will become more of an integral part of the game as he grows, but for now he is happy just getting an occasional opportunity to dribble and shoot the ball. We work hard at establishing team play so that we can score more baskets and involve every player equally in the game.

Frequently there are rather heated arguments among the younger boys about who will be on which team. (They consider Darrin a better player than I am, and so they prefer to be on his team!) There are also some occasional hassles about alleged fouls committed and guarding procedures, but so far we have managed to work them all out amicably. We talk out any difficulty, but each problem becomes harder to resolve the longer we've played. The trick is knowing when to gather up the balls and go home.

Although this activity takes a relatively small part of every week, it gives me a rare opportunity to spend time with all my sons together. We don't pretend to achieve total idealism, but we get good exercise, learn and cultivate basketball techniques, and learn to understand and appreciate each other. Since mothers so often are expected by children and society to do the nurturing, it is important for fathers to carve out their own niche.

We are committed to family home evenings in our family, but the fact that they have continued to succeed as the kids have grown older is based on our decision to make them more flexible. We decided to change their character when we saw that they were getting stale and that we were becoming less and less effective in involving all children in the discussions at the same time. One of the greatest challenges of family home evening is to effectively teach a group of children of varying ages.

In most Latter-day Saint homes, the father takes the leading role in family home evenings by organizing the group, conducting the business, calling on people to pray, and alternating with the mother in presenting the lesson. Marti and I thought about it and decided to radically change the format by rotating all the responsibilities throughout the family. Now everyone has a turn to conduct, pray, give the lesson, lead the song, prepare the dessert, and plan the activity we have at the end. Going through this process has enlivened our home evenings by creating an attitude of equality. Everyone enjoys it more, and everyone participates more. Even Spencer plays a leading role when it is time, although with plenty of advice from Mom or Dad. It is a classic example of sharing the load and involving every member of the family. Relating to every age group is a problem, but the kids are much more tolerant when one of them is giving the lesson and dealing with that problem. We are comfortable with the fact that the lesson is geared to one age group one evening and another age group another evening. It seems to work, and it has been enlightening to observe just how well every family member does in presenting a lesson to the others.

The process has also taken away some of the anxiety caused by authority figures. Because we are sharing responsibility, there is less of a tendency to criticize and more willingness to listen and follow instructions. Each family member knows that he or she will be in the same position soon, and he or she will want respect when that happens.

Since we changed the format, we have had more fun in our activities. We have suddenly become more creative in the games we choose to play, and we enjoy them more. We have had great fun playing "Sardines." This is a game like "Hide and Seek" that allows every person who finds the hidden person to join him, finally resulting in a massive pile-up in some ridiculously tiny space. There is something eerie about being the only one left. Everyone races around the house, running into each other, searching for the one. Then suddenly there is quiet. The last person realizes that he is completely alone until he finds every member of his family piled like sardines on top of one another. This is Spencer's favorite game.

We have received a measure of satisfaction from reading scriptures together after dinner each evening. Although there are often ruses entered into by more than one child to try to get out of doing it, it is almost always a positive experience. When we began this ritual, I would read aloud two or three chapters, and we would discuss it as we went. We discovered that, like family home evening, it was far more successful if we could involve every one equally. So we take turns reading three verses each and go around the group twice. lt has helped our younger children become better readers because of some of the challenging words found in scripture. We even have Spencer repeat a phrase of scripture so that he feels thoroughly involved in the enterprise. This is a terrific activity. We may derive only one major idea from the process, but it allows us to do spiritual things together, plant some seeds, and teach the language of the scriptures.

Most children enjoy having their parents read to them. Our kids have been enriched in this way, and it may have been partly responsible for making the older ones active, independent readers and thus effective students. But Marti and I benefit too, spending time with them, reading, thinking, and talking.

Sometimes we have had the suspicion that many of the little things we have done with our children are not worth the effort. But we have been surprised to learn that our older two, Darrin and Kelly, remember with fondness the evenings that they tussled on the floor with their dad when they were small. We had regular pillow fights in those days, and they would both try to beat me up on the floor. They enjoyed it more than I realized then. They also have warm memories of our travels across the country to visit family and friends in Utah, when we would stop at rest areas and play baseball or toss the frisbee.

When your children tell you not to come to some important event in their lives, proceed with caution. You should probably go anyway no matter what professional sacrifice is involved. Just as explicitly as they remember the good things you did with them, your children remember the events you decided not to attend. Watching children participate in sports or theater or receive honors is a vital part of your support for them as they grow up.

Recently, we had one of our finest family activities when we attended The Pirates of Penzance presented by our son's high school. Darrin played a major role, and we could tell he loved every minute of the acting and the singing. Besides seeing how effective he was in the role, we were enlightened to glimpse this interesting, colorful side of his personality. On the way home, Spencer said that he wanted to be a pirate when he grew up, like Darrin. It occurred to me that if we had missed that play we would have missed an entire chapter in our son's life. This was just something that he could not share with us by telling us about it.

David, our second oldest, greatly enjoys playing little league baseball or basketball sponsored by our town, and it is very important to him that we watch him play. Maybe even more than some of our other children, David needs that constant encouragement and expression of interest. If he does especially well, he loves knowing that we were there and witnessed it. When he makes a basket or gets a hit, he can't wait to discuss it. One of the fruits of child rearing is found in sharing experiences with children as they become more capable.

There is no question that parents who share responsibility for domestic life and for the care of their children will communicate better with each other about their needs. They will be more united in their values and on methods of discipline. Couples who share the responsibility of their children will discover a new dimension of life that makes families self-sustaining, loving, and interesting. Parents will learn convincingly about life and love as they attempt to extend the equality of their marriage to life with their children.
