Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

5

Making a Living

According to the 1980 and 1984 U.S. Census Bureau reports, from 1960 to 1980 the number of women in the workforce in America had risen from 32% to 51%; and in an even shorter time span, from 1970 to 1980, the proportion of women in traditionally male-dominated executive or management positions had risen from 18.5% to 30.5%. Unfortunately, women are paid far less than men for comparable work (in 1984, women received only 59Â¢ for every dollar that men earned), but the tightening economy has forced more and more women into the workforce. Even couples who prefer that the man be the single breadwinner have often been constrained to reconsider.

For many years couples that feature both working husbands and working wives have been in the majority (in 1980 62% of all married couples were two-income families). There are also a number of women who work outside the home because they feel the need to make a contribution to their families and to society in addition to homemaking, and there are an increasing number of women who simply want another way to develop their own talents and interests. The women's movement of the late sixties to the early eighties has undoubtedly made a significant difference in inspiring many women to seek a balance in their lives between homemaking and careers.

Even if a couple prefer that the wife not work, they may realize it is desirable that the wife seek training in a field she enjoys, if only as insurance against the premature death or incapacity of her husband. Some unfortunate women have been forced to earn a living for their children in undesirable, menial work because they were without a college education or relevant work experience when their husbands died.

In spite of the increasing numbers of working women, 1% of them earn $25,000 per year or more compared with 12% of the men who earn the same. More important, in families in which both spouses work full-time, 59% of the women compared to 22% of the men spent eleven hours or more a week on housework. (American Couples, p. 144.) According to a Ladies Home Journal poll (January 1984, p. 124), the greatest cause of anger among 86,000 women respondents who work is having to pick up after everybody else. These figures prove that sharing responsibility in the home when both spouses work is necessary to maintain a home and avoid contention. More and more marriages will break down in the future if men will not change their life-styles and become more domesticated. Women who are working full-time outside the home should not be expected to carry the major domestic burden as well. Those who do so for extended periods may be victims of psychological collapse and marital discord.

Because of traditional attitudes and values, a number of women and men still react adversely to women joining the workforce. Grace and Kevin, a middle-aged couple, came to me to seek advice because his job, while secure, was producing insufficient income for the needs of their large family. To try to make ends meet, Kevin worked odd jobs on Saturdays and evenings. He and Grace wanted advice on managing their finances more wisely. As President N. Eldon Tanner once said, "Most marital problems, it seems, originate from economic roots—either insufficient income to sustain the family or mismanagement of the income." (Ensign, November 1979, p. 81.)

We talked of their need to live within their means and to trim their expenses. Our discussion revealed that Grace had some marketable skills that could have been helpful to the family without disrupting it. By working two or three afternoons a week she could have brought in enough additional income to make a difference. Because of their acceptance of traditional roles, Grace and Kevin were uneasy about that suggestion, even though her skills on a part-time basis were worth considerably more than his. They preferred their current plan of him working several jobs, even though it made their time together as husband and wife almost nonexistent. We theorized that Kevin could be home while Grace worked these few hours, and they would earn more money combined and have increased time together. They would have taken pressure off each other and shared the load of supporting the family. They rejected the advice. Instead, they continued to see little of each other while Kevin worked harder, the fatigue showing visibly on his face.

Rachel and Grant felt similarly although their circumstances differed. Rachel enjoyed excellent health, but Grant's health was tenuous, and his job provided steady but limited income. They had both been reared on the maxim that the husband earns the living while the wife takes care of the home. When I suggested that she work two days a week while he conserve his health and take up the slack at home, they were shocked. Yet this is the course of action that many people must realistically accept. If the husband's income is growing regularly and is high enough to compensate for the steady rise in the cost of living, then it is acceptable to view the family in the traditional way. If not, there may be a need to be more practical. In many cases today, that means sending the woman into the workforce on at least a part-time basis. Many Latter-day Saints are offended even by the suggestion that women work at something that they can do in the home, on the theory that such activity takes them away from their traditional tasks of homemaking and child rearing. Yet most people today cannot survive economically on only one income.

I have seen a number of couples who have achieved a much greater measure of security in their marriage and family life by deciding that the wife would work part-time. A few years ago, Barry and Liz decided that it would be wise for their circumstances for Liz to work. Although Barry worked hard and long hours, his income was insufficient for their large family. He took on a part-time position, but this was still not adequate. Then Liz had an offer for a job which she could work part-time with hours of her own choosing. It was even acceptable for her to bring some of her children to help her complete the tasks. She enthusiastically accepted it. Although the family members are sometimes fatigued from their busy schedules, they are all working as hard as they can to meet their own needs, with no outside help. Everyone feels self-sustaining, and all family members know how hard it is to meet the financial needs of so many people. For them, it is a fulfilling life-style. The marriage has been improved because Liz is making a financial contribution when they need it, and the family is contented.

Some men need to get over the notion that, because of their manhood, they are solely responsible for carrying the burden of earning the living, even if it means making a superhuman effort in several jobs. In many cases, their wives are very willing to contribute, and a great many find that, when they actually do work, they gain better opinions of themselves, enhancing the marriage. Every family should live within its means and look for ways to keep expenses down. But as more couples with moderate incomes took to the future—to support children on missions and in college—more and more spouses may need to accept the possibility that husband and wife should work.

Whether one partner or both are working, they should both agree on the course they pursue. A job should be accepted only after mutual consultation and discussion so that both feel comfortable with the decision. A husband who comes home and announces that he has taken a new job offer in another state that requires the family to move in two weeks is making a mistake. On the other hand, it is inadvisable for a person to accept a job—or change a job—just to make his partner happy. For several months Sylvia tried to persuade Ryan to move so that they could live near her parents and friends in another state. Ryan was happy and successful in his work and preferred not to move, but he did so anyway to make Sylvia happy. Unfortunately, his new job failed to give him similar opportunities, he was restive in Sylvia's home town, and he blamed it all on her. A formerly positive relationship had suddenly become quarrelsome. Finally, Ryan left Sylvia to move back to the town they had left and to his former job. The marriage dissolved because of their lack of mutual discussion and agreement.

Couples should also try to choose jobs that offer rewards other than money. Working couples need personal satisfaction and a feeling of achievement in doing something they enjoy. If a husband, for instance, works at a job that is boring, or is forced to do things that he hates, or works with people he finds distasteful, he will be unhappy most of the time. A person's work takes so much time that the need for it to be pleasant and rewarding is compelling. When it is not, the wife will suffer as much as the husband. An unhappy person cannot bring excitement, enthusiasm, and optimism to a relationship. People who are unhappily employed run a very high risk of being unhappily married. A husband who hates Mondays, looks forward to time off, and is always letting off steam about his employment will be a difficult companion. Under such circumstances, a change in employment is not only advisable but may be necessary to preserve the marriage.

Laurie and Brad were so anxious to correct an employment problem that they took immediate action. They put their house on the market and managed to sell it before Brad could secure another job. It was necessary for the family to find temporary quarters while he continued to seek a satisfactory position. This was unfortunate because it put additional pressure on Laurie and the children when the pressure on Brad was already excessive. Laurie began to doubt Brad's judgment, causing a formerly stable relationship to waver. Taking precipitous action had only traded one employment problem for a worse employment problem and had resulted in many other drawbacks.

Dan and Janeen were so determined to move that they sold their house and moved clear across the country from Massachusetts to California, even though he had no job waiting for him when he arrived. After several months during which they stayed with relatives, Dan finally found employment. It was considerably less glamorous than he had intended, even menial in comparison to the standards of the job he had left, but he had to take it to meet the needs of his family. Their marriage endured, but every family member suffered during the many months of temporary living. It is usually easier to live with a job one hates than to have a family to support and no job at all.

For many people, moving becomes an all-purpose antidote. It can be deceptive, and the conditions hardly ever improve as much as people hope. After two or three weeks in a new location, many of the same problems often emerge. When Marti and I lived in university student housing, we had a desire to move every June when we observed moving vans pulling up to the apartments of happy graduates. Moving seemed to portend the great escape. Now I notice that I often get the urge in February, in the middle of an interminable winter, with two months left until spring. If I can last it out until the end of April, my optimism comes out of hiding.

Darrell and Gwen were an unhappy couple who had the urge to move. Darrell was a seemingly successful executive who had moved his family four times to four states in three years when I first met them. He had what he called an excellent job opportunity that brought him to our ward. He announced that he intended to stay for a long time because their frequent moves had taken their toll on his family. Before the year was out though, he announced fresh plans to move to still another state so that he could take still another executive slot. The new position was the "dream job," he said, and would be far better than the many unforeseen difficulties of his current one. Although they agreed to follow him again, his wife and family were depressed. A mood of unhappiness hovered over the husband-wife relationship, and the children bitterly complained about all the different schools they had attended. Darrell's problem was compounded by the frequent absences from his family that all his jobs had caused. I had the feeling that he ran away from his problems instead of facing them, and that he was on a collision course that moving would not solve.

There are many people who put long hours into their work away from home in a quest for advancement or simply because they enjoy what they are doing. These people need to make a constant effort to maintain balance between work and family so that the marriage and family do not suffer. There are other people who are actually escaping marriage or family responsibility by staying late at work regularly or traveling often. Men are the most frequent culprits. If they find parts of domestic life unappealing, or if they have not resolved certain domestic problems or marital disagreements, they may intentionally stay away. This practice is surprisingly common and usually harmful to the marriage. Often it is a two-way street. The wife enjoys the husband's long absences because there is less bickering or because she is free to make the decisions she prefers without anyone hassling her.

Stephen travels frequently, not only for escape from his many disagreements at home, but because he genuinely enjoys it. Although most of the disagreements are not serious, it is much easier for him to travel and let Kelly solve those problems in the way she prefers. Stephen and Kelly usually see each other on weekends, and they get along better then. Kelly admits that she enjoys having him gone. She is more relaxed and can do things her own way. While this couple's problems are not as serious as many, they are not working to cultivate their relationship. They are escaping it most of the time, and their marriage has turned into a weekend encounter session.

Sometimes the woman is the one who seeks escape. Nadine is forever taking menial part-time jobs that require her to work evenings or nights, even though she and her husband do not need the extra income. Ostensibly, she does it because she wants to make a contribution to the home, but there is that sneaking suspicion that what she really wants is to get out of the house on a regular basis. If Peter were to give her regular opportunities to pursue outside interests or to seek education, he might be able to curb this potentially destructive impulse.

For either partner to regularly escape without working out their problems breeds frustration and hostility. It leaves the mate with the major homemaking and child rearing burdens, fostering resentment and causing the couple to drift apart. People who really care about their marriage should try to be home enough to cultivate their relationship and work out their problems.

Today, more and more people carry on long-distance marriages caused by both partners entering the professional workforce. If the husband has a good job opportunity in Detroit while the wife has an equally good one in Los Angeles, then one of them commutes during the week and comes back to the family home on weekends. This arrangement, while considered progressive in many quarters because it gives the woman an equal opportunity to develop her interests, is nothing more than a dating life. It is hard to see how anyone who practices this life-style over an extended period can develop a warm, growing, mutually satisfying marriage relationship. Good marriages require more time and hard work than long-distance relationships can allow. Intimacy is lost and superficiality emerges.

Society is showing some signs of meeting this challenge creatively. Some companies and institutions are making efforts to employ both husband and wife when the professions are compatible, or are helping the mate secure employment with a suitable institution of comparable salary and status. For instance, a college professor offered a position in an English department of a university may ask whether a position is available for his wife in the psychology department. The institution may desire his services enough that it is willing to make extensive efforts to get the mate a job. Sometimes a firm offering an engineering position to one person will be willing to find a correspondingly good position for the mate in sales or business. For women in the workforce, these are encouraging developments, far superior to the long-distance marriage.

Ideally, making a living should be a pleasant, productive, satisfying way of spending time but should never be at the expense of the family. If a person's values remain clearly in view even as he ascends an executive ladder, his marriage is less likely to be sacrificed on the block of financial success. Whatever the line of work, there should be ample time left over for developing the marriage relationship. Some people figuratively marry their work and are so eager for advancement and high earnings that they virtually turn themselves over to their professions. This is a serious mistake that will adversely affect the marriage.
