Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

6

Managing Finances

Perhaps the most neglected topic during courtship is the delicate one of how money will be budgeted and spent. In fact, many couples throughout their married lives continue to debate spending practices without ever establishing a mutually acceptable system. Ted and Valerie argued constantly about finances because he came from an affluent, free-spending family and she came from a middle-class, frugal one. Early in life she had been responsible for her own earnings and learned to be cautious about spending them. She had worked her way through college and learned that if she were to acquire new clothing, she would have to budget to pay for it. On the other hand, Ted was the recipient of money for his college education and virtually all of his needs and wants. He had very little real understanding of the importance of money. There were many misunderstandings and disagreements as they searched for middle ground. Eventually she learned to be tolerant of his expectations, and he learned the practical mechanics of budgeting. Ted and Valerie were typical of many couples who are attracted to each other for idealistic or romantic reasons but fail to consider practical matters.

During counseling, it became evident that Ted was victimized by society's stereotypes. He had grown up believing that men are naturally entrusted with money matters. It was ego-shattering for him to realize that Valerie's attitudes and habits were better adapted to their situation than his own. Growing up in a home where his father controlled the purse strings, he assumed that the father handled the money because he was the chief decision-maker—the holder of power. We talked about the bias inherent in that assumption. He recognized that Valerie was a highly capable human being, as able to make important decisions as he was. Finally, he agreed that she deserved to share whatever power was symbolized by the money they shared. This was an important step because when they had argued about money, power had been on their minds. Although he had recognized her abilities earlier, he feared that her increased role in money management would also shift the power from him to her. Yet the strength of their relationship lay in their willingness to regard each other as equals. Over a period of weeks, they talked about their financial philosophies, agreed to compromises, planned a budget, and organized certain spending practices. Once these differences were resolved, he was able to benefit from her financial expertise and still retain his ego.

It would have been tempting to turn all money matters over to her, but that would have been a mistake. In the first place, there are practical benefits from having both partners equally involved in financial planning. If one is hospitalized, temporarily disabled, or dies, the other can continue to make decisions and initiate payments without a painful learning process. For most of their marriage, my own parents assigned the major financial responsibility to my mother, who seemed the most adept. But when she passed away, my father found himself unknowledgeable and out of touch with money matters, a handicap which, combined with his grief, was a heavy burden to carry. In the second place, if both partners are equally involved in spending and saving, both will understand the mechanics and can more effectively respond to emergencies and consult each other about important purchases. If one person retains control and a crisis occurs, the mate may lay blame. Money matters are sensitive enough that any couple is better served by sharing the knowledge.

Neal A. Maxwell once said, "If your companion is going to participate in a crash landing, then she should also help file the flight plan." (As quoted in "A Lasting Marriage," Ensign, May 1982, p. 22.) Vernon learned this the hard way. From the beginning of his marriage, he had made family financial decisions alone—quietly and secretively. When he found himself in serious debt, he juggled the bills, took out loans, and worried heavily, all without consulting or even informing Madeline. When she finally learned the extent of their difficulty, she was understandably angry and hurt. By the time I got to Vernon, it was necessary to take drastic steps. Before we talked about spending practices, however, I insisted that Madeline join us and that she be included in the decision-making. Fortunately, she was tolerant enough to forgive him, and he was wise enough to admit his error. It was only with great difficulty and patience that they emerged from the quagmire. But afterward, Vernon realized that they would be insulated from future problems by making joint, well-considered decisions. With embarrassment and frustration, he managed to overcome the false notion that he alone could be the money manager.

Some people prefer for reasons of convenience and aptitude that only one person—whether husband or wife—handle money matters. Where this is practiced, it is essential that the manager consult regularly with the partner about all decisions and transactions. If the manager pays the bills, balances the checkbook, and prepares the taxes, he or she should sit down with the partner at least monthly to talk it over. Whoever is not paying and preparing should become thoroughly familiar with the transactions made and be sure there is mutual consent and understanding. Unfortunately, the natural tendency is to let that slip. The couples who are most successful in managing their money do it together.

Hugh B. Brown offered this sensible advice: "The husband who refuses to take the wife into his confidence on money matters, on income, expenditures, and investments, and who makes her beg for every cent of money she spends, should not be surprised if his wife eventually asserts her independence, claims her rights as a human being and as a partner, and refuses longer to be treated as a little child. A man should be frugal but not penurious. Wives are entitled to dignity and consideration and not merely to penny-pinching indulgence." (You and Your Marriage, p. 148.)

Every couple should develop their own philosophy of spending and recognize the importance of money management in the success of their relationship. Ross and Laura consistently argued over money. They could not afford to furnish their home in the way they preferred, and whenever they visited someone else's home, they returned depressed about their own. They had never considered themselves materialistic, but when they saw the possessions their friends had acquired, they became envious and anxious about their own potential. Laura had expected that Ross would be earning more money after three years of marriage, and Ross was disappointed with Laura's low income from her free-lance artwork. Their problem was "keeping up with the Joneses," and they needed to carefully consider their values. We talked together about their long-term goals, what they hoped to achieve in life, and the beauties of their relationship, and they realized that they did not need more possessions. Once they put everything in proper perspective, they felt better about their situation and could concentrate on the positive qualities of their life together.

Some people confuse money with love. People who grew up thinking that parents proved their love by giving gifts may have some difficulty sorting out marriage priorities. From childhood, people sometimes repeat the statement, "If you loved me, you'd buy me a ——." If a marriage partner says, "We can't afford that," it should have nothing to do with love. People who establish this understanding early will have a better chance of building a relationship that is secure in spite of material concerns.

One vital rule of thumb for every couple is that they should make no major purchase without consultation, no matter how affluent they might be. I well remember Jody's reaction when Clark recounted the story of his purchase of an expensive watch that he had wanted for years. He saw the watch one day and impulsively bought it. He was honestly excited about it, but Jody was clearly offended. Maybe they could not afford it, or maybe she had planned to buy the watch as a birthday gift for him, or maybe she would have been happy about it had she been consulted; but the act of secret buying was obviously a wedge between this otherwise compatible couple. Connie purchased an expensive watch for Neil's birthday and was excited to present it to him. To her amazement, he was furious: "This doesn't make any sense! How could you spend this much money on a stupid watch?" The birthday celebration was ruined by an intensive argument about money.

When one person goes out alone and buys a watch or a piece of furniture or a dress or a suit and surprises the spouse, there is a good chance the spouse will be offended. Often the secret buyer does so irrationally, getting lost in the excitement of the impulse. Sometimes he or she knows the gift will not be well received but is sure that seeing the item will bring approval. Sometimes the buyer plans for total secrecy and buys a personal item that only an audit of the checkbook would reveal. In any case, trust is eroded and the marriage suffers.

Chris and Emily were frequently unhappy because of Chris's spur-of-the-moment purchases. He loved to buy exciting gifts for Emily. Judged in purely romantic terms, that could be viewed as an admirable quality, but their finances were usually dangerously close to the edge. When Chris came home with a new dress or coat or piece of jewelry, Emily became depressed. She admired the thought behind the gift, but her mind immediately detailed which bill could not be paid because of the unreasonable purchase. For a long time, Chris took personal offense to Emily's reactions, fearing that she loved him less. Their simple solution was to agree to talk before any major purchase and to relinquish the momentary thrill of the surprise.

Tom and Michelle had problems that seemed to them insurmountable. In fact, they had so many disagreements about money that they had essentially refused to deal with them. They put money matters on the shelf. Their individual backgrounds were very different. It was the second marriage for both. After her divorce, Michelle had become accustomed to earning her own living and had developed a careful budgeting system to protect her security. When she married Tom, there were financial arguments because he was in the habit of spending what he had in his hand. Budgeting confused and depressed him while his habits exasperated her. She persisted in teaching him sound spending principles, and he, in turn, became offended. They argued and screamed at each other without ever reaching any solution, then usually made up by going out to a movie or dinner that they could not afford. In the meantime, the stack of bills grew taller and creditors more demanding until they found themselves in a crisis.

In our talks, we tried to treat his uneasiness with budgeting, his damaged ego, and their habit of pretending the problem did not exist. They agreed to work together rationally and to face their problems realistically, but their problems did not disappear quickly. Even as we tried to discuss them, Tom and Michelle continued to carp at each other. It was revealing that they talked to each other in different financial language: when Tom tried to explain a specific matter, Michelle seemed confused and disoriented; and when Michelle would take a stand, Tom would behave in a similar manner. The realities of budgeting and spending meant one thing to her and another to him.

Troublesome finances often lead people to escape their depressed state by putting the money problems out of their minds altogether. In my experience, most people in financial difficulty either fail to recognize the problem early enough or they purposely refuse to deal with it. In the meantime, they sink deeper into debt, and the problem becomes more difficult to resolve. People with financial problems or disagreements should seek counseling early. Many people fail to seek it until they have suffered financial disaster: their home is about to be foreclosed, their fuel has been cut off, or some other emergency has occurred. Excessive pride is common but of little use in a crisis.

Henry and Christine were a working couple who did not earn enough money from their combined incomes to pay their bills every month. Since they were not spendthrifts, they were baffled as to how to rectify the situation. As we carefully compared their income with their bills, we verified their suspicions that they did not have enough money to seek entertainment of any kind. Their finances were further complicated by the unpredictability of his income. He was in sales and completely dependent on commissions. Some weeks he brought in a rather healthy sum, and some weeks he earned nothing. I advised him to look for more stable sales employment. At first he was depressed because he enjoyed his work very much, but surprisingly he found a sales position quickly that would pay him in regular increments. Because Christine's salary was fixed, they were able to budget more easily, and the higher salary from Henry's new position gave them new financial security. Over a period of months they were able to meet their financial obligations more easily and to develop a more harmonious relationship.

In Church counseling, I discovered that the most productive course by far was to appoint a financially knowledgeable person to work with specific families in trouble. Together with the consultant they could rework their finances over a period of weeks or months. Nelson, a member of our ward, was gifted and experienced in financial consulting. He was also mature enough that people trusted him. Confidentially and with a couple's permission, I would introduce Nelson into their life, and he would work on their budget, examine their bills, and in some cases take over the decision-making until the couple were knowledgeable and capable enough to resume control. Max and Paula seemed to resent the bishop's advice but were glad to sit down with a professionally trained financial consultant. Nelson was able to make substantial differences in their life-style by meeting with them weekly for an extended period and calling them on the telephone between meetings. When he discovered that Max had been commuting thirty-five miles to work every day, Nelson suggested that he seek new employment closer to home. Max was able to find a job within five miles of his home that paid him more for his services. For Max and Paula, the change was a monumental one for their day-to-day happiness as well as for their economic security.

Nelson also worked with Owen and June, who worried about large purchases but practiced inconsistent spending for smaller items. They worried about money for gasoline and frequently remained home from church meetings because they could not afford to drive their car. On the other hand, they were meticulous enough in their personal relationships that they regularly sent thank-you notes, Christmas cards, birthday cards, and letters to a great many people without considering the expense. They did not purchase anything in bulk but spent a considerable amount on "junk food." Nelson helped them develop a better understanding of priorities and practice consistency in their spending so that they could take better advantage of their limited resources.

In my experience, families who need Church assistance reach that point mostly because of inconsistent spending practices, lack of knowledge about money matters, and failure to consult between husband and wife. Every couple can benefit from a mutually agreeable financial plan. If they hold regular monthly planning sessions in which they review expenditures, organize a ledger book, and work out plans for the future, they will be happier and their marriages will become more secure.

Every couple should beware of the materialistic pressures of society. Each of us is tempted to increase our spending as our income becomes greater. President Spencer W. Kimball cautions us about this:

The Lord has blessed us as a people with a prosperity unequalled in times past. The resources that have been placed in our power are good, and necessary to our work here on the earth. But I am afraid that many of us have been surfeited with flocks and herds and acres and barns and wealth and have begun to worship them as false gods, and they have power over us. Do we have more of these good things than our faith can stand? Many people spend most of their time working in the service of a self-image that includes sufficient money, stocks, bonds, investment portfolios, property, credit cards, furnishings, automobiles, and the like to guarantee carnal security throughout, it is hoped, a long and happy life. Forgotten is the fact that our assignment is to use these many resources in our families and quorums to build up the kingdom of God. (Ensign, June 1976, p. 4.)

I have often seen couples misjudge their finances because of their desire to acquire some material possession that would cause them to rank favorably with their neighbors. Many objects, such as videocassette recorders and computers have some very appealing uses for a family, but they are not normally classified as necessities. Any couple who decide to purchase them should be sure that they remain within their economic capability. Other people are tempted to purchase motorcycles, new cars, various kitchen appliances, new clothes, and so on. Luxuries invariably trap a couple into spending right up to their income level and beyond, with nothing left over for savings. A simple rule is that if sufficient money is not left over each month to apply to savings, then there is none available for luxury items. I have seen many couples who were thrilled to acquire some luxury item one month but were depressed the next month because an unexpected expense ruined their financial security.

President N. Eldon Tanner, noted Church leader and financier, said, "I realize that young families find it necessary at times to purchase on credit. But we caution you not to buy more than is truly necessary and to pay off your debts as quickly as possible. When money is tight, avoid the extra burden of additional interest charges." (Ensign, November 1979, p. 82.)

Savings accounts may allow for a luxury or two, but mostly they protect us against those emergency expenses that few of us are ever prepared enough to meet. Marti and I have found in our own life that budgeting for emergencies does help to cushion the blow. We have also had success with saving small amounts of money on a monthly basis to provide for the large expenses that we know will come regularly, such as automobile and home insurance and utility bills.

Money worries remain one of the most important challenges to the security of every married couple. Few people understand that a concerted effort to consult and to carefully chart family finances can bring surprising contentment. If economic disaster brings with it misery and often a broken marriage, economic planning can bring joy and greater stability. It is worth the effort.
