Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

7

In-Laws

There are many different psychological factors operating when newly married couples interact with in-laws. Parents have dreams for their children: a certain kind of education, profession, friends, and idealized impressions of the right mates. Since children sometimes differ dramatically from their parents, this image can rarely be completely satisfied. Frequently parents must resist the feeling that their son or daughter is being taken away from them. That fear may cause them to be defensive and to try to maintain control of their children by loaning money or giving advice. At the same time, a newly married couple usually feels uneasy and fearful about the many decisions they have ahead and are prone to seek advice and be dependent on others, most notably their parents. They are vulnerable. Clearly, couples and in-laws need to approach their relationship with care.

Some couples experience conflicts with in-laws even before they are married. As Scott and Sandra approached their wedding day, they experienced predictable clashes with their parents. Scott's political views were completely opposite of Sandra's father, and so they avoided any political discussions. Although Scott's parents liked Sandra, they had the typical fear that she was not entirely suited to their son. Scott's parents considered Sandra's parents to be on a higher social plane and were uncomfortable with them in social settings. When the wedding invitations were printed, they did not include the names of Scott's parents. His parents were hurt and thought the omission was a personal affront. Actually Sandra's parents intended no malice and had carefully studied wedding protocol. They honestly thought they were following accepted etiquette by including only the names of the bride's parents. The uncomfortable episode blew over, but it was symptomatic of the problems every couple face as they approach marriage.

When Brenda and Steve were married, they found that one of the most prevalent arguments they had about in-laws concerned which ones they should visit on Sundays or holidays. After experiencing angry words for several weeks in a row, they finally devised a system of alternating visits. For instance, they would eat Thanksgiving dinner at Brenda's parents' home, Christmas dinner at Steve's parents', and the next year they would reverse it. Similarly, they alternated other holidays and Sundays. As soon as it became evident that Brenda and Steve were trying to deal with the problem equitably, the parents were able to accept the principle. Everyone was reasonably happy with the system, and the anxiety went out of their relationship.

Ruth's and Tim's problems with in-laws stemmed from geography. Both sets of parents lived only a few houses from each other in the same neighborhood. If Ruth and Tim visited Ruth's parents and not Tim's, his parents invariably considered themselves discriminated against. Word always seemed to travel that they had been at one house and not the other. At first, Ruth and Tim explained to their parents the reasons that they found it impractical to visit both at one time, but the issue was emotional enough that discussion was fruitless. Both sets of parents fully expected the couple to spend a large portion of every weekend with them. Finally, in desperation, Ruth and Tim decided to either go elsewhere or simply stay home. They and their parents might have been happier if they had used an alternating system like Brenda and Steve's. The in-laws were at fault for intimating that one set of parents was better in their children's eyes, and the couple were at fault for giving up.

When Wes and Anita finished school in Massachusetts, he received job offers out of state, and they decided to move to California. At first it was disturbing to them to think of leaving their parents, hometown, and lifelong friends. But three months after they had moved, they noticed an interesting phenomenon. Their quarreling had virtually stopped. When they analyzed it, they concluded that most of their quarrels had been rooted in disagreements over in-laws. Wes had been offended when Anita made a comment uncomplimentary to his mother. Anita had been offended when Wes refused to have Sunday dinner with her parents. Settled in California, they found that their discussion of in-laws was limited to letters and phone calls, and the occasions to hurt each other's feelings dramatically disappeared. They missed their parents and periodically traveled back to visit them. Their parents also occasionally visited them from the East. When they did, Wes and Anita noticed that their relationship was heightened and improved. Both sets of parents and the couple seemed to appreciate each other more than they would have had Wes and Anita continued living down the street. After a few years, Wes developed a relationship with Anita's parents that was surprisingly close and mutually appreciated. When Anita thought back on the clashes they had experienced early in their marriage, she was incredulous. Their marriage seemed to benefit by the absence of day-to-day association.

President Hugh B. Brown offered this wise advice:

In many cases the cause of divorce can be traced right to the doorstep of unwise in-laws. As each new marriage craft sets sail, there should be a warning call, which is familiar to all ocean travelers, "All ashore that's going ashore," whereupon all in-laws should get off the matrimonial boat and return only at infrequent intervals and then only as invited guests for brief visits. If they are wise and polite, they will remember they are merely guests and not members of the crew. They will make no comment on the condition or management of the ship and will leave the controls entirely in the hands of the captain and the mate. To do otherwise is to invite trouble for hosts and guests alike. (You and Your Marriage, p. 138.)

I remember vividly a class on courtship and marriage taught by Lowell L. Bennion at the University of Utah. When discussing in-laws, Dr. Bennion cleared the blackboard completely, then drew one circle on the far left-hand side of the board and another circle on the far right-hand side. "Now," he said forebodingly, "this circle is you . . . and this other circle, clear over here . . . is your parents!" Everyone got the point.

In the ward where I grew up, one well-known family owned a large plot of land. Whenever one of the children would get married, this family would build another little house on the family plot, until there was a veritable village of close relatives. Apparently, this plan had the kind of mixed success it might have anywhere. After a short time some members of the family moved far away, while others seemed content to remain for a lifetime. To some, the decision to live so close to in-laws was a mistake, and others adjusted to it smoothly. This example suggests the futility of making blanket rules that apply to everyone equally. Some people may get along better with their in-laws than others and be contented living near them. Others seem destined to have a series of arguments and unpleasant times. It is safe to say that living close to in-laws may create hazards that a couple would otherwise not face. It really has nothing to do with the ability of the couple and the parents to blend with each other; rather, it has more to do with the frustrations of blending two sets of personalities, incomes, schedules, and life-styles. When antagonisms occur, they may remain for many years. As a general rule, married couples are better off not living with other married couples, whoever they are.

Debra and Carl came to me for advice about their economic situation. They thought their solution was to move into a large house with another couple (fellow ward members and good friends) to enable both couples to economize on rent and utilities. They planned to stay only until their finances were on a firmer footing; but they looked forward to the move. They loved the other couple and were confident that they would enjoy participating in many activities together. I cautioned them against it. I pointed out that everyone needs privacy and that there would be very little with two couples in the same house. I recommended that they not live with friends because the relationship might be adversely affected by the strain of two couples with different habits, needs, and schedules living under the same roof. I told them about Vaughn and Gail, whose relationship with their best friends was destroyed after one year of living next door to each other. But like so many young couples, they had already made their decision and had really come to me to have it confirmed. They had great difficulty understanding how such a warm friendship could be threatened. Less than three months later, Debra and Carl returned to talk again, a very unhappy couple, full of sad stories about the loss of their freedom, invasion of their privacy, and the alleged "obnoxious acts" committed by their good friends. They announced plans to move out immediately and said that they realized belatedly the correctness of my advice. By this time, it was small consolation. Both couples had already learned much more about each other than they ever wanted to know.

I have known several other young couples who decided to move in with in-laws "for just a few months," confident that the relationship would be harmonious. Although economic expediency dictated most of these cases, the couples and their parents would have been happier if the marriage had been delayed until their financial status was healthier. Many couples take advantage of what they think is an ideal situation, an opportunity to move into the basement apartment of their in-laws, only to find that maintaining their independence is virtually impossible. Couples who do this really never leave home—or the watchful eye of their parents.

When Wynne and Lois were married, they moved several miles away from their parents, but they had financial uncertainties. They were both attending the university, and they were having a difficult time making ends meet. They confided their problems to Lois's parents during a visit, and Lois's affluent father made them an attractive offer. He would buy them a home with no financial obligation to them, removing their biggest economic headache. Without thinking carefully and because they knew that the gift was inspired out of love for them, they readily agreed to the proposal. They could not think of a good reason to refuse the offer. After they acquired the house, Lois's father began to offer advice on so many aspects of the young couple's life that they resented him. Yet they never felt as though they had a right to reject his advice or even to disagree because he had done so much for them.

Parents frequently offer to loan or give money to a couple or to arrange employment for one or both people. While always well-meant and understandable, each act tends to make the couple obligated to the parents, whether or not they want to be. In so doing they become dependent and unable to make many decisions of their own. If in-laws have given financial aid, they often expect their advice to be followed. Some in-laws will be tempted to remind the couple of the help they have received. There are exceptions, of course. Unusual circumstances or emergencies may arise, from which parents cannot resist bailing out their children. Humanitarianism may come first, and love of family can never be denied. But the general rule persists that offering financial help usually is associated with control, and the relationship may suffer accordingly. On the other hand, the bank can loan the money without being a partner in the couple's intimate relationship and can be repaid with no special favors involved. Couples who borrow from in-laws may also feel less an obligation to repay. They may drag their feet and fail to develop the same sense of commitment to creditors that is necessary for temporal security.

Like all couples, Beverly and Roger had disagreements early in their marriage that caused them to be angry. Afterward Beverly would call her mother on the telephone and recount to her the entire argument. Over a period of months Beverly's mother developed hostile feelings toward Roger. By the time Roger and Beverly had been married for two years, their disagreements decreased, and their marriage became happier and more stable. Unfortunately Beverly's mother refused to believe it. When the in-laws visited, there was friction because they always commented unfavorably on Roger's disposition. Beverly became very depressed because her mother evidently could not forget the stories she had heard about Roger and correspondingly could not forgive him. Roger was offended because Beverly had confided their differences to her mother. By allowing her mother to share the intimate details of their married life, Beverly compromised her relationship with Roger. The commitment and loyalty that they felt for each other should have exceeded what they felt for their parents.

Sometimes the conflicts that couples have with in-laws increase when they have children of their own. Couples should not make the mistake of expecting their parents to be "built-in baby-sitters." Usually, couples feel greater trust in their own parents than in anyone else, and so they naturally feel comfortable in leaving their children with them. But in-laws who baby-sit usually feel some responsibility for child rearing; they will invariably offer advice or argue about methods of discipline. Mark and Melanie frequently brought their two young children to Melanie's parents when they went out. After several months Melanie became disconcerted when her mother gave her regular instructions about the children's care. Next she noticed that her children were giving more credence to her mother's views than they were giving to hers. If Mark and Melanie had lived several hundred miles from their in-laws, they would not have had this problem. On the other hand, their children would have been denied the very real advantages of having close contact with loving grandparents. Children who grow up with grandparents usually develop a sense of family and responsibility that helps to define them as individuals. They also learn to appreciate age, wisdom, and experience as only a healthy relationship with grandparents can provide. Because they see grandchildren less, grandparents are often less conscious of discipline than they were with their own children and find little need to show temper or irritability. Any couple should recognize the advantages of this special relationship but at the same time try to protect the integrity of their own role as parents. The children may then benefit from a balanced, healthy view of authority.

Hugh B. Brown told the story of one Canadian Indian tribe that required that mother-in-law and son-in-law never speak or cross each other's path after the wedding. If either broke the rule, he or she had to forfeit a pony to the other. There were allegedly few forfeits and few divorces in that tribe. (You and Your Marriage, pp. 139-40.) Although this example seems extreme, we tend to offer the same advice when we say: "You don't have to marry the whole family! You are only marrying one person!" Actually in many ways you do marry the whole family. Even if you choose to keep the association with family members to a minimum, many ties will continue. Most people do not favor the abandonment of family connections and heritage in return for a marriage partner. In fact, it is asking too much. We are all products of our families and maintain a love for them even under the worst of conditions. It is advisable for every person who marries to make an honest effort to cultivate his or her relationship with the in-laws too. Even in cases where backgrounds and interests are very dissimilar, productive and happy relationships may still be developed. You owe it to your mate and to your children to make the attempt.

Parents of newly married couples should understand that any couple is entitled to make its own decisions and its own mistakes. Parents need to willingly relinquish control. Otherwise, the young couple, struggling to find its own approach, may never understand true commitment to its marriage and may be denied a strong bond. Newlyweds need to understand early that their best source of advice and comfort is not their parents, or their best friends, or their neighbors, but each other.
