Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

8

Sensitivity to Feelings

The way a husband and wife look at each other is often a reflection of their sensitivity to each other. Ever since I first met Marti, her eyes have had a powerful impact on me. I can look into them even from across a room and melt. One of the most interesting facets of being in love is the ability to communicate by looking into each other's eyes. I can still look at her and feel the mood or message she is reflecting.

This sensitivity can be a distinct advantage in a marriage because it allows either partner to be aware of thoughts, fears, and concerns that should be acted upon. In a social gathering, if a man can read impending disaster on his wife's face, he can spirit her away from the group without protracted or embarrassing conversation. A person may say something in a group that is potentially embarrassing, and a look from his partner may reveal to him that he has made a mistake. If he is sensitive to it, he will change his conversational approach. Taking a safer course when warned by a partner can save friendships and make life more productive.

On the other hand, some people react adversely to that same kind of communication. I have known people who are angered when a mate tries to communicate silently, and they purposely reject it. They know what the look means, but they ignore it because they dislike what seems to be an attempt to control their words or actions. This unfortunate reaction discourages an especially intimate form of communication. A relationship may be hurt irreparably if one partner chooses to ignore intimate avenues of communication developed through love and confidence in each other.

When Dick and Angela were together in a group, he was in the habit of dominating the conversation by recounting personal stories he found amusing. One night Angela was embarrassed and uncomfortable because she considered the stories inappropriate for the group. She began sending Dick silent messages through her eyes, but he was so carried away with good humor that he did not even notice. Finally, when he became aware that she was not just solemn but actually threatening fire with her eyes, he recognized what she was trying to convey but chose to ignore her. He was angry at her for failing to trust his judgment. Unfortunately the earthy nature of his stories offended several people while others thought his manner obnoxious. Before the evening was over he realized that he should have followed her suggestions.

Actually, the most severe effect was on Angela, who was disappointed and hurt that her sincere attempts to influence him were brushed aside. None of their communication that night had been verbal, but both knew and understood it. To ignore it seemed to her a violation of their intimate relationship. His approach reflected his lack of judgment, and when we talked he realized that. Instead of regarding her silent messages as intimate and loving communication, he had interpreted them as an invasion of his privacy and an insult to his judgment. After discussing the incident, he realized that her motives were pure and that he could and should communicate with her similarly. The silent message was a strength to their relationship.

If a person knowingly and consciously hurts the feelings of his partner, he is taking both of them on a sure route to unhappiness. They may steadily desensitize each other and erode trust so completely that communication is impossible. If a person can knowingly hurt feelings, he indicates a serious lack of respect for his partner, suggesting that either the marriage is vulnerable or the person who is hurting the other is in need of counseling.

Most often, hurt feelings result from a trigger-happy temper. One person says or does things he immediately regrets but which hurt deeply. We all have different levels of anger. Some of us stay angry only a few seconds and rarely act on it; while others blow up, scream, and even commit acts of violence. One of the best ways to repair the damage caused by words delivered in anger is to apologize. People often think that angry words will be forgotten if their actions return to normal and nothing more is said. While actions undoubtedly help, in this sensitive area, nothing should be left to the imagination. It is important to actually utter the words of an apology, proving that you can humble yourself and that you are capable of admitting mistakes. Otherwise, your partner will suspect that you are so insensitive as to be unaware of what you have done or that you do not love deeply enough to apologize. Eric Segal's Love Story led us to believe that "Love is never having to say you're sorry." We should rather believe and practice the opposite. Love demands that we be sensitive enough to apologize.

Our society has become increasingly accustomed to the use of sarcasm—in our humor, entertainment, and relationships. But saying one thing and meaning another is a dangerous combination in love. While a sarcastic comment may be considered harmless and amusing to one person, it may deeply hurt another. Husbands and wives need to be aware of each other's sensitivities and pattern their relationship accordingly. If sarcasm is a tool that endangers respect, then couples should avoid it. Some people become so accustomed to living with each other that they think they can say and do virtually anything and not be misunderstood. Married couples should be wary of the use of sarcasm in their relationships even if spouses are confident about their mutual feelings.

Every person in love wants his or her loved one to inquire about matters of health and happiness. If your mate had a sleepless night or is suffering from a cold, you ought to be willing to show your love and interest by asking about health and needs. Questions left unasked imply lack of concern or interest.

On the other hand, few people appreciate a hypochondriac who persists in discussing his or her health at great length. Betsy was determined that whenever Victor brought up his health in conversation, she would refuse to discuss it since all of his conversation relating to health was negative, depressing, and exaggerated. When he understood the nature of her objection and that it did not affect her love for him, he accepted it; and it helped him to get his mind off himself. Unselfishly he became more sensitive to her needs and desires.

If marriage partners talk about problems and expect love and concern from their companions, they should realize that their mates may feel the need for equal time. If one partner always has more severe or more numerous problems than the other, a wall of hostility instead of love and compassion may build up. There needs to be an equality of understanding and compassion in all matters that concern two people.

Unselfishness, too, is a key ingredient to successful marriage. One need not be subservient in order to be sensitive to one's spouse. Carolyn has health frailties that curtail her physical activity. Russ is sensitive to this and always speaks in her behalf to prevent embarrassment and searches for the best physical circumstances for her comfort. Because she tires easily and cannot stand for long periods, he does everything possible to alleviate her discomfort. We went to a concert with them and found that all seats were filled. We decided to remain, but he was resourceful enough to find her a chair almost immediately. It was not possible for her to sit through the entire concert, but his determination to find the chair allayed her suffering considerably. She appreciated it and considers him an unselfish man who wants to make the one he loves comfortable even at the cost of his own comfort.

Frank and Cheryl face a more severe test of their relationship. For over a year Frank has suffered from an illness that physicians thus far have been unable to diagnose definitively. In the meantime he suffers excruciating pain that is debilitating to both his personal and professional life. Cheryl, who is especially sensitive, not only must assume burdens and responsibilities that they had formerly shared, but must also be his counselor and comforter. She must constantly reinforce his morale and nurse his self-confidence. Because of their impressive love and devotion to each other, they are coping with this tragedy. She is an unusually selfless and independent personality, adding to her steadiness during troubled times.

It is fairly common for people who are wrapped up in their own interests to ignore their partners in public. When Barry and Kay go to virtually any public gathering, he becomes enmeshed in a long conversation with someone he has met there, and Kay is abandoned. Barry seems oblivious to her absence. To her credit, she has learned to handle this awkward situation unobtrusively. She never drops her guard or even appears uncomfortable. Essentially she has learned to live on her own in public settings.

This pattern is undesirable for their marriage because he allows himself at critical times to forget all about his wife. Evenings out are to be their time together. Since he is a busy professional throughout the week, she has the right to expect his full attention when they go out together. Barry has no intention of being rude to Kay, although that is the ultimate effect. Since he does not mix well in groups and detests small talk, his habit of focusing on one person is a self-protective device. Nevertheless, he should work hard to correct his behavior before Kay decides that she is independently successful enough that she could leave him entirely. It takes an extremely tolerant person to withstand this behavior consistently. People who thoughtlessly carry on their professional lives or church business at social events, to the exclusion of a spouse, may cause their marriage to sour.

A sensitive person will avoid talking publicly about his or her partner in either jest or derision. Happily married people usually consider their personal life to be confidential. They would not feel comfortable discussing their sexual relationship, for example, within a group of people, no matter how friendly the group. People who really care for each other will be sensitive about protecting their intimate relationships.

Willard and Jane's relationship suffered a great deal because of his tendency to make public some details of their intimate life together. Willard saw himself as still thin and attractive after 15 years of marriage, and it galled him that Jane had gained weight. He never ceased to take advantage of the opportunity to jibe her in my presence, implying that her weight made lovemaking less desirable for him. He always did it with a joke and a flourish so that it was possible that some people did not take it seriously. Her face would always turn ashen, and her reply was cynical and biting rather than light and humorous.

It may be that they had many private chats in which she refused to consider seriously the importance of her appearance. Even if that were the case, to make her weight a public issue and, more important, to put their sex life on display was inconsiderate. In doing so, he was endangering the foundation of their marriage.

Mark seemed happily married to Marion, a very attractive woman. But whenever we were together, he would make all of us uncomfortable by dropping embarrassing comments about the attractiveness of other women. For instance, one evening while we were watching television, he insisted on commenting about the physical assets of a female entertainer and comparing them to Marion's. The comment was made at Marion's expense in her and my wife's presence. This seemed in the worst possible taste and caused us to curtail our association with him. He would also comment about the attractiveness of other women we knew and would talk to other women in a flirtatious manner. Our relationship steadily became more uncomfortable, and Marion grew more and more unhappy. She seemed unsure of herself and tended to withdraw from many public situations. Little acts of insensitivity accumulate. A spouse may try to ignore them, but they are constant reminders that one partner lacks respect for the other. Over a period of time they may destroy love.

Victor L. Brown, Jr., tells of a man who discovered late in life that he had been insensitive enough to his wife's needs to make her unhappy. For years Donald had left the nurturing of their children almost completely to Lorna, who resented it but worked around him. He resolved to change his behavior and began concentrating almost exclusively on her needs. He consciously redesigned his work and civic schedule so that he would have more time with Lorna and the family and she would have more time for her interests. Then suddenly he realized that in doing so he had become a martyr by "pretending not to have his own needs." Even in redirecting efforts toward his wife's needs, he managed to remain the dominant personality, "seeing himself as a heroic, enlightened male, nobly meeting Lorna's needs." When his wife "demanded that he meet her as a whole person rather than as a collection of needs, he had to become a nurturant companion and friend." This was not an easy transformation but was possible over time because of their commitment to each other. He wanted to become sensitive to others and be able to nurture his wife in ways that he himself wanted to be nurtured. (Human Intimacy, pp. 76-78.)

This example may sound idealistic, but such transformations are possible when both partners are committed to each other and have determined to make each other happy. In order to make serious changes in behavior patterns, each partner must have an honest desire to improve him or herself and the marriage.

When I was a child I noticed that some of the older couples in our neighborhood strongly resembled each other. I remember asking my parents if they were related. How was it possible, I enquired, that they could be about the same height, that their facial expressions could be similar, that their voices sounded alike, and that they made similar jokes? So far as I remember, I never received a satisfactory answer, but I think I have one today: People who grow to resemble each other after many years of married life are demonstrating their sensitivity to each other. They have become so committed to each other's feelings, thoughts, and desires that they act on them in an effort to make the partners happy. To their friends and relatives, they appear as one—a happy, secure couple. As the Lord says about his people in Doctrine and Covenants 38:27, "Be one; and if ye are not one ye are not mine."

The greatest example I have seen of sensitivity came from my father and mother. Each of them always made a giant effort to be sensitive to the other, in a myriad of conditions. At times they were playful and romantic, and at other times they were serious and devoted. In the last several years of their marriage, my father, ten years older than my mother, nursed her night and day until her death. He was constantly sensitive to her every need and desire, even in the middle of the night. When she became confined to her bed, he fed her and bathed her and kept her company. If anyone visited who failed to understand her illness or needs or expressed any doubts about her condition, my father was the first to respond in her defense.

As a young man he had courted her and married her; they had had four children together and reared them under sometimes difficult financial circumstances; they had lived a long and happy life together; then when she contracted cancer that eventually made it impossible for her to eat normally, he nurtured her. When she passed away, he was so caught up in serving her that he continued to wake up in the middle of the night, thinking he had heard her voice calling for his help. I will always revere my father for that earnest example of sensitivity.

Sensitivity must be protected and cultivated to enable a loving relationship to benefit. Those silent, electric messages—the look or the touch—will continue to breed strength over the years.
