Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

9

Sexuality

Carlfred Broderick says that "for the most part, the quality of the marriage is reflected in the quality of the sexual relationship." (Couples, p. 138.) Yet we should never fail to remember that the sexual relationship is part of a much bigger relationship, a blending of values and goals that goes well beyond sex itself. Broderick also says, "Sex is most rewarding when it is part of a caring, enduring relationship." (Couples, p. 154.)

There is no question that a marriage nurtured with romance will be more sexually fulfilling. Sexual intimacy is the natural capstone to the romantic life, and psychologists generally believe that women and men usually have more satisfaction in sexual relations if they continually work at romance.

Janet and Ken tried to improve their sexual relationship by attending erotic movies. Ken believed that he was more interested in romance and sexuality than his wife. He thought that Janet's interest might be stimulated by being exposed to worldly attitudes and actions. She had no desire to go but agreed to do so in an effort to please him. Although the movies did stimulate his sexual interest (which needed no further stimulation), they destroyed hers because they caused her to regard sexual intercourse as degrading. What she saw on the screen was foreign to her own feelings, values, and experience.

This couple had greater success in improving their sexual life when they realized that they would have to make mutual compromises, instead of doing whatever pleased Ken. It was important for him to admit that although Janet's interest in sex was not as great as his, her love for him was strong and unconditional. When they both accepted that fact without taking it personally, both were willing to approach their sexuality with more understanding. Janet made an effort to engage in sexual relations with Ken when she was less inclined to do so, and he scaled down his sexual advances and expectations and worked harder at pleasing her. Previously they had failed to understand that their sexual relationship would never be mutually satisfying until they were solicitous of each other's happiness and well-being.

Unfortunately, the video revolution has caused the problem this couple faced to be even more serious for others. It is now possible for couples to view videotapes that are filled with pornography as a prelude to lovemaking. Men are now being tempted to pick up videotapes at a shop and bring them home to "surprise" their wives. This practice can bring heartache and disappointment.

One reason for this is that pornography portrays women in a plethora of demeaning situations and activities. Obviously, use of such material can never enhance the sexual relationship of a sincere couple. The same is true of the magazines that too many men resort to for "pleasure," when, in fact, they are being taught that women are playthings whose wishes and feelings are unimportant. Every couple should improve their sexual relationship by working together with understanding and compassion.

Even seemingly harmless advertisements appearing in newspapers and on television often use women as ornaments or playthings to be exploited. Men who fail to recognize that disturbing fact will be more likely to regard women as sex objects instead of human beings. I have counseled with many men who seemed to be at least partially victimized by their culture and who failed to consider their wives as equals. Both women and men should come to grips with that problem and accept each other as equals in order for their sexual relationships to achieve their full potential.

Invariably some people have physical needs and desires for sexual activity that do not blend easily with the needs of their partner. Consider, for instance, the "day person" married to the "night person." A "day person" arises early, works at peak performance in the morning, puts in a good day, and prefers to retire early, hoping for at least eight hours sleep. After a hard day, this person becomes drowsy in the early evening hours because the body is already running down. On the other hand, a "night person" enjoys sleeping in occasionally, usually begins the day slowly, and gets cranked up for peak accomplishment in the afternoon. By the evening hours, this person is operating on all cylinders and continues to do so until midnight or even later. Some "night persons" need less sleep than "day persons" and may get by on five or six hours of sleep a night.

People who have these physiological differences will inevitably experience marital clashes. A "day person" may have a hard time staying awake during a late movie and will be unpersuaded afterward that sexual activity would make an enjoyable ending to the evening. "Day persons" and "night persons" have to be sensitive to each other's needs and body chemistry. Sexual activity may be more pleasurable for both if engaged in during a daytime hour, perhaps the morning.

Varying the circumstances of sexual interaction is healthy for reasons of variety and romance. For many people fatigue or other pressures of the day mean that nighttime sexual activity is undesirable. Both partners might be pleasantly surprised if they could engage in sex in the morning or sometime during the day or could steal away from the home occasionally for an intimate weekend at a motel. Doorbells and telephones as well as requests of young children often ruin a couple's best intentions. A lock on a bedroom door can be well worth its price in the peace of mind that it brings. On the other hand, sexual relationships that are too carefully planned can result in tenseness, mediocrity, or disappointment. Every couple's sexual life needs a generous amount of spontaneity.

Husbands and wives may also have different needs and desires for the frequency of sexual activity. One person may desire intercourse three times a week while the other may prefer only once. Twice a week in this hypothetical case may not be completely satisfactory to each person, but as a mutually acceptable compromise it may be important in increasing sexual fulfillment for each person. Give and take in marriage applies equally to the sexual relationship.

Too many people attempt to convince their partners to accept their own time clock for sexual performance. This is inadvisable and may result in degradation or exploitation of the partner. There are men, for instance, who desire sexual intercourse every day, some several times a day; yet it is not desirable for such men to insist that their wives, who may desire intercourse only once a week, submit to them daily. If wives do so, the result will most likely be frustration and antagonism.

Ellen and Paul came to me to discuss Paul's frustration because he desired sexual intercourse much more often than Ellen. They loved each other deeply, were compatible with respect to personality, and shared many interests. However, where sex was concerned, they were working at cross purposes. I suggested that they compromise—that they have intercourse more often than she desired but not so often as he desired; that he exercise self-control and work hard to understand her needs and to help her achieve sexual fulfillment. The fact that Ellen was not as sexually active as Paul desired made him more demanding and less sensitive to her needs during intercourse. At the same time, she was tense, constantly worrying that he was not satisfied and that she would be expected to perform when she was unable to do so. Agreeing to have intercourse less often would relieve pressure on her and enable her to make the experience more enjoyable for him so that their sexual encounters would be more satisfying to both. They agreed that their most satisfying and exciting sexual experiences were those that both had enjoyed equally.

They took much of the advice and noticed improvements. At one point, they improvised in an effort to cope with the pressure she was still feeling. Ellen seriously wondered if Paul were capable of sexual intercourse every night, and she suggested as an experiment that they try. Almost too willingly he agreed. Throughout the week she became steadily more fatigued, and he became almost overcome with lust. He found himself thinking ahead to their evening activities so much that it was difficult for him to keep his mind on his work. Sex was taking over his life, and his sexual desires were affecting his wife negatively so that she was enjoying intercourse less each night. After one week, they discussed the problem objectively and agreed that engaging in sex so often was not desirable. They reverted to the compromise arrangement and decided that spontaneity without obsession was much more fun.

Women who desire sex less often than their husbands are sometimes made to believe that they will drive their husbands to infidelity. If the differences in sexual appetites are not dealt with frankly, infidelity can be one of the results. Even so, the woman would never be responsible for a man's inability to control his passions. A decision on his part to seek sex elsewhere would reveal a character flaw as well as a carnal nature. Both the man and the woman have a responsibility to meet their differences squarely and honestly and work out acceptable compromises. The suggestion that the woman alone is responsible for success in their sexual relationship is sexist and naive.

To be mutually satisfying, lovemaking should be gentle; it should include caresses, conversation, and tenderness. Moreover, both partners should realize that there is an unceasing need for balance in life. Sex must never define the marriage relationship; rather it is one way of expressing love and commitment. With unselfishness and tenderness, sexual intimacy can be truly exciting and pleasurable. If sexual activity becomes the important part of every day, the balance in marriage will be lost.

Marriage surveys have demonstrated that most couples are happier if sexual interaction is initiated almost equally by both partners. Unhappiness results if one partner always initiates sexual activity and the other is always the one who refuses. Furthermore, surveys demonstrate that when both partners equally share the process of initiating or refusing sexual interaction, they will actually engage in intercourse more frequently. (American Couples, p. 223.) Initiating sexual activity equally takes time and effort for those couples who are accustomed to the traditional expectations of man approaching woman. It is worth the effort, however, because it takes the pressure off one sex, makes for more spontaneity, and downplays the stereotypical conception of the male exercising "control." It is unfortunate when the man controls the sexual relationship—it should be mutually worked out, mutually enjoyed, and entered into only with the willingness of both parties.

Merrill said that Gerry often seemed too tired for sex, but that she was always willing to respond "because I promised you." While he appreciated her gesture and willingness, he could never agree to proceed at those times because he wanted her to be equally involved. Although they had problems that needed resolution, he was justified in wanting sexual intimacy that was mutually pleasurable. This desire prevented him from thinking of her as an object and of the sexual act as one of self-gratification. Merrill and Gerry needed variety, spontaneity, and a willingness to work together to find times for mutually satisfying sexual activity.

Withholding sex is sometimes used as a weapon in a relationship that one of the partners perceives as unequal. A husband or wife who always initiates sexual activity may be regarded by his or her spouse as too powerful, and the spouse may feel the need to curtail that power. Rejection, when practiced regularly, can cause grave feelings of inadequacy and insecurity and over a period of time can seriously harm the relationship. I have known couples who allowed the rejection process to rule their sex lives. Women sometimes use rejection as a tool to get consideration and material rewards. Instead of devising a mutually agreeable sexual relationship, they take power into their own hands, based on their sexual attractiveness. The result is a distortion of the normal sexual relationship.

Communication about sex is vital. Each couple need to talk about the approaches they prefer and enjoy, about techniques, frequency, and their philosophy of sex. It takes work and careful thought to understand a partner's needs and responses. Expression of that concern will produce a rare appreciation and empathy likely to enhance sexual enjoyment. Husband and wife should talk to each other about their areas of sensitivity, about the touch each prefers. When Marti and I were married, her physician gave her a little pamphlet with advice for newly married couples about sex. We read it and focused on one brief sentence: "Frankness is the key." We laughed about it then but found ourselves quoting it seriously as we tried to communicate with each other about sex.

Husbands and wives need to understand each other's different physical desires and needs in order to be able to give each other pleasure. Some of those differences can be felt or sensed but most need to be discussed candidly. The fact that most men are more visually stimulated than women is one difference that is helpful for each partner to understand. Because of this, men may often want the lights on while women want them off. Men may desire that women wear certain clothing in order to enhance visual appeal, but many women may feel uncomfortable doing so. Insisting that the wife dress a certain way despite her objection is counterproductive to the relationship. Compromises must be reached humanely and compassionately.

The fact that most women need a longer time to achieve satisfaction in lovemaking is very important for men to understand. Some women have also told me that they have no immediate, vivid memory of their last sexual encounter, which indicates to me that each new sexual experience will take serious effort to create satisfaction. Most men, on the other hand, retain a clear visual image of the last encounter and often desire to recreate it. These and other equally important differences should be discussed in an effort to make sex mutually fulfilling.

Variety in the sexual relationship is beneficial as long as it is mutually agreeable and satisfying and deepens appreciation and respect between husband and wife. Spouses should never impose their desires on their partners and hope to enhance love and respect. I believe that respect is ultimately important to achieve happy and fulfilling sexuality. Any couple will likely be happier if they decide in advance what activities are desirable and chart their relations accordingly.

We tend to encourage, however, overly flexible attitudes toward sexuality by saying "whatever both partners agree to is perfectly acceptable." The truth is that to please each other, both partners may agree to practices that portray a degrading picture of sex or of each other. Those practices that are demeaning or degrading to either men or women should be avoided. Tying one another up or abusing one another in other ways is not healthy sexuality and will not promote the deep love necessary to happy marriages. Every person should protect his or her integrity and simply refuse to participate in sexual acts that result in shame, guilt, or unhappiness.

A sense of humor can be one of the more valuable assets in sex. Too many people take themselves too seriously during lovemaking. A couple can develop a more casual attitude and realize that if lovemaking is not as successful today as they would prefer, they will have other days and other opportunities. There is always room for improvement, and the couple married many years are liable to enjoy a more fulfilling sexual relationship than are newlyweds.

When I consider all of the needs and problems that have been expressed to me by couples who have had difficulty with sex in their marriage, I would offer this general advice: Be loving and romantic—never lustful and urgent. Lust encourages self-gratification, whereas love by its nature inspires an interest and desire to make the partner happy. Unfortunately, lust can be present in marriage. If either men or women are overcome with physical desires and become obsessed with the physical attributes of their partners, they will have a difficult time making their partners happy. Usually, spouses can sense the lustful feelings and may become turned off, disgusted, or frustrated. Each person is a thinking, rational being who can control his or her thoughts and actions. To show love, couples need do only those things that will give their partners pleasure.

Because of our culture, we are all prone to fantasies of a romantic or sexual nature. Fantasies are often born of lust, meaning that they are useful for self-gratification instead of mutual satisfaction. Consider how harmful it would be for a person to fantasize about a sexual relationship with someone other than the person he is making love to. Consider again how harmful it would be to fantasize about things he would like his partner to do while they are doing something else. Some people get so caught up in sexual fantasies that they express them to their partners during lovemaking. This usually causes the mate to have oppressive feelings of inadequacy and disappointment. Everyone is susceptible to occasional fantasizing, but he or she should make a clear effort to keep a solid line between fantasy and reality. A husband or wife should resist temptations to indulge in the fantasy or to make the fantasy reality. Successful lovers devote their complete attention to each other.

Richard told me he had such a difficult time making love to Carol that he fantasized that she was a movie star. Apparently her face and figure didn't measure up to his expectations, and so he blanked them out of his mind and made love to someone who was not there. Although he never actually slipped and called her the wrong name, it was evident to her that he was thinking of someone else, perhaps an old girlfriend. Richard's habits came home to haunt him one night when she demanded that he explain his preoccupation and his distance from her. He had allowed fantasy to become reality.

A sexual relationship is the most complete example of emotional and physical union between human beings. When entered into with love and sincere concern for the welfare of the spouse, it can represent excitement, emotional satisfaction, and a very important part of a happy, fulfilling marriage. Lovemaking is wonderful if practiced not repetitiously but thoughtfully, with gentleness and deep feeling. Most important, husbands and wives should make every effort to make each other happy.
