Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

10

Coping with Anger and Disagreement

"A soft answer turneth away wrath: but grievous words stir up anger." (Proverbs 15:1.) Likewise, President Gordon B. Hinckley has declared that one of the cornerstones of a happy home is the "soft answer": "It seems to me that communication is essentially a matter of talking with one another. Let that talk be quiet for quiet talk is the language of love. It is the language of peace. It is the language of God. It is when we raise our voices that tiny mole hills of difference become mountains of conflict." (Cornerstones of a Happy Home, p. 8.)

Partners should approach disagreement in marriage calmly, reasonably, and with concern for each other. If they initially decide on that technique, they will have a better chance of practicing it in a crisis. Use of the soft answer protects the respect for each other that is vital to every relationship. Feelings are too often irreparably hurt by violent outbursts, name calling, or personal attacks that have little or nothing to do with the disagreement at hand. Physical abuse, of course, is unacceptable under any circumstances. Hitting, scratching, pushing, and slapping each other are disastrous results of disagreement. People who persist in inflicting harm on their partners undoubtedly need psychological counseling; and the partner who allows physical abuse without reporting it to authorities is on a collision course with tragedy.

In my experience, there are a number of men who would never consider abusing women but would freely abuse their children. People often discover their vulnerabilities and weaknesses after they get married and have children. The process of building a marriage and family puts stress on people that they have never before had to bear. Frank told me that he had never struck anyone until he and Kathy had children and that he was surprised to learn he was capable of spanking a child in anger. His anger lasted only a very short time, but he would swat the child several times on the rear and rush him to his room before his anger subsided. His behavior alarmed him, and he began to think about what accidents could happen during that explosive period. He could imagine, for instance, taking a child to his room and throwing him on his bed, and the child hitting his head and incurring serious harm. Determined that he did not want to victimize anyone by his anger, Frank resolved never to spank while he was angry but instead to order a child to his room or escort him there. By recognizing this problem he was able to control it realistically. All people, however, may not be so fortunate. People who find that they cannot control their anger under such circumstances should seek counseling.

Many people fail to recognize that they can reason even with very young children. Children may not understand everything adults want them to understand at a given minute, but they will understand a situation more clearly through reason than through hitting. Anger can be dangerous and unproductive. Anger itself, of course, is a natural and healthy reaction to many different problems, but we must be careful about how it is expressed.

Much of the verbal anger that people express to their children is not justified. If they could express it in unabusive ways, as noted child psychologist Haim Ginott suggests, then the children would know that parents get angry (a human trait), but that they use it in productive ways. According to Ginott, people can benefit from anger without insult. Rather than attack the personalities or characters of our partner or children, Ginott said that we should make very clear how our anger makes us feel: "I feel angry"; "I feel very, very angry"; "I feel furious." Or the situation may make us so angry that we feel the need to describe it in more detail: "When I see the shoes and the socks and the shirts and the sweaters spread all over the floor, I get angry, I get furious. I feet like opening the window and throwing the whole mess into the middle of the street." (Between Parent and Child, p. 51.)

Sometimes we can vent anger with a touch of humor. Ginott told of a thirteen-year-old boy who had been fighting with his older sister, hurling insults at her. "Mother walked into the room and said: 'I'm tired of your relentless hostility and acrimonious attitudes."' The boy and his sister looked at each other and burst into loud laughter. Another example was Roy, age fifteen, who pushed the mattress off his brother's bed to punish him for an insult. "Father intervened. In a stern voice, he said, 'There is no place for acts of revenge and retaliation in our home. It is against my cherished values.' The boys looked at their father in disbelief. This was the end of what could have become an endless argument." (Between Parent and Teenager, pp. 100-102.)

Children have infinitely more respect for parents who do not abuse each other or scream at each other. Howard said that his children think he and Barbara never argue. Once they had a minor disagreement over a car repair. Barbara thought that Howard had not been careful enough in insuring that the mechanic had completed the repairs he was supposed to make. She also considered him overzealous in seeking the repair of even the most minor problem no matter what their financial condition. They were arguing about this when their daughter came into the house and overheard them. She was shocked. They were not screaming but were obviously angry. The daughter said, "This is the first time I've ever seen you angry with each other!" That was a revealing comment, because Howard and Barbara had tried to work out their disagreements in private. They felt that argument in front of the children caused them to feel insecure. It was gratifying for them to know that their daughter had such a lofty opinion of her parents, even if it was not always justified. Unfortunately, children often feel responsible for their parents' disagreements, especially if the arguments result in divorce.

Ralph and Beth considered themselves happily married. Ralph had the utmost respect for Beth and wanted to make life happy and secure for her. When their children disappointed him, however, he would scream and hit them. This distressed Beth terribly. Both partners agreed that he was virtually incapable of doing any physical harm to her or even of talking abusively to her, yet he lashed out regularly at his children. Sometimes they acted as scapegoats for Ralph's seething anger at Beth, which he would not express to her. Most of the time, he just became frustrated at the difficulties of handling a large family or because he thought his children had been disrespectful to or inconsiderate of their mother. He didn't realize that his violent actions made his wife more unhappy than did the children's misbehavior. When he finally awakened to that painful fact, he decided to change his behavior. Because he loved his wife and children and wanted their approval, he was able to control his anger more frequently and make their life together more peaceful. Unfortunately many of the children had lived with the anger so long that their most vivid memories of their father were his temper tantrums.

If the disagreement is about rearing children, then the couple should talk it over and work out a compromise. It seems especially important, where children are concerned, that a couple form a united front. Working out differences in private allows the couple to support each other in the presence of the children. If the children believe that they can get what they want by going through one particular parent, then the discipline and order of the family will be effectively eliminated. Children should not have an opportunity to manipulate their parents, and they can do so if they realize that one parent has one philosophy and the other parent, another. One of the most familiar stories I hear is that of the child who asks permission from the parent he thinks will give him the answer he wants, ignoring the other.

I have known many couples who have had great difficulty agreeing on techniques of child rearing. In one especially volatile situation, Brent and Bobbie argued freely in front of the children about whether it was wise to allow a child to go out or what form of punishment was advisable. They did this because they had "just never got around to talking privately" about family matters. As a result, the children suffered and lost respect for their parents and their ability to make decisions.

People often get the mistaken impression that anger has no place in a marriage. According to Carlfred Broderick, "Anger works like a smoke detector. It warns you of danger so you can take appropriate action." Anger cannot be ignored; rather, it should be expressed productively. Broderick says that he sees many marriages in which the partners "simply contain their anger. . . . They may think they have a 'good' marriage. They may never say a cross word to each other. But neither do they have any warmth or sparkle in their relationship." There are also couples who go to extremes by pouring out anger over the slightest provocation. According to Broderick, "Couples who vent their anger and do nothing to get at its cause and cure are committing marital suicide." Steady, calm conversation is the best way to resolve anger. "Guard against saying things you'll later be sorry for. . . . And remember: willingness to compromise reflects strength of character—not weakness." (As quoted in Reader's Digest, June 1984, p. 24.)

Coping with disagreement is really a form of communication. If a couple regularly communicate, they can prevent many arguments from developing or can resolve others that do. Talking honestly about differences is important. If something is bothering the husband and he decides to keep it secret and brood over it, hostility toward his wife may follow. By the time the problem is brought out into the open, the problem will seem worse than it did originally. Rather than nursing a grudge for weeks, months, or even years, it is better to have a good discussion and work out a solution.

It is also better to forget those irritations that are so minute in a relationship. If she leaves the razor on the shower ledge and he is afraid it will fall on him while he showers, he should just take if off the ledge before he showers and forget it. If he leaves a soaked washcloth in the bottom of the sink, she should just wring out the washcloth and forget it. Everyone has idiosyncrasies, most of which are not important enough to justify major disagreements. It is possible and preferable to learn to live with a partner's little habits. If a small irritation can be resolved briefly in a friendly context, then no harm is done. But many people linger over the most minor problem and cause unnecessary anger and even bitterness.

When there are differences, a couple should try to gauge their importance. Does the disagreement concern the day-to-day relationship or is it merely a habit that one partner finds objectionable? Is the difference over an atypical incident that will probably never occur again? Is it an irritating comment? If a couple attempt to evaluate the seriousness of the problem, they can defuse many potentially destructive situations. When husbands or wives feel hurt or emotional, they are more likely to exaggerate incidents and allow them to color their relationships. If couples discuss problems with love and concern, the problems can usually be resolved.

A couple may find it hard at first to recognize some issues within their relationship as being relatively insignificant. For instance, I know couples who disagree on politics and argue vehemently about it. Some spouses become offended if their partners refuse to accept a certain political point of view or to agree to support a certain candidate. Politics is an important life issue but is usually quite separate and apart from the marriage relationship. It is perfectly acceptable for a couple very much in love to disagree about which presidential candidate to support. If a couple will treat such a difference creatively, it can even enrich their relationship.

There may be several matters about which a couple sincerely disagree. Marriage itself should not cause a person to relinquish beliefs that are not the same as the partner's, nor should it even require that all beliefs be blended into one. We should recognize that our partners have the right to make up their own minds.

Bertrand Russell says this about individuality in marriage:

There must be a feeling of complete equality on both sides; there must be no interference with mutual freedom; there must be the most complete physical and mental intimacy; and there must be a certain similarity in regard to standards of values. (It is fatal, for example, if one values only money while the other values only good work.) Given all these conditions, I believe marriage to be the best and most important relation that can exist between two human beings. If it has not often been realized hitherto, that is chiefly because husband and wife have regarded themselves as each other's policeman. If marriage is to achieve its possibilities, husbands and wives must learn to understand that whatever the law may say, in their private lives they must be free. (Marriage and Morals, pp. 143-44.)

A man and a woman should each have an equal opportunity to resolve disagreements. It is not right for the man to think that since he is "the head of the home," his opinion is automatically the right one. "The head of the home" can be wrong; yet many men endeavor to get what they want by pulling rank. A marriage run dictatorially by either the man or the woman will result in unhappiness for both. Gordon Hinckley said to husbands: "If you are guilty of demeaning behavior toward your wife, if you are prone to dictate and exercise authority over her, if you are selfish and brutal in your actions in the home, then stop it! Repent!" (Cornerstones of a Happy Home, p. 2.)

In a few cases, the woman is the one who believes that her view should always prevail, and the man, out of deference to her, complies. It is undesirable in any case that either the man or the woman insists on the decision-making right. The couple should discuss their differences, candidly consider the pros and cons, then make a decision which both can live with.

Many couples fail to develop their consultation skills because one or the other refuses to talk in a crisis. The couple have a disagreement and the husband talks, but the wife is so distressed that she refuses to respond. She sulks. He talks and she stares at the ceiling or the walls. Maybe she even stalks off, gets in the car, and leaves for three hours without telling him where she is going, or purposely stays away all night, in a vain effort to punish or scare her mate.

Tom came to bed very distressed over an incident at his place of employment and told Joan about it. She attempted to comfort him, but he would not be comforted. He was volatile enough that he became more and more angry, and when she became impatient over his anger, he stalked out of the room, taking his pillow with him. About thirty minutes later she came after him. This time she found him more rational, and they made up. Ironically enough, the problem did not concern their relationship at all, yet Tom had managed to escalate it into a full-blown marital dispute. This is a typical example of the hazards of sulking and of the tendency of many men and women to refuse to be consoled. Tom was angry, and no one was about to rob him of his anger! Soon his anger became displaced and directed toward his innocent wife. Many relationships suffer because of a person's tendency to react to problems in such a predictable manner.

Sulking and exaggeration are often related. One partner will inform the other that the disagreement is so severe that "there is no way to save the marriage!" Usually this is only an attempt to try to shock the other person into an apology, but playing games with marriage is dangerous. Honesty and perspective are better. Few problems are insoluble if the couple love each other enough to work at them.

Finally, it needs to be said that when a couple sits down to work out a problem, they should be careful to confine themselves to that single issue. When people are emotionally upset, they tend to dredge up a host of past hurts, always to the detriment of the relationship. Usually they do so because one person feels insecure and wants to hurt the other person in an attempt to save face. An argument is not the right time for a couple to talk over all of their past problems. An incident that occurred in 1952 has no relevance to a current crisis. Every couple should force themselves to concentrate on the matter at hand and consider it rationally and carefully, without insult. There is no justification for making disagreements an excuse to tear down a loved one.

If a couple cannot work out some disagreements, then they should let them be. All couples have areas that they agree to work around. Husbands and wives should come to accept them as things they see differently and realize that the differences can complement the areas of agreement. Agreeing to disagree can represent a genuine sign of strength. Every relationship is unique, and areas of disagreement contribute to its character.
