Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

11

Privacy

Kahlil Gibran has said, "But let there be spaces in your togetherness. . . . Fill each other's cup but drink not from one cup." (The Prophet, p. 15.)

Everyone who is attracted to another person recognizes shared interests and feelings. When Marti and I were dating, I noticed many aspects of her personality and temperament that were either similar or compatible to mine. We enjoyed laughing together and exchanging repartee. We enjoyed long intellectual conversations and shared a deep interest in education and achievement. We recognized early that we shared the same ethical and moral values of living. Although we enjoyed material things, neither of us had a great desire to be rich. We made friends with the same kinds of people and easily adapted to each other's friends. Unquestionably, we had a generous share of the common interests that are usually thought necessary for a durable relationship.

But we were also very different from each other in many ways. Her inherent intellectual interests were focused in mathematics and science while I felt more comfortable with history and English. Her memory retained equations and solutions while mine retained names and dates. Her field is elementary education, requiring that she be adept in all subjects, whereas my aptitude lies in specific topics. When we were first married, her attitudes toward money were careful and conservative while mine were freewheeling and undisciplined. Her mechanical abilities are inherent, and she easily qualifies as the "handyman" around the house, while I am awkward and impatient. She has always enjoyed the intricacies of puzzles while I find them frustrating and boring. On the other hand, I have a mind that retains trivia, so I enjoy games such as Trivial Pursuit, which she finds dull. Generally speaking she is a game-oriented person while I am not. Although she has a naturally affectionate nature, I am more demonstrative in both words and actions. In spite of many differences, we have found it productive and enjoyable to collaborate on writing projects together.

Married people are also individuals with separate identities. Although I respect married couples with identical backgrounds and interests, I think it would be boring if Marti were also a history professor with a penchant for politics. We benefit from complementary aspects of our personalities. It makes our relationship more interesting and allows each of us to learn from the other.

Because of those individual needs and interests, every person deserves a certain measure of privacy. The amount differs with each couple, but the need is undeniable. Men and women are often threatened by a partner's need for privacy. They should understand that it has nothing to do with any perceived weakness in their relationship and does not mean that their partners love them or need them any less. They just need breathing space—some opportunity for personal development and satisfaction. When they have that opportunity, they will be more fulfilled and will bring more energy and conviction to the marriage.

There are times when any person needs to be alone, either to meditate or to cultivate personal interests. Begrudging that need will usually result in the mate feeling smothered. Overprotectiveness or too much togetherness may have disadvantages. People do not have to be together constantly to prove their commitment or to protect their marriage. Mature couples should be able to enjoy their individuality.

Early in our marriage I behaved in an overprotective way whenever Marti went anywhere alone. I worried when she went on the simplest errand, especially at night. I always tried to persuade her to forego the trip or wait until I could accompany her. If she was late getting in, I made much of my worries. These constant attempts to protect her went increasingly unappreciated. I belatedly realized that I had appeared obnoxious and selfish and had definitely implied that she was a child who could not care for herself.

Although I still worry on occasion if I am at home while she is out, I realize that she must be her own person. We are both happier for it. It has caused our relationship to grow closer, and I have matured somewhat in understanding her individual needs. All couples do not have a similar situation. The personalities and needs of each couple determine the degree to which they desire to be alone. But everyone has those needs, and they must be recognized to promote a healthy relationship. No one likes to be viewed as a possession, and unfortunately too many men are in the habit of considering women in just such a fashion.

Getting private time without feeling guilty or making a spouse feel rejected can be very difficult. Some people have felt the need so deeply that they were willing to take drastic action. Linda actually caused quarrels with her husband so that he would leave the apartment and allow her to be alone. Marilyn stayed up nights while her husband and children were asleep so that she could get privacy. Harold turned up the radio very loud and tuned out his wife and family. Admittedly these techniques are unsatisfactory ways to achieve the goal. But all of these people were reacting to an honest need that would be better served by honestly communicating it to a spouse. With effort, even people who say, "If you loved me you wouldn't need your privacy," can eventually be convinced of the need.

Since more women than men are involved in full-time homemaking, they feel a greater need to get outside the home. No matter how much any woman may enjoy homemaking, she needs some regular form of release. Homemaking is a constant pressure. A husband can often escape his professional obligations by coming home, but the housewife has to stay on the job. Even if the woman is not interested in working outside the home, she needs some time off.

Erika claims that the key to domestic peace is just one or two hours of private time each day, which she uses to read, knit, exercise, or take long luxurious baths. Harry has accepted this desire for many years. At 6:30 or 7:00 in the evening, Erika disappears, usually somewhere else in the house, and she gets together again with Harry at 8:30 or 9:00 P.M. A private room—a sewing room or an office—is helpful. Erika said, "There's a wonderful aspect of marriage, in that you share quality time. But there are times when I just don't want my husband to be there. It's a hard thing because we don't always need privacy at the same time."

Ann and Jack get their privacy in big chunks of time when he travels professionally for two or three days. He enjoys getting away and fits in movies and shopping trips while she stops worrying about housekeeping and enjoys being on her own. They have a large family, and she still has the children to care for, but she seems to feel less hassled just having him gone. He is more meticulous about the house than she is, and so that pressure is removed. Clearly both Ann and Jack feel the need for time away, and this arrangement seems to satisfy it.

Although men often desire breathing space, it is usually for different reasons than those of women. Rather than feeling the need to escape from the home or from the children, a man may crave escape from the work place, especially when he brings worries and work home with him. A physician who is dogged by constant pressure and demands on his time may want to leave town for a prolonged period so that he cannot be reached. This is similar to the housewife who must escape from the home so that she cannot be bothered. Everyone has a need to be refreshed and to recapture lost freedom.

Some men may get the same sense of release by jogging or just taking the day off and devoting time to a hobby. Occasionally, I feel moved to escape by doing anything that is unrelated to my professional pressures: making cookies, going for a walk, or playing basketball, for instance. There just seems to be a time when everyone wants to do something that will not be billed as accomplishment or be connected in any way to deadlines. Those who occasionally act on impulse are more likely to retain balance and health in their lives.

Many men get simple release by just going home to wife and family, a feeling that a full-time homemaker can never share. A man who has been under heavy pressures at work may actually find it appealing to come home and play with the children or do some work around the house or the yard. Yet while he is winding down, his wife is merely continuing her long day of pressures, something that he may fail to recognize.

Yet there are men who feel the way Ron did. "Too much togetherness is too much," he said. In his opinion, it is possible for even a happily married couple to get into a rut and to get on each other's nerves. "I'm not talking about days apart; I'm talking about hours apart. Even when I retire, I'm going to find something to get me out of the house every day." It would seem that the housewife syndrome can apply to men in the working world too.

Even now that Marti and I have opened up our lives to new avenues of equality, I notice that the children put different pressures on her than they do on me. She is still considered the anchorperson of the home, the dependable one who can be asked every question and be expected to fulfill every request. Many men do not understand women's constant hassle: "Why can't I just finish one paragraph of the newspaper?" Men are allowed to finish the newspapers, but women are usually expected to respond to every need of the family from morning until night.

Since marriage is still a blending of two personalities, consultation must remain an integral part of the pursuance of private interests. If the partner is offended because of inconsiderate behavior and failure to consult, then the advantages that usually come from privacy are largely eliminated. One person may find that painting for long hours is a wonderful release and a development of a talent, but that person must be careful not to pursue painting at the expense of planned joint activities, times the couple have scheduled for enjoying each other's company. Privacy is not the right to be selfish.

Each person seeking private fulfillment should remember that he also needs support from his partner and that his partner needs support from him. There is the danger that someone can become so swallowed up in a private interest that he will fail to offer continuing support to a companion. Marriage counselors have asserted that we all need to take turns being the child and that we should never deny that part of being loved means being taken care of.

When a couple become so involved in a busy life that they are unable or unwilling to nurture each other, then friction between them can create competition. To some people, competition means, "I'm not getting the attention I need." As a result a couple may compete for support, and if both are emotionally needy at the same time, they are at a disturbing impasse. The most obvious time for this to occur is at the end of a day, when both come home from work, or when one comes home from work and finds the other trying to cope with a never-ending day of domestic responsibility. Both are likely to be exhausted and in need of support. Unless each is able and willing to back up and let the other vent some emotional steam, there is bound to be trouble. Each is bound to think that he or she is the one who had the worst day or needs the most support.

Breathing space at the end of the day can be rejuvenating for both persons. If there is time for some kind of unwinding, meditating, exercising, or just sitting—without too much conversation—a couple may find it easier to deal with each other's problems. A husband and wife should give each other an opportunity to regroup and regenerate energies.

Even when a couple have a close relationship in which they stress unity and sharing, they need to accept the rights of each other as an individual. There are bound to be possessions that a person considers sacred. If a person writes or receives letters or writes in a journal, those should be considered confidential. Whenever a person shares this information, it ought to be voluntary. Few people appreciate someone opening their mail or reading their letters indiscriminately. A couple that have established a truly intimate relationship may very well prefer to share most or all of these things, but the choice should be left to the individual. If a person decides not to share some of these things, it should have no bearing on the closeness or the validity of the relationship. It does not mean that anyone is hiding anything, merely that the person has made a definition of privacy that fits his or her personality. Some people feel that sharing everything compromises their individuality and integrity.

Everyone experiences the need for privacy. Even children, as they grow up, become more and more interested in protecting their possessions, their rooms, their correspondence, and their private lives. Parents who invade that privacy by opening mail or confiscating possessions oftentimes hurt their children. The fact that children reach a point at which they treasure their privacy does not mean that they love their parents any less. It means that their developing maturity and personalities demand a measure of privacy. This need does not disappear as people grow older, marry, and have children of their own.

The most enduring union of two people is one that not only recognizes a unique blending of personalities in a commitment of love and appreciation, but one that acknowledges the right of privacy. Privacy protects the right of the individual to retain an identity and personality unique to that person. It is one of the characteristics that gives each of us our integrity and the ability to love another person.
