Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

12

Competition

Although it is not generally acknowledged, competition for attention or recognition is a genuine problem in most marriage relationships. Competition can be especially keen among achievement-oriented people. If both partners are competitive, there is liable to be resentment or friction. Everyone should be aware of the threats of competition in order to provide the emotional support to offset it.

Competition can appear at very simplistic levels. In a shared relationship in which a couple divide domestic obligations more equally, there can be competition for who gets the dirtiest job. Even in so-called liberated relationships, the woman is often the one who cleans the toilets and mops the floors and cleans the stove. The person who thinks he has the authority in the home or earns the most money often manages to pass off these more menial tasks to his mate. For the person forced or expected to do the unsavory work, resentment invariably builds and competition increases. When sharing responsibilities in the home, it can be helpful to rotate the jobs that no one likes. The same principle applies to the tasks in child rearing. The husband often gets out of the unsavory task of changing diapers. Marti and I find great benefit in rotating our seats at the dinner table, depending on who cooks the meal. If I cook, I am entitled to sit where I don't have to interrupt my meal to help a younger child. This has become a great incentive to cook.

Too often the wife, even if she works outside the home, is expected to run all the errands and put out all the fires. Why should the wife always be the one to take teenagers to an activity, to take the little leaguer to the ball field, to take the sick child to the doctor? Necessary phone calls for dinner reservations, to check on the mysterious increases in the auto insurance bill, or to find out when the road show practices will be held can be rotated. For one person to be saddled with these all the time is unfair and debilitating. Sometimes the man will have to make the suggestion to rotate because some women are so accustomed to unsavory tasks that it may not occur to them that there is an alternative.

If the man dislikes talking on the telephone enough, he may be tempted to pass on the obligation to his wife. She should not be expected to be his social secretary, at least not by virtue of her wifely role. It is revealing that in an era when equal numbers of men and women drive, the man is the one who almost always drives the car when the couple go anywhere together. Children growing up in that atmosphere are bound to think that men, not women, drive cars. Throwing away some of the accepted standards of role expectations can be refreshing. Even though both men and women are capable of doing the grocery shopping, the woman most frequently does it for the family, unless she is ill. Women may, of course, enjoy a release or escape from the rigors of the home through grocery shopping, unless they are obliged to bring all the children with them. If so, it would be preferable for the man to agree to be in charge of home and children while his wife shops.

In most marriages, the man takes the car in for repair or servicing. The woman may observe that he does not return with enough information to satisfy her and that this might be a task that should either be rotated or simply assigned to her. Some men may be happy to relinquish that task, even if it has seemed in true stereotyped form like his responsibility.

It is almost always the woman who takes the children shopping for school clothes, a task she may not mind relinquishing. It may involve some research and preparation for a man to take over the school shopping or for the woman to take the car in for repair, but the rotation principle could greatly enhance a relationship.

Randall and Evelyn have reversed many of the traditional roles in the home with great success. For instance, Evelyn mows the lawn, partly because she enjoys it more than he does and partly because his back condition makes that job difficult for him. She enjoys outside work and usually takes care of landscaping and gardening. In return, Randall does most of the cooking and the inside work. They are very happy and feel no threat to their relationship. Yet they too should occasionally rotate roles to make each familiar enough to cope with emergencies in the absence or illness of the other.

Competition can be present in seemingly simple matters, such as fatigue. Walter lost a great deal of sleep one night and had no opportunity to catch up, so he craved sympathy. Unfortunately Ellen had a bad night too. Ellen and Walter were forced to compete with each other to see who was suffering more—and who might escape the most household tasks. Since both were tired, they resented each other and were physically and emotionally unable to give each other support. This spirit of competition has also inserted itself into many other facets of their lives. For instance, when Walter neglected his exercise, it irritated him to find that Ellen had been exercising regularly and looked great. The irritation caused Walter to feel guilt, which motivated him to "catch up" to Ellen and get his needed exercise.

Judy and Maurice frequently dieted together, with mixed results. They did it hoping to inspire each other to succeed. At the outset, they decided that Maurice needed to lose ten pounds and Judy needed to lose five pounds. Judy did beautifully the first two days and dropped two pounds, and Maurice cheated on the diet and lost nothing. He was irritated and actually resented her success. The resentment, however, motivated him to succeed: "Tomorrow when we compare our standing on the scales, I will win!" There is nothing wrong with this type of competitive behavior as long as the couple understand it and can keep it in perspective.

When a couple start sharing domestic responsibilities, the woman may feel some resentment about having her turf invaded. It may bother her that utensils are stored in different places and that it is harder to keep track of supplies. When she tries to make something, she may find that some of the ingredients have already been used up. Once a man becomes more comfortable in the kitchen, he may resent too many suggestions on what techniques to use to cook a certain dish.

Norman was a pastor of a Lutheran church while his wife, Marilyn, was a writer and a medical secretary. In their thirty years of marriage, they shared responsibilities in the home, including child rearing and housework. One day they found themselves with a new problem. His church gave him an opportunity for a five-month sabbatical from his duties to travel abroad. When he asked Marilyn to accompany him, she balked because the sabbatical was not hers and because she did not like the thought of being regarded as "the minister's wife" for the entire trip. She was willing to go but wanted to carve out some meaningful role in which she could make a contribution. She volunteered to keep a journal of the trip and write back to the congregation, but her husband resisted because he thought it was his responsibility. They found themselves competing for turf. The problem was finally resolved when she was invited to write articles for an international Lutheran newsletter. Both husband and wife wrote back to the congregation separately, and when they returned, they shared the pulpit in a report to the people. This is an important example because it shows that even couples with many years experience in sharing are still apt to have disagreement that may cause competition. With patience and determination a couple can work it out.

I recently took a sabbatical leave myself to pursue research toward writing a book. I considered it a valuable renewing experience, a chance to shift gears and spend my time differently, which would allow me to go back with new perspectives to teaching. Although Marti was very happy for me, she had to make certain adjustments because she had no sabbatical. Her life was filled more than ever with demanding responsibilities. Although we worked out a schedule for her work and my research, there were some strained moments when I found myself regarding my own work as more important than hers. I thought to myself, "This is a sabbatical that comes only once in seven years, and I have to make the most of it!" But she had a commitment to her job too, and she earned money that was vital to our household. We were both pleased with the work I was able to accomplish during this time, and there was no leftover feeling of resentment, yet there was a competitive flavor that we needed to respond to effectively. People have a natural tendency to think their work is the most important and to want to protect their position.

A man whose wife enters the workforce for the first time may experience similar feelings of resentment or irritation. When Marti began to work outside the home, I wondered sometimes if I were being compromised. When I was new to certain household tasks, I resented being "taken over" by emergency situations. When I was trying to complete some professional work and had to stop and solve a problem because Marti was not home, I had some second thoughts. But these were selfish feelings that I was able to work out. Now we feel very comfortable with our life-style and our accomplishments. In a marriage of equals, no one will feel as if they should be completely subordinate to the success of their mate.

The person who has been accustomed to handling a certain responsibility may treat the partner in a condescending manner when the responsibility changes. The man may be condescending with the woman when she asks questions about auto repair—as if to suggest that she could not understand this problem. Women often respond in a similar way if the question concerns domestic responsibilities about which they feel the utmost confidence.

There is a familiar tendency to make anything relating to sports a competitive duel between sexes. Sometimes men are presumed to have an expert knowledge of sports while women are expected to accept only what information men choose to give them. Men who bury themselves in super bowl action to the exclusion of their wives and children may cause resentment. The husband who is guilty of watching bowl games for eight hours at a sitting should develop some balance and refrain from treating his wife condescendingly. If he does so and treats her as an equal, she just may develop an interest in the game.

There are some notable exceptions to the stereotype. Bruce and Bonnie have reversed roles in their attitudes toward sports. Bonnie gets very excited during a basketball game and cheers and shouts directions to the players even when the game is on television. On the other hand, Bruce is quiet and passive, although he seems to enjoy the game. In conversation Barbara reveals a detailed knowledge of basketball and of the players, whereas his is only cursory. She clearly reads about the game much more than he does. Although some men react with astonishment to her interest and knowledge, Bruce seems perfectly adjusted to it. In fact, he takes a rather noticeable pride in her interest. For them the cutting edge is missing, and competition seems not to play a role at all.

In recreational pursuits a predictable macho image often emerges in men. If the family is going camping, fishing, sailing, or some other presumed "macho" activity, the man may make a point of showing off his knowledge and then of instructing his wife so pontifically that she feels inferior and may even lose her desire to participate. If a common interest is to be cultivated, this kind of competition should be curtailed. In my home, this is reversed too. Marti had camping experience as a child and I did not. As a result, she has to teach me the rudiments of camping, although she is assisted by our eldest son, who is very close to becoming an Eagle scout. Here too, competition is downplayed. Although my inexperience in camping has been a sensitive area for me, Marti has handled it gently enough to help me to enjoy it. I really don't worry about who knows the most.

For Latter-day Saints, one of the most notable forms of competition is found in attitudes toward Church service. Because of traditional role biases, it is most common for the man to feel that his responsibility in the Church is more important than the woman's. Often he will not actually say his responsibility is more important but will act in a manner that makes his attitude unmistakable. If their respective activities fall on the same day, he expects her to quietly defer to him.

Competition may also come into play if the woman has an executive position like Relief Society president and her husband has a less time-consuming one like Sunday School teacher. Predictably, she may think her job is more important and expect him to defer to her. Any Church calling may require that a person be out of the home on Church assignments fairly often, and so this is a problem that must be resolved to mutual satisfaction. Since some callings involve more work and more time than others, the couple may have to agree that one person for the time being has a more demanding calling, but realize that the other person may have one later. Nevertheless, it is important that the person with the least demanding calling have every right to fulfill it without rancor or belittlement from the mate. Competition in Church callings can be debilitating unless recognized and resolved.

Although Perry was a member of the bishopric in his ward, he failed to see the importance of supporting Marjorie in her calling as a Relief Society teacher. They had continuing arguments over it, and Marjorie was distressed because Perry always insisted that she defer to him. He would never consider telling the bishop that he would have to tend the children because of a clash of responsibilities between his calling and hers. When Marjorie was called to be a member of the Relief Society presidency, she frankly told the bishop that she could not accept because she knew Perry would not allow her to perform in a responsible way. When the bishop told Perry that his Church duties might have to be occasionally sacrificed for Marjorie's, he agreed to reconsider his approach to her callings. Slowly Perry became educated, and a long, difficult, competitive battle abated.

Nancy and Bert have a competitive conflict over spirituality. Nancy has had several Church leadership callings, and because she is usually the one who cautions against sinful practices or encourages the family to be more devoted to the Church, she has been labeled by Bert as "the more spiritual" of the two of them. Instead of regarding it as a compliment, Nancy feels that her husband almost "accuses" her of being more spiritual. When he mentions it, he does so with an air of resignation or sarcasm, as if to imply that he could not possibly live up to her standard. He alternates between two extremes: on the one hand, expressing pride in her and her accomplishments and being happy for himself and, on the other hand, being irritated and jealous of her and ashamed of himself. He harbors beneath the surface a spirit of jealousy over her Church experience and opportunities, which he feels have come to her because she is the "better person." If they could ever experience a role reversal, it might do wonders for his self-esteem and alleviate the competition.

On the other hand, Joyce served for two years as ward Relief Society president and enjoyed the call very much. Her husband and family regarded her calling as the preeminent one in the family and deferred to her needs. She was frequently gone because of leadership meetings with the bishop and others who were engaged in leading the ward. Then her husband, Bob, was called as the bishop, necessitating her release as Relief Society president. They agreed that one burdensome calling in the family was enough and that Joyce would have to spend more time with their children. Although Joyce accepted this decision as the right one, she missed her leadership position greatly. For several months she found herself feeling resentful that Bob was the bishop because it implied that she was dispensable. She missed the action and the challenge and resented Bob because he went off in many directions to do the kind of things she wanted to do. For some time she was unable to offer the support expected of a bishop's wife. Her situation was typical of many people throughout the Church. Where Church callings are concerned, everyone needs to cultivate a magnanimous attitude, to be willing to step aside, encourage, and support his or her spouse.

In any relationship a certain amount of competition is healthy and inevitable. It can be energizing and inspire people to be their best; but excessive competition undermines a marriage without strong, loving assurance from a companion to ease tension and maintain balance.
