Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

13

Support in Church Callings

The pursuance of Church callings, involving sacrifice and service, can be either burdensome or productive to a marriage. Often one person must spend many hours in a calling while the other is left to deal with most of the domestic matters. With mutual planning, however, a marriage can be strengthened through Church callings instead of threatened.

When someone is asked to accept a calling, it is vital that he or she consult the spouse. Often Church leaders call in both husband and wife to talk to them together about the call. Sometimes, though, a call may be extended to a husband, and he may feel a need to accept immediately, without telling his wife. Bypassing the wife is a mistake because it causes her to feel unimportant and may impose unacceptable burdens and schedules.

When a couple discuss the calling to determine such things as the specific responsibilities entailed, the time away from home, the necessity to rearrange domestic duties, and their frank feelings about it, they can make a carefully considered joint decision. If no consultation is involved and the call is simply announced, resentment can result, weakening the relationship.

It is wise for the person given the calling to ask the spouse directly if he or she is willing to offer support and if there are any resentments. The spouse should know all problems at the beginning so that blame will not be heaped on the other person later. When Marti was called to be president of the stake Young Women, we took a few days to deliberate and pray about it. We were stunned by the call, had not considered it previously, and needed to look at it realistically. When we talked about it, we realized that it would involve many hours of separation from each other. We expressed to each other some of our initially negative reactions. Although I knew that the burden would be great, I also knew that Marti was highly qualified for the position and that she would be a dynamic leader. She felt moved to accept it even though she was nervous. Since we knew that we had made the decision together, we could not be angry at each other later, no matter what happened.

Marriages often receive a severe test when the spouse of a nonmember is called to a Church position. When Jessica, a recent convert to the Church, was called to be ward Primary president, she willingly accepted. She discussed it at length with her husband, Ray, and he gave his approval. But after she had served in the calling for one month, he began to panic. Although the responsibilities had been explained to him in detail, he had apparently failed to see them in perspective. When he observed that she was gone frequently from the home in the evenings and sometimes on Saturdays, he regretted his approval of the call. Although they had several difficult weeks while he adjusted to a personally inconvenient schedule, his attitude eventually improved markedly. Once he had accepted it, he began to admire the ability Jessica was demonstrating and the sacrifice she made to be effective in her home as well as in the Church.

On the other hand, Sally was married to a nonmember who was always surprisingly tolerant of her Church callings. In a period of several years, Sally held many important leadership callings that involved heavy time commitments, and yet Rex never complained. He was very friendly toward the Church, regularly attended meetings with Sally and the family, and had no objection to her high activity level. His religious faith differed from hers, but he recognized her desire to make an important contribution and thought he should encourage her. His support of her religious beliefs added greatly to the quality of their marriage. The tolerant, supportive attitude of this nonmember should inspire couples who share the same religious faith to supply the same level of understanding to each other.

Church leaders should carefully guard against issuing too many callings in one family. In some small branches, members hold three or four callings each. This practice spreads a family very thin and tests the marriage in ways that may be unnecessary. If both husband and wife are gone from the home on separate assignments several different evenings, a couple may have to take a stand that will protect the sanctity of their marriage. A Church calling can balance the marriage and enrich it but should never supplant it.

When I was called to be a bishop, my stake president gave my children some admirable advice. He told them that if I were not spending enough time with them, they were to call him on the telephone, and he would promise to release me—even if I had only served eighteen months. They were very impressed, and many times they threatened me with that directive. It served a useful role in keeping my activities outside the home in perspective. This stake president illustrated the well-known Church axiom that the family always should come first, no matter what the calling. It is important for every married couple to strike the right balance between Church activity and time for the marriage and family.

A couple who strike such a balance will find that their Church service teaches their children their values. If the right blend can be reached between Church service and family time, the children will reap a harvest of spiritual understanding. Our children happily accepted my call as bishop and were called on to sacrifice in ways that caused them to grow spiritually. They learned the gospel in ways they never could have appreciated otherwise. They took pride in the call. Our son David, four years old at the time, announced to his Sunday School teacher: "I'm the bishop's son. But you can call me David—or the bishop's son."

When a calling involves travel to other wards, many parents have found that they could ease the sense of separation from their children by taking them along. When I was a member of the Boston Stake high council, I had to travel intermittently to thirteen different units of the Church in Massachusetts and Rhode Island. Because I did not want to be away from my children every Sunday, we decided to take them along whenever possible. Unfortunately the experience for them proved not entirely satisfactory. They developed a strong distaste for riding in the car and a strong desire to attend their own ward. Taking them along was not the magic solution that it had seemed. Although they came to appreciate the nature of the calling and learned much about Church leadership, there was some negative impact on them.

Church leaders sometimes issue callings to people who consider themselves unqualified. Usually the callings will help those people develop skills they might not otherwise develop, but sometimes the results are less fortunate. Wayne was called to be ward clerk soon after he joined the Church, only to become frustrated and discouraged because of his inability to function effectively. He had always detested mathematics, and he left financial matters for his wife, Elaine, to manage. Nevertheless, Wayne tried very hard to make a success of the calling. He worked arduously on statistics but sadly discovered that he was making numerous mistakes. He went into a severe depression that affected every aspect of his life, especially his marriage. Finally he asked to be released. The bishop agreed to do so, but Wayne punished himself for several months afterward for what he regarded as his failure to succeed.

Fortunately this example is not typical of the stress that some people experience when balancing the responsibilities of a calling with those of a marriage. Wayne's experience, however, should alert us all to the possible hazards. When a person's marriage is being threatened by the rigors or problems of a Church calling, he or she should not be hesitant in discussing the difficulties with the bishop or one of his counselors, who can take effective action, such as extending a release or readjusting duties and workload.

If a man accepts a calling with the assumption that his wife will be able to make telephone calls, write letters, or substitute for him on a regular basis, he is courting trouble. Such expectations will usually strain the marriage and defeat the purpose of the calling, which is to allow the person called an opportunity to serve and grow. It is better to decline the calling than to share it in this way. Fred, a counselor in a bishopric, had the habit of giving several of his Church responsibilities to his wife to perform for him. Often the bishop would get a call from Nora, who was acting on his behalf. The bishop estimated that approximately one third of Fred's responsibilities were being delegated to Nora, in addition to those of her own Church calling. The bishop instructed Fred to stop doing it, for his and his wife's benefit. I have witnessed several other men in Church leadership positions who similarly "dump" on their wives. That puts an unacceptable strain on the marriage, and it is a dishonest way to fulfill a calling.

The kind of support needed from a partner for the fulfillment of Church callings is an excellent example of the emotional support all couples require in marriage. Church callings provide every couple unusual practice in supporting each other. If they perform their callings thoughtfully and well, they can savor them and gain from them; if they miscalculate the impact of the calling on the marriage, they may sacrifice the family relationship so revered by all Latter-day Saints.

The most intensive experience Marti and I have had with callings was my six-year tenure as bishop and her more recent tenure as president of the stake Young Women. As is common to most bishops, I spent an average of thirty to thirty-five hours per week in Church work. The most difficult problem to balance with my marriage was the Church-related emergency calls in the middle of the night or on evenings when some family activity was planned. Many of these emergencies were not true emergencies and could be tactfully rescheduled at a better time. But others, involving someone in a state of physical or emotional panic, seemed to require immediate action. Marti and our children always accepted that decision without hesitation. Actually I preferred that an emergency interrupt my professional work during the day than that it interfere with family matters, but, of course, I could not control that.

Most of the time that I served as bishop, Marti was the Sunday School gospel doctrine teacher, a position that called for fewer meetings than mine. Essentially, she could fulfill her responsibility by preparing the lesson and teaching. That was easier said than done, of course, and it required my help to get her some free time from the children. Still, the calling was close to ideal for our needs because it allowed at least one of us to remain with the children. Besides that calling, she was also "bishop's wife." She was, in a sense, on display and was expected to satisfy certain preconceived notions of the Church members. She had to appear at certain events and to do or say the right things—all of which caused her some stress. Many will agree that being a bishop's wife could very well be considered a calling in itself.

At the same time, I received strong support from her in my calling. She willingly and effectively gave me advice when I sought it. She acted as my best friend and confidante, and our marriage was strengthened because of her help and understanding. Experiencing this calling together was unique and fruitful for us, even if it was limited by constraints of confidentiality. When I was worried, I knew that I could go to Marti for comfort and encouragement. When I was in a crisis, she was there to give me ideas and suggestions. She was at her best in emergencies.

The nature of a calling as bishop is such that it envelops a person's life. A bishop suddenly becomes intimately involved in the lives of numerous members of his ward and is forced to give advice about many sensitive issues. He is expected to be strong in all situations, to be understanding, wise, humble, and punctual. He must be letter-perfect in protocol or many people will call attention to his mistakes. In all of this, he needs the love of a wise and sensitive companion. There is enormous satisfaction in the calling, in spite of its difficulty. The deep relationships formed with people, and the exhilaration that comes from personal service can hardly be found in such abundance anywhere else.

When I was released, I was called to the high council. The pressures were dramatically reduced, and the assignments were more readily manageable, so I looked forward to a long awaited "breather." That was not to be. Soon afterward, Marti was called to be stake Young Women president, involving extensive leadership responsibilities and meetings with ward and stake leaders. The gigantic youth program, so appreciated and stressed by our stake leaders, was placed in the hands of my wife.

The telephone, which had stopped ringing so incessantly, began again in earnest. Instead of me going to an interview with the stake presidency, my wife would go. Instead of me coming home seeking advice about a difficult problem, Marti would need the help. With a heavy load and numerous worries, she became the administrator in the family. She really is doing a wonderful job, and I try to remind her often. She needs encouragement, as I did, and ideas to help her through crises. I give her advice willingly yet realize that the burden to make the decision and live with it is still hers. She needs someone who can care for the children and be at home when she is away on a Church assignment.

It is ironic that things have turned out the way they have. If Marti had been called to her position before I had been called as bishop, I would have had a very difficult time accepting it. Now I see it in a positive light. I believe that being bishop was enormously helpful to me personally. It gave me new confidence, experiences, and skills, and I can see that Marti's position is benefiting her similarly. As a result, I would never want to deny her that experience, even though I know she sometimes gets discouraged. It would be wonderful if every couple had this kind of opportunity to trade major Church responsibilities. Supporting each other in Church callings is one unmistakable way to underline the nature of equality in the marriage relationship.

A couple may also have the opportunity to see each other transformed by Church callings. I have seen Marti in several instances when she demonstrated the "mantle of the calling," times when she exuded wisdom beyond her years or experience. I have been impressed with her courage under pressure, her ability to say the right thing at the right time, to sound, in fact, "presidential." The fact that my opinion of her and her abilities continues to increase suggests the inherent value to a marriage of a Church calling. When a couple can agree to help each other, they will learn new ways to appreciate each other.

Church callings often give people opportunities to participate in activities that they would not meet in the secular world. For a wife who doesn't work outside the home, some callings can be especially beneficial. Restless wives can get self-fulfillment from important Church callings that allow them to use their brains in a variety of ways in administrative, secretarial, or teaching roles. On the other hand, if the husband is too busy to support her in the calling, or if he is actually busier in the Church than she is, the purpose may be defeated.

My own profession provides little opportunity for administrative experience; yet as a bishop I was in charge of the administrative machinery of a large organization and had the additional task of supervising the raising of funds to construct a $600,000 building. After the fund raising, I was charged with selecting an architect, a contractor, and following the project to its completion. In the process I had to utilize business and administrative skills that probably would have otherwise remained latent. Many business people have opportunities to teach in the Church, and this is similarly productive.

One of the finest opportunities any couple can have for enriching their marriage through Church callings is to serve a mission together. Alan and Edith were called to serve a mission together over 2,000 miles from their home. They had never during their long and stable marriage had a calling that they could in any sense "share," and Alan's work had never utilized Edith's talents. For the first time they found themselves planning every day together, worrying about all problems together, and finding joy in success that both shared equally. For several months they were assigned to a small branch that utilized well their experience and talents. They consulted more than they had ever done in their marriage and discovered new things about each other. Although they missed their children, who were grown and living with their own children, they received constant emotional support from them. The children took pride in their parents' accomplishments and sacrifice. Since neither Alan nor Edith had been missionaries before, they found the experience challenging and creative. Their happiest memory was of teaching the gospel to a young couple who joined the Church, completely changed their life-style, and added their abilities to the small branch.

Earl and Vivian enjoyed similar success by going on a temple mission, where they learned and participated in all the major ordinances performed in the temple. Although much of their temple work was done apart from each other, they had essentially the same responsibilities. They could therefore help each other learn and become proficient at their duties. They gained an appreciation for each other's talents that increased their love and enriched their marriage.

Church callings, then, provide opportunities for personal growth at the same time they strengthen the relationship. As people gain perspective and skills, they become more interesting people to their mates. Their ability to make well-reasoned, effective decisions increases, and their judgment becomes seasoned and experienced, all of which is to be admired and appreciated, as long as the marriage and the family are not compromised.
