Dennis L. Lythgoe, Marriage of Equals ( 1985)

14

Spiritual Growth

Lowell L. Bennion, one of the great teachers in the Church, says this about the importance of love and service in the gospel of Jesus Christ:

I become concerned for myself and my cobelievers because I fear that other things in religion and life take precedence over love of neighbor. We talk about religion, we participate in rituals and meetings, we sing and we pray, we believe in God and his Word, but these things tend to satisfy our religious need and we are not "grieved for the affliction of Joseph" to the point that we take action. . . .

My experience tells me that great joy comes to us when we have the faith and moral courage to lose our lives for others. (The Things That Matter Most, pp. 48-49.)

For many years I have admired a couple who emulate spirituality. Even though they have both continued to carry heavy responsibilities in the Church, they have always made time to visit the sick and the elderly, expressing interest in their welfare and often bringing them food. My mother was especially impressed that they cared enough to visit her in her illness. In fact, she requested that the husband be the major speaker at her funeral. This couple have felt the joy of voluntary Christian service, and the spiritual impact on their marriage is evident. As I listened to his funeral address, I realized that he knew things about my mother that I did not know. He had not been just a casual visitor, but an intimate friend. The service that he and his wife extend to others will continue to benefit him and his family.

According to scripture, if we live faithfully in this life, we will hear the coveted words on the other side: "Well done, thou good and faithful servant." We don't need a pat on the back to understand the joys of service—it is satisfaction enough in itself. My favorite scripture, Doctrine and Covenants 58:26-27, says that disciples should do "many things of their own free will and bring to pass much righteousness." Implicit in that statement is the understanding that doing things that are assigned to us is not enough. Church leaders may ask us to do many things that involve service. While those things are important, we will not have true satisfaction until we do "many things of our own free will." A married couple who consciously make service an integral part of their life together will realize the potential of spiritual growth in marriage.

Our family has had occasion to participate in acts of good will and to feel the profound impact on ourselves and our children. Taking homemade soup to an elderly woman in our ward gets such a heartfelt reaction that we constantly wonder why we don't devote more of our time to such projects. Those of us who are young and healthy should devote ourselves to the needs of the aged and wise among us, showing genuine interest in their lives and giving them comfort when they need it. My aging father benefits so much from a simple visit and conversation from a member of his ward that anyone would be inspired to go and see him. Those who are bereaved or suffering ill health need and appreciate good conversation and genuine interest. The first ingredient, essential to spiritual growth in marriage, is service.

A second avenue to spiritual growth is regular prayer. A marriage is happier if prayer is made part of every day. If one partner goes to bed before the other and they fail to pray together, their relationship will reflect the void. Every couple should pray together at least twice each day. They should enjoy praying together and thinking about what they need from the Lord. They should consider it a challenge to speak for each other in prayer and make a major effort to avoid repetition and stereotype, recognizing that too much concern for self may deaden spirituality. Prayer can sometimes devolve into little more than a dialogue with oneself, but sincere prayer can actually lift a person beyond that to the needs of others.

Prayer is most effective when a couple follows the admonition of the Lord to study the problem in their minds, then asks the Lord if the answer they prefer is correct. If it is right, they will get a feeling that the Lord refers to as a burning in the bosom. If it is wrong, they will feel confused and frustrated—"a stupor of thought that shall cause [them] to forget the thing which is wrong." (D&C 9:8-9.)

A third consideration in increasing spirituality is fasting. Michael said that he never liked fasting "because it gives me no spiritual insight at all. It just makes me very hungry!" Actually fasting makes a person so hungry that he is constantly reminded during the course of a day that he is supposed to be concentrating on an answer to prayer. Marti and I have used fasting and prayer on a number of occasions when we needed to feel close to the Lord and to know his mind. We fasted together about whether to move to Massachusetts several years ago, whether to take other job offers, whether to purchase a home, and whether to accept various Church callings. Some answers required much more effort and were slower in coming than others, but we have always received satisfaction in knowing that we have done the most that we could to prepare for a major decision. We believe that the Lord expects us to make our own decisions, but that he will help us avoid pitfalls in the process if we seek him in prayer.

In the years I served as bishop, we fasted together about many important matters that related to the Church and its members. A good friend went into surgery for cancer, and we were enormously grateful when he was healed; another friend was suspected of having cancer, but the tests turned out negative; still another friend was struck with terminal cancer at a relatively young age, and in spite of our fasting and prayer, she died. When I was asked to deliver the eulogy at her funeral, we fasted to get help to prevent me from breaking down emotionally. We were concerned that the family have the ability to listen to the entire message and appreciate it. With the Lord's help, I was able to deliver the entire eulogy, a remarkable achievement considering my natural tendency to tears in spiritual matters.

A couple fasting together should talk it over several times during the day in order to feel the inspiration and to better understand it. At the conclusion of the day they should go to a private room to kneel in prayer, officially ending the fast. I have noticed that if I am not getting the answer I am seeking, I become depressed and frustrated by the end of the fast. If I feel a favorable response, I am excited by the end of the day. There is an unmistakable feeling of satisfaction and unity from fasting and praying together.

Joseph F. Smith explains some other benefits of this spiritual principle:

[Compliance with the law of the fast] would call attention to the sin of over-eating, place the body in subjection to the spirit, and so promote communion with the Holy Ghost, and insure a spiritual strength and power which the people of the nation so greatly need. As fasting should always be accompanied by prayer, this law would bring the people nearer to God, and divert their minds once a month at least, from the mad rush of worldly affairs and cause them to be brought into immediate contact with practical, pure and undefiled religion—to visit the fatherless and the widow, and keep themselves unspotted from the sins of the world. (Gospel Doctrine, pp. 237-38.)

A fourth avenue to spiritual growth is the process of sharing spiritual experiences. Every couple can gain from talking about their spiritual feelings and sharing their spiritual experiences. A few years ago, Marti and I attended the Sunday morning devotional of the Mormon History Association annual meeting, held in the Sacred Grove. The major part of the program was a reading of Joseph Smith's own story of the First Vision. Sitting in the Sacred Grove on that morning in May, I received an overpowering spiritual witness that Joseph Smith actually spoke the truth when he said that he saw God and Jesus Christ and that he spoke with them. Marti received an identical impression, and we talked about the experience for a long time afterward. It was an exceptional feeling to be there together and to share a spiritual experience that we will never forget.

Sometimes late at night we talk about our spiritual feelings and analyze the meaning of the gospel in our lives. Several times that has been such an exciting experience to us that we talked long into the night, feeling a great sense of unity. At other times, when writing an article or a book together, we have felt something of the joy of creation and a sense of understanding that unified us spiritually.

A fifth avenue to spiritual growth is studying and discussing the scriptures together, something that brings many couples great satisfaction when done regularly. Discussing the scriptures is one way to express and deepen a couple's ethical and moral principles. Sharing insights into passages of scripture can create better understanding of one's own spiritual experiences. Joseph Smith's preparation for the First Vision was his own study of the scriptures—one verse in James impressed him profoundly: "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall be given him." (James 1:5.) In remembering the impact of that scripture, the Prophet said, "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on it again and again." (JS-H 1:12; italics added.) If a married couple reflect on important passages of scripture together, they will build a better spiritual understanding and be inspired to have spiritual experiences of their own.

Temple work represents a sixth important component of spiritual growth. Married couples should go often to the temple to enrich themselves spiritually. Some people think of temple work in a utilitarian fashion, as work to be done in a spirit of sacrifice and speed. They try to perform as many endowments as they can in a short time. I respect that approach, but prefer to go more slowly, to think more carefully about what I am doing, to pray, to discuss the meaning of temple work with Marti, and try to feel the spirit in the temple. This sometimes enables me to get answers to questions I have been grappling with for a long time.

If possible, I enjoy sitting next to her in the endowment session so I can look at her occasionally and feel her spirit. After the session is completed, we find it especially productive to meditate and talk quietly in the celestial room about the gospel, temple work, or about important personal matters. As we explore new dimensions of spirituality, we feel closer to each other. In addition, every time we have been to the temple together, Marti has had some outstanding insight to share with me that has caused us to talk productively. In our experience, the temple provides a unique setting for understanding spiritual things.

In addition, every time we have gone to the temple, we have seen old friends whom we've not seen in a long time, people we knew in Utah or Massachusetts now living in New Jersey or Michigan or North Carolina. The reunion is suggestive of the nature of the eternities. It seems to underscore the importance of people and the humane aspects of life, the Christian service so necessary to happiness, and the friendships that strengthen us all. Seeing old friends reminds us that we are part of a great cause that includes not only millions of people on the earth, but the entire human race.

I especially enjoy going to the temple to remind me of the covenant that Marti and I made when we were married and to watch other couples or families be married or sealed. It always causes us to reflect on our own marriage and its importance to us.

Joseph Smith once said that a religion must require the sacrifice of all things in order to produce the faith necessary to lead to salvation. (Lectures on Faith 6:7.) Temples, particularly those that service large regions, offer one of those opportunities for sacrifice. People who travel on buses to attend the temple lose sleep and volunteer two or three days of their time to do vicarious work for those who have died. In the temple they also covenant with the Lord to obey the principle of sacrifice. That is a fitting concept for marriage, since so many sacrifices are required in the daily life of every couple. That attention to sacrifice is one reason that temple attendance can lift a marriage and bring out the best in a couple.

A seventh factor in acquiring spirituality is to integrate spiritual principles in our daily work. So many, as they work to compete in the world for commercial gain, lose touch with the principle of sacrifice and allow the world's influence to erode their spiritual qualities. Walter, a former church leader, is one such example. In his work he found that he could increase his earnings dramatically if he catered specifically to the homosexual community. In the process his values became hazy, and he forgot his years as a bishop. He offered a service and reasoned that cultivating the homosexual community was perfectly legitimate if it served them well. As a result, he used commercial devices that took advantage of their sexual preference. His actions, though, deeply disturbed his wife, Andrea. As Andrea and Walter argued over this question, their relationship became noticeably distant. He began sharing less and less of his life with her and began to look at her as someone not to be trusted. His activity in the Church correspondingly dropped off until he refused to go at all, and his values became hopelessly confused. He allowed immorality to enter his life, and the close interpersonal relationship he had had with his wife evaporated. It is important that couples combine their values and their spiritual interests with their day-to-day activities. The making of money cannot be separated from spiritual health.

Giving priesthood blessings, particularly during troubled times, represents an eighth factor in spiritual growth in a marriage. Marti and I have felt great spiritual unity when I have given her blessings for various reasons, sometimes when she has had trouble sleeping and other times when there were more serious problems. On one occasion, I acted hastily. She had been having problems early in her pregnancy, and I instantly gave her a strongly worded blessing, promising her that her health would be protected and that the baby would live. As soon as I finished, I knew that I had acted incorrectly, without seeking the Lord's help, and that the unborn baby had died.

After fasting and prayer, I gave her a second blessing. This time I carefully listened for the Lord's guidance instead of acting impulsively. I found myself unable to promise that the baby would live, but rather that Marti would be the mother of other healthy children. Although this baby did not survive, we have five children in fulfillment of the blessing. In the second blessing, I hadn't said what I wanted to say, but Marti and I both enjoyed the peace that comes from the comforting of the Spirit. I have blessed her prior to the birth of every one of our children, and each experience reinforced our love for each other. There are great spiritual benefits from enduring crises together.

A couple that has grown spiritually exudes maturity and depth of feeling. They reach out to others without regard to status or protocol or time constraints. Even Church members are often hesitant to reach out to someone who is lower on the economic scale or has had fewer positive religious experiences. In fact, these people may be the ones who most need that contact. Those who serve others reflect a quiet composure in their life and marriage. They are not selfcentered or materialistic, and they are filled with genuine interest in the people they meet. People ask questions in an honest effort to know them. A couple that lose themselves in service to and interest in others are less likely to become obsessed with their own problems. All things will be put into perspective. Every marriage will be enhanced by adoption of Christlike principles in the act of service.
