Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter One

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPJoseph Smith

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPJoseph Smith Jr., the fourth child and third son of Joseph Smith Sr. and Lucy Mack Smith, was born December 23, 1805, in Sharon, Windsor County, Vermont. Life was not easy for the Smith family. The marginal farm that Joseph Smith Sr. tilled was leased from his wife's father, Solomon Mack. Because his farming did not yield enough to support his family, he taught school in the off-season to cover the deficit.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPWhat the Smiths lacked in material means was more than balanced by their spiritual wealth. Both parents were devout believers in the reality and the power of God. This was shown in the fervency of their prayers, the regularity of their Bible study, and the constancy of their Christian charities. Their religious convictions, based upon striking answers to prayers and, in the case of the father, remarkable visions, often were shared with the children as they matured. Such were the spiritual influences permeating the Smith household that young Joseph Smith later reported that when he kneeled in prayer for answers to perplexing questions, he had no doubt God would hear and answer. His faith was firm and unyielding because of the teaching and the example of his parents.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIn a futile search for economic security, Joseph Smith Sr. moved his family four times between 1805 and 1816. He operated leased farms at Tunbridge, Vermont; Royalton, Vermont; Lebanon, New Hampshire; and Norwich, Vermont. After three successive crop failures at Norwich, he decided to go to western New York, pursuing reports of fertile land available at affordable prices.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIn New York the Smiths settled first in Palmyra. They remained there two years, living off the earnings of the father and the older sons, Alvin and Hyrum, who hired out as laborers. Their income was supplemented by the sale of painted oilcloth coverings Lucy made. By now there were eight living Smith children. A son, Ephraim, who was born in 1810, died in infancy. The family became active in the affairs of Palmyra, which was noted as a community of churches. Lucy and several of the children affiliated with the Presbyterian Church in Palmyra while young Joseph showed an interest in the local Methodist sect. He seems to have been attracted there by the preaching of a Reverend Lane, an articulate and charismatic man who was well schooled in the scriptures.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAfter two years, the father found a hundred-acre tract of wooded land near Manchester, New York, located about ten miles from Palmyra, which he was able to buy under contract. He and the older boys cleared thirty acres for farming and built a log cabin on the site. Later a substantial two-story home was constructed.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIn the spring of 1820, a fervid religious revival came to the area. It was a recurring phenomenon, symptomatic of the times. This one was centered in Palmyra, and within an eight-mile radius were thirteen different religious congregations, including Quakers, Baptists, Presbyterians, and Methodists. Caught up in the excitement, the Smith family traveled to Palmyra to attend some of the meetings. On one occasion young Joseph, who was confused by conflicting doctrines taught by the different sects, attended a revival meeting in the Methodist Church, where Reverend Lane addressed the subject "What church shall I join?" Among the scriptures the minister quoted was the first chapter of James, which admonishes those who lack wisdom to ask of God. Soon after, back home on the Smith farm, young Joseph, strongly impelled by the promise of James, decided to ask God for wisdom about which of the competing churches to join.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPHe retired to a grove of trees near the farmhouse where members of the family often went to pray. Kneeling, he began to pray vocally, the first time he had ever done so. Immediately he was seized by an evil power that temporarily bound his tongue and caused him to feel as if he were doomed. But by a powerful exertion of his will, Joseph held on, struggling in prayer, and the power was dispelled. At that moment, he saw a pillar of light over his head, "above the brightness of the sun," which descended until it fell upon him. He then saw two personages, "whose brightness and glory" defied all description, standing above him in the air. One addressed him by name and, pointing to the other, said, "This is My Beloved Son. Hear Him!" After regaining his composure, the boy asked which of the contending sects was right. He was told that none of them was right, that they were all wrong, and that he should join none of them. After telling him "many other things," the visitors ascended out of sight. When Joseph came to himself, he was lying on his back, completely drained of energy.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe boy shared this experience with his parents. They believed him implicitly. But when he told Reverend Lane about it, the minister scoffed, saying with contempt it was of the devil. The boy was hurt and humiliated because he had thought the preacher would be pleased to learn the impact of his teaching and the truth of the scripture he had quoted from James.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe scornful attitude of Reverend Lane, and of others who learned about Joseph's experience, isolated young Joseph from the mainstream of the community. It was then he developed friendships with a group of boys his age. Typical of some teenagers, they were rowdy, sometimes impudent, and often insensitive to the feelings of others. After a while, Joseph felt condemned by this association, given the supernal nature of the experience he had enjoyed in the Sacred Grove. So on the evening of September 21, 1823, he kneeled in prayer in his bedroom to acknowledge his "sins and follies" and to learn his status before God. As he prayed, a bright light filled the room, which became "lighter than at noonday." Immediately a personage appeared at his bedside, "standing in the air." After describing the general appearance of this personage arrayed in a robe of exquisite whiteness, Joseph added that the angel's "whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance truly like lightning."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAfter identifying himself as Moroni, the visitor told Joseph that God had a work for him to do, that there was a book written on gold plates giving an account of an ancient people who lived on the American continent, that with the book was an instrument called the Urim and Thummim to be used in translating it, and that the record would be given to him later to be translated. As the visitor spoke, a vision was opened to Joseph's mind and he could see the place where the plates were deposited. After quoting and explaining several scriptures from the Bible and giving other instructions, Moroni ascended from the room. To Joseph's surprise, the angel appeared two other times that night, rehearsing exactly what he had said before and then adding words of warning. The next day, he appeared to Joseph in the field, related all that was said before, and instructed him to tell his father what had happened. Later that day, following the advice of his father, Joseph went to the place shown him in a vision where the plates were buried. Prying up a large domed rock, he saw the plates and the Urim and Thummim in a stone box laid in cement. Moroni then appeared to him again, the fifth time in two days, and instructed him not to remove the plates but to return to the same place on the same day each year for four years.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPNeeding money for himself and his family, Joseph accepted employment with Josiah Stowel, a well-to-do farmer and entrepreneur of Chenango County, New York. At the time, Mr. Stowel was prospecting for an ancient mine in Susquehanna County, Pennsylvania, said to have been opened long ago by Spaniards. While engaged in this work, Joseph boarded at the home of Isaac Hale in Harmony, Pennsylvania. There he met the attractive Hale daughter, Emma, whom he later courted, then married on January 18, 1827, in nearby Bainbridge.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPWord of Joseph's spiritual experiences followed him to Pennsylvania. Like Reverend Lane, most people rejected these stories as fabrications and regarded the young man as an impostor. Intense criticism of Joseph escalated when he would not recant but would persist in affirming the truth of his claims. This brought on a spiteful lawsuit in which Joseph was charged with being a disorderly person. It was dismissed for lack of evidence. Failing in this, Joseph's enemies sought to blacken his name by accusing him of being a "money digger" because of his employment with Mr. Stowel. This cruel lie followed Joseph throughout life.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAt last Joseph received the gold plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate on September 22, 1827, from the angel Moroni. He was charged with responsibility to protect them and to show them to no one. Because of harrassing efforts to get the plates from him, Joseph took them and Emma to Harmony, Pennsylvania, in December, where the Hale family provided them with housing. By February 1828 he had copied and translated some inscriptions from the plates. These pages were given to Martin Harris, a prosperous farmer from Palmyra who, interested in Joseph's story, had offered help but wanted proof that Joseph was telling the truth. Mr. Harris took the inscriptions and the translation to Professor Charles Anthon of Columbia University. A statement from the professor satisfied Mr. Harris about the ancient character of the inscriptions and the accuracy of their translation. He therefore began to serve as Joseph's scribe.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPBetween April and June 1828, Joseph translated 116 pages of manuscript from the plates, with Martin Harris serving as scribe. Yielding to Martin's persistent nagging, Joseph allowed him to take the manuscript home so he could show it to his wife, who distrusted Joseph and objected to the help Martin had given him. She lost or destroyed the manuscript. Joseph was devastated. In a revelation he was rebuked for his lack of judgment, and the plates and the Urim and Thummim were taken from him. Although they were returned later in the summer, from then until April 1829 Joseph's translation work was at a standstill because he lacked a scribe. Through Joseph's fervent prayers, that lack was filled when Oliver Cowdery came to Harmony from Palmyra in early April. Oliver, a schoolteacher, had learned about the gold plates and Joseph's work in translating them. Moved by a spiritual impulse, he went to Harmony to visit Joseph and shortly after began to serve as his scribe.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPWith a reliable scribe, the Urim and Thummim, and Joseph's familiarity with inscriptions on the plates gained during nineteen months, the translation proceeded smoothly and was completed in less than ninety days. Separated from his scribe by a curtain, Joseph dictated while Oliver wrote in longhand. At the beginning of each day, Oliver read aloud the last words of the previous day's dictation. Joseph then picked up at that point and continued dictating, with no editing. Oliver's manuscript was unpunctuated. Therefore, except for added punctuation, spelling corrections, and division into chapters and books, the Book of Mormon as we now have it is essentially a first draft.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPWritten in reformed Egyptian, a hieroglyphic writing expressing Hebrew thought, the Book of Mormon is a record of three migrations of people from the Mideast to the American continent. It records God's dealings with these people, even as the Bible records God's dealings with people of the Eastern Hemisphere. The book relates, among other things, the appearance of Jesus Christ on the American continent and his ministry among some of the people there.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIn the course of translation, Joseph and Oliver were intrigued by references to baptisms in the ancient record. Seeking additional understanding on the subject, they knelt and prayed to God. In response, John the Baptist, a resurrected being, appeared to them. The visitor conferred the Aaronic Priesthood upon them and instructed them to baptize each other, which they did. He also told them they would later be given authority to confer the Holy Ghost. This occurred weeks afterward when Peter, James, and John appeared and gave them the Melchizedek Priesthood.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPDuring the course of translation, open opposition to Joseph at Harmony caused him to move to Fayette, New York, in company with Emma and Oliver. Here they lived with Peter Whitmer Sr., whose son David was Oliver Cowdery's friend. As the translation neared its end, John Whitmer replaced Oliver Cowdery as scribe while Oliver made a copy of the manuscript. The unhappy experience of the lost manuscript written by Martin Harris convinced Joseph Smith of the need to have a backup copy. Meanwhile, the truthfulness of Joseph's account of the origins and the appearance of the Book of Mormon plates was validated when three men—Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, and Martin Harris—were shown the gold plates by the angel Moroni; and when eight men—Christian Whitmer, Jacob Whitmer, Peter Whitmer Jr., John Whitmer, Hiram Page, Joseph Smith Sr., Hyrum Smith, and Samuel H. Smith—were shown the plates by Joseph Smith Jr.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPE. B. Grandin, a printer in Palmyra, was employed to publish the Book of Mormon. Martin Harris underwrote the cost. The first copies came off the press in March 1830.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAlthough Joseph and Oliver had performed a few baptisms, both in Harmony and near Fayette, they had never presumed to organize a church. Now, however, Joseph was instructed by revelation to do so (see Doctrine and Covenants 20). In obedience, a group gathered in the home of Peter Whitmer Sr. on April 6, 1830, at which time The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was officially organized. Of those present, six served as the legal organizers under the laws of New York: Joseph Smith Jr., Oliver Cowdery, Hyrum Smith, Peter Whitmer Jr., Samuel H. Smith, and David Whitmer. Afterward, those who had been baptized were confirmed members of the Church and were given the gift of the Holy Ghost. There followed a rich outpouring of the Spirit of God when "some prophesied, whilst [they] all praised the Lord, and rejoiced exceedingly."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPSoon after the organization of the Church, Joseph went to Colesville, New York, not far from Harmony. There he stayed with his friend, Joseph Knight, while holding a series of meetings. By so doing, he was able to build up a branch there composed of his converts—the only time a Church unit was built up as the result of the direct teaching of the Prophet. The people in Colesville regarded this as such a distinction that they continued to identify themselves as the Colesville branch even when they later migrated to Missouri as a body. An outpouring of spiritual phenomena attended many of the meetings the Prophet held around Colesville. In one of them, the Prophet Joseph cast out an evil spirit from the body of his host's son, Newell Knight. This first miracle performed in the new Church created a great stir in the neighborhood and attracted many investigators who later became members.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe first general conference of the Church was held in Fayette, New York, in September 1830. During the conference the Prophet received a revelation instructing the Saints to gather together in one place (see Doctrine and Covenants 29:7-8). Later, in December 1830, Ohio was designated as the first gathering place (see Doctrine and Covenants 37). In another revelation received during the September general conference, Oliver Cowdery was instructed to preach the gospel to the Indians, called Lamanites (see Doctrine and Covenants 28:8). He left soon after in company with Peter Whitmer Jr., Parley P. Pratt, and Ziba Peterson. En route westward, the party stopped in Kirtland, Ohio, where Elder Pratt had once lived. Within three weeks, 127 converts were baptized. In a short time membership had swelled to several hundred.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAmong the early converts were Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge, able and experienced men who were a generation older than Joseph Smith. Soon after their baptism, they traveled to Fayette to visit the young Prophet, the result being that Joseph and his family moved to Kirtland, Ohio, in January 1831. There Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge played key roles in the early development of the Church. Elder Rigdon served as Joseph Smith's scribe and associate in the translation of the Bible and later became his counselor in the First Presidency. Edward Partridge became the first bishop in the Church. They were typical of numerous other men who joined the Church in the early days—men who, though older and more experienced than Joseph, subordinated themselves to him and followed his direction.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe call of Edward Partridge as bishop in Kirtland was driven by the large influx of members from the eastern branches, many of whom were poor and in need of help. The bishop willingly left a thriving business to assume the immense task of caring for them. His call was the first step in the process of completing the administrative structure of the Church, accomplished through revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. During 1832 and 1833, for instance, the Quorum of the First Presidency was organized and instructed (see Doctrine and Covenants 81; 90); and the Quorum of the Twelve and the First Quorum of Seventy were organized in February 1835 (see History of the Church, 2:180, 201-2).

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThroughout the Kirtland period, Joseph Smith received numerous revelations that, along with others received before and afterward, were compiled and published as the Doctrine and Covenants of the Church. These revelations cover many matters of doctrine, procedure, instruction, prediction, warning, and explanation. Some were received through the Urim and Thummim or by vision, while others were dictated by Joseph as he received spiritual promptings or insights. Eyewitnesses reported that when a revelation was given by dictation, the Prophet spoke slowly enough that it could be recorded in longhand. The revelation stood as it was dictated, without editing. Some observers reported a subtle change in his appearance and facial expression while he dictated a revelation, denoting intense concentration and producing a kind of spiritual aura around him. During the Kirtland period, Joseph also translated an ancient Egyptian scroll pertaining to Abraham, which is now part of the Pearl of Great Price, the fourth of the standard works of the Church (Bible, Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price).

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAs Church membership escalated in and around Kirtland, many local residents became uneasy at the prospect of being dominated by the newcomers. Others were put off by Mormon beliefs in visions, revelations, and the appearance of heavenly beings. Still others, especially the ministerial class, were openly antagonistic as their flocks declined. These elements combined in the spring of 1832 to produce the first act of overt violence against Joseph Smith and the church he had organized. While he was a guest in the home of John Johnson at Hiram, Ohio, near Kirtland, he was dragged outside by a mob one Saturday night, stripped naked, beaten and scratched, then tarred and feathered. Helped by friends to clean up, he was able to speak at Sunday services the next day. But consequences to the family were tragic. One of the twins he and Emma had adopted after the death of their own twins became ill from exposure during the melee and died a few days later. It was a sad time for the Smiths, especially for Emma, who grieved over the loss of this adopted child and her own babies.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPA sense of optimism came to the family and to the entire community a little more than a year later when construcution commenced on a temple in Kirtland. By revelation it was to be "a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God" (Doctrine and Covenants 88:119). Joseph Smith was the architect. His brother Hyrum was the chairman of the building committee. The master builder was Artemis Millett. Many skilled craftsmen found among the new converts helped in the construction. Brigham Young, for instance, supervised the inside plastering. The sandstone used in the walls, taken from a nearby quarry, was stuccoed. Sisters sacrificed some of their choice glassware, which was ground up and mixed with the stucco so that when the sun fell on the walls, they sparkled like jewels.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPGreat excitement stirred the community as preparations were completed for the dedication of the temple. It took place on March 27, 1836, as well as during several days thereafter, and was accompanied by spiritual outpourings likened to the Day of Pentecost. Heavenly beings appeared. Many of the members present spoke in tongues and prophesied. Later the Savior, Moses, Elias, and Elijah appeared in the temple. "I have accepted this house," said the Savior, "and my name shall be here; and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy in this house" (Doctrine and Covenants 110:7). Moses committed the keys of the gathering of Israel, Elias committed the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham, and Elijah committed the keys to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to the fathers.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPArmed with these additional keys, Joseph Smith was in a position to make notable extensions to the work of the Church. A few months later, a significant step to that end was taken when, during a meeting in the temple, he called Heber C. Kimball to open missionary work abroad in England. Meanwhile, the upper rooms of the temple were used as a school to improve the knowledge and the skills of the elders who later would be added to the missionary corps.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPEven while the Church exulted over the events connected with the dedication of the temple, seeds were being sown that would soon cause Joseph Smith to leave Kirtland in fear for his safety, or even for his life. In November 1836 Joseph and some of his associates organized the Kirtland Safety Society Bank. The timing was unfortunate; economic panic swept over the country in 1837. In May of that year, eight hundred banks failed. Underfunded, and overextended in real estate whose values were plummeting, the Kirtland Safety Society Bank never had a chance. It went under almost immediately, carrying with it the savings of many Latter-day Saint investors. Looking for a scapegoat, people laid blame for the collapse on the most prominent member of the bank organizers—Joseph Smith. Almost overnight, the beloved Prophet became the hated banker among many of those who had lost money. The speed of the change and the depth of the hatred were apparent in a meeting held soon after in the temple where disappointed investors bitterly attacked Joseph. "This order of things increased during the winter," wrote Heber C. Kimball, "to such an extent that a man's life was in danger the moment he spoke in defense of the Prophet of God." In these circumstances, Joseph left Kirtland in mid-January 1838 and traveled to Missouri in order to "escape mob violence, which was about to burst upon us."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe Prophet arrived at Far West, Missouri, in mid-March 1838 and began at once to counsel with the local leaders. The Church had had a presence in Missouri since early 1831 when Oliver Cowdery and his fellow missionaries had begun to work there. At a conference held in Kirtland in June of that year, Joseph received a revelation announcing the next conference of the Saints would be held in Missouri. It also said the land of their "inheritance" would be made known at the time, the land of Zion where the New Jerusalem would be built. Twenty-eight elders were named to go to Missouri, traveling in pairs and preaching along the way (see Doctrine and Covenants 52). Also, the Colesville branch was instructed to move to Missouri.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPArriving in late July, Joseph received a revelation that identified Missouri as the land the Lord had consecrated for the gathering of His people. It was called "the land of promise, and the place for the city of Zion." The site for a temple was designated, and the Saints were instructed to purchase as much land in the area as their resources would allow, so that they might "obtain it for an everlasting inheritance." (See Doctrine and Covenants 57:1-5.) During the first week in August, they began erecting a log house in Independence, Missouri; Sidney Rigdon dedicated the land of Zion for the gathering of God's people; and Joseph Smith dedicated the site where the temple was to be built. Soon after, the Colesville branch settled on a tract twelve miles west of Independence.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPBefore returning to Kirtland, Joseph appointed Sidney Gilbert as an agent for the Church to receive money and to purchase land; Bishop Edward Partridge was instructed to grant inheritances to the Saints as the lands were purchased; and W. W. Phelps was designated as the printer and publisher for the Church, assisted by Oliver Cowdery. Later, the Church's first official organ, the Evening and the Morning Star, was published in Missouri.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPShortly after his return to Kirtland, the Prophet received two revelations that explained the present and future status of the land of Zion in Missouri. A few Saints were directed to go there to settle, but the general body of the Church was counseled to defer moving there until some future time (see Doctrine and Covenants 63; 64). These revelations convinced Joseph's followers of the subordinate role Missouri would play at the moment while underscoring the ultimate importance and the preeminent role of that land.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPA few months after returning from Missouri, Joseph received a revelation, through vision, that described the three degrees of glory in the hereafter and prescribed the conditions for their attainment (see Doctrine and Covenants 76). The rich detail given and the elevated style of the language profoundly expanded the scope and the meaning of the doctrine of gradations in the hereafter first expounded by the Apostle Paul (see 1 Corinthians 15:40-44). The Prophet's reaction to this revelation shows a surprising detachment as if he were a spectator of the event, not a participant. "The sublimity of the ideas," he wrote, "the purity of the language; the scope for action; . . . the rewards for faithfulness, and the punishments for sins, are so much beyond the narrow-mindedness of men, that every honest man is constrained to exclaim: 'It came from God.'"

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPMeanwhile, a crisis had developed in Missouri. The influx of Latter-day Saints had raised concerns among the old settlers. It was a repetition of what had happened at Kirtland, but the situation was even worse because of the general coarseness of the people in this frontier area and also because of the revelation identifying Missouri as the place of the "inheritance" of the Mormon people. An added irritation was the false belief that the Church had encouraged the migration of free blacks into the state. These factors prompted a demand that the Church newsaper be discontinued and the store be closed. When the Saints refused, an angry mob destroyed the press and tarred and feathered several of the leading brethren. Hopelessly outnumbered and without legal recourse because most local officials were either members of the mob or sympathetic to it, Church leaders negotiated a "treaty" with the mob in July 1833. Under it the signers agreed to leave Jackson County by the following January and to use their influence to persuade others to do likewise. Unwilling to wait until the deadline, elements of the mob attacked three Mormon settlements in Jackson County on October 31 and November 1, 1833, stoning and ransacking houses, strewing furniture and other contents outside, and driving many of the Saints from their homes. Threats of further violence forced the Saints to leave Jackson County and to flee to counties to the north.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe news stunned Joseph Smith. He was concerned about the safety of the Missouri Saints and distressed that the sanguine plans for the temple and the gathering in Independence had been thwarted. He struggled in prayer to know what to do. In answer he received a revelation on February 24, 1834, part of which declared, "Behold, I say unto you, the redemption of Zion must needs come by power" (Doctrine and Covenants 103:15). Joseph was instructed to recruit a body of men and to "gather [them] together unto the land of Zion" (v. 22). There were no instructions about what to do when they arrived. By the first part of May two hundred men had been recruited, armed, and equipped. Known as Zion's Camp, they left soon after for Missouri, which was a thousand miles away.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIt was a long, difficult march. The camp attracted widespread attention along the way. Questions about their destination and purpose were turned aside with nebulous answers. When they arrived in Missouri on June 16, 1834, things looked better for the Saints. Governor Daniel Dunklin had shown an inclination to assist them and had urged them not to use self-help in asserting their rights. Honoring that request, Joseph disbanded the camp on June 23 and soon after returned to Kirtland. Before doing that, however, he reorganized the leadership in Missouri that had been torn with controversy. Some of the high leaders had been caught up in this, including Oliver Cowdery. Sadly for the Prophet, Oliver later was cut off. Joseph grieved for the loss of this old friend who had endured so much for the Church and for him personally. After Joseph's martyrdom, Oliver returned to full fellowship. Throughout his disaffection, Oliver never denied the truth of his testimony about the translation and the validity of the Book of Mormon, nor about his participation in the heavenly appearances he shared with Joseph. His problems were caused by jealousy and by unfounded suspicion of the motives of others.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPSome critics questioned the need and the value of Zion's Camp. To the contrary, Joseph and most members of it lauded its worth. For Joseph, it confirmed his leadership ability and his poise under pressure. The others acquired self-confidence and knowledge that would be important in the later expulsions of the Saints from Missouri and Illinois. Significantly, most of those who later were called to the Twelve and the Seventy were members of Zion's Camp.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPDuring the four years between Zion's Camp and the arrival of Joseph Smith in Far West in mid-March 1838, the Latter-day Saints had settled in many Missouri communities in counties north of Independence. Joseph settled in Far West, the largest and the most prominent of those communities. Despite the upset caused by the disaffection of Oliver Cowdery and others, the Prophet moved forward confidently with major initiatives. It was at this time he began the immense task of preparing a history of his life and of the Church. He also laid plans for an expected influx of converts from England and elsewhere. On May 18, 1838, he traveled north of Far West to explore an area along the Grand River and its tributaries, "for the purpose of . . . laying off a stake of Zion [Adam-ondi-Ahman]; making locations, and laying claims to lands to facilitate the gathering of the Saints, and for the benefit of the poor." A few weeks later he returned with Sidney Rigdon "to settle some Canadian brethren in that place, as they are emigrating rapidly to this land from all parts of the country."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe old settlers were alarmed, foreseeing that the Mormons, if unchecked, could soon dominate Missouri politics. They decided to take a stand at the ballot box. In August 1838 a group of them sought to prevent Mormons from voting at an election in Gallatin, Daviess County. A brawl ensued in which the Saints were greatly outnumbered. Learning of the incident, Joseph went there with several brethren to help protect their rights. Later a justice of the peace at Gallatin, Adam Black, signed a false affidavit alleging Joseph Smith and other Mormons had threatened his life over a dispute in a land transaction. This was followed by another false affidavit, this one signed by William Peniston, alleging the Mormons had raised an army of five hundred and had threatened his life and the lives of others. On the basis of these false affidavits, and ignoring contrary evidence, the local judge issued a warrant for the arrest of Joseph Smith. And the governor of Missouri, Lilburn W. Boggs, without inquiring into the validity of the charges, ordered the state militia to increase its forces.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIn the following weeks, there were reports of sporadic mob attacks against Mormons in several northern Missouri counties. The main one was at DeWitt, located on the Grand River near its confluence with the Missouri River. A hundred mobbers invaded DeWitt, threatening to kill the Mormons if they did not leave by a certain day. The Mormons appealed to Governor Boggs for help. He answered that since the controversy was between local citizens, they would have to work it out among themselves. Under further threats from the mob, the Mormons left.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PP"After the evacuation of DeWitt," wrote Parley P. Pratt, "when our citizens were officially notified that they must protect themselves and expect no more protection from any department of the State Government, they assembled in Far West to the number of one thousand men, or thereabout, and resolved to defend their rights to the last."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe position of the Saints was weakened at this time by unfounded charges that Joseph Smith directed a murderous band called the Danites and that, like Mohammed, he intended to conquer by the sword. These charges were given weight by the false affidavits—based on misinformation—of Thomas B. Marsh and Orson Hyde of the Twelve. Later they acknowledged their error and returned to the Church in good standing.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe first armed conflict between the mob and the Saints occurred at Crooked River in early autumn 1838. Three Mormons were killed, including David W. Patten of the Twelve, and several others were wounded. The mob suffered similar casualties. Yet in a letter to Governor Boggs, Sashiel Woods, a sectarian preacher, reported the Mormons had "massacred" fifty to sixty men and had threatened to burn Richmond. "For God's sake, give us assistance as soon as possible," the letter pleaded. Without checking the facts, Governor Boggs ordered General John B. Clark to hasten to Richmond "with all possible speed. The 'Mormons' must be treated as enemies and must be exterminated or driven from the state, if necessary for the public good. Their outrages are beyond description."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPA few days later, on October 30, 1838, a mob of more than two hundred attacked a small Mormon community at Haun's Mill, killing nineteen and wounding twelve. Joseph was crushed by the news. Foreseeing what would happen to his people under the governor's extermination order, he knew steps had to be taken to end the conflict. Before he could act, Colonel George Hinkle of the Caldwell County Militia, a member of the Church, acting without authorization from Joseph Smith, negotiated a pact with generals of the Missouri militia that surrounded Far West. Under it Joseph and other Church leaders were to be surrendered and tried; the property of the Saints was to be appropriated to pay their debts and to indemnify their enemies; and the Saints were to relinquish their arms and leave the state. Though annoyed by Colonel Hinkle's presumption and incensed by the sacrifice of the constitutional rights of the Saints, Joseph yielded in order to avoid further killing among his people. He and other Church leaders were taken into custody by the Missouri Militia.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe prisoners were moved first to Independence and then to Richmond, where they were imprisoned and shackled at night in a makeshift jail. During a fifteen-day preliminary hearing, a parade of prosecution witnesses gave inflammatory, mostly perjurious testimony against the Prophet and his codefendants. Deliberate efforts were made to prevent defense witnesses from testifying. The result was no surprise: Joseph, his brother Hyrum, Sidney Rigdon, and three others were bound over for trial on the charge of treason and sent to the jail in Liberty, Missouri. Parley P. Pratt and four others were bound over for trial on the charge of murder and were left in Richmond. All of the other defendants were released.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIn the Richmond jail, Joseph rebuked his guards with striking effect. Revolted by their tales of degradation and rape of Mormon women, he stood erect and, in a loud, authoritative voice, commanded them to be silent else he or they would die immediately. There was such a tone of finality in his words, such an air of commanding authority in his bearing, that the guards instantly fell silent. Of the incident, Parley P. Pratt wrote, "Dignity and majesty have I seen but once, as it stood in chains, at midnight, in a dungeon in an obscure village in Missouri."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPLiberty Jail was cramped, dark, rank, and oppressive. The beds were hard and dirty, the food barely edible. Yet from this sordid environment came some of Joseph Smith's most eloquent writings (see Doctrine and Covenants 121-23). To his family he wrote tender and loving letters devoid of complaint or self-pity. He also gave wise counsel to Brigham Young and other members of the Twelve about directing the exodus of the Saints from Missouri to Illinois. Joseph's conduct in the Liberty Jail is a convincing illustration of the conquest of mind and spirit over one's environment.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPWith the knowledge, if not the help, of certain Missouri officials, Joseph escaped from custody in April 1839. He arrived in Quincy, Illinois, on April 22, where he was reunited with his family and the Saints. The conditions in Quincy were deplorable. The Saints were living in makeshift shelters, sickness was rampant, and food was scarce. Many were discouraged. Something had to be done immediately to change attitudes and to provide hope. Eight days later, on May 1, Joseph contracted to purchase 182 acres of land from Isaac Galland and Hugh White at Commerce, Illinois, north of Quincy, on the east bank of the Mississippi River. Most of the land was undeveloped; some of it was swampy. Later, other lands were purchased, including tracts across the river at Montrose, Iowa. Soon the land was surveyed and divided into lots. The name Commerce was changed to Nauvoo, and the Saints began to gather there. Within two years twelve hundred homes and other buildings had been constructed. Joseph and his family first occupied a rough cabin on the Galland tract. Later he built a gracious, two-story, Federal-style home named the Mansion House.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIn the summer of 1839, the Prophet spent many hours training the Twelve who were preparing for their missions to England. In addition to instructions about first principles, he gave valuable counsel about spiritual matters. "A person may profit by noticing the first intimation of the spirit of revelation," he told the Brethren. "For instance, when you feel pure intelligence flowing into you, it may give you sudden strokes of ideas, so that by noticing it, you may find it fulfilled the same day or soon; (i.e.) those things that were presented unto your minds by the Spirit of God, will come to pass; and thus by learning the Spirit of God and understanding it, you may grow into the principle of revelation, until you become perfect in Christ Jesus." He also warned them to guard against self-sufficiency, self-righteousness, and self-importance and admonished them to walk humbly and to observe charity toward all.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe Saints had suffered heavy losses in Missouri. The assets acquired during eight years were gone. They rightly felt entitled to reimbursement. Since Missouri's officialdom had callously denied their requests, the Prophet turned to the federal government for redress and decided to make the appeal in person. On October 29, 1839, Joseph, Sidney Rigdon, and two other companions left Nauvoo to go to Washington, D.C., for this purpose. They carried with them a sheath of protests, appeals, and memorials to support their contentions. Checking into a second-rate hotel at the corner of Missouri and Third Streets, they began to make the rounds of legislative and executive offices.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThey might as well have left their papers at home, for no one would read them. The stock answer was that their remedy lay only in Missouri. This reflected the prevailing legal philosophy that the federal government possessed only limited, delegated authority that did not extend to local matters of this kind. That reasoning made no sense to the Prophet. Were they to seek justice from those who had mobbed, killed, and driven them? Joseph was especially incensed by the attitude of President Martin Van Buren, who treated him "very insolently" and who told him, "Your cause is just, but I can do nothing for you." The Prophet was convinced that with his vast authority and influence, the president could have found a way to help if he had wanted to despite the legal restrictions. "On my way home," the Prophet wrote later, "I did not fail to proclaim the iniquity and insolence of Martin Van Buren, toward myself and an injured people." Indeed, it seems the Prophet never failed ever after to berate President Van Buren on any fitting occasion when his name was mentioned. Perhaps this experience was an important factor in Joseph Smith's later decision to run for the presidency of the United States.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPWhile Joseph's visit to the Capitol failed in its main purpose, there were beneficial side effects. For example, while there he accepted invitations to speak. His celebrity status guaranteed large and interested audiences. The general impression he created seems to have been favorable to him, the Church, and its doctrines. Congressman Mathew S. Davis, who attended one of these meetings, wrote about it in a letter to his wife: "I have taken some pains to explain the man's beliefs, as he himself explained it. I have done so because it might satisfy your curiosity, and might be interesting to you, and some of your friends. I have changed my opinion of the Mormons. They are an injured and much abused people."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPJoseph Smith returned from Washington convinced that if the Saints were to receive civil justice, it would have to be under a government they devised. He began to work immediately on plans for a liberal charter for Nauvoo. He was assisted by many, but especially by a new convert, John C. Bennett, who had political influence in Springfield. It was an unusual document, likened by some to the charters that created the Greek city-states. The city courts were empowered to issue writs of habeus corpus, and the city council was authorized to raise and maintain an army and to organize a university. The city had almost complete autonomy. The act creating it was signed December 16, 1840. Joseph noted the event: "The City Charter of Nauvoo is of my own plan and device. I concocted it for the salvation of the Church, and on principles so broad, that every honest man might dwell secure under its protective influence without distinction of sect or party." Acting under the authority of the new charter, the Prophet and his associates soon organized a city militia and named the Nauvoo Legion and the University of Nauvoo.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PP While plans for the Nauvoo Charter were moving forward, an important new doctrine was introduced. At a funeral in the late summer of 1840, Joseph quoted 1 Corinthians 15:29 and explained that the Savior's disciples had taught the doctrine of baptism for the dead but that it had been abandoned during the Apostasy. This would be one of the basic vicarious ordinances to be performed in the Nauvoo Temple. Its cornerstones were laid at the general conference in April 1841. A revelation defining the procedure in recording vicarious temple ordinances was received September 6, 1842 (see Doctrine and Covenants 128).

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAbout the time of the April 1841 conference, Joseph Smith married his first plural wife. The revelation explaining the doctrine of plural marriage was recorded on July 12, 1843 (see Doctrine and Covenants 132), though Joseph had received it more than ten years earlier while working on his translation of the Bible. He had memorized the revelation then and over the years had divulged parts of it to associates who subsequently leaked it to the public. These leaks had given rise to false charges in the 1830s that the Church taught and practiced plural marriage. Even in 1843, when it was put into writing, the revelation was not published and would not be published until years after the Prophet's death.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPBecause of his strict upbringing, Joseph Smith resisted entering into plural marriage. He did so only after being rebuked by the Lord. Afterward, he divulged the revelation to several members of his inner circle, including Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, John Taylor, and others, directing them to take plural wives. They too were reluctant but eventually obeyed. All this was done in secret. However, word of the practice leaked out, creating widespread rumors and gossip. Not being authorized to publicly discuss the revelation, yet under direction to teach and practice it privately, Joseph walked a narrow line. He adroitly avoided making direct denials while making ambiguous though true statements to try to silence the rumors. This dilemma created the controversies that led to his martyrdom.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPWhile Joseph and Emma occupied the Mansion House in 1842, Julia, the adopted twin, was eleven; Joseph III was nearing ten; Frederick was six; and Alexander was four. It was a close-knit and loving family. To Joseph, Emma was the "elect lady" who had always stood loyally beside him in every crisis. Moreover, she was a woman of talent who compiled the first hymnal for the Church and who became the first president of the Relief Society, the women's auxiliary organization established in 1842. Most important, however, Joseph regarded Emma as an eternal companion with whom he would share an everlasting union, enjoying, if they proved faithful to the end, an association in the celestial kingdom with the Father and the Son, with their own children, and with a numerous progeny that would descend from them. Emma shared this vision with her husband, even as she had accepted the many other doctrines revealed through his prophetic ministry. However, Emma's acceptance of the doctrine of plural marriage did not come easily. Indeed, she rebelled at first. Later she accepted it grudgingly, even to the extent of approving those whom her husband took as plural wives. After Joseph's death, however, she reverted to her rebellion to the point of denying her husband ever had engaged in polygamy.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe whisperings in Nauvoo about plural marriages created an atmosphere of tension and suspicion. They became the subject of common gossip, spoken about guardedly at first and later erupting into topics of public conversation and condemnation, creating a furor. Meanwhile, a ring of enemies sought to revive the charge of treason leveled against the Prophet by the court in Richmond, Missouri. In the forefront of this scheme was John C. Bennett who, after losing his place as a counselor in the First Presidency because of adultery, turned against Joseph Smith. Through political influence, he persuaded the Missouri governor to seek the Prophet's extradition and the Illinois governor to issue a warrant for his arrest. The plot failed when, after his arrest, Joseph was released on a writ of habeus corpus. The same result followed when Bennett and his confederates attempted to have the Prophet extradited to Missouri as an accessory in the shooting of Governor Lilburn W. Boggs.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPYet another counselor turned traitor to Joseph Smith during this crucial period. William Law, called as a counselor in the First Presidency at age thirty-one, was a well-to-do entrepreneur convert from Canada. He had invested heavily in the growing Nauvoo economy. He became worried about his wealth upon learning of plural marriage, fearing it would cause the economy to crumble. Failing in his effort to persuade Joseph to abandon polygamy, he and several conspirators plotted the Prophet's death. Joseph became suspicious. "What can be the matter with these men?" he asked rhetorically in his journal on January 5, 1844. "Is it that the wicked flee when no man pursueth, that hit pigeons always flutter, that drowning men catch at straws, or that Presidents Law and Marks are absolutely traitors to the church, that my remarks should produce such an excitement in their minds? Can it be possible that the traitor whom Porter Rockwell reports to me as being in correspondence with my Missouri enemies is one of my quorum?" Within a few months, the mask would be ripped off the conspirators, causing them to change their strategy.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe Prophet's inclination to begin major initiatives during times of extreme stress surfaced again on January 29, 1844. A meeting with the Twelve that day focused on the qualifications of the presidential candidates and their attitudes toward the Saints. The men were dissatisfied with what they found, so it was decided that Joseph Smith would offer himself as a candidate for the presidency of the United States. No one believed he could win. The hope was that a vigorous campaign would present the plight of the Saints before the people, enhance the image of the Church, and introduce thoughtful issues into the national debate.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPPlans for the campaign shaped up fast. Thirty-seven special conferences were scheduled throughout the country before the fall election. The final ones would be held in the nation's capital. Missionary-campaigners were to be sent into all twenty-six existing states to advance the Prophet's candidacy while expounding the gospel. These included all members of the Twelve except John Taylor and Willard Richards, who were to remain in Nauvoo to direct the campaign. A political tract was prepared that outlined Joseph's platform. It proposed a substantial decrease in the size of Congress and the compensation of its members; sweeping prison reforms, with emphasis on rehabilitative instead of punitive treatment of inmates; abolition of slavery by the purchase of slaves from their owners; development of a national banking system; annexation of Texas, Mexico, Oregon, and Canada; and power in the president to suppress mobs and to intervene in state affairs to protect the civil liberties of United States citizens. As the campaigners left Nauvoo, armed with the printed platform, Joseph wryly observed, "There is oratory enough in the Church to carry me into the presidential chair the first slide."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAs Joseph's campaign gathered momentum throughout the nation, conditions in Nauvoo deteriorated rapidly. In March the Prophet learned from informants, A. B. Williams and M. G. Eaton, that William Law and Robert D. Foster had accused him of trying to seduce their wives and that, with others, they were plotting Joseph's death. The Prophet mounted the stand near the temple on March 24, 1844, and laid the entire matter before the public, accusing Law and Foster of plotting his death. On April 18 they were excommunicated from the Church for "unchristianlike conduct." With the mask ripped away, the conspirators abandoned plans to kill Joseph Smith and launched a scheme to discredit and to humiliate him. William Law persuaded a grand jury in Carthage to indict Joseph for polygamy and adultery; Foster was able to get an indictment for false swearing; and Francis Higbee, another member of the ring, pressed a suit against him for alleged slander. They also pooled their resources to purchase a press and announced their plans to publish a newspaper in Nauvoo under the provocative name the Nauvoo Expositor.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe first and only issue of the Expositor appeared on June 7, 1844. It portrayed Joseph as a fallen prophet, ambitious and power hungry. A fictional story implied that the missionary effort abroad was a lure to trap unsuspecting women into polygamy. Joseph was characterized as "one of the blackest and basest scoundrels that has appeared upon the stage of human existence since the days of Nero and Caligula." The remedy proposed foreshadowed the bloody killings that would take place in less than three weeks: "Let us arise in the majesty of our strength," it intoned, "and sweep the influence of tyrants and miscreants from the face of the land, as with the breath of heaven."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPConcerned that repeated attacks of this kind would create a mob spirit, Joseph recommended to the city council that the Expositor be abated as a public nuisance. There was common-law authority to support the action. His proposal prevailed, and on June 10, only an hour and a half after the council meeting ended, the Expositor press was destroyed and the type scattered.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe reactions were prompt and violent. Newspapers in nearby Quincy, LaHarpe, and Warsaw bitterly denounced the action. The most graphic was the Warsaw Signal, whose editor, Thomas C. Sharp, wrote: "We hold ourselves at all times in readiness to cooperate with our fellow citizens . . . to exterminate, utterly exterminate the wicked and abominable Mormon leaders." Two days later, the court in Carthage indicted Joseph on a charge of inciting to riot. When Joseph avoided arrest through a writ of habeus corpus issued by the Nauvoo court, the mood of his enemies turned to rage. They appealed to Governor Thomas Ford to direct the state militia to take the Mormon prophet into custody. Meanwhile, they whipped up anti-Mormon sentiment among mobs throughout the area, even into Iowa across the river. Alarmed at the menacing tone of his enemies, Joseph declared martial law in Nauvoo and called on the Nauvoo Legion to defend the city against what he feared was imminent mob attack.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPGovernor Ford led the state militia to Carthage and invited Joseph to send emissaries to explain his actions. The hearing was held in public where the representatives from Nauvoo were surrounded by Joseph's bitter enemies, some of whom had called for his death. Their testimony was interrupted by frequent contradictions and angry outbursts from the audience. The governor, through ineptness or bias, was unable to control the proceedings, which degenerated into chaos. The result was embodied in a letter dated June 22. It ordered Joseph to submit to arrest by the Carthage constable and to stand trial on the charge of inciting to riot in the midst of those who had threatened to kill him. He was forbidden to invoke the writ of habeus corpus in Nauvoo and was told the state militia would enforce the order if he refused to obey.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPJoseph was convinced he would be killed if he went to Carthage. To avoid that he considered fleeing west beyond the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois and the United States. Migrating west had been considered before, and tentative plans to do so had been made. Indeed, he had prophesied the Saints would migrate west and would become a mighty people in the Rocky Mountains. He had crossed the Mississippi River and was preparing to flee west when a delegation pleaded with him to return. He declined at first but changed his mind when he was accused of cowardice and of abandoning his flock. It was then he uttered the oft-quoted statement that if his life was of no value to his friends, it meant nothing to him.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPIn company with the others who had been charged with inciting to riot, Joseph went to Carthage on Monday, June 24, on horseback. It was while en route there he uttered the statement: "I am going like a lamb to the slaughter, but I am calm as a summer's morning. I have a conscience void of offense toward God and toward all men. If they take my life I shall die an innocent man, and my blood shall cry from the ground for vengeance, and it shall be said of me, 'He was murdered in cold blood.'"

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThere was a circus-like atmosphere in Carthage. Several companies of militia had been assembled. Many people had been drawn there by intimations of what would happen. Liquor flowed freely, and talk of assassination was whispered about. The legal proceedings were a charade. At the preliminary hearing on the charge of inciting to riot, Joseph and the other defendants were bound over for trial but were released on bail. However, Joseph's enemies had devised a spurious charge of treason against him and Hyrum based on the declaration of martial law in Nauvoo. Their imprisonment in the Carthage Jail on this charge of treason was illegal because the preliminary hearing had not been held at the time. The next day, on Wednesday the twenty-sixth, they were taken from the jail for the hearing, which was another mockery. Bail was denied, and they were returned to their cell Wednesday afternoon. Despite widespread rumors of assassination, Governor Ford left Carthage with most of the militia to go to Nauvoo to disarm the Nauvoo Legion. He left the Carthage Greys to guard the jail. Earlier, members of this company had made open threats against Joseph's life. The governor had dismissed these lightly with the statement, "The people [were] not that cruel."

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPSeveral friends were allowed to accompany Joseph and Hyrum to jail, including John Taylor and Willard Richards of the Twelve. They were housed in the debtors' cell upstairs, which did not have bars on the door or the windows. Joseph spent his last hours dictating letters to Willard Richards for his family and associates. Intermittently, he and the others read and discussed the scriptures and other literature brought with them to the jail. They also sang for diversion. John Taylor, who had a fine baritone voice, sang all fourteen verses of "A Poor Wayfaring Man of Grief," and then sang the hymn again at Joseph's request. During the day on Thursday, all the friends left the jail except Elders Taylor and Richards.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPAbout 5:00 p.m. one of the guards served a light supper. Soon after a loud commotion was heard outside. Glancing out one of the windows, Elder Richards saw a large group of armed men with blackened faces. Some circled the building while others forced their way through the outside door and ran upstairs, firing as they came. Joseph and Hyrum reached for handguns that had been smuggled into the prison for their self-protection. Elders Taylor and Richards armed themselves with canes to try to ward off the attackers as they sought to enter the room. Hyrum was shot first by a ball on the left side of his nose, which snapped his head back violently and sent him crashing to the floor. In quick succession he was hit by three other balls—the first entering his left side, the second striking his throat, the third lodging in his left leg. Joseph reacted instinctively, thrusting his gun out through a crack in the door and firing it once without apparent effect. He then abandoned any further attempts at self-defense. As he sought to escape through one of the windows, he was hit almost simultaneously by three balls, two from inside the room and one from outside. He fell headlong out the window, landing on the ground near a well at the southeast corner of the jail. Joseph and Hyrum were dead. John Taylor was seriously wounded. Willard Richards escaped injury except for one ball that had slightly grazed his left earlobe.

Smith, Joseph, Jr.PPThe killers thought they had achieved victory over their victims and the Church they led. But they were mistaken. Actually, having died as martyrs for their religion, Joseph and Hyrum in death became even more powerful instruments for advancing the principles they had taught in life.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Joseph Smith: Martyr, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1977) and sources cited therein.
