Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Two

Young, BrighamPPBrigham Young

Young, BrighamPPThe tenacious qualities of Brigham Young's character had their roots in his heritage and early environment. His father, John Young, was a veteran of the Revolutionary War, and his grandfather had fought in the French and Indian War. Both ancestors were frontier farmers whose livelihood depended on hard work, perseverance, and large families who could help share the load. Brigham, who was born on June 1, 1801, in Whitingham, Windsor County, Vermont, was the ninth child and fourth son of John Young and his wife, Abigail (Nabby) Howe Young. Two more children would be born into this family before the mother passed away in 1815. The family then lived in Aurelius, Cayuga County, New York.

Young, BrighamPPThe parents were staunch members of the Methodist Church and taught their children "to live a strictly moral life." Scripture study and family prayer were main features of their home. The children, who looked to the father for direction, looked to the mother for nurturing care. This seemed especially true of Brigham, who had a strong emotional attachment to his mother. Her death, therefore, was a grievous blow to him. However, two years later, when the father married Hannah Brown, Brigham, then in his seventeenth year, already had begun to chart his own course.

Young, BrighamPPIn addition to his training on the farm, Brigham had learned skills as a carpenter, joiner, painter, and glazier. He applied these while living as a young bachelor in Auburn and later in Port Byron, New York. In Port Byron he joined a debating society, which helped to develop his speaking skills and to broaden his interests. There he became active in the Methodist Church and was baptized at age twenty-two. He also courted and married Miriam Works in Port Byron. A year later their first child, Elizabeth, was born.

Young, BrighamPPIn 1829, when Elizabeth was four, Brigham and Miriam moved to Mendon, New York, where several members of the Young family had settled. The location was significant to Brigham Young's future. Nearby was Palmyra, where, during late 1829 and early 1830, a printer, E. B. Grandin, was busy setting in type a book named the Book of Mormon. It came off the press in March 1830. The following month a church, which came to be known as The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was organized in nearby Fayette, New York. Its leader was Joseph Smith. According to the front pages of the Book of Mormon, Joseph Smith had translated it from gold plates delivered to him by an angel.

Young, BrighamPPPhineas Young, Brigham's brother, acquired a copy of the book later in 1830. The Book of Mormon was circulated in the Young family, and its message and the teaching of missionaries caused most of the family to join the Mormon Church. Brigham was baptized on April 14, 1832, by one of the missionaries, Eleazer Miller. Years later he explained his conversion: "When I saw a man without eloquence, or talents for public speaking, who could only say, 'I know, by the power of the Holy Ghost, that the Book of Mormon is true, that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of the Lord,' the Holy Ghost proceeding from that individual illuminated my understanding, and light, glory, and immortality were before me. . . . I knew for myself that the testimony of the man was true."

Young, BrighamPPBrigham Young's conversion soon was reflected in personal spiritual experiences. At a meeting shortly after his baptism, he spoke in tongues. "We thought only of the day of Pentecost," he reported later, "when the Apostles were clothed upon with cloven tongues of fire." He exercised this gift frequently. While holding meetings with Saints on his way to Kirtland a few months later, he spoke in tongues, as he did in a meeting with Joseph Smith when he arrived there. It was the first time the Prophet had witnessed the gift.

Young, BrighamPPMiriam, who was seriously ill during the summer of 1832, passed away quietly on September 8. She left two daughters, Elizabeth and a baby, Vilate, named after her friend, Vilate Kimball, who, with her husband, Heber C., also had joined the Church in Mendon. Brigham grieved over the loss of Miriam, who not only was his wife and the mother of his children but also his friend. She had been baptized during the summer and had encouraged her husband in his desire to travel to Kirtland, Ohio, to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. Knowing this, Vilate Kimball offered to care for Brigham's daughters so he could go there with Heber. Before leaving, Brigham performed a symbolic act fraught with significance. He gave away his earthly possessions so that he "might be free to go forth and proclaim the plan of salvation to the inhabitants of the earth. . . . I had not a coat in the world," he wrote. "Neither had I a shoe to my feet, and I had to borrow a pair of pants and a pair of boots."

Young, BrighamPPIn Kirtland, Brigham promptly sought Joseph Smith. He found the Prophet chopping trees in the woods. "Here my joy was full at the privilege of shaking the hand of the Prophet of God, and [I] received the sure testimony, by the Spirit of Prophecy, that he was all that any man could believe him to be, as a true Prophet." At his residence that evening after he heard his visitor speak in tongues, Joseph prophesied that Brigham Young one day would preside over the Church.

Young, BrighamPPA year after returning to Mendon, Brigham filled two missions to Canada, baptizing many and building up branches of the Church. He traveled more than twenty-four hundred miles, mostly on foot but also by boat and wagon. It was arduous work, but he gloried in it. After completing these missions, he moved to Kirtland with the Kimballs. There, realizing the need for a wife and mother in his home, he courted and married Mary Ann Angell.

Young, BrighamPPWith his varied skills as an artisan, Brigham had little difficulty finding work in Kirtland. Sometimes he had to wait to be paid, but he remained in Kirtland so as not to "build up the gentiles" by working elsewhere. In the end he prospered more than those who left town to work for immediate cash and for higher wages.

Young, BrighamPPShortly after his marriage to Mary Ann, Brigham was called by Joseph Smith to join Zion's Camp. This was a group of two hundred men who traveled to Missouri in May and June 1834 to assist the Missouri Saints, who were under mob attack. Because Brigham walked most of the way—a round trip of two thousand miles—sometimes he walked, as he later explained, with "blood in my boots." Because the camp was disbanded a week after arriving in Missouri, some critics questioned its purpose and value. Brigham had a ready answer: "I would not exchange the knowledge I have received this season for the whole of Geauga County; for property and mines of wealth are not to be compared to the worth of knowledge." The knowledge Brigham Young acquired by watching Joseph Smith lead Zion's Camp was important when he himself led the exodus of the Saints from Missouri and later from Illinois.

Young, BrighamPPElder Young was ordained an Apostle and set apart as a member of the Twelve on February 14, 1835. The blessing given him promised he would "do wonders in the name of Jesus; . . . cast out devils, heal the sick, raise the dead, open the eyes of the blind, go forth from land to land." Soon after, he went to the eastern states with members of his quorum on their first mission to proselytize and to organize local branches. Returning to Kirtland, he played a key role in building the Kirtland Temple, directing the crew that finished and painted the walls of the interior. He was buoyed up by the Pentecostal outpourings at the dedication of the temple in March and April 1836, when heavenly beings appeared and the Saints prophesied, saw visions, and spoke in tongues.

Young, BrighamPPWithin months after this supernal event, serious schisms appeared among the Saints. The cause was the failure of the Kirtland Safety Society Bank, which was caught in the economic panic of 1837 that swept the country. Many of the investors who lost money blamed Joseph Smith, president of the society. Blame soon turned to wrath and even to violent threats against the Prophet. At one meeting in the temple when angry calls were made for Joseph's removal as the head of the Church, his main defender was Brigham Young: "I rose up and in a plain and forcible manner told them that Joseph was a Prophet, and I knew it, and that they might rail and slander him as much as they pleased, they could not destroy the appointment of a Prophet of God, they could only destroy their own authority, cut the thread that bound them to the Prophet and to God, and sink themselves to hell." His defense of Joseph Smith brought the malice of these dissenters upon Brigham. It became so intense that he was forced to leave Kirtland three days before Christmas in 1837.

Young, BrighamPPHe arrived in Far West, Missouri, in mid-March 1838, built a snug cabin on Mill Creek, and sent for his family, which then consisted of Mary Ann and five children. The Mormons in Missouri were under siege from mobs who feared political power would shift to the newcomers as their numbers increased. By lies and scare tactics, the mobs convinced Governor Lilburn W. Boggs that an army of Mormons had massacred numerous people during a battle at Crooked River and was advancing on Richmond, Missouri. Without confirming the charges, the governor directed the militia to guard Richmond and to surround Far West, where the Saints had assembled armed men for self-defense. He also ordered that the Mormons be driven from the state or exterminated. After nineteen Saints at Haun's Mill were massacred and more than twelve were wounded, Joseph Smith, concerned about the possibility of more killings among his people, surrendered to the militia. He was bound over on the charge of treason after a kangaroo court hearing in Richmond and was imprisoned in the jail at Liberty, Missouri. From the jail, Joseph gave instructions to the Twelve for the evacuation of the Saints from Missouri. Due to the apostasy of Thomas B. Marsh and the death of David W. Patten at Crooked River, Brigham Young then presided over the Twelve. He directed the exodus of the Saints from Missouri to Illinois. Arriving at Quincy, Illinois, in mid-March 1839, he arranged with a group called the Democratic Association for the temporary refuge of the Saints in Quincy.

Young, BrighamPPElder Young and other members of the Twelve traveled back to Missouri in late April. On April 26, in obedience to a revelation Joseph Smith had received a year before, they laid the cornerstones of the Far West Temple and made plans to go to England on a mission. Brigham spent the summer settling his family at Montrose, Iowa, across the river from Commerce City, Illinois, later renamed Nauvoo, where the Saints were gathering. In Montrose he renovated an apartment for Mary Ann and the children in an old army barrack. Still weak from fever that had afflicted him during the summer, and with limited money and little clothing, Brigham, along with Heber C. Kimball, left for the East on September 18. Aided by members of the Church and generous strangers, and preaching along the way, they arrived in New York City on January 31, 1840. There they stayed in Parley P. Pratt's rented apartment until their departure for England.

Young, BrighamPPBy late March, Elder Young was ready to embark. With $19.50 donated by members of the Manhattan Branch, he purchased a steerage ticket for $18 and paid $l as his share to hire the ship's cook, leaving 50 cents as his only cash surplus. On March 24, 1840, Brigham and his companions, Heber C. Kimball, Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt, George A. Smith, and Reuben Hedlock, boarded the Patrick Henry, a packet ship of the Black Ball Line. The passage was so rough that Brigham sampled but little of the cook's offerings. He spent much of the voyage in his bunk, deathly seasick. On stepping ashore in Liverpool on April 6, he was so emaciated that his cousin Willard Richards did not recognize him at first.

Young, BrighamPPThe brethren went immediately to nearby Preston, where Heber C. Kimball and his companions had opened the work in England three years earlier. Here they were joined by John Taylor and Wilford Woodruff, who had arrived in England in January. At a historic council meeting in Preston, Willard Richards was ordained to the apostleship, and plans were laid to publish the Book of Mormon and a hymnbook and to commence publication of a Church periodical called the Millennial Star. Also, work assignments were made. Brigham Young and Willard Richards accompanied Wilford Woodruff to Herefordshire, where Wilford had had extraordinary success laboring among a group called the United Brethren. With the three Apostles working together, the abundant harvest of converts continued. Their work was accompanied by unusual manifestations of spiritual power that healed the sick, cast out devils, and made the lame to walk. The most remarkable case of healing involved an eleven-year-old cripple, Mary Pitt. "Brigham Young being mouth," wrote Wilford Woodruff, "[he] rebuked her lameness in the name of the Lord, and commanded her to arise and walk. The lameness left her, and she never afterwards used a staff or crutch."

Young, BrighamPPConverts John Benbow and Thomas Kington donated three hundred fifty pounds to advance the work. Elder Young returned to Preston with the money to arrange for the publication of the Book of Mormon and the hymn book and to help finance the Millennial Star. Meanwhile, steps were taken to help converts immigrate to the United States.

Young, BrighamPPOn April 6, 1841, a general conference assembled in the Carpenter's Hall in Manchester. Almost sixty-five hundred were in attendance, including six hundred priesthood bearers. Two weeks later, when Brigham Young and his brethren embarked for home, they could count the harvest of their mission in Great Britain: "We have gained many friends," wrote Elder Young, "established churches in almost every noted town and city in the kingdom of Great Britain, baptized between seven and eight thousand, printed 5,000 Books of Mormon, 3,000 hymn books, 2,500 volumes of the Millennial Star, and 50,000 tracts, and emigrated to Zion l,000 souls, [and] established a permanent shipping agency."

Young, BrighamPPWith six other members of the Twelve and 123 converts, Elder Young embarked for the United States on April 20, 1841, on the sailing ship Rochester. It arrived in New York Harbor on May 20 after another turbulent passage. It was chaotic on the docks, where "a great crowd of draymen and pickpockets . . . stood ready to leap on board and devour all our baggage." Brigham had to threaten and to rap the fingers of some of the draymen to protect their belongings. After spending several weeks in the East working among the branches, Elder Young returned home via Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and St. Louis, and then upriver by steamer to Nauvoo. He learned upon arrival that in his absence Mary Ann and the children had moved from Montrose into a cabin in Nauvoo.

Young, BrighamPPOther major changes soon faced Elder Young. A revelation received by Joseph Smith instructed him to remain home in the future and care for his family. Then at a public meeting on August 16, 1841, the Prophet announced the time had come for the Twelve to take their place next to the First Presidency. Later Joseph instructed the Apostles that full responsibility for the Church rested on the Twelve, subject only to his direction. Most notably, Joseph taught Elder Young and other members of the Twelve the principle of plural marriage. The doctrine had been revealed to Joseph in the early 1830s, but he had not begun to practice it until April 1841. Brigham had received hints about it while in England and so was not completely surprised. Yet, it was a startling development and difficult to accept, given his orthodox upbringing. At Joseph's direction and with Mary Ann's consent, Brigham Young married his first plural wife, Lucy Ann Decker, on June 15, 1842. She bore Brigham seven children and outlived him by thirteen years.

Young, BrighamPPElder Young engaged in business activities to maintain his families, became active in civic and political affairs, and continued to perform his apostolic duties. He also filled special assignments given him by the Prophet. The last one of these was to direct 344 men who were called to work for Joseph Smith in his campaign for the presidency of the United States. Brigham organized them so there were workers in all twenty-six states and instructed them to couple campaigning with missionary work. He also scheduled forty-seven conferences to be held throughout the country before the election, the last ones to be held in Washington, D.C.

Young, BrighamPPElder Young was in Massachusetts campaigning when Joseph was martyred in Carthage, Illinois, on June 27, 1844. He did not learn about the tragedy until July 16. He was overwhelmed by the news. After the first shock, however, he realized that the keys to govern the Church remained with the Twelve. He and his brethren returned to Nauvoo as soon as circumstances allowed to take charge of Church affairs at headquarters. He arrived in Nauvoo on August 6.

Young, BrighamPPAt a public meeting two days later, Sidney Rigdon presented his claim to serve as a "guardian" of the Church, representing Joseph Smith. "The Twelve are appointed by the finger of God," answered Brigham Young, President of the Twelve, "an independent body who have the keys of the priesthood—the keys of the kingdom of God to deliver to all the world: this is true, so help me God. They stand next to Joseph, and are as the First Presidency of the church." At the end of the meeting, those present, by hand vote, unanimously accepted the leadership of the Twelve. Many who were present attested that as Brigham Young spoke he appeared as Joseph Smith in voice and manner. Later there were a few dissenters, including Sidney Rigdon, who was excommunicated in September for insubordination.

Young, BrighamPPLed by Brigham Young, the Twelve moved promptly to assert its leadership. The Saints were urged to follow a peaceful course, to improve their holdings, to complete the temple, and to live their religion. At a general conference in October, Wilford Woodruff was called to return to England to head the Church there, and eighty-five men were appointed to preside over mission districts in the United States. These actions frustrated the enemies who had murdered Joseph and Hyrum. They read into these actions an intention of the Saints to remain in Illinois permanently. This prompted pressure and threats for the Mormons to leave. Behind the scenes, Brigham and his brethren had been planning the exodus. Prayerful study had led to the decision to migrate west to the western slope of the Rocky Mountains. The original plan was to leave in the spring of 1846. Members were instructed what to take on the trek and how to maximize the return from the forced sale of their property. By December 1845 the temple was sufficiently completed to enable the Twelve to administer its sacred ordinances to the Saints. On February 15, 1846, Brigham Young and his family crossed the river with others to begin the Mormon exodus from Nauvoo.

Young, BrighamPPIt took three and a half arduous months to cross Iowa. Not all who started were cut out for pioneering. Some became discouraged and turned back. Of those who persevered, Brigham Young expected obedience and discipline. "I wish the brethren to stop running to Nauvoo, hunting, fishing, roasting their shins and idling away their time," he told the Saints at Sugar Creek, the first way station. Instead he expected them to "fix nosebaskets for their horses, and fix comfortable places for their wives and children to ride." After criticizing those who let their dogs run loose or kept horses with distemper, he added, "If any want to live in peace, . . . they must toe the mark." Yet with this sternness, Brigham showed the loving concern of a parent: "I would not go on until I saw all the teams up," he wrote at Sugar Creek. "I helped them up the hill with my own hands, . . . acting the part of a father to everybody."

Young, BrighamPPStopping periodically to care for the sick, to bury the dead, and then to rest and to regroup at Garden Grove and Mt. Pisgah, Brigham Young reached the Missouri River on June 14, 1846. Twelve days later Captain James Allen of the United States Army arrived from Fort Leavenworth seeking five hundred Mormon volunteers to serve in the war with Mexico. Influenced by loyalty to his country and by the benefits of army pay that would accrue to the families of the volunteers, Brigham aided the captain in recruiting what became known as the Mormon Battalion. However, the loss of these strong, young men caused Brigham to decide against going farther than the Missouri River in 1846.

Young, BrighamPPThrough negotiation with the Omaha Indian Chiefs and with government officials, the Saints acquired the right to settle temporarily on Indian lands west of the Missouri. By December 1 they had constructed 621 buildings in a community called Winter Quarters. With typical Mormon efficiency, it was divided into twenty-two wards, each with a bishop responsible to care for his flock. There, during a cold and bleak winter, the Twelve planned for the departure of a pioneer company the following spring, destined for an unidentified site on the western slope of the Rocky Mountains. The main body of the Saints would follow.

Young, BrighamPPThe Pioneer Company departed from a staging area several miles west of Winter Quarters in mid-April 1847. Comprising 143 men, three women, and two children, it included teamsters, blacksmiths, road and bridge builders, carpenters, masons, farmers, cattlemen, coopers, hunters, historians, musicians, a doctor, and a scientist—all with their wagons, equipment, and animals. President Young gave careful instructions about the behavior of the company, its objective, its historic importance, and its conduct toward Indians it might encounter. The company traveled on the north side of the Platte River as far as Fort Laramie, creating what became known as the Mormon Trail. This was done because of better grazing there and to avoid unnecessary contact with the thousands of immigrants traveling on the Oregon Trail south of the river.

Young, BrighamPPThe Pawnee Indians east of Fort Laramie were outwardly friendly while using veiled threats to enforce their requests for "contributions" of food and provisions. Brigham Young sought to minimize friction with the Indians by heeding their requests and by insisting the company kill only the number of buffalo needed for food. In some places "the face of the earth was alive" with these animals, "moving like the waves of the sea."

Young, BrighamPPFrictions within the company were minimal. However, once near Chimney Rock, Brigham became annoyed by a spirit of levity and by profanity and idle games that had appeared among some members of the camp. Bluntly telling them he would not continue to travel under these circumstances, he delivered a pointed sermon, noting their failings and calling them to repentance. Commenting on the quieting effect of these remarks, William Clayton wrote, "It truly seemed as though we had emerged into a new element, a new atmosphere and a new society."

Young, BrighamPPSeventeen Saints from Mississippi, who had wintered in Pueblo, Colorado, joined the Pioneer Company at Fort Laramie. Four brethren were sent toward Pueblo to lead the rest of this group westward. Also, at the crossing of the Platte near the present city of Casper, Wyoming, several brethren were left to operate a ferry to help later companies across and to hire out to non-Mormon caravans.

Young, BrighamPPIn barren Wyoming the pioneers were distressed by clouds of dust kicked up by the wagons and by hordes of crickets. At that point they also passed a number of trappers and mountain men, including Moses Harris, Thomas L. Smith, and Jim Bridger, all of whom were pessimistic about establishing a large settlement in the Salt Lake Valley. At the Green River, the Pioneer Company, which was augmented there by thirteen men of the Mormon Battalion, met Samuel Brannan, who had traveled east from San Francisco to encourage the Saints to settle in California. Little did he know that the rosy picture he painted of the wealth, the mild climate, and the expected explosive growth there were the very things Brigham Young sought to avoid. He welcomed the isolation the mountain valleys would offer the Saints, enabling them to live their religion in peace.

Young, BrighamPPAs the company neared the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young became ill with fever and transferred to Wilford Woodruff's carriage. When he saw the valley for the first time on July 24, 1847, he told Elder Woodruff, "This is the right place. Drive on."

Young, BrighamPPBrigham Young remained in the valley a month and two days. At a meeting held soon after his arrival, the company approved the new gathering place, agreed on the layout of the city, and adopted general rules to govern its inhabitants. Later Brigham scouted the area, inspecting, among other places, the Great Salt Lake and a peak on the north end of the valley the pioneers had named Ensign Peak. This name suggested that the flag raised there would be an emblem, attracting people from all nations to gather to the new Zion. Before leaving the valley on August 26 to return to Winter Quarters, Brigham Young also designated the site for a temple and rebaptized the members of the Twelve in City Creek as a symbol of cleansing and rebirth.

Young, BrighamPPEn route to Winter Quarters, he passed four large companies of Saints on their way to the valley, led by Daniel Spencer, Parley P. Pratt, John Taylor, and Jedediah M. Grant. To these he gave instruction and encouragement. Soon after passing Elder Grant's company, a lapse in security resulted in the loss of twenty-eight of their best horses to a group of Sioux Indian rustlers. Putting the most optimistic light on this crucial loss, Brigham "called upon all the returning brethren, except the teamsters, to take a walk with me to Winter Quarters." This destination was seven hundred miles east. Exhausted and footsore, he and his companions arrived there on October 30, 1847.

Young, BrighamPPDuring the winter months, devoted mainly to planning for three more major migrations of Saints the following summer, a significant historical event took place. On December 5 Brigham Young was ordained and set apart as the second President of the Church by the Twelve. He selected Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as his counselors. These actions were confirmed at a conference held on December 27. Also, an epistle was sent to the Saints everywhere, urging them to assemble at the new gathering place in the Rocky Mountains and to bring with them seeds, plants, and all kinds of implements and other resources needed to build a new civilization.

Young, BrighamPPBrigham Young led one of the three migrations in 1848. The group left for the mountains on June 1 and arrived in the Salt Lake Valley on September 20. The presence of many women and children explains why the travel time was longer than that of the Pioneer Company. They arrived in time to witness the first harvest in the new home of the Latter-day Saints.

Young, BrighamPPBrigham Young and his associates assigned "inheritances" of land to the Saints even though they lacked legal title, which at that time, 1847, was vested in the civil government of Mexico. But by provision of the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, the underlying title passed to the United States. The Saints proceeded confidently on the assumption their squatters' rights would be confirmed later with legal title. Under President Young's leadership, they also devised their own local government, adopting building codes; prescribing rules of civic conduct; constructing roads, bridges, and irrigation systems; and erecting a council house. On the ecclesiastical side, a stake was organized in the Salt Lake Valley in February 1849, exploration parties were sent out to identify other places of settlement for the many immigrant converts who were expected, and missionaries, including members of the Twelve, were sent into the world to accelerate the conversion and migration process.

Young, BrighamPPOn September 9, 1850, the United States Congress passed an act creating the Utah Territory. Soon after, Brigham Young was appointed the first territorial governor. This merger of dominant civil and ecclesiastical authority in one man created little difficulty in the early days when the population was mostly Mormon. But when non-Mormons began to settle in larger numbers, the issue became a thorn in their side.

Young, BrighamPPThe first large influx of those of other faiths into Utah occurred during the gold rush to California that began in 1849. Salt Lake City was on the main path of the thousands who trekked to the coast to find fame and fortune. This proved to be both a boon and a bane to the Mormons. The benefit came from an unusual source: Many trekkers, facing the western desert and the rugged Sierra Nevada beyond, sought to lighten their loads at Salt Lake City. They gave away or sold at minimal prices a wide variety of food, clothing, furniture, and implements. The huge volume of these excess commodities sharply reduced prices, fulfilling a prediction made earlier by Heber C. Kimball that goods would sell as cheaply in Salt Lake City as in the eastern centers.

Young, BrighamPPThe main disadvantage of the flood of gold seekers through Salt Lake City was the enticement it created for some of the Saints to join them. The lure of instant wealth and an easier lifestyle in a mild climate was too tempting for some to resist. As President Young saw some members beginning to yield, he mounted an all-out campaign to head them. In many talks and private conversations, he pointedly reminded the Saints that God had led them to Utah and that the future success of the Church depended on strengthening their foothold in the mountains. Most of the Saints heeded his message and remained. A few left. Brigham Young seemed to take each departure as a personal affront and predicted that those who went would not prosper.

Young, BrighamPPFollowing in the wake of the gold seekers came another invasion from the East in the person of federal employees who had been appointed to territorial offices. The first wave was led by Judge Perry E. Brocchus, whom the historian H. H. Bancroft called "a vain and ambitious" man. Soon after his arrival, the judge was granted permission to address the Saints. In a long, rambling speech, he justified the federal government's inaction in the mobbings in Missouri and Illinois, admonished the Saints to be more friendly and tractable, and questioned the morals of those who practiced plural marriage. In response Brigham said the judge was either profoundly ignorant or willfully wicked and expressed indignation "at such corrupt fellows as Judge Brocchus coming here to lecture us on morality and virtue." The judge and his friends left after only a few weeks. They carried with them false tales about alleged Mormon failings, and these reports added to the official misconceptions about the Latter-day Saints. Many other federal carpetbaggers would follow Judge Brocchus and his friends with similar results.

Young, BrighamPPIndian difficulties claimed President Young's attention in 1853. At first the Mormons and Indians lived in peace. Indeed, Ute Indian chief Walker invited the Saints to colonize San Pete Valley in central Utah. Frictions developed, however, when Mormon fences interfered with Indian movements. Fighting erupted with killings on both sides. The conflict became known as the Walker War. Brigham, who always had followed a policy of friendliness toward the Indians, sought to end the conflict through negotiation. At a parley held at Chicken Creek, west of Nephi, Utah, an accord was reached. A breakthrough in the talks occurred when President Young, who had come to the conference bearing many gifts, healed the chief's ailing daughter by a priesthood blessing. This ended Mormon-Indian conflict until the late 1860s, when some hostilities broke out as part of the so-called Black Hawk War, which ended with the Indians being moved to reservations in eastern Utah.

Young, BrighamPPThe year of the Walker War saw President Young break ground and lay the cornerstones for the Salt Lake Temple. Forty long, laborious years would be required to complete it. The year also saw him complete the creation of a unified school system throughout the territory and build upon an ambitious public relations initiative. The latter, commenced in 1852, was deemed necessary because the public announcement that year that the Church taught and practiced plural marriage had created a powerful backlash. To counter this, President Young founded a newspaper, the Seer, in Washington, D.C., edited by Orson Pratt. Soon after, the Mormon was established in New York City, edited by John Taylor. Later the St. Louis Luminary, edited by Erastus Snow, and the Western Standard in San Francisco, edited by George Q. Cannon, were created. These papers, as well as the Deseret News in Salt Lake City, sought to change the harsh attitudes toward the Church and its members created by a hostile press and government. These papers presented the Latter-day Saints in a favorable light, something the mainline press had failed to do.

Young, BrighamPPThe Church faced a crisis in the mid-1850s. Its root cause was a change of focus. At first the Saints aimed to build a model society. Along the way, however, the focus of many changed to wealth, comfortable homes, and security, which appear to have become more important than creating an ensign to the nations. With that change among the Saints came a careless attitude toward their religion. Sabbath breaking, profanity, and sexual immorality crept in. Viewing this condition with alarm, President Young decided a strong antidote was necessary. His remedy was to launch what became known as "the Reformation." It was a call to repentance. For several months, President Young and his brethren conducted a vigorous speaking campaign throughout the Mormon communities. "If the people will not repent," President Young told one audience in a typical sermon, "let the sinners and hypocrites look out. . . . I shall not spare the wicked; I shall be like a flaming sword against them. . . . I cannot hold men and women in fellowship that serve the devil and themselves, and give no heed to the Almighty. . . . It cannot be suffered any longer. . . . You must part with your sins, or the righteous must be separated from the ungodly." This kind of straight talk had a bracing effect on most of the Saints who had strayed. They were rebaptized as a symbol of their repentance and returned to their obedient ways. However, a few left the territory, unwilling to live up to so strict a standard, while others remained to become sour dissidents, opposed to the Church and its leaders.

Young, BrighamPPThis reformation came in the midst of the tragedy of the handcart companies. Beginning in 1856, some of the poor Saints who lacked means to purchase wagons and teams walked across the plains, pulling handcarts loaded with their belongings. The first three of these companies arrived safely in Salt Lake City in late September. Two others led by James G. Willie and Edward Martin started late and were caught in early snowstorms on the plains. Almost a third of the nine hundred members of these companies died on the way or afterward because of their weakened condition. When word came of the peril these companies faced, rescue teams in wagons were sent out from Salt Lake. The last of these returned on November 30 while the Saints were assembled in the "Old Tabernacle." Speaking from the stand, President Young asked the Saints to "nurse and wait upon the newcomers and prudently administer medicine and food to them, . . . to wash them and nurse them up." He added, "I have sent word to Bishop Hunter that I will take in all that others will not take." Despite this tragedy, some Saints continued to cross the plains in handcart companies until 1860.

Young, BrighamPPThe home to which President Young invited the handcart company survivors consisted of two main buildings: the Beehive House, built in 1854, and the Lion House, built two years later. Connecting them was a structure that housed the offices of the First Presidency. Ordinarily, twelve of Brigham Young's wives and their children occupied the Lion House. Another family occupied the Beehive House. Later, other homes were built for different families, including the White House, in the block east of the Beehive House; Forest Farm, in the south-central part of the valley; and homes at Provo and St. George. Allowing for the conflict found in practically all families, the Brigham Young family was surprisingly peaceful. Each wife had her own apartment with a drawing account at the family store and at ZCMI. Household duties were shared and rotated. Meals were served in common. There were always ample baby-sitters if a mother had commitments out of the home. The older wives who were childless or whose children were raised had freedom to pursue private objectives. The numerous children, who were taught in the family school, never lacked for friends or playmates. While Brigham insisted on order and discipline in the home, he was kind and loving to his family. "He could be stern when occasion demanded," wrote daughter Clarissa H. Young, "but he was the wisest, kindest, and most loving of fathers. His constant thoughtfulness for our happiness and well-being endeared him to all of us. . . . I shall always be grateful that I was born his daughter."

Young, BrighamPPNon-Mormon judges W. W. Drummond, George P. Stiles, and John F. Kinney created serious trouble for the Mormons in the spring of 1857. Returning to Washington, D.C., they falsely accused Brigham Young and others of destroying court records, sabotaging the government survey, and inciting the Indians to rebellion. Without consulting Governor Young to get his views, President James Buchanan ordered the muster of a large, well-equipped army. Its mission was to install a new territorial governor in Utah and, if necessary, to subdue the Mormons by force. The U.S. president's glaring negligence earned the mission the name "Buchanan's Blunder."

Young, BrighamPPThe army, under the command of General W. S. Harney, left Fort Leavenworth, Kansas in mid-July. Brigham Young learned about it on July 24. He promptly directed missionaries in the United States and abroad to come home; instructed Charles C. Rich and Orson Hyde to dissolve Mormon colonies in San Bernardino, California, and Carson City, Nevada; and instructed the Nauvoo Legion to defend against a threatened invasion. Hundreds of men were assigned to guard the mountain passes. Others conducted harassing attacks on the U. S. Army. All were instructed to avoid bloodshed if possible. President Young also prepared the minds of his people to follow a "scorched-earth" policy: "When these troops arrive," he told an army officer, "they will find Utah a desert; every house will be burned to the ground, every tree cut down, and every field laid to waste." Through the mediation of Colonel Thomas L. Kane and others, a settlement was reached. Brigham Young willingly relinquished the office of governor to his successor, Alfred Cumming. The army was allowed to march through the city and camp west of the Jordan River. Later it moved to Camp Floyd, a permanent military post thirty miles southwest of Salt Lake City.

Young, BrighamPPWhile the Saints awaited the invasion, a tragedy occurred in southern Utah during September 1857. An Arkansas wagon train of one hundred twenty en route to California was ambushed west of Cedar City. All except a few children were murdered. A federal judge in Provo, John Cradlebaugh, sought to implicate Brigham Young. Through collusion with officers at Camp Floyd, several hundred troops were sent to Provo as an obvious intimidation. Nothing came of it because there was no evidence President Young was responsible for the tragedy. Later events proved that some local members of the Church were involved with Indians in the ambush. But only one of them, John D. Lee, was tried, convicted, and executed for it.

Young, BrighamPPAfter the Cradlebaugh affair, Salt Lake federal judge Charles E. Sinclair attempted to have President Young arrested on a false charge of counterfeiting and called on Camp Floyd troops to help make the arrest. The Nauvoo Legion was mustered to resist. Governor Cumming intervened to insist the troops be withdrawn. Later both Judges Cradlebaugh and Sinclair were reprimanded for exceeding their authority and were removed from office.

Young, BrighamPPBrigham Young and the Saints were relieved when Camp Floyd was closed in the early 1860s before the Civil War began. The soldiers had been a disruptive force in the area with their drinking and brawling in the Mormon communities. In the first eighteen months after the camp was established, there were more murders on the streets of Salt Lake City than during the previous decade. The closure of the camp also benefited the Saints because the inventories on hand were sold at bargain prices. President Young purchased several thousand dollars' worth of these commodities and later sold them at a profit through his agent, H. B. Clawson.

Young, BrighamPPThe effects of the Civil War even reached into remote Utah. President Abraham Lincoln bypassed the territorial governor and, wiring Brigham Young directly, asked that he raise, arm, and equip a company of cavalry for ninety days' service "to protect the property of the telegraph and overland mail companies." The assignment was given to the Nauvoo Legion. After ninety days, Colonel Patrick Edward Connor was commissioned to enlist a corps of volunteers from California and move them to Utah, ostensibly to relieve the Nauvoo Legion. An ulterior motive was suspected when the colonel marched his troops through Salt Lake City with fixed bayonets and loaded rifles, camping on the east bench above the city. He later explained that his purpose was to bring "a large gentile" population to the area in order to dilute the influence of the Church, which he said was "disloyal and traitorous to the core."

Young, BrighamPPColonel Connor's attitude soon brought him into conflict with Brigham Young. The prophet thundered at the colonel from the pulpit and the Church's newspaper, the Deseret News. He urged Mormon merchants to up their prices for military personnel and admonished all the Saints to shun them socially. The colonel retaliated by establishing his own newspaper, the Union Vedette, in which he thundered back at Brigham. By way of insult, he required that all Mormons trading at the post exchange give an oath of allegiance to the United States. The Saints quit going there, completing the polarization of the community. Meanwhile, the colonel pursued his goal of diluting Mormon influence by encouraging his troops to prospect for minerals in the nearby mountains, hoping thereby to create another gold rush by a rich strike. It never happened. The dilution he hoped for had to await the completion of the transconti nental railroad in 1869. But this dilution did not achieve his goal of destroying Mormon influence, and especially the influence of his nemesis, Brigham Young.

Young, BrighamPPTheir enemies in Congress struck a blow at the Saints and the Church in 1862 by enacting an antibigamy law, the Morrill Act. It provided criminal penalties for those living in plural marriage. From the time of its passage, the Mormons contended the law was unconstitutional because it infringed on their religious freedom.

Young, BrighamPPSince the constitutional question was not decided until two years after Brigham Young's death, he openly lived in polygamy the remainder of his life, confident his conduct was doctrinally, morally, and legally correct. He and other polygamists were able to avoid prosecution under the antibigamy act because jurisdiction in criminal matters lay with the territorial probate courts, whose jurists were elected by the popular vote of electors, who mostly were members of the Church.

Young, BrighamPPAs completion of the transcontinental railroad neared, President Young sought to prepare the Saints for the changes that event would bring. He added a spiritual dimension by reinstituting the School of the Prophets. At the temporal level, he urged increased production by mechanizing. He also suggested that costs and prices could be reduced if workers voluntarily accepted lower wages. These steps were thought necessary in order to compete with the expected influx of inexpensive goods from both coasts. Some Saints, including a few members of the School of the Prophets, opposed these policies, especially the reduction of wages. They also criticized President Young's refusal to encourage mineral development. These critics went public, airing their views in the Utah Magazine, whose name was later changed to the Mormon Tribune. When their rhetoric changed to slander and caricature, these dissidents were excommunicated. As a group they became known as Godbeites, named after one of their leaders, W. S. Godbe. They presumed to organize a new church called the Church of Zion. Their voice of dissent was added to other groups, including several Christian sects who entered Utah hoping to "reclaim" the Mormons. And representatives of the Reorganized Church who came to Utah joined in the chorus. President Young's response to all this was to stay the course, expounding the gospel vigorously to his people and expanding the size and influence of the Church through colonization and missionary work.

Young, BrighamPPAnother activist federal judge, James B. McKean, arrived in the spring of 1871. He came to Utah with a mandate from President Ulysses S. Grant to "make the laws respected." He began by ignoring the law, decreeing that when the United States was a party to an action in a territorial court, it automatically became a federal court with federal officials in charge. Using this fictitious device, he entertained suits under the antibigamy law, using juries that systematically excluded Latter-day Saints. One was a suit against Brigham Young that included sixteen counts of "lewdly and lasciviously associating and cohabiting with women, not being married to them." In court, the judge said that while the suit was against Brigham Young, its real title was Federal Authority versus Polygamic Theocracy. While the aging prophet was in St. George seeking relief from severe arthritis, the judge set a hearing in the matter for January 9, 1872, which now included a spurious charge of murder. Without complaint, President Young made the long, painful trip home in the midst of a winter storm. In binding him over for trial, the judge denied bail but allowed the prophet to be incarcerated in his home. At this point, the judge's scheme began to unravel when the justice department disallowed court costs in the case totaling fifteen thousand dollars. This forced the judge to dismiss the jury because there was no money with which to pay the per diem charges. Soon after, the Supreme Court decided in another case coming up from Utah that a judgment was void because the jury had been impaneled contrary to law. This required the release of 138 defendants, including Brigham Young, in other cases in which juries had been illegally impaneled.

Young, BrighamPPThe prophet was not yet through with Judge McKean. Soon after, President Young's last wife, Ann Eliza Webb Young, sued for divorce. In the proceeding, the judge ordered the defendant to pay a living allowance of a thousand dollars a month. Defense counsel objected because under the court's rulings, polygamous marriages were void and therefore the plaintiff had no legal standing to sue. The judge ignored the legal precedents and went forward. When, on advice of counsel, Brigham Young refused to make the support payments, the judge charged him with contempt, imposed a fine, and ordered him jailed for twenty-four hours. Despite the ingrained anti-Mormon bias, leading papers across the country erupted with indignation. Five days later, Judge McKean was summarily dismissed from office.

Young, BrighamPPPresident Young was harassed by this suit for several years through a series of other judges who succeeded Judge McKean. However, several months before the prophet died, a court decided in his favor, ruling that the marriage was void as a matter of law. Despite this, President Young retained love and respect for Ann Eliza, who had become an unwitting tool of the prophet's enemies. To the end, he was not unmindful of her needs.

Young, BrighamPPBurdened with age, illness, and a heavy workload, President Young began to free himself of some responsibilities. In February 1873 he resigned as president of the Deseret National Bank and ZCMI. Later he relinquished his role as trustee-in-trust for the Church. To help carry the load, he called five additional counselors in the First Presidency: Lorenzo Snow, Brigham Young Jr., Albert Carrington, John W. Young, and George Q. Cannon. "For over forty years I have served my people," he explained, "laboring incessantly, and I am now nearly seventy-two years of age and I need relaxation." This did not affect his role as President of the Church. "In that capacity," he added, "I shall still exercise supervision over business, ecclesiastical and secular affairs, leaving the minutiae to younger men." With mingled pride and gratitude, he gave an account of his stewardship: "The result of my labors for the last 26 years, briefly summed up, are: The peopling of this Territory by the Latter-day Saints of about 100,000 souls; the founding of over 200 cities, towns and villages inhabited by our people, which extend to Idaho in the north, Wyoming in the east, Nevada in the west, and Arizona in the south, and the establishment of schools, factories, mills and other institutions calculated to improve and benefit our community."

Young, BrighamPPThe following year, President Young began his last major initiative, which was to establish the United Order of Enoch. His vision was embodied in this statement made at a meeting in Paris, Idaho: "I want you to be united. If we should build up and organize a community, we would have to do it on the principle of oneness, and it is one of the simplest things I know of. A city of one thousand or a million people could be united into a perfect family, and they could work together as beautifully as the different parts of a carding machine work together. Why, we could organize millions into a family under the order of Enoch." The key to him was not the pooling of material resources, but the pooling of talent and labor.

Young, BrighamPP"We do not want your horses and cattle," he explained as he taught the United Order throughout the Church. "We do not want your gold and your silver. . . . We want the time of this people called Latter-day Saints, that we can organize this time systematically, and make this people the richest people on the face of the earth."

Young, BrighamPPIn June 1875 President Young took a painful action that had been considered for many years. At a meeting in San Pete he announced a reordering of seniority in the Twelve due to gaps in the tenure of Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt caused by their brief disaffections during the hard days in Missouri and Illinois. The effect of this affirmed John Taylor as the senior member of the Twelve, in line to succeed Brigham Young at his death.

Young, BrighamPPA crowning event of President Young's life was the dedication of the St. George Temple in 1877. In celebration, the annual general conference of the Church was held in St. George that year. On April 6 he delivered the last general conference sermon of his life. Wracked with arthritic pains, he slowly arose in the upper room of the temple to counsel his people. "This is the work of God," he testified, "that marvelous work and a wonder referred to by ancient men of God. . . . I never mean to be satisfied until the whole earth is yielded to Christ and his people. . . . I know not how soon the messenger will call for me, but I calculate to die in the harness."

Young, BrighamPPHe fulfilled that promise. On the way back to Salt Lake he dedicated the site for the Manti Temple. At home he counseled with his brethren, held meetings with the Saints, and set his personal affairs in order. His last major administrative action was to call home the members of the Twelve who had been living in outlying areas. He put in a full day at his office on Thursday, August 23. He rode out after dinner and later attended a bishops' meeting. During the night he became ill with severe abdominal pains. He suffered for six days, passing away Wednesday, August 29, 1877, at 4:00 p.m. In charge to the end, he had left detailed instructions for the funeral arrangements. He specified the size of the coffin which was to have the appearance "that if I wanted to turn a little to the right or to the left, I should have plenty of room to do so." He decreed that the females in the family were not to buy black bonnets or dresses, although he gave liberty to those who already had them to wear them. Remarks at the funeral services were to be by any of his friends who "really desire" to speak. By his direction he was to be buried in the family cemetery on the hill. His final injunction: "No crying or mourning with anyone as I have done my work faithfully and in good faith."

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Brigham Young: Modern Moses, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1981) and authorities cited therein.
