Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Three

Taylor, JohnPPJohn Taylor

Taylor, JohnPPJohn Taylor, third President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was born on November 1, 1808, in Milnthorpe, England. To date (1996) he is the only Church President born outside the United States. His parents, James Taylor and Agnes Taylor Taylor, also were natives of England. John's father, who was proficient in Greek, Latin, and higher mathematics, mixed farming with government service. His parents had John baptized as an infant into the Church of England and saw that he was trained in its catechism and formal prayers.

Taylor, JohnPPAs a boy, John showed unusual spiritual qualities. Often when alone, and sometimes in company, he "heard sweet, soft, melodious music, as if performed by angelic or supernatural beings." Finding the cold forms of the Church of England uncongenial with his temperament, John joined the Methodist Church at sixteen. Soon he became a Methodist exhorter, traveling about to instruct and to motivate others. Once while on assignment, he stopped in the road and, turning to his companion, said, "I have a strong impression on my mind, that I have to go to America to preach the gospel."

Taylor, JohnPPDuring the years of his spiritual growth, John also learned temporal skills, first on his father's farm, then as a cooper's apprentice, and finally as a turner. Financed by his father, he set up a turner's shop in Hale, Westmoreland, which he operated successfully for four years until 1832, when he liquidated his assets and migrated to Canada. During a terrible storm on his Atlantic crossing he went topside "and amidst the raging elements" felt total calmness and an assurance he would reach America and perform his life's work.

Taylor, JohnPPJohn settled in Toronto, Canada, opened a turner's shop, became active in the local Methodist Church, and soon was an exhorter. In the congregation was a charming English immigrant, Leonora Cannon, twelve years older than John, whom he courted and finally won over after she had a vivid dream confirming their relationship. They were married on January 28, 1833. Three years later, on May 9, 1836, they were baptized into the Mormon Church by Parley P. Pratt.

Taylor, JohnPPThe next spring Elder Taylor traveled to Kirtland, Ohio, to meet the Prophet Joseph Smith. He found there the man whom, by spiritual means, he instantly recognized as a prophet of God. He also found turmoil and a spirit of apostasy there because of the failure of the Kirtland Safety Society Bank. Even Parley P. Pratt had become disaffected temporarily. John told him that if Joseph Smith was a prophet several months before, he was still a prophet. He also defended Joseph openly in the temple.

Taylor, JohnPPAt a meeting with friends near Niagara Falls on the way home, John spoke in tongues and received the spiritual impression he would be called as an Apostle. A few months later he received a letter from Joseph Smith advising him he had been called to the Twelve. "I looked upon it as a life long labor and . . . for eternity also, and did not shrink now, although I felt my incompetency." Soon after, the Prophet instructed John and his family to move to Missouri. They arrived in the late summer of 1838. Staying briefly at DeWitt, where the Saints were under mob attack, they settled in Far West. There on October 6, 1838, he was sustained as an Apostle; and on December 19 he was ordained an Apostle and set apart as a member of the Twelve.

Taylor, JohnPPOn the day of John Taylor's ordination, a report seeking redress for the losses suffered by the Saints through mob actions was submitted to the Missouri legislature. Elder Taylor was a chief author of this report and also of a similar report prepared later for the United States Congress. Neither report brought the relief requested. However, they demonstrated John's ability in research, analysis, and writing and foreshadowed his later role as an editor of Church publications.

Taylor, JohnPPThe Taylors were uprooted again when the Saints were driven from Missouri under Governor Lilburn W. Boggs's extermination order. They arrived in Quincy, Illinois, on January 15, 1839. Three months later, Elder Taylor returned to Far West with other members of the Twelve. There on April 26 they relaid the cornerstone of the temple in obedience to a revelation received the previous year. They also ordained Wilford Woodruff and George A. Smith to the apostleship and made plans for their mission to England.

Taylor, JohnPPReturning to Illinois, Elder Taylor spent several months locating his family in an old military barracks in Montrose, Iowa, across the Mississippi River from Nauvoo. On August 8, 1839, he and Wilford Woodruff left Montrose on their mission. At the direction of the Prophet Joseph Smith, they traveled without purse or scrip. En route to New York City, Elder Taylor became seriously ill at Germantown, Indiana. He insisted that Elder Woodruff go on to New York alone, where Elder Taylor joined him on December 13. They stayed in an apartment in Manhattan rented by Parley P. Pratt while making arrangements to embark for Liverpool, England.

Taylor, JohnPPUpon arriving in New York, John had only a penny in his pocket. Yet when a member of the Manhattan Branch asked about his finances, Elder Taylor said he had "plenty of money." Being told about the remark, Elder Pratt asked for a loan to publish a pamphlet he had written. John told Parley he was welcome to all the money he had and produced the penny. When asked why he had said he had plenty of money, John answered: "I am well clothed, you furnish me plenty to eat and drink and good lodging; with all these things and a penny over, as I owe nothing, is not that plenty?"

Taylor, JohnPPAccompanied by Elder Woodruff and Theodore Turley, Elder Taylor embarked on the packet ship Oxford on December 19, 1839. Twenty-three days later, they docked at Liverpool. Leonora's brother, George Cannon, and his wife, Ann Quayle, lived there. This couple and three of their children, including twelve-year-old George Q. Cannon, were among the first converts John Taylor baptized in England. This nephew was ordained an Apostle later in life and was called as a counselor to John Taylor when he became the President of the Church.

Taylor, JohnPPBrigham Young and four other members of the Twelve arrived in England on April 6, 1840. At an organizational meeting held soon after in Preston, Willard Richards was ordained an Apostle. Also, Elder Taylor was appointed to continue his labors in Liverpool and to serve on a committee to publish the Book of Mormon and a hymnbook. Finding the doors of Protestant churches closed to him in Liverpool, Elder Taylor rented the Music Hall for his meetings. A delay in occupying it offered the chance to visit Ireland and Scotland. In Ireland he held meetings in Newry, Bellimacrat, and Lisburn. En route to Lisburn, a traveling companion named Tate asked to be baptized. John performed it in Loch Brickland, the first known Latter-day Saint baptism in Ireland. In Scotland he held meetings in the Glasgow Branch, where the small cluster of Saints were in awe at the presence of an Apostle.

Taylor, JohnPPBack in Liverpool, Elder Taylor gave a successful series of lectures in the Music Hall. More conversions followed. When the lease on the Music Hall ended, he left the branch he had built up in charge of an associate and traveled to the Isle of Man. The work there, although contentious because of the strong opposition of Protestant ministers, was fruitful and was marked by another display of Elder Taylor's gift of tongues. He completed his mission by working again in Liverpool and in several other English cities, assisting with the publication of the Book of Mormon and a hymnbook and supervising the emigration of hundreds of converts. He returned to Nauvoo in 1841, arriving there on July 1.

Taylor, JohnPPElder Taylor soon became involved in the life of the city. He was appointed an officer of the Nauvoo Legion, a member of both the city council and the board of regents of the university, and an editor of Church publications, the Times and Seasons and the Nauvoo Neighbor. He moved his family to a new frame home in Nauvoo and later into a large brick home adjacent to the office of the Times and Seasons.

Taylor, JohnPPA stressful decision faced Elder Taylor and his family when Joseph Smith revealed the principle of plural marriage to him. John struggled to accept it, doing so only after the Prophet gave him an ultimatum. With Leonora's consent, he married her cousin Elizabeth Kaighin on December 12, 1843. Later he was married to five other wives: Jane Ballantyne, Mary Ann Oakley, Sophia Whitaker, Harriet Whitaker, and Margaret Young. Despite the personal challenges plural marriage created, the Taylor family lived in harmony.

Taylor, JohnPPIn January 1844 Joseph Smith, with the encouragement of his brethren, decided to run for the presidency of the United States. No one expected him to win; his purpose was to advocate sound principles for public debate and to advance the cause of the Church. John Taylor was appointed campaign manager, assisted by Willard Richards. The other members of the Twelve went on the stump to campaign.

Taylor, JohnPPMeanwhile, the apostasy and excommunication of two of Joseph Smith's counselors, John C. Bennett and William Law, created a serious schism in the Church. These men bitterly attacked the Prophet and even conspired to kill him. William Law and his associates also organized a paper, the Nauvoo Expositor, whose purpose was to defame Joseph Smith and to destroy his influence. The only issue of this paper was published on June 7, 1844. In it Joseph was depicted as a fallen prophet, grossly immoral and power hungry. Fearing that continued publication of the paper would produce civil chaos, the city council, John Taylor concurring, declared the Expositor to be a public nuisance and ordered it to be abated. Accordingly, on June 10 the press was destroyed and the type scattered. Newspapers in neighboring towns erupted in wild protest. One of them even called for the extermination of the Latter-day Saints. The mob spirit this aroused caused Joseph Smith to declare martial law in Nauvoo and to muster the Nauvoo Legion.

Taylor, JohnPPMeanwhile, an inciting-to-riot action was filed against Joseph Smith and others, including John Taylor. In a lame attempt to quiet things, Governor Thomas Ford went to Carthage with units of the state militia and invited Joseph Smith to send representatives there to explain his actions. The Prophet sent John Taylor and J. M. Bernhisel, whose explanations were interrupted and shouted down by a disorderly crowd the governor allowed to be present but failed to control. The result was an order for Joseph Smith and the others charged to appear for arraignment before the court in Carthage. Although the Prophet was convinced he would be killed in Carthage, despite the governor's promise of protection, he eventually went there with John and his other codefendants.

Taylor, JohnPPAt the arraignment, all the defendants were bound over for trial and released on bail except Joseph and Hyrum Smith, who later had been charged with treason. The brothers were ordered jailed on the treason charge. John Taylor and Willard Richards voluntarily entered the Carthage Jail with them.

Taylor, JohnPPOn the evening of June 27, the four friends were preparing to eat dinner in the upstairs debtors' cell, which had no bars on the door or windows. Suddenly a mob with blackened faces, which included militiamen appointed to protect the prisoners, ran upstairs shouting and swearing, forced the door, killed Joseph and Hyrum, and wounded John Taylor with five balls. One of the balls, which otherwise might have proved fatal, luckily was stopped by the watch in Elder Taylor's vest pocket. Willard was unharmed except for one earlobe that had been grazed by a ball.

Taylor, JohnPPStifling their sorrow, anger, and fear, the two Apostles sent conciliatory messages to the Saints in Nauvoo, urging calmness and counseling against retaliation. After several days, Elder Taylor was moved to Nauvoo to convalesce. Although confined to bed, he continued to direct the Times and Seasons, writing editorials to compose the feelings of the Saints and to urge patience until the other members of the Twelve had returned from the East. At a public meeting on August 8 in which Sidney Rigdon sought to be appointed "guardian" of the Church, the Saints, moved by an eloquent speech of Brigham Young, unanimously accepted the leadership of the Twelve.

Taylor, JohnPPAfter a brief lull, the enemies of the Church resumed their attacks, falsely accusing the Saints of illegal acts and demanding that they leave Illinois. Incensed by an officer of the Illinois militia who came to admonish the Saints to observe the law, John Taylor had had enough. "You talk about the majesty of the law! What has become of those murderers? Have they been hung or shot, or in any way punished? No, sir, you know they have not." Meanwhile the Mormon leaders were quietly preparing for the exodus, instructing the Saints what to take with them and how to maximize the return from the sale of their property on a depressed market. John Taylor and his family were ready to leave by mid-February. Before leaving, he published the last issue of the Times and Seasons, dated February 15, 1846, which carried its usual masthead: "Truth Will Prevail."

Taylor, JohnPPElder Taylor and his family crossed the river on February 16, 1846. Their belongings were stowed in eight freight wagons. They also had a carriage with springs that afforded occasional relief from the jarring ride of the wagons. In a letter to the Millennial Star, Elder Taylor sought to minimize the discomforts and trials of their four-month trip across Iowa. "Our health and our lives were preserved," he wrote, adding that "we outlived the trying scene, we felt contented and happy and the songs of Zion resounded from wagon to wagon." He also minimized the fact that his Nauvoo holdings sold for only a third of market value. Noting the rapid inflation that had occurred during the Nauvoo years, he reasoned that the Saints had been "well paid" for their labor. Persistent optimism was at the core of John Taylor's character.

Taylor, JohnPPSoon after Elder Taylor arrived at the Missouri River on June 17, 1846, word came there was serious trouble in the Church in England. He and Elders Parley P. Pratt and Orson Hyde were assigned to investigate. Traveling by river scow, boat, and then sailing ship, they arrived at Liverpool on October 3. Sadly, they found that the brother in charge was guilty of theft and adultery. He was excommunicated. Others implicated with him were disfellowshipped. While in Great Britain, Elder Taylor visited branches throughout England and in Scotland, Wales, and the Isle of Man. He also made an unsuccessful attempt in London to obtain subsidies for British Saints to migrate to Vancouver. Leaving Elder Hyde in charge, he and Elder Pratt returned to America. Elder Taylor arrived at Winter Quarters in April 1847, in time to deliver to Brigham Young valuable scientific equipment needed by the Pioneer Company—two sextants, two barometers, two artificial horizons, a circular reflector, seven thermometers, and a telescope.

Taylor, JohnPPElders Taylor and Pratt had only two months to organize a large group of Saints—men, women, and children—for the trek west, following the trail blazed by the Pioneer Company. Divided into four units, they departed in June. Elder Taylor's unit arrived in the Salt Lake Valley on October 3, 1847. For him it was a repetition of the trek across Iowa. The dust, wind, rain, insects, tedium, and uncertainty were submerged in the marvel of the exodus of God's people to another promised land. "I might talk of trials, afflictions, and so forth," he wrote in another letter to the Millennial Star, "but what avails it? They are the common lot of man—they are momentary and pass away, and are not to be compared to the glory that is and shall be revealed, and I have not time to think, speak, or write about them."

Taylor, JohnPPNeither did Elder Taylor have much time for reflection after he arrived in the Salt Lake Valley. There was too much to be done. "About Christmas," he wrote, "I had put up, enclosed and covered about ninety feet of building made of split logs, out of which was taken a four inch plank. The plank was used for partitions, etc. . . . In addition to this, I had built corrals and stables behind, and enclosed a garden spot in front, with a board-rail fence. I assisted in all this labor of sawing, building, hawling, etc.—enough for one fall."

Taylor, JohnPPDuring 1848 and until October 1849, most of Elder Taylor's energies were devoted to developing the new gathering place. He was active in helping to build roads and bridges, to develop an irrigation system, and to explore the area for new sites for settling the immigrating Saints. At the October 1849 general conference, it was announced that four members of the Twelve had been called to serve missions abroad: Franklin D. Richards to England, Erastus Snow to Scandinavia, Lorenzo Snow to Italy, and John Taylor to France. Traveling light, Elder Taylor left the valley on October 19 with a group of missionaries headed east. With his gear were books on the French language and French history that he studied avidly on the way to his field of labor. En route he stopped intermittently to hold meetings, to counsel the Saints, and to transact personal business. At St. Louis, for instance, he purchased a wagon load of supplies that he sent home with a friend to be sold to help sustain his family. He embarked for England at New York City on the packet ship Westwelt, arriving at Liverpool on May 27, 1850. After conferring with associates and friends in England and obtaining necessary government clearances, Elder Taylor crossed the English Channel with several companions. They worked for a while at Jersey in the Channel Islands, then moved up the channel to Boulogne sur Mer, France. There on a secluded beach the missionaries sang, prayed, and shared testimonies, after which Elder Taylor dedicated France for the preaching of the gospel.

Taylor, JohnPPAfter obtaining permission from the mayor, Elder Taylor rented a hall and announced a series of public lectures. Several ministers attended, interrupting to ask devious questions. Elder Taylor tried to ignore them or to put them off, knowing that argument and debate were the least effective means of teaching. However, they persisted; and when three of them openly challenged him to a debate, he could not gracefully decline. The debate was held over three nights and focused on the issues of Joseph Smith, the Book of Mormon, and the authority of the elders compared with that of the ministers. The strategy of the ministers was to blacken Joseph Smith by quoting the apostate John C. Bennett and a bitter Protestant enemy of the Church, the Reverend Henry Caswell. While Elder Taylor made an able defense, the slashing attacks of his opponents and the bias of the audience turned the tide against him. When on the night after the debate only two people showed up, Elder Taylor relinquished the hall. Soon after, the missionaries traveled to Paris.

Taylor, JohnPPThe unsatisfactory experience at Boulogne sur Mer and government restrictions in Paris convinced Elder Taylor that success in France would not come from large public meetings as in England. He therefore began to concentrate on translating and publishing the Book of Mormon in French. He also established a French language Church publication, L'Etoile du Deseret (The Star of Deseret), in which the history and doctrines of the Church were explained. During this period, he also began to write his distinguished literary work, The Government of God, which was published in England in 1852. Of this work the historian H. H. Bancroft wrote, "As a dissertation on a general and abstract subject, it probably has not its equal in point of ability within the range of Mormon literature." Slowly the Church began to take hold in France. Elder Taylor and his associates were able to build up branches in Paris, Calais, and Le Havre.

Taylor, JohnPPNear the end of summer 1851, believing his work in France had been completed, Elder Taylor prepared to return home. He was deterred, however, by a letter from Salt Lake City asking that he remain in Europe for a few more months. He then went into Germany, repeating the kind of work he had performed in France. He organized a German language Church publication called Zions Panier (Zion's Banner) and arranged to have the Book of Mormon translated and published in the German language. Returning to France in December, he found Paris in chaos. Three weeks before, Louis Napoleon had overthrown the first republic in a bloody coup d'etat. Despite the upset, Elder Taylor went forward with a conference that had been scheduled previously. Four hundred Saints from the branches in France assembled in Paris on the same day the French people were going through the charade of voting for Louis Napoleon. Commenting on the event, Elder Taylor said the Church would stand "when their [cause] is crushed to pieces; and the kingdom of God will roll on and spread from nation to nation, and from kingdom to kingdom."

Taylor, JohnPPUnknown to Elder Taylor, the French authorities had compiled a dossier on him as a suspected subversive. Unaware of their intention to question him, he left Paris without hindrance and traveled to a quiet seaside town to work on a plan he had conceived some time before. The plan was to organize a company to manufacture sugar from sugar beets in Utah. The company was named the Deseret Manufacturing Company. Well-to-do members had purchased stock, a management team and a team to construct the facility in Utah had been assembled, blueprints for the plant had been obtained from a refinery in France, twelve hundred pounds of choice beet seed had been purchased, and Fawcett-Preston & Co. in Liverpool had contracted to manufacture the machinery.

Taylor, JohnPPOn March 6, 1852, the freighter Rockaway left Liverpool destined for New Orleans. On board was the machinery for the sugar plant. On the same day, Elder Taylor, along with a company of twenty Latter-day Saints aboard, departed on the steamer Niagara destined for Boston. John was to rendezvous at St. Louis with those who were to accompany the machinery upriver. At New Orleans the carefully laid plans began to unravel. Customs officials at New Orleans levied a four-thousand-dollar duty on the machinery, 40 percent of its cost. Then the steamer carrying the machinery upriver exploded and sank. After the machinery had been salvaged and transported to Fort Leavenworth, differences developed between Elder Taylor and the chief stockholder of the company about the wagons being constructed to carry the machinery to Salt Lake City. Then, in Salt Lake City, differences arose about the location of the plant; and because of complaints by the chief stockholder, President Young replaced Elder Taylor with Orson Hyde. The plant never produced sugar. Ultimately it was moved to a site southeast of town, a site appropriately called Sugarhouse. This enterprise, begun with such promise and careful planning, was the chief failure and disappointment of John Taylor's career.

Taylor, JohnPPElder Taylor put the painful experience behind him as he took up his duties again at Church headquarters. In 1853 he became involved with his brethren in preaching repentance to the Saints during the so-called "reformation." The following year he moved to New York City to establish a Church publication named the Mormon. This was part of an elaborate plan of the Church to change its public image. Other Church publications were established at the time in Washington, D.C., St. Louis, and San Francisco. Their purpose was to present the history and the message of the Church accurately and to try to influence public opinion.

Taylor, JohnPPElder Taylor boldly rented space on the corner of Nassau and Ann Streets, between the offices of the New York City's largest newspapers, the Herald and the Tribune. A message in the first issue of the Mormon set the tone of its editorial policy: "We have said before, and say now, that we defy all the editors and writers in the United States to prove that 'Mormonism' is less moral, scriptural, philosophical; or that there is less patriotism in Utah than in any other part of the United States. We call for proof; bring on your reasons, gentlemen, if you have any." The big newspapers responded with more bitter, unfounded attacks on the Church and its members. But Elder Taylor gave as good as he received, ably defending the Church while including in the Mormon well-written sketches of Church history and doctrine. He also commented on current issues of national interest, including plans to construct a transcontinental railway, a project he warmly endorsed.

Taylor, JohnPPElder Taylor closed out the Mormon and returned to Utah in 1857 at the time of the so-called Mormon War. He joined President Young and others to prepare for the threat ened invasion by U.S. Army troops sent to Utah through the blundering of President James Buchanan. Indeed, the operation became known as "Buchanan's Blunder." Without checking, President Buchanan accepted as the truth false reports about the Saints and sent the army to quell an uprising that never existed. The Mormon strategy was to burn their own homes and withdraw from the Salt Lake Valley should the army invade, leaving nothing but scorched earth behind. To that end, Elder Taylor gathered his family and belongings and moved south to Provo, determined to torch his homes if necessary. Seeing the resolve of the Mormons, and realizing its error, the government eagerly sought a compromise. "I do not remember having read in history," Elder Taylor said later in the Old Tabernacle, "where an army has been subjugated so easily, and their power wasted away so effectually without bloodshed, as this in our borders." He attributed it to the power of God shown in behalf of the Saints.

Taylor, JohnPPSoon after, Elder Taylor became immersed in the spiritual and temporal affairs of the territory. While continuing his service in the Twelve, he became the speaker of the territorial house of representatives, the superintendent of public schools, and a probate judge in Provo for a time. Meanwhile, he retained a keen interest in events back East as they affected the Church. He and the other leaders were alarmed by politicians in Washington, D.C., who had been elected on a platform of abolishing what were called the "twin relics of barbarism"—slavery and polygamy. Despite the efforts of friends of the Church to prevent it, this faction was able to enact an antibigamy law in 1862. It imposed criminal penalties on those who engaged in plural marriage. The Church contended the law was unconstitutional as applied to its members because it infringed on their freedom of religion. Thus John Taylor and others like him continued to live openly in plural marriage, ignoring the law. They did not fear prosecution as the Utah probate courts, which had original jurisdiction in criminal matters, were administered by elected officials who were members of the Church.

Taylor, JohnPPThis condition angered the Church's enemies, who sought to change it. An army officer, Colonel Patrick Edward Connor, who commanded troops stationed at Fort Douglas near Salt Lake City, tried to dilute Church influence by encouraging non-Mormons to settle in Utah. He did this by promoting efforts to find and develop mineral deposits, hoping thereby to create another gold rush. He failed. Legislators in Washington, D.C., tried to pass laws to give federal courts in Utah original jurisdiction in criminal matters. These efforts failed until the mid-1870s. A federal judge, James B. McKean, tried to solve the problem by the simple expedient of declaring that a court became a federal court with original jurisdiction when the United States was a party to an action. Using this illegal device, he impanelled in bigamy cases juries from which Mormons were systematically excluded. One of these was a suit against Brigham Young. While the prophet was under house arrest, the Supreme Court, in a parallel case, held that Judge McKean's actions were unconstitutional. This required that President Young, and others similarly affected, be freed. Later Judge McKean was summarily dismissed when he jailed the prophet for twenty-four hours in a civil matter.

Taylor, JohnPPDuring this period, Elder Taylor wrote astute editorials in the Deseret News, criticizing official misconduct and promoting the cause of the Church. Later he became involved in a celebrated debate with the vice president of the United States, Schuyler Colfax. Mr. Colfax, a former newspaper editor, spoke in Salt Lake City, severely censuring the Church for its stand on polygamy. Elder Taylor responded in a skillful editorial. In a rejoinder, the vice president expanded his attack to demean Mormon colonizing achievements and to blame them for the difficulties in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois. In rebuttal, Elder Taylor adroitly answered Mr. Colfax, bringing to bear the full weight of his experience, intellect, and writing ability. Compiled in a set, these writings represent perhaps the best public debate on key issues then facing the Church. And they demonstrate the competence of John Taylor as a defender and advocate of the Church against a man of intelligence, ability, and public stature. This incident marked Elder Taylor as the public spokesman for the Church on the issue of plural marriage. When John Taylor later became President of the Church, that issue dominated his administration, because Mormon leaders ultimately were forced underground by the pressures of anti-Mormon legislation.

Taylor, JohnPPSome of that legislation appeared in 1874 when Congress passed the Poland Act. This gave federal courts in Utah original jurisdiction in criminal cases and abolished the offices of territorial marshal and attorney general. This put teeth in the 1862 antibigamy law and, without the shield of the sympathetic probate courts, exposed Mormon polygamists to criminal prosecution. Aware of the critical effect of such legislation, the Church opposed it vigorously. In Utah Elder Taylor wrote telling editorials and compiled statistics showing the inefficiency and the anti-Mormon bias of the Utah federal courts. In Washington, D.C., George Q. Cannon, then a member of Congress, opposed the legislation with the tools of persuasion and influence. All this availed nothing, and the bill passed by a wide margin. The Church continued to assert that the antibigamy law was unconstitutional and to teach and live the principle of plural marriage, although with more caution than before.

Taylor, JohnPPElder Taylor's status in the Church was radically altered the following year. In June 1875, at a meeting in San Pete County, President Young changed the order of seniority in the Twelve. This action, which had been discussed intermittently for years, made John Taylor the senior Apostle in the Twelve, positioned to succeed President Young at his death. The action also confirmed the policy that seniority dates from the ordination and induction into the quorum and took into account the gaps in service of Orson Hyde and Orson Pratt that occurred in the early years. It was a very sensitive move because Elder Hyde had served as President of the Twelve for twenty years. This fact dictated the location of the meeting, as Elder Hyde had lived and presided in San Pete for many years. Every effort was made to soften the blow for him, his family, and friends. The quiet way this drastic change was accepted by all underscores the selfless nature of apostolic service.

Taylor, JohnPPPresident Brigham Young passed away on August 29, 1877, and was buried four days later. At the moment of death, the First Presidency was automatically dissolved and Elder Taylor became the de facto head of the Church in his role as the President of the Twelve. In consultation, the Twelve decided to defer reorganization of the First Presidency. At a meeting held in connection with the October general conference, Elder Taylor was sustained as the President of the Twelve, confirming his status as the head of the Church. In remarks made during the conference, he stressed the need for humility in Church service, quoting extensively from section 121 of the Doctrine and Covenants. He also emphasized the importance of the priesthood and admonished the brethren to be more diligent in their duties. "Some of our brethren feel sometimes that these things draw heavily upon them," he said. "Of course they do; and God expects to try us, to see what we are made of, and see whether the right ring of metal is in us or not, and whether we are prepared to stand up to the rack and walk forth in the name of Israel's God." Talk of this kind dispelled any question whether John Taylor, the learned writer, editor, and philosopher, was mentally and spiritually prepared to lead the Church in the troubled days ahead.

Taylor, JohnPPFollowing the death of President Brigham Young, President Taylor became the Trustee-in-Trust of the Church, which enabled him to oversee the Church's temporal affairs. The ecclesiastical duties were administered by the Twelve through task committees; so as chairman of the Church's Executive Committee, President Taylor could direct the priesthood functions of the Church almost as efficiently as if the First Presidency were in place.

Taylor, JohnPPHis leadership style soon emerged. He resolved a dispute between two brethren merely by singing several hymns at the beginning of their meeting. They were so touched that they left afterward without explaining their difficulty. He resisted a recommendation to release a stake president because of discord in the stake until members of the Twelve had visited the stake and in a meeting with the local leaders had elicited positive comments about the stake president. Then months later, when there was unity again in the stake, he authorized the reorganization of the stake presidency. And he refused to release a stake president who had said in an open meeting that he did not know the gospel to be true but that he merely believed it. President Taylor told the Apostle with him the young stake president had a testimony but didn't know it yet. That stake president, Heber J. Grant, later became the President of the Church.

Taylor, JohnPPAt the October 1877 general conference, President Taylor followed up his comments about priesthood responsibilities by convening a special meeting of the General Authorities and stake presidents. There the principles of delegation and personal initiative in priesthood service were emphasized. Soon after, he laid the cornerstones of the Logan and Manti Temples and encouraged increased use of the St. George Temple. With that came instructions about genealogical research. Meanwhile, he attended and gave counsel at ward and stake meetings as his schedule allowed.

Taylor, JohnPPIn 1879 the Supreme Court upheld the antibigamy act of 1862. This undercut the Church's claim that the act was unconstitutional. Thereafter, those practicing plural marriage clearly were in violation of the law. Yet President Taylor continued to teach and to practice the principle. His stand, differing from the concept of civil disobedience as taught by Leo Tolstoy and Henry David Thoreau, embodied these ideas: First, because the antibigamy act was directed solely at the Saints and was passed more than twenty years after they began to practice plural marriage, the law should be administered with equity and a benign tolerance. Second, to help bring about an equitable solution, the Saints should pray for Congress. Third, while the Church did not intend to rebel openly, the Saints would not cooperate with the government or do things they were not specifically required to do. Fourth, in appropriate cases, some new polygamous sealings would be allowed. In the end, the brethren who had more than one wife simply disappeared into the underground to avoid prosecution under what they considered to be an unjust and inequitable law.

Taylor, JohnPPAt a solemn assembly held on October 10, 1880, John Taylor was sustained as the third President of the Church. He selected George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors. In the same year he declared a jubilee to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the organization of the Church. In the spirit of the jubilee, the Church forgave many of the debts owed to it and encouraged members of the Church to do likewise with their debtors.

Taylor, JohnPPIn December 1881, President Taylor moved from "Taylor Row" into the Gardo House, across the street south from the Beehive House. Called "Amelia's Palace," this ornate, Church-owned building once was occupied by one of Brigham Young's families. President Taylor had resisted moving there because he thought it was too fancy. He finally yielded because of its convenient location. A few days later, on January 2, 1882, the Taylors hosted a public reception in the home, and streams of guests, both members and nonmembers, were shown the house and served refreshments.

Taylor, JohnPPThe pleasant mood created by this occasion was ruined on March 14, when the Edmunds Act became law. This statute expanded the criminal sanctions of the 1862 antibigamy law and excluded polygamists and those who believed in polygamy from jury service. It also placed the elective process in the hands of enemies of the Church. President Taylor commented on the act at the April general conference: "Let us treat it the same as we did this morning in coming through the snow storm—put up our coat collars and wait till the storm subsides. . . . While the storm lasts it is useless to reason with the world; when it subsides we can talk to them."

Taylor, JohnPPThe prophet followed his own advice and went about his work, counseling with the Brethren, speaking at meetings, greeting new immigrants, sending out missionaries, and planning new settlements. A special revelation later in the year called George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant to the Twelve. Meanwhile, as time allowed, President Taylor worked on his other literary masterpiece, The Mediation and Atonement.

Taylor, JohnPPThe first case under the Edmunds Act came to trial in 1884. The defendant was twenty-seven-year-old Rudger Clawson, a son of Hiram B. Clawson, who had been one of Brigham Young's business agents. President Taylor was subpoenaed as a witness, not because he was in possession of any relevant facts but because of the desire of government attorneys to heighten publicity in the case. The packed jury guaranteed a conviction of the defendant. At a meeting held in Ogden, the prophet openly condemned the decision. He told the audience that all that would have been necessary for Rudger Clawson and his plural wife to avoid prosecution would have been "to walk in the way of the world today, unite with our modern Christian civilization, and if passion guide their actions, why call each other husband and wife, why hallow their association by any sacred ceremony—was there any need of such?" However much this scathing irony may have troubled the conscience of the officials, it did not deter them from pressing aggressively for other convictions.

Taylor, JohnPPPresident Taylor saw clearly how this would disrupt the lives of all Mormon polygamists and their families. He sought some relief from the pressure by establishing Mormon communities beyond the jurisdiction of the United States. He traveled to Mexico in January 1885, where arrangements were made to purchase property in northern Chihuahua. Later the Mormon communities of Colonia Juarez, Colonia Diaz, Colonia Pacheco, and DublÃ¡n were established there. President Taylor also visited the governor of Sonora, who assured him the Latter-day Saints would be welcome. When President Taylor returned to Salt Lake City in late January, he found that President Cannon had been arrested and was free on bail and that warrants for his own arrest and the arrest of President Joseph F. Smith had been issued. The strategy of the federal officials was to prosecute the high leaders of the Church in the hope this would cause others to yield. These circumstances prompted President Taylor to go underground to avoid arrest.

Taylor, JohnPPThe prophet delivered his last address in the Salt Lake Tabernacle on February 1, 1885. In it he denounced the government for its double standard of justice. He contrasted the vigorous enforcement of the antibigamy laws against a peaceful, industrious people with the negligent enforcement of the law when Mormon rights were infringed upon. "I want to know if any one of you can tell me of any individual that was ever punished according to law for killing a Mormon," he asked the audience. Convinced there was no justice for the Latter-day Saints in the current environment, he said, "We must take care of ourselves as best we may and avoid being caught in their snares." Leaving the meeting early, President Taylor was accompanied by his two bodyguards, Charles Wilcken, a veteran of the Prussian Army, and Samuel Bateman, a convert from Manchester, England. These two faithful men would be the almost constant companions of the prophet until the time of his death.

Taylor, JohnPPPresident Taylor's first place of refuge was at the home of Samuel Bennion, bishop of the North Jordan Ward in Taylorsville, Utah. He remained there for nine days and was then moved to another safe place. During the first year, the prophet lived in eleven different homes. Although his hosts did everything possible to make him comfortable, it was a difficult life for a seventy-seven-year-old man. The cramped quarters, changes in diet, lack of adequate exercise, absence from his family, concern about the Saints, and the constant emotional strain took their toll on the aging prophet. He received frequent reports from some of the Brethren not on the underground; and he and his counselors sent messages to the Saints, published in the Deseret News and read in stake and ward meetings. The last of these, dated April 8, 1887, which covered a wide range of subjects, gave special attention to the Edmunds-Tucker Act, which had been passed a few weeks before. This act contained stringent new provisions to penalize the Church and those practicing polygamy. The message said the Church was passing through a period of "transition and evolution" such as appeared "to be necessary in the progress and perfecting of all created things." It concluded with this optimistic forecast: "The result will be that we shall be stronger, wiser, purer, happier, for the experience gained, and the work of the Lord . . . will yet triumph gloriously over all its foes."

Taylor, JohnPPOn November 22, 1886, President Taylor moved to his last place of refuge. It was the farmhouse of Thomas F. Roueche, located on the flatlands west of the peaceful community of Kaysville, Utah. There President Taylor continued to receive reports and to send messages to the Saints. He also kept in touch with his family through regular letters that breathed a spirit of optimism despite the tragic circumstances of his life. "Some people suppose that persecution and trials are afflictions," he wrote in one letter. "But sometimes, and generally, if we are doing the will of the Lord and keeping His commandments, they may be truly said to be blessings in disguise." There followed comments on the law of compensation and on his conviction that life's battles are intended by a loving heavenly parent to assist in honing character and to help one to prepare for celestial glory. "I must fight, if I would reign," he quoted approvingly from John Wesley. "Increase my courage, Lord; I'll bear the toil, endure the pain, supported by thy word."

Taylor, JohnPPIn February 1887 Congress passed the Edmunds-Tucker Act, the last and most stringent of the antipolygamy laws. It disincorporated the Church as a legal entity, forfeited all Church property in excess of fifty thousand dollars, and dissolved the Perpetual Emigrating Fund Company. It decreed the legality of testimony by a wife against her husband and empowered the president of the United States to appoint county probate judges. It also abolished women's suffrage in Utah, provided a new voting test oath, redefined voting districts, and abolished the office of territorial superintendent of schools.

Taylor, JohnPPThe effect of this law was devastating. It practically guaranteed that in time the Church would be destroyed as an earthly organization with its leaders imprisoned, its temples and other properties in the hands of the government, and its missionary system in disarray. While President Taylor was prepared to accept this result, it had to be measured against the apostolic mandate given to him and his brethren to preach the gospel to every creature and to prepare a people ready to receive the Savior at his Second Coming. While he knew the law of plural marriage is an eternal principle and was given by inspiration through the Prophet Joseph Smith, he also knew that Joseph waited almost ten years after receiving the revelation before he lived it; and he knew from the Book of Mormon (see Jacob 2:23-30) that plural marriage on earth is allowed or disallowed intermittently as God decrees through his prophets. President Taylor never felt impressed to direct a cessation of plural marriage; yet a few weeks before he died, he approved the draft of a proposed constitution for Utah that contained a provision prohibiting plural marriage. He was prepared to leave the matter in the hands of the Lord and of the prophet or prophets who would succeed him.

Taylor, JohnPPLife on the underground took a heavy physical toll on President Taylor. As he was deprived of regular exercise, his health declined rapidly. In the summer of 1887 he became bedridden. Seeing the end approaching, President George Q. Cannon urged President Joseph F. Smith to return from his exile in Hawaii, which he did on July 18. When the two counselors entered the prophet's room, President Cannon mentioned it was the first time the First Presidency had been together since December 1884. In response, President John Taylor uttered the last recorded words of his mortal life. "I feel to thank the Lord," he said quietly, almost inaudibly.

Taylor, JohnPPThe prophet passed away on July 25, 1887. After the body was prepared, it was moved to the Gardo House, where family and friends gathered to pay their last respects. The funeral was held in the Tabernacle on July 29. Before the services commenced, there was a public viewing. After appropriate eulogies were spoken, President Taylor was lovingly interred in the Salt Lake City Cemetery. Nearby were the graves of members of his family and of many of his brethren with whom he had fought the good fight.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book John Taylor: Mormon Philosopher, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1985) and sources cited therein.
