Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Four

Woodruff, WilfordPPWilford Woodruff

Woodruff, WilfordPPWilford Woodruff, born March 1, 1807, in Farmington, Hartford County, Connecticut, descended from long-lived and hard-working British ancestors. His parents, Aphek and Beulah Thompson Woodruff, were strict Presbyterians who trained their children in their church's catechism but disbelieved in modern revelation and other spiritual gifts. For Wilford, that lack was filled by a neighbor called Father Mason, a spiritual man who shared with Wilford a vision he had received years before in which he saw a restoration of the church and kingdom of God on the earth "with all its gifts and blessings." He predicted Wilford would become "a conspicuous actor in that kingdom." This and an inborn sense caused Wilford to retire frequently to a secluded place where he "offered up [his] soul in prayer to the Lord."

Woodruff, WilfordPPOn December 29, 1833, Wilford and his brother, Azmon, attended a meeting conducted by two Mormon missionaries, Zera Pulsipher and Elijah Cheney. On an impulse, Wilford arose in the meeting and bore witness of the truth of what had been said. Two days later, the Woodruff brothers were baptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Soon after, Wilford began to keep a journal. With only a few gaps, he kept it faithfully the rest of his life. It became one of the most important historical records of the early years of the Church.

Woodruff, WilfordPPIn April 1834 Parley P. Pratt recruited Wilford as a member of Zion's Camp, a group organized to assist members of the Church in Missouri who were under mob attack. After arranging his affairs, Wilford went to Kirtland, Ohio, where he met Joseph Smith, who, in Wilford's words of certitude, was "the Prophet & Seer which God hath raised up in these last days." He stayed in the Prophet's home until the camp departed on May 1. The seven-week trek was one of the key experiences of Wilford Woodruff's life. It trained him in leadership and revealed his dependable character to Joseph Smith.

Woodruff, WilfordPPWhen Zion's Camp was disbanded in June, Wilford remained in Missouri. He worked for Lyman Wight and lived in his home. Soon after, he was ordained a priest by Simeon Carter. This imbued him with a desire to fill a mission. He prayed fervently in secret to this end. His prayers were answered, and in January 1835 he was called and left on a mission to the Southern states with his companion, Henry Brown. Before leaving, he inventoried all his possessions and consecrated them to the Lord, "that I may be a lawful heir to the Kingdom of God even the Celestial Kingdom."

Woodruff, WilfordPPWilford labored for twenty months in the states of Missouri, Arkansas, Tennessee, and Kentucky. He traveled mostly by foot, often in rain and mud, through rural areas where wild animals were common. After Elder Brown gave up and returned home, Wilford worked alone for a while. What he lacked in polish and poise he made up in fervor and spirituality, for he possessed the gifts of tongues and prophecy. His diligence was rewarded when he was ordained an elder on June 28, 1835, by Warren Parrish and then a seventy on May 31, 1836, by David W. Patten of the Twelve. When he left the mission field in September 1836, he sent twenty-two of his converts to Missouri in obedience to directions he had received. He was told to return to Kirtland.

Woodruff, WilfordPPIn Wilford's absence, the Kirtland Temple had been completed and dedicated. He soon received special blessings in that sacred building, where "the Lord poured out his spirit" upon him. On January 3, 1837, he was set apart as a member of the First Quorum of Seventy by Zebedee Coltrin, who promised that the Lord would give him "great power, knowledge & wisdom & faith" and that he would "preach to the nations of the earth & to the inhabitants upon the islands of the sea." Three months later when Wilford received his endowment in the temple, Elder Coltrin promised him he would "have long life & bring many into the Kingdom of God." And on April 15, 1837, when he received a patriarchal blessing from Joseph Smith Sr., he was told that God had looked on him "from all eternity." Meanwhile, Wilford became a member of the School of the Prophets, where he studied history and languages and was inspired by the doctrinal teachings of Joseph Smith.

Woodruff, WilfordPPAfter a short courtship, Wilford married Phoebe W. Carter on April 13, 1837. The following month he left for a mission to the Fox Islands, off the coast of Maine. Visiting members of his family in Richland, New York, and in Farmington, Connecticut, along the way, he arrived at the home of his wife's parents in Scarborough, Maine, in early August. Phoebe joined him there.

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff and Jonathon Hale sailed from Portland, Maine, to the Fox Islands on August 19, 1837. The elders began their ministry by finding a place of seclusion where they prayed fervently for guidance in this the first missionary work of the restored Church on the "Isles of the Sea." Their first conversions occurred on September 3, when Captain Justus Eames and his wife were baptized. Ebenezer Eames was baptized a week later. "I truly felt to rejoice to behold the mighty captains of the sea enter the new and everlasting covenant," Wilford exulted. By the end of December he was "preaching and baptizing almost daily." Great spiritual fervor accompanied his efforts. "I spoke in tongues and interpreted and prophesied and we rejoiced," he wrote on December 17.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe success of the missionaries was accompanied by increasing opposition from the clergy. Hecklers began to attend their meetings, and an ugly spirit of mobocracy appeared. Yet the number of converts grew. In the spring of 1838, Wilford was instructed to encourage the converts to move to Missouri. By October, fifty-three of them had liquidated their holdings and were prepared to leave.

Woodruff, WilfordPPOn August 9, 1838, Elder Woodruff received a letter from Thomas B. Marsh advising that he had been called to the Twelve and instructing him to go to Far West, Missouri, to meet with his quorum and to leave from thence on a mission overseas. Settling his family (which now included a daughter, Sarah Emma) temporarily in Rochester, Illinois, Wilford went to Far West as directed. There on April 26, 1839, he was ordained an Apostle by Brigham Young and helped to re-lay the cornerstone of the Far West Temple. Later in the summer, he settled his family in an old army barracks in Montrose, Iowa, across from Nauvoo; and on August 8 he and John Taylor left Nauvoo on their mission. Making their way to New York without purse or scrip, they boarded the packet ship Oxford on December 19, 1839, in company with Theodore Turley. They arrived in Liverpool on January 11, 1840.

Woodruff, WilfordPPAccompanied by Elder Turley, Wilford Woodruff began his missionary work in the Potteries, small market towns where china and stoneware were manufactured. There they had success and baptized many. Yet, during a sermon at a Sunday service on March 1, he cancelled meetings he had scheduled and announced he was leaving. "The Lord warned me to go south," he reported later. With William Benbow, he traveled to the Hill Farm of John Benbow in Castle Frome, Ledbury, Herefordshire. There he found six hundred former members of the Wesleyan Methodist Church who called themselves the United Brethren. The day after his arrival, Elder Woodruff spoke to a large group of them. He was impressed that "many present would be Saints." The next day he baptized six converts, including John Benbow and his wife. Foreseeing what was ahead, he prepared a baptismal pool. During the month that followed, Elder Woodruff's pool was in almost daily use. "Glory hallelujah!" he exclaimed following baptisms at the pool on March 21, "the work of God rolls on." The baptisms continued amid ever increasing opposition from mobs. Once he was stoned as he baptized in his pool.

Woodruff, WilfordPPIn early April he traveled to Preston to meet with Brigham Young and several other members of the Twelve who had arrived in England later. Learning of Wilford's success in Herefordshire, Brigham Young and Willard Richards accompanied him there after the Preston meetings. With the three Apostles working together, the process of teaching and baptizing accelerated. When John Benbow donated two hundred pounds and Thomas Kington one hundred pounds to the Church, Brigham Young went to Manchester with the money to arrange for the publication of the Book of Mormon and a hymnbook. When Elders Woodruff and Richards left for Manchester to attend a conference in late June, there were 541 members of the Church in Herefordshire who were organized into thirty-three branches. "I never before left a field of labor with as much satisfaction as on this occasion," Wilford reported.

Woodruff, WilfordPPBy July 26 the first group of converts from among the United Brethren, fifty in number, was prepared to migrate to the United States. Many others followed. Later Wilford worked for a while in London but with much less success and much more trauma. There on October 18, 1840, he was accosted by a spiritual being whom he understood to be "the Prince of darkness, or the devil." Through prayer and the ministrations of three personages who appeared to help him, he was delivered from peril.

Woodruff, WilfordPPOn April 19, 1841, Elder Woodruff boarded the Rochester with six other members of the Twelve and 120 converts. After the Atlantic crossing and after spending several months in the East visiting family members and working in local branches, he arrived in Nauvoo on October 6, 1841. Before Wilford's arrival, Joseph Smith had announced the time had come for the Twelve to take their place next to the First Presidency and to remain at home. It required a major adjustment in Wilford's thinking, which was strongly oriented toward missionary work out in the world. But he settled into his new role obediently. He fixed up a home for his family, was appointed to the city council, became an associate editor of the Times and Seasons, and engaged in private business.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThere was much turmoil in Nauvoo during 1842. Joseph Smith went underground to avoid arrest on the false charge he was an accessory to the shooting of Missouri governor Lilburn W. Boggs. The Apostles were saddened when Orson Pratt was temporarily excommunicated. And Wilford was in bed most of the winter with a severe case of the flu. Things brightened for him in 1843 when he filled a four-month mission to the East to raise funds and to speed the gathering of the Saints to Nauvoo.

Woodruff, WilfordPP1844 was a year of triumph and tragedy—triumph when on May 4 the Woodruffs moved into their new two-story brick home, and tragedy when the Prophet Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum were murdered. At the time of the Martyrdom on June 27, Elder Woodruff was in Massachusetts promoting Joseph's campaign for the presidency of the United States. He did not learn about the murders until July 9. He was devastated, as were the other Apostles. After venting their grief and realizing that the keys to build up the Church remained with the Twelve, the Apostles who were in the East returned to Nauvoo in early August. There they joined Elders John Taylor and Willard Richards, who were with Joseph and Hyrum at the time of their martyrdom in the Carthage jail. At a general meeting on August 8, the members of the Church unanimously accepted the leadership of the Twelve instead of Sidney Rigdon, who had offered himself as a "guardian" of the Church.

Woodruff, WilfordPPAt a meeting of the Twelve on August 12, Elder Woodruff was appointed to preside over the Church in Great Britain "and the adjacent islands and continent." After leasing their new home, storing their belongings, arranging to leave Wilford Jr. with the Benbow family, bidding good-bye to their friends, and receiving blessings from the Brethren, Wilford and Phoebe left Nauvoo on August 28. With them were two-year-old Phoebe Amelia and their thirteen-month-old baby, Susan Cornelia (Sarah Emma had passed away while Elder Woodruff was in England). They traveled first to Scarborough, Maine, where they left Phoebe Amelia with the Carters. After taking care of Church matters in the Northeast, including the excommunication of several apostates in Boston, Elder Woodruff, accompanied by Phoebe and the baby, embarked on the John R. Skiddy, a new packet ship, on December 8, 1844. With them were three missionary couples, including Dan Jones and his wife, who had been assigned to serve in Great Britain. It was a rough Atlantic crossing. "The sea was piled up like mountains," wrote Wilford. "When we were in the trough of the sea, waves would arise at our stern as high as the top of the mizzenmast." Later during a particularly bad day, he wrote: "We kneeled before the Lord and prayed unitedly that the Lord would cause the gale to cease and the wind to change, that we might go forward and not backward; and in a little time after the wind instantly ceased and finally changed into the southwest which gave us fair wind."

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe travelers arrived safely at Liverpool on January 3, 1845. Soon after, Elder Woodruff rented a house for his family on Museum Place, at the bottom of Virgin Street, and took up his new duties. These consisted of overseeing the work generally throughout the mission, directing emigration, supervising publication and writing of the Millennial Star, obtaining the British copyright for the Doctrine and Covenants and having that book printed, and instructing and motivating leaders and members in meetings held throughout the area. To broaden her interests and understanding, Wilford took Phoebe with him when feasible. Together they visited museums, libraries, ancient buildings, and points of historical interest. Phoebe's travels were restricted after July 18, 1845, when a son, Joseph, was born.

Woodruff, WilfordPPAs he visited in the branches, Wilford was troubled by an "aspiring spirit" he detected among some. He even found this attitude in the two principal leaders in the mission office, who failed to meet him at the pier when he arrived, who were uncongenial in their relations with him, and who gave him little help as he prepared to leave. Only a few months later, the senior of this pair was excommunicated and the other was disfellowshipped when John Taylor, Parley P. Pratt, and Orson Hyde came to England to investigate reports of official misconduct.

Woodruff, WilfordPPPhoebe and the two children embarked from Liverpool on January 21, 1846, destined for New Orleans, from where they would travel upriver to Nauvoo. Elder Woodruff left a few days later for New York. After picking up Phoebe Amelia in Scarborough and his father and stepmother in Connecticut, and after handling matters in the eastern branches, Elder Woodruff traveled to Nauvoo, arriving there on April 13.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThings were chaotic in Nauvoo. Many of the leaders and members had been driven out in February and were on their way west. Wilford liquidated his holdings; purchased supplies, wagons, and animals; packed his belongings; and crossed the river on April 30. Later that evening, he and others recrossed the river and dedicated the Nauvoo Temple. Earlier, on April 15, with Phoebe's consent, Wilford was married in the temple to his first plural wife, Mary Jackson. Because of their strict, monogamous upbringing, Wilford and Phoebe struggled to accept the principle of plural marriage. They did so at last due to the instruction of Joseph Smith, whom they sustained as a prophet. Later Elder Woodruff was married to three other plural wives: Emma Smoot Smith, Sarah Brown, and Sarah Delight Stocking. These faithful women bore thirty-three children—nineteen daughters and fourteen sons.

Woodruff, WilfordPPWilford's forty-eight-day trip across Iowa was marked by the serious illness of Susan Cornelia; an almost-fatal accident to his father, Aphek; the rebellion of his stepmother and her return to Nauvoo to live with his sister, Eunice, who had left the Church; and the constant hassle of keeping his animals rounded up. The family problems continued at Winter Quarters on the Missouri River when little Joseph died and when another baby, whom they named Ezra, died shortly after birth. Phoebe was almost inconsolable with grief that was aggravated by her adjustment to living in plural marriage. To help ease her distress, Wilford built her a new, snug cabin.

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff left for the Rocky Mountains with Brigham Young's Pioneer Company in early April 1847. Compared to the crossing of Iowa, this was a relatively peaceful trek for him. He kept an accurate record of the journey, commenting on the interesting and peaceful contacts with Indians; the awesome appearance of the buffalo herds, which "looked as though the face of the earth was alive and moving like the waves of the sea"; and his first exciting view of the mountains "piled up" to the sky. Near Fort Bridger, where the company crossed several trout brooks, Wilford broke out fly-fishing equipment he had purchased in England and indulged in his lifelong recreation. "I caught twelve in all," he reported with not a little pride, "and about one-half of them would weigh about three fourths of a pound each, while all the rest of the camp [which used mundane bait of meat or grasshoppers] did not catch during the day three pounds of trout in all." As the Pioneer Company neared the Salt Lake Valley, Brigham Young, ill with mountain fever, transferred to Elder Woodruff's carriage. When the valley came into view, the two Apostles "gazed with wonder and admiration upon the vast, rich, fertile valley." Wilford envisioned "that in not many years . . . the House of God would stand upon the top of the mountains while the valleys would be converted into orchard, vineyard, gardens and fields."

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff remained in the valley from July 24 to August 26, 1847. Except on Sundays, which were devoted to prayers and religious services, he worked each day from dawn to dark, plowing, planting, exploring, cutting timber, making adobes, and beginning a rustic home for his family. He also joined in setting standards for the city, in designating a site for the temple, and in renewing his sacred covenants through rebaptism. Before leaving to return to Winter Quarters, he checked the field and found the corn was a foot high and about to tassel out.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe return trip was marred by conflicts with Indians and the loss of many horses. This slowed the pace of travel as the members of the party had to alternately ride and walk. They arrived at Winter Quarters on October 31, 1847. Wilford learned that three days earlier, Phoebe had given birth to a daughter, whom they named Sarah Carter Woodruff.

Woodruff, WilfordPPIn counsel, Elder Woodruff and his brethren of the Twelve sustained and ordained Brigham Young as the second President of the Church on December 5, 1847. He selected Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards as his counselors. These actions were ratified at a general conference on December 27. A few months later, the First Presidency appointed Elder Woodruff president of the Eastern States Mission, with headquarters in Boston, Massachusetts. He would both supervise proselytizing and administrative work in the mission and direct the emigration of converts from there and abroad.

Woodruff, WilfordPPAgain tragedy struck the Woodruff family en route to Boston when baby Sarah died on July 22, 1848. At the time they were visiting Phoebe's sister and her husband, Rhoda and Luther Scammons, near Lost Grove, Illinois. Phoebe would not be comforted. Of seven children she had given birth to, four were dead. Wilford was at a loss to console his wife. The baby was buried in the Scammonses' garden. Wilford put up a limestone slab at the grave site on which he carved the names and dates of birth of all seven of Phoebe's children and the dates of death of those who had passed away.

Woodruff, WilfordPPArriving in Boston August 12, 1848, Wilford rented a house in Cambridgeport, a Boston suburb, which served as his home and his headquarters for twenty months. From there he traveled throughout the northeastern states and into Canada, ministering to the members, directing missionary and emigration work, and counseling the Saints to move to the new gathering place in the Rocky Mountains. He also conferred with J. M. Bernhisel and Colonel Thomas L. Kane, who were working with eastern politicians to try to obtain statehood for Utah.

Woodruff, WilfordPPIt was a stressful and demanding assignment for Elder Woodruff. Not the least of his problems was transportation. In New Brunswick, Canada, for instance, thirty-five miles from his destination and with no transportation, he decided to walk, carrying his bag. "Although I began to be very weary and lame, yet I entered the dark forest before me, and found my last 15 miles a sore, dreary road indeed." And the circumstances he found at the end of the road were not always pleasant. "I sat all day to settle a difficulty," he wrote about a branch meeting in Massachusetts, "and I heard it until my head, heart, and brain ached. It lasted until night." He found relief from the constant pressure through Phoebe's companionship and by working hard in the little garden he had planted and by fishing occasionally.

Woodruff, WilfordPPFollowing instructions from the First Presidency in April 1850 to "gather up the Saints" and come west, Elder Woodruff organized a group of two hundred and, traveling on the rivers, arrived at Kanesville, Iowa, in mid-May. There wagons and animals were acquired for the trip to the Salt Lake Valley. Wilford had twelve wagons, twenty-seven yoke of oxen, and thirty cows. Ten of the wagons were loaded with merchandise belonging to his brother-in-law, Ilus Carter. It was a hard trek, marked by several deaths from cholera, a stampede that created havoc, sticky mud caused by heavy rains, and an overturned wagon. The party limped into the valley on October 14, 1850.

Woodruff, WilfordPPAfter completing a home for his family, branding his animals, and selling the merchandise he had purchased from Ilus, Elder Woodruff settled into a normal routine for the first time since 1844. It was a joy to meet regularly with his brethren and to fill apostolic assignments. The love and respect he had shown toward Joseph Smith was now transferred to his new leader, Brigham Young. "The power of God was upon President Young," Wilford wrote on August 23, 1851, "who is made by the power of God a great, good and glorious man, and a father, indeed, to the church and kingdom of God."

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff also became involved in a major effort at self-improvement. Impressed by Benjamin Franklin's autobiography, he copied lengthy excerpts in his journal, including the author's thirteen virtues with their precepts. He enrolled in Parley P. Pratt's Spanish school and Orson Hyde's grammar school, and he became president of the Universal Scientific Association. He affiliated with the newly organized Pomological Society, Lorenzo Snow's Polysophical Society, and the Typographical Society. He also organized a school for his children.

Woodruff, WilfordPPMeanwhile, Elder Woodruff became Assistant Church Historian and a member of the territorial legislature, serving as chairman of the standing committees on revenue, libraries, and roads and as a member of the education committee. When in December 1855 the legislature met in Fillmore, Utah, Wilford stayed in the home of a member. His days were filled with legislative business, while letter writing, keeping his journal, reading, and meeting with his brethren occupied the evenings and weekends. At one meeting Elder Woodruff spoke about the responsibilities resting on the priesthood: "I feel that as Prophets, Apostles and Elders we have no time to sleep, slumber and rest. . . . There is a mighty responsibility upon us as a people, and we have no time to lose or throw away if we do our duty to God." Those words reflect Wilford Woodruff's lifestyle and work ethic: he was never idle. Except for occasional recreations or socializing, all his hours were filled with some kind of productive activity, whether mental, spiritual, or physical. And as with his fishing, Wilford's socializing was zestful: "The Governor and Legislative Assembly of the Territory of Utah made the most splendid party ever got up in these mountains as far as a feast and decorations were concerned. The U.S. Judges and military officers were invited. Dancing commenced at three o'clock; dinner at nine; and supper at twelve o'clock." The feasting included "pies, cakes, oysters, etc."

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff and other Church leaders made frequent trips to outlying communities to provide direction and encouragement. It was not always easy to get there. "We have been over the worst road for a few days past that I ever knew wagons to pass over," he wrote of one trip to southern Utah. "We had to draw our wagons up and let them down with ropes [and] it was so sideling we had to hold our wagons up to keep them from turning over." Their arrival at these communities often was greeted by band music, the firing of cannons, and the waving of flags.

Woodruff, WilfordPPIn the mid-1850s Elder Woodruff joined with his brethren in conducting a "reformation" among the Saints, some of whom had become negligent in their Church duties. Others were guilty of sexual sins, swearing, smoking, stealing, and other conduct unacceptable for Latter-day Saints. To combat this, the leaders went through all the Mormon communities calling the people to repentance. This effort was spearheaded by Elder Woodruff's good friend, Jedediah M. Grant, who was a member of the First Presidency. Elder Woodruff recorded the crux of President Grant's message in his journal, giving it his endorsement: "When you are right, we will cease to chastise; we will cease to rebuke; we will cease throwing the arrows of the Almighty through you; we will cease telling you to surrender, to repent of all your sins." The speaker also said if the Saints did not repent, the leaders would "continue to throw the arrows of God through you, to hurl the darts of heaven upon you and the power of God in your midst; and we will storm the bulwarks of hell, and we will march against you in the strength of the God of Israel."

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff used the messages of this reformation to evaluate his own status. Wondering whether he measured up, he went to President Brigham Young and offered to step down from the Twelve if the prophet felt someone else could serve more effectively. Brigham declined the offer, assuring Wilford his service was exemplary. Then as Elder Woodruff rose to leave, President Young stopped him: "Come, don't be in a hurry. . . . I want men to stop here who [have] the spirit of God. It rests me."

Woodruff, WilfordPPIn the spring of 1857 three federal judges, George P. Stiles, W. W. Drummond, and John F. Kinney, returned to Washington, D.C., bearing false reports that the Mormons were guilty of destroying or hiding court records. Without checking this and other negative reports, President James Buchanan assembled an army to quell an uprising in Utah that didn't exist. This reckless action rightly earned the venture the name "Buchanan's Blunder."

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe Mormons learned about the invasion on July 24 at a gathering in the mountains to celebrate the tenth anniversary of their arrival in the Salt Lake Valley. After the persecutions and drivings in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois, the Saints were resolved to resist the new threat. The Nauvoo Legion was activated; missionaries and leaders were called home; and plans were laid to guard the mountain passes, to harass the army with guerrilla attacks, and, if pushed to it, to scorch the valley with fire and then leave. In the spring of 1858 Elder Woodruff moved twenty wagon loads of belongings, including Church historical records, to Utah Valley. He was prepared to burn and destroy his Salt Lake Valley holdings. When the invading forces saw the same resolve among all the Saints, they were anxious for a truce. When a peace commission met on June 4, it was agreed that Brigham Young would relinquish the governorship to Alfred Cumming, that any claims against the Saints would be dropped, and that the army would be allowed to march through—but not to stop in—Salt Lake City. It was a major victory. "The Lord has heard our prayers," wrote Elder Woodruff, "and the President of the United States has been brought to a point where he has been obliged to ask for peace."

Woodruff, WilfordPPWithin a few months another crisis prompted Elder Woodruff to pack the historical records and his personal belongings again in preparation for another move. It occurred when federal judge John Cradlebaugh requisitioned several hundred troops to guard the courthouse in Provo, where he presided at a murder trial. The excitement over the case occurred when the judge attempted to tie Brigham Young to the murders because of false charges that the prophet was responsible for the massacre at Mountain Meadows. Petitions to Washington, D.C., brought censures to the army and the judge. Later, federal judge Charles E. Sinclair, in Salt Lake City, unsuccessfully sought to enlist the help of the army to arrest Brigham Young under a false charge of counterfeiting. On June 29, 1859, Elder Woodruff commented on the end of this charade: "The Deseret News contained Judge Black's letter to the Utah judges, reproving them sharply for their course."

Woodruff, WilfordPPAnother Federal official who harassed the Saints was Colonel (later General) Patrick Edward Connor, who arrived in Salt Lake City in December 1862. He came to Utah with the avowed purpose of diluting the influence of the Mormon leaders. To this end, he encouraged his troops to prospect for minerals, hoping to cause another gold rush. He also established a newspaper, the Union Vedette, in which he attacked the Church leaders, especially Brigham Young. Following passage of the antibigamy act in 1862, the colonel threatened to use the military to serve a writ on Brigham Young. "There was quite an excitement in the city," Elder Woodruff wrote on March 12, 1863. "Colonel Connor marched out his forces and travelled one mile towards the city. The flag was raised upon the President's house and the people gathered in arms to meet the enemy; but as soon as they came about one mile, they marched back again." Further tension occurred when Church leaders urged members not to mix with the soldiers, and the colonel responded by imposing restrictions on the right of the Mormons to shop at the military post. The enmities continued throughout Colonel Connor's tour of duty but never erupted into physical conflict.

Woodruff, WilfordPPMeanwhile, there was some dissension within the Church. A few dissidents in Weber County were excommunicated for apostasy. Their leader, Joseph Morris, claimed he had been sent to rule over "all of Adam's posterity." A more serious dissension occurred in Salt Lake City when a group called the Godbeites apostatized. Their leaders were prominent businessmen who at first questioned the Church's economic policies, especially its opposition to mineral development. Later their dissent expanded to include doctrinal and other questions. The pages of their publication, the Utah Magazine, were used to attack the Church and its leaders. Elder Woodruff, Orson Pratt, and George Q. Cannon were appointed to work with these dissidents. Some of them changed as a result, but others were excommunicated. Wilford mourned over these men, some of whom were former associates in the School of the Prophets.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe 1860s saw a surge in the Church's building program. The foundation of the Salt Lake Temple, covered during the Utah War, was uncovered and then replaced when the original work was found to be inadequate; the Salt Lake Tabernacle was completed; and other Church buildings were completed, including chapels in Bountiful and Farmington. The dedication of a new building was a milestone, accompanied by brass bands, flags, military displays with cannons, and speeches, all capped by a dedicatory prayer. Elder Woodruff was pleased to offer the prayer dedicating the chapel at Farmington: "I dedicated the house from the foundation to the top thereof," he reported, "naming everything I could think of in the building, and the ground upon which it stood."

Woodruff, WilfordPPFollowing the death of Heber C. Kimball on June 22, 1868, George A. Smith was called as the first counselor to President Brigham Young. Although ten years older than he and senior to him in the apostleship, Elder Woodruff had served as a subordinate to George A. Smith in the Historian's office. After his call as counselor to Brigham Young, President Smith served as Church Historian for two more years until he was replaced by Albert Carrington, who in turn was replaced by Orson Pratt. Not until the death of Orson Pratt in 1881 was Elder Woodruff named Church Historian. For almost thirty years he worked faithfully and uncomplainingly in a subordinate role in the Historian's office, despite his preeminent contributions to Church history. Elder Woodruff always focused on performance, not position.

Woodruff, WilfordPPTwenty years after arriving in the Salt Lake Valley, Elder Woodruff began to enjoy the fruits of his labors. He owned several large, comfortable homes built for his growing family. His family also included foster children, whom he nurtured and protected. He owned farms, gardens, and cattle. He continued to seek self-improvement, was influential in government and civic affairs, and, of course, was prominent in Church affairs as a member of the Twelve. He passed a significant milestone when Wilford Jr. left for a mission in England. "It rejoices my heart that I have lived to see the day when I have a son who is called to go into the vineyard of the Lord," he wrote. After the son's return, Elder Woodruff was pleased to seal Wilford and his bride in the temple. And the arrival of grandchildren opened a new world for him. He was awakened one morning by a two-year-old grandson, Wilford Leslie Snow, while he was visiting in the home of his daughter Phoebe Snow, wife of Lorenzo Snow. The little boy put his hands on his grandfather's head and blessed him: "O Lord, bless grandpa. Give unto him great wisdom, health, strength and peace. Comfort his heart. May he live long upon the earth to do great good." The proud grandfather added, "As Wilford Leslie is young in the patriarchal office, it is right to say he had the assistance of his mother."

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff's wealth was acquired from his own strenuous efforts. Along with his church, family, civic, and political responsibilities, he performed prodigious physical labors—haying, picking strawberries, threshing wheat, gathering peaches, repairing the house, drawing corn and carrots, pulling weeds, tying up grapevines, setting out trees, sowing seeds, and digging ditches to head off grasshoppers. And all these activities were conducted with a zest that belied his advancing years and in a manner that, to some, was inconsistent with his prophetic role. Such as these seem to have forgotten that Adam was commanded to labor by the sweat of his brow all his days; Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other biblical patriarchs were herdsmen or farmers; and the Savior was a carpenter, accustomed to working with his hands. Wilford Woodruff was a wondrous worker in that noble tradition.

Woodruff, WilfordPPSeveral months before Brigham Young died, Elder Woodruff received one of his most notable assignments: he was called to be the first president of the St. George Temple. He and President Young worked closely together for weeks writing down the temple ordinances taught them by the Prophet Joseph Smith. In early January 1877, portions of the temple were dedicated under the direction of President Young. Elder Woodruff dedicated the baptismal font. He remembered the ancient covenants made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob and recalled the renewal and extension of those covenants incident to the restoration of the gospel. He also invoked special blessings upon President Young. "Comfort him in his old age," Elder Woodruff implored. "Heal up his body, relieve him of his aches and pains; fill him with the revelations of thy spirit, that he may be able to spread thy word unto the people."

Woodruff, WilfordPPWhen endowment work began, Elder Woodruff's first act was to serve as proxy for "the Prophet Robert Mason," who had foreseen the restoration of the gospel and had predicted Wilford would become a principal actor in the restored Church. Later Elder Woodruff had vicarious temple work performed for many notable people, including some deceased presidents of the United States.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe dedication of the entire temple occurred in April 1877 as part of the Church's general conference held in St. George. There Brigham Young delivered his last general conference sermon. He died four months later in Salt Lake City. Elder Woodruff was one of the speakers at the funeral and dedicated the prophet's grave. He later chaired the audit committee assigned to straighten out the confusion between Church assets and those of the Young estate, a situation caused by the intermingling of assets necessitated by the unfair provisions of the antipolygamy legislation.

Woodruff, WilfordPP The Saints had said that legislation was unconstitutional in its violation of their freedom of religion. That position was eroded away in January 1879 when the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the 1862 antibigamy act in Reynolds v. United States. Soon after, federal officials sought to arrest high Church leaders who lived in plural marriage. In early February, U.S. Marshall Stokes and three men were seen in St. George, reportedly seeking to arrest Elder Woodruff. He remained in the temple for two days, where a bedroom had been prepared for him. Then under cover of night, he fled west into Nevada with his friend, David H. Cannon. After several days with members of the Church in Bunkerville, he returned to Dixie, spending two weeks shuttling back and forth between Santa Clara and St. George while composing a message to the world. He then decided it was wise to go into hiding again.

Woodruff, WilfordPP This time Wilford headed south into Arizona. Traveling through rugged, desolate country, he reached Moencopi, an Indian trading post, where several Latter-day Saints lived. On an exploring trip out of Moencopi, he met a Mormon missionary serving among the Indians, Jacob Hamblin, who had a copy of the Deseret News for April 1, which contained Elder Woodruff's message to the world. In it he had borne testimony, counseled the Saints, and called on all kings, presidents, and rulers to repent.

Woodruff, WilfordPP In May, after suffering a severe illness he called "bilious cholic," Elder Woodruff moved to Sunset on the Little Colorado River near Winslow, Arizona. There, and in the neighboring towns of Brigham City and St. Joseph, the Saints were living the United Order. "I ate my supper of bread and milk at the Sunset table," he wrote. "The center table was fifty feet long; the side table the same. . . . All I talked to seemed to prefer this manner of living."

Woodruff, WilfordPPLot Smith, president of the Little Colorado Stake, prepared a special room for Elder Woodruff at Sunset. "It is 18 x 16," wrote the Apostle, "well carpeted with a chimney and mantel piece, two good windows, curtains . . . and all very comfortable." Not long after arriving there, he "went into the mountains alone and built an altar of stone and dedicated the land to God for the benefit of the Saints."

Woodruff, WilfordPPSunset was surrounded by Indian tribes. Elder Woodruff visited the Apache, Zuni, Navajo, Laguna, Islata, and Hopi tribes. He spoke to them and bore testimony to them. He also authorized the purchase of the St. Johns town site upriver from Sunset for 750 head of cattle.

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff's stay in Arizona ended when President John Taylor invited him to attend the April 1880 general conference in Salt Lake City. Shortly before he left, the Saints at Sunset honored him at a party on March 1 to celebrate his seventy-third birthday. More than a hundred guests sat down for the birthday dinner. After the meal there were speeches, recitations, and singing: "A company of little girls sang 'Papa Come Home' while several young ladies sang 'Do They Pray for Me at Home.'" He was showered with gifts.

Woodruff, WilfordPPEn route to Salt Lake City, Elder Woodruff spent several days in St. George performing ordinance work and speaking to the Saints. A frigid weather pattern had made it uncomfortably cold in balmy Dixie. After a full day of meetings and half sick with a cold and headache, Elder Woodruff reported, "I went to the house, soaked my feet, and went to bed with a hot stone at my feet."

Woodruff, WilfordPPThere were unfounded rumors that the First Presidency would be reorganized at the April general conference. However, the conference was distinguished by the declaration of a jubilee to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the organization of the Church. The Church forgave large debts owed to it and gave hundreds of cattle and sheep to the poor. Members were urged to treat their debtors charitably. It was a time of compassion.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe event expected in April occurred in October, when at the 1880 semiannual general conference John Taylor was sustained as the third President of the Church, with George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors. Elder Woodruff was sustained as the President of the Twelve.

Woodruff, WilfordPPIt also was a time of tension. The aggressive pursuit of polygamists that followed the Reynolds case had subsided temporarily. But all recognized it was only a lull in the storm. To prepare for the onslaught, the general Church leaders emphasized the need for decentralization and the assumption of more responsibility by local leaders. Elder Woodruff and the members of the Twelve were constantly on the move, visiting the stakes, training the leaders, and motivating the members. President Woodruff's comment following a stake conference in Nephi reflected a typical result: "The spirit and power of God rested upon us and the people."

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe expected storm struck on March 14, 1882, when the Edmunds Act was passed by Congress. It added tough new provisions to supplement the 1862 antibigamy act. The first case prosecuted under the Edmunds Act was against Rudger Clawson. In October 1884 he was found guilty of unlawful cohabitation, fined $800, and sentenced to four years in the penitentiary. It sent a wave of fear among those who practiced plural marriage. "I find my house watched this morning by a marshal or some spy," President Woodruff wrote three months later. "He walked the street in front of my house until 11 o'clock watching. I did not attend meeting." A few days later Wilford moved into a room in the Seventeenth Ward chapel that had been fixed up for him and Elder George Teasdale. "We are living in perilous times," President Woodruff wrote. "No man who obeys the patriarchal law of marriage is safe. . . . There never has been a more united and determined effort made for our destruction since the organization of the church than now."

Woodruff, WilfordPPDuring the next two years, Wilford Woodruff was on the run, trying to escape detection and arrest. He traveled incognito and kept out of sight when he was not on the move. He stayed with members who opened their homes and gave him their best: Bishop Edward Bunker in Bunkerville, Nevada; William Squires and Thomas Cottam in St. George; Truman Frink in Salt Lake City; and Henry Woodruff in the Uintah Basin. The kindness and solicitude of these hosts could not compensate for the loss of freedom Wilford suffered. "I feel like a prisoner shut up in the house," he wrote while staying with Brother Squires. To break the monotony, he helped reap his host's wheat field. "Brother Squires reaped one shock of wheat today in his field, the first wheat cut in the county, and I cut another shock in the evening." The seventy-eight year old Apostle worked regularly in the field until the harvest was completed, always doing so in the evening to avoid detection. The last day of the harvest was June 3, 1885, when he produced his greatest yield: "I cut twenty four bundles of wheat in the dark," he wrote on that day, "and hurt one of my eyes." In other places he stayed, he was not so fortunate as to have physical work to do. Without it, he devoted all his time to writing letters, keeping his journal, reading, and visiting with the host family. It was a routine that taught patience.

Woodruff, WilfordPPLearning Phoebe was ill, Wilford traveled to Salt Lake City in November 1885. Her condition was worse than he had expected. She died on the ninth and was buried three days later. It was wrenching to lose this beloved companion of almost fifty years, especially because he was unable to attend the funeral. He watched the procession from behind the curtain of his Church office. "The Lord has borne me up in this affliction in a wonderful manner," he wrote of the experience. "I pray to God to still sustain me."

Woodruff, WilfordPPElder Woodruff dreamed often during his exile. He attached spiritual significance to some dreams; others he dismissed as being driven by physical impulses. In the spring of 1887 he had a series of dreams about President John Taylor. He did not understand them but felt they had spiritual implications. "I dreamed again last night," he wrote on March 15, 1887, "of attending another general conference. President Taylor was present but seemed in poor health. He seemed to think he should pass away. . . . I dream almost every night of these great meetings. I do not now understand what these dreams mean." Three months later the meaning of the dreams came into focus when he learned that President Taylor's condition had worsened. When on July 16 President George Q. Cannon advised that the prophet was not expected to live long, Wilford immediately left for Salt Lake City. President Taylor died before he arrived. Behind the scenes, Wilford offered condolences to the family and counseled with his brethren about the funeral. Again he was unable to attend the services and watched the procession from behind the curtain in his office.

Woodruff, WilfordPPWilford Woodruff had never aspired to the heavy responsibility that now came to him as the presiding officer of the Church. But he accepted it willingly, confident that God would help qualify him for the task. Pending the installation of a new First Presidency, he was authorized to transact necessary Church business in behalf of the Twelve.

Woodruff, WilfordPPPresident Woodruff felt impressed to establish a beet sugar industry to provide a money crop for Mormon farmers. Two committees of experienced businessmen recommended against it. Although his business experience was limited, Wilford rejected their recommendations. "Every time I think of abandoning it there is darkness; and every time I think of building it, there is light. We will build the factory if it bursts the church." The sugar industry ultimately succeeded and proved to be a great boon to the Saints. This shows the revelatory quality Wilford Woodruff brought to the prophetic office when he was sustained as the fourth President of the Church on April 7, 1889. He selected George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith as his counselors. He freely sought advice from his counselors and others; but his final judgments were always based upon inner promptings.

Woodruff, WilfordPPBefore President John Taylor died, he had approved a provision in a proposed constitution for the state of Utah prohibiting the practice of plural marriage. President Woodruff concurred in this. A few days after his ordination, he traveled to San Francisco, California, to confer with powerful political and business leaders. He obtained their support to urge a change in policies and attitudes in Washington, D.C., toward the Latter-day Saints. In the following months he also traveled around the Church to confer with stake presidents about "the temporal situation in their stakes." Following these actions, President Woodruff issued a temporary ban on the performance of plural marriages. And when he discovered the ban had been violated in one instance, he ordered the dismantling of the Endowment House. All this led to the action President Woodruff took on September 25, 1890, when he issued the Manifesto, which discontinued the teaching and practice of plural marriage in the Church. This did not mean the principle of plural marriage is wrong or that Joseph Smith was not inspired in initiating it. It only meant that God had spoken through Wilford Woodruff as the living prophet, directing that the practice be suspended.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThe Manifesto was unanimously accepted by the Church at the general conference on October 6, 1890. Later a few dissidents refused to accept it, inexplicably affirming the principle of continuing revelation through a living prophet while refusing to accept the revelation given through this living prophet.

Woodruff, WilfordPPThis paved the way for the completion of the Salt Lake Temple and its dedication in April 1893. It also paved the way for Utah's statehood on January 4, 1896. Two years later, on September 2, 1898, President Woodruff died in California. His long, productive life attests to his faith, diligence, and obedience. And the "conspicuous" role he played in the restored Church attests to the power of God and the inspiration of President Woodruff's childhood friend, old Father Mason.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Wilford Woodruff: Wondrous Worker, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1988) and works cited therein.
