Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Five

Snow, LorenzoPPLorenzo Snow

Snow, LorenzoPPOliver Snow III and Rosetta L. Pettibone Snow were descendants of solid British and New England ancestors. They had migrated to Mantua, Portage County, Ohio, in search of farming opportunities. There on April 3, 1814, their fifth child and first son, Lorenzo, was born. The Snows were Baptists. That they were open-minded and amenable to new truths is shown by the conversion of the mother and her daughter, Leonora, to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in 1831. Another daughter, Eliza, followed them into the new church in 1835. These actions had no seeming effect upon Lorenzo, who was imbued with a desire to follow a military career and who showed little interest in religion at the time.

Snow, LorenzoPPIn September 1835 Lorenzo enrolled in the nearby Oberlin Collegiate Institute, intending to pursue his military career. A chance encounter with David W. Patten en route to Oberlin veered Lorenzo from this career path. Elder Patten, an Apostle in the Mormon Church, bore emphatic testimony about the truth of Mormonism. The power of that testimony and the urging of Eliza, who then lived in Kirtland, Ohio, prompted Lorenzo to move there after a few months in Oberlin. In Kirtland he enrolled in a Hebrew school taught by a Jewish scholar, Joshua Seixas. Influenced by Joseph Smith as well as by the Prophet's father, Lorenzo was converted to the Mormon Church and was baptized in June 1836 by John Boynton of the Twelve.

Snow, LorenzoPPDisappointed his baptism was not accompanied by the spiritual uplift he expected, Lorenzo retired alone to the woods to implore God for a witness. In answer he received "a perfect knowledge that God lives, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, and of the restoration of the holy Priesthood and the fulness of the Gospel. It was a complete baptism—a tangible immersion in the heavenly principle or element, the Holy Ghost." He experienced the same spiritual phenomenon during several successive nights. The experience turned his life around and set him on a course that would lead far away from a military career and to the pinnacle of leadership in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Later Joseph Smith Sr. gave Lorenzo a patriarchal blessing that promised in part that "there shall not be a mightier man on earth than thou. . . . Thou shalt have power over unclean spirits. . . . If expedient the dead shall rise and come forth at thy bidding . . . and Thou shalt have long life."

Snow, LorenzoPPSoon after, Lorenzo filled a successful mission, laboring without purse or scrip in several counties in Ohio. It humbled him to ask for food and lodging. With that humility came increased spiritual perception. Once a vivid dream warned of a plot to mob him. When the circumstances in his dream occurred in reality, he knew exactly what to do to avoid harm.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow found chaotic conditions in Kirtland when he returned. Some Saints had apostatized because of the failure of the Kirtland Bank. He was impressed by Joseph Smith's poise during the crisis. It had a profound effect on him and helped him develop a deliberate poise and calmness in the face of trouble, which was one of his most notable traits.

Snow, LorenzoPPIn 1838 the Snow family moved to Adam-ondi-Ahman in Missouri. Although still weak from a severe illness, Lorenzo left a few months later on his second mission. He labored in southern Missouri, southern Illinois, and Kentucky for more than a year with good success. During a cold, wet autumn in 1839, he walked five hundred miles from Kentucky to northern Ohio. He laid over in Shalersville, Ohio, during the winter months, teaching school to replenish his funds. Since the Saints had been driven from Missouri during his absence, Lorenzo went to Illinois in the spring, joining his family at LaHarpe, near Nauvoo. Within weeks of his arrival, he was called on a third mission, this one to England where the Apostles and other missionaries were laboring. After arranging a loan at high interest to pay his way, Lorenzo left for England on May 20, 1840. He would be gone for almost three years.

Snow, LorenzoPPAfter a rough forty-two-day Atlantic crossing, Elder Snow arrived in Liverpool, England, in midsummer. He was assigned first to labor in Manchester, then in Birmingham, where the work was flourishing. Lorenzo's prior missionary experiences, his maturity, and his success in England, especially in Birmingham, prompted the Brethren to appoint him to preside in London. It was an honor that carried a great burden with it.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow found an oppressive, stifling spirit in London that was not conducive to effective missionary work. He discovered this emanated largely from satanic influences. One night in his London apartment he was awakened by a strange clamor. To Lorenzo "it seemed as though every piece of furniture in the room was put in motion, back and forth against each other in such terrible fury that sleep and rest were utter impossibilities." This was accompanied by an ominous spiritual essence that filled the room. This disturbance was repeated on several successive nights. To combat it, Lorenzo engaged in a special fast that he ended by reading a chapter from the Bible. He then kneeled in prayer and in an authoritative voice rebuked the evil spirits by the power of the holy priesthood and "commanded them to leave the house." They never bothered him again.

Snow, LorenzoPPAfter that experience the work accelerated in London. During the months Elder Snow presided, the branch doubled in size. His service also was marked by a high degree of spirituality. The gifts of prophecy and tongues were shown through him. Once while speaking, he even sang in tongues. He also confided in Brigham Young the couplet that had come to him by inspiration, "As man now is, God once was; as God now is, man may be." Later the Prophet Joseph Smith declared that statement to be "true gospel doctrine." While in England, Lorenzo also wrote and published a tract, The Only Way to Be Saved.

Snow, LorenzoPPIn early 1843 Elder Snow led a party of 250 Mormon converts from Liverpool to New Orleans and thence upriver to Nauvoo. While crossing the Atlantic on board the Swanton, he healed one of the stewards whom the captain thought was dying and beyond help. Upon reaching New Orleans, several officers and members of the crew were baptized, convinced that Elder Snow was a true servant of God.

Snow, LorenzoPPSoon after arriving in Nauvoo, Lorenzo learned that his sister Eliza had been sealed to Joseph Smith in plural marriage. This was a shock to him, even though he had received spiritual promptings that the ancient practice would be introduced among the Saints. At Eliza's request, Joseph met privately with Lorenzo to explain the principle to him. He accepted it, although he did not begin to practice it until later.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow earned his livelihood teaching school. He arranged his schedule to enable him to supervise Joseph Smith's Ohio campaign for the presidency of the United States. Lorenzo was in Cincinnati campaigning when he learned that Joseph had been murdered in Carthage, Illinois, on June 27, 1844. He grieved over the death of his mentor while consoling Eliza in her great loss.

Snow, LorenzoPPWhen pressures applied by enemies of the Church made it plain the Saints would be forced to leave Nauvoo, Lorenzo began to prepare for the exodus. In the midst of these exertions, he acted on Joseph Smith's instructions about plural marriage by being sealed to four women in the Nauvoo Temple on the same day in 1845: Mary Adaline Goddard (his cousin who had three sons by a former marriage), Charlotte Squires, Sarah Ann Prichard, and Harriet Amelia Squires. Suddenly, at age thirty-one, Lorenzo Snow, the bachelor, became the head of a family of eight. And in the spring of 1848 while at Winter Quarters preparing for the trek to the Salt Lake Valley, he married a fifth wife, Eleanor Houtz.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow and his family crossed the Mississippi on February 12, 1846. Their trek across Iowa was interrupted by a lengthy stay at Mt. Pisgah, one of the way stations established by the Saints. Appointed by Brigham Young to preside over the Saints there, Lorenzo created an intricate, smooth-running organization with numerous committees, each responsible for one aspect of the work. He also sponsored theatricals presented in his rustic cabin, which was decorated imaginatively. His philosophy was that life should be lived to the full at the moment, and enjoyment should not be postponed to some uncertain, future date.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow was the captain of one hundred families that migrated from Winter Quarters to the Salt Lake Valley in the spring of 1848. All in all, it was a pleasant trek for members of the Snow family. They had ample food, the weather was good, the trail was well marked, and the Indians were friendly. "I managed to discharge my obligations as captain of my hundred very satisfactorily, for which I felt truly grateful to the Lord," he wrote afterward.

Snow, LorenzoPPAt first, the Snows lived in the fort built by the first pioneers. Later Lorenzo built a rustic cabin for his family and then a gracious home on South Temple at Third East. Several months after arriving in the valley, he had become a useful member of the new community as a teacher, a family man, and an active member of the Church. He had no aspirations for office and was content to play the inconspicuous role marked out for him. So he had no idea of what was afoot when he was invited to meet with the First Presidency on February 12, 1849. It came as a surprise when he was called as a member of the Twelve, ordained, and set apart. He was surprised again in October when he was called on a mission to Italy.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow traveled east with a group of missionaries, and from New York he embarked for England. He spent two months there, renewing acquaintances with some of his converts whom he affectionately called "my children in the gospel." Crossing the English Channel and continental Europe, he traveled to Genoa, Italy, on the Ligurian Sea. This great seaport, the birthplace of Christopher Columbus, was dominated by the Catholic Church and provided no openings for missionary work. Very soon, therefore, Elder Snow and his companions went north to the Piedmont, where the Waldenses lived. These self-reliant people had resisted all efforts to turn them from their Protestant beliefs. After the miraculous healing of a young boy named Joseph Guy, the elders had success. The climate improved further when Elder Snow dedicated the land for the preaching of the gospel. In the autumn of 1850 he and his companions climbed a mountain near LaTour, where Elder Snow offered a dedicatory prayer. They named the site "Mount Brigham" and called the place on which they stood "the Rock of Prophecy."

Snow, LorenzoPPLeaving his companions in charge, Lorenzo went back to England to arrange for the translation and publication of the Book of Mormon in Italian. Returning to the Piedmont after nine months, he was pleased to find the work there was flourishing. The gifts of the Spirit were appearing and people with administrative ability were being baptized. Soon after, a convert named John D. Malan was placed in charge of the branch, and Elder Snow and a companion traveled to Malta. There arrangements were made to publish and distribute Church tracts, including two tracts written by Elder Snow, The Voice of Joseph and The Ancient Gospel Restored. Time constraints caused Lorenzo to abandon plans to travel to India. Instead, he booked passage to England. Embarking for the United States from Liverpool on June 12, 1852, he arrived in Salt Lake City on July 30. The joy of being reunited with his family was muted by the news that his plural wife Charlotte had died in Lorenzo's absence. His frequent moves had prevented him from receiving the dreadful news. He grieved at the passing of this beloved companion.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow soon became heavily involved in the affairs of the community. He was elected to the territorial legislature and appointed to the board of regents of the University of Deseret. He also organized the Polysophical Society, a social group that met regularly in his home. It featured readings, recitals, singing, and dramatic sketches and was one of the forerunners of the Church's Mutual Improvement Associations.

Snow, LorenzoPPIn October 1853 the First Presidency called Elder Snow to lead fifty families to settle an area fifty miles north of Salt Lake City. He became president of the stake that grew up around that settlement, which was later named Brigham City. At first the Snows lived under primitive conditions in an old fort. By the autumn of 1854, however, Lorenzo had built a substantial home that included a living room large enough to accommodate frequent visitors who gathered for entertainments like those sponsored by the Polysophical Society in Salt Lake City. Later the Brigham City Dramatic Association was organized to stage entertainments on a community-wide basis. Elder Snow felt the need to elevate the cultural life of the community by wholesome recreations. He also stressed education and soon established an efficient school system. And his preaching emphasized spirituality, resiliency, and work.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow always performed his duties with a flair. In Salt Lake City he directed an event that celebrated the second anniversary of the arrival of the Saints in Utah. It was marked by elaborate pageantry featuring bands, costumes, parades, banners, and decorations. Lorenzo repeated this on a minor scale when President Young paid his first visit to Brigham City. An escort of uniformed young men riding horses and sixteen young women dressed in white seated in wagons met the prophet at the edge of the town. With a martial band leading the way, President Young was escorted through the streets lined with men, women, and children amid "loud cheers, the ringing of bells and waving of banners."

Snow, LorenzoPPAs Elder Snow put his mark on any enterprise he directed, he also left his mark on the geography surrounding Brigham City. To the east is Mantua, a town named after Lorenzo's place of birth; to the north is Portage, a town named after the county where he was born; and to the northwest is Snowville, which honored the area's most distinguished resident.

Snow, LorenzoPPDuring the threatened invasion of Utah by Johnston's Army, Elder Snow activated the Box Elder Battalion of the Nauvoo Legion, although he did not lead it. As part of the "scorched earth" policy, he also led his people to Utah County, settling some of them around what was then called Pond Town, later Salem, where many lived in crude dugouts. When the truce was signed, they moved back to Brigham City.

Snow, LorenzoPPWhile he lived at Brigham City, Elder Snow occasionally received ad hoc apostolic assignments. One of these came in 1864 when he and Elder Ezra Taft Benson were assigned to go to Hawaii to investigate reports of misconduct by Walter Murray Gibson. Included in the party was young Joseph F. Smith, who, having returned from a mission to Hawaii, would serve as translator. When the schooner Nettie Merrill arrived near the mouth of Lahaina Harbor on March 31, 1864, there was a stiff wind and the sea was running high. A mile away, waves could be seen breaking over the coral reefs that guarded the narrow mouth of the harbor. Believing there was no danger, the two Apostles decided to transfer to a small boat with their gear and go on to the beach so they could begin their work. Joseph F. Smith, who was familiar with these waters and the treacherous weather of the islands, said it was too dangerous and warned against going. When he saw they intended to ignore his warning, he said he would go with them only if directed to do so. Not wanting to order him to go, the Apostles went ahead with a crew, leaving Joseph F. behind. Later Elder Snow said he had the impression at the time this young man would one day be the President of the Church. He was impressed by his self-confidence as well as his willingness to go contrary to his own judgment if directed to do so by priesthood authority.

Snow, LorenzoPPJoseph F. Smith's concern about the danger proved correct—the boat capsized crossing the reef. Elder Snow was drowned but after an hour was miraculously brought back to life by those who recovered his body and worked over him. After a probe, Walter Gibson was excommunicated, and Joseph F. Smith was left in charge of the mission.

Snow, LorenzoPPAfter returning from Hawaii, Elder Snow began to organize the system of cooperatives for which he became noted. Moved by the desire to make his people self-sufficient and to stir a spirit of enterprise among them, he initiated a system of "home industries." The nucleus was the Brigham City Mercantile and Manufacturing Association, which he and three associates had founded. He persuaded his associates to use some of their surplus to fund the first home industry, a tannery. The investors and the tannery workers and managers received stock interests in the new enter-prise. Boot- and shoe-making units as well as saddle- and harness-making units were spun off from the tannery. Then came a woolen mill, and a group of satellite units were spun off from it. A prolific number of other home industries were organized afterward, intended to fill every need of the community. These included a dairy; a horticultural unit; a machine and maintenance unit with a blacksmith shop; a construction unit with sawmills and brick and adobe, lime kiln, carpentry, masonry, and architecture departments; tin and pottery shops; rope, broom, and brush factories; a greenhouse and nursery; a public works department to supervise the construction of roads, bridges, and irrigation projects; an education department; and even a tramp department that gave handouts to hobos in exchange for menial labor. When President Young founded the United Order in the mid-1870s, stock interests in the Brigham City enterprises were converted into "stewardships," and the activities were carried on in much the same manner as before.

Snow, LorenzoPP"Because of many losses and disasters," Elder Snow explained on July 20, 1880, "we have discontinued some of our enterprises and curtailed others. Yet for a period of fifteen years, our union has prevented division in mercantile business; to say nothing about many other things which have been done by our union, and I have nothing to regret of all we have accomplished, . . . and in all these matters we did them by common consent." In time all the home industries were dissolved, having fulfilled their purpose.

Snow, LorenzoPPA major factor in the ultimate dissolution of the home industries was the completion of the transcontinental railroad on May 10, 1869. Less expensive and more plentiful manufactured goods then became readily available in Utah from the East and the West. Because the transcontinental line bypassed both Salt Lake City and Brigham City, many, including some Mormon dissidents, believed that Corinne, a town west of Brigham City on the main line, would become the economic center of Utah. Not wanting to lend credence to that idea, Brigham Young and Lorenzo Snow, and most other high leaders of the Church, deliberately stayed away from the ceremony on May 10 at Promontory Point, west of Corinne, which linked the Union Pacific and Central Pacific lines. A week later, Lorenzo Snow joined with Brigham Young and other general Church leaders near Ogden where ground was broken for the Utah Central Railway, which would connect Ogden with Salt Lake City. That line was completed in January 1870. Later the Utah Northern Railway constructed a line running through Brigham City that connected Franklin, Idaho, with Ogden, Utah. These events, which gave Salt Lake City and Brigham City rail access to eastern and western markets, minimized the status of Corinne, causing it to wither and leaving Brigham City the main economic center in that area.

Snow, LorenzoPPIn October 1872 Elder Snow, along with his sister Eliza, was invited to join President George A. Smith and a small party to tour the Holy Land. Lorenzo and Eliza chronicled the trip by sending regular dispatches to the Deseret News. The reports were compiled and published later. Visiting the Holy Land was a signal event of Elder Snow's life.

Snow, LorenzoPPEn route to Palestine, the party visited England and Italy where Elder Snow was able to relive his missionary experiences in those countries. Along the way, libraries, museums, art galleries, cathedrals, castles, and other ancient buildings claimed their attention. In Egypt the vivid impact of the Sphinx and the pyramids was eclipsed in his mind by the kind and charitable character of the Egyptian people.

Snow, LorenzoPPTheir guide and his assistants met the party at Jaffa with the equipment, food, and animals to make their two-week tour of Palestine enjoyable. The equipment included four large, carpeted tents, three for sleeping and dining and one for food preparation. On the way to Jerusalem from Jaffa, the party passed through the Plains of Sharon and the valleys of Ajalon and Elah, the last being the scene of the battle between David and Goliath. Elder Snow was in awe of Jerusalem, although he doubted whether the sites shown them were the actual places where significant events occurred. He also doubted whether the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem stands on the exact site where the Savior was born. Despite his skepticism, there were aroused in him "impressions never to be forgotten" when he saw in the Grotto of the Nativity the inscription Hic de Virgine Maria Jesus Christus natus est ("Here the Virgin Mary gave birth to Jesus Christ"). Although Lorenzo was a special witness of the Savior's reality and divinity and often had felt his presence or influence, when he visited this place and read the simple inscription, he was filled with a sense of awe and commitment that was never to abate during the remainder of his apostolic ministry.

Snow, LorenzoPPOn March 2, 1873, the party gathered in a tent on the Mount of Olives for a sacrament and testimony meeting during which President Smith dedicated the land of Palestine for the gathering of the Jews. He also invoked divine assistance in the rebuilding of Jerusalem and expressed gratitude for the restoration of the gospel.

Snow, LorenzoPPWhile this was the crowning event of the visit to Palestine, Elder Snow was equally moved by his visits to Nazareth, Cana, and the Sea of Galilee. "The Savior came down from the hilly country of Galilee," wrote Lorenzo, "and made his home upon these shores, chose his twelve apostles, taught the people in their towns and villages, and on the seaside as they flocked around him in multitudes."

Snow, LorenzoPPLeaving Galilee, the party traveled northeasterly past the Fountain of Dan, a main source of the Jordan, to Caesarea Philippi. Lorenzo recalled that there Jesus counseled with his disciples following their first missionary effort when Peter boldly testified that Jesus was "the Christ, the Son of the living God" (Matthew 16:16).

Snow, LorenzoPPAfter visiting Damascus in Syria and Beirut in Lebanon, the party embarked for Constantinople (Istanbul) and then for Athens, where they spent five days visiting the ruins of that ancient Grecian city. Unknown to him, Elder Snow was sustained as a counselor to President Brigham Young while the party was in Athens. The action was taken during the April 1873 general conference and was affirmed by a setting apart when he returned to Salt Lake City.

Snow, LorenzoPPAfter cruising through the Grecian islands, the party disembarked at Trieste. From there the itinerary included stops in Munich (where Lorenzo and Eliza were astonished at the 800,000-volume royal library), Vienna, Berlin, and Hamburg. Elder Snow was both excited and oppressed by the prevalence of military personnel on the continent. "As in all other countries which we have visited," he wrote of the tour in Germany, "soldiers, in military costume, are seen almost everywhere in great numbers." The excitement came from his dormant desire for a military career, the oppression from knowing that the basic purpose of an army is to kill. This was repugnant to one who gave up hunting when he heard a wounded animal cry as if it were human.

Snow, LorenzoPPSince the traveling party disbanded upon reaching New York, Lorenzo and Eliza decided to take a side trip alone to the Snow family home in Mantua, Ohio. Elder Snow had been there only once during the previous thirty-seven years, and Eliza had never been back. They were given celebrity treatment by relatives and friends. "Indeed, it was one continual ovation, from first to last," wrote Eliza to the Woman's Exponent.

Snow, LorenzoPPAt home, Elder Snow learned that his call would not require moving to Salt Lake City. His duties in the First Presidency consisted mostly of traveling throughout the Church to teach the principles of cooperation and the United Order. He also met periodically with President Young and the other counselors in Salt Lake City and filled special assignments given by the prophet.

Snow, LorenzoPPOne of these was to participate in the dedication of the St. George Temple in April 1877 and in the general conference to be held in connection with it. In St. George, Lorenzo learned that members of the Twelve were to be released as stake presidents and that other stake presidencies would be reorganized as well.

Snow, LorenzoPPOn the way home following the conference, Elder Snow reorganized stake presidencies in Kanab and Panguitch. Then he joined in reorganizing the Salt Lake Stake. Later he reorganized the stakes in Ogden, Morgan, and Cache Valley. Meanwhile, other counselors in the First Presidency reorganized additional stakes. However, President Young decided to reorganize the Box Elder Stake himself. He and a party from Salt Lake City traveled to Brigham City for the occasion. The party received a typical Lorenzo Snow reception with all its trappings. President Young, who was a guest in Elder Snow's home, delighted everyone present by singing a hymn solo, something he had done often in the early years but seldom did later on. It was the last time the President Young sang a solo—he passed away less than two weeks later.

Snow, LorenzoPPPresident Young selected Oliver G. Snow, Lorenzo's son, as the new stake president. At the meeting on August 18, 1877, when the change was made, he said, "Brother Lorenzo Snow, who has had charge of you, has set the best example for the literal building up of the Kingdom of God of any of our presiding elders."

Snow, LorenzoPPThe releases as stake president and, when President Young died, as a member of the First Presidency relieved Elder Snow of heavy responsibilities he had borne for many years. He continued, of course, to perform duties as a member of the Twelve, serving on ad hoc committees. These duties, however, were hardly sufficient to fill up the days of one accustomed to performing sustained and important labors in a leadership role. For a period of three years, therefore, he shifted the main focus of his efforts from church to family and personal matters. In many ways it was a change he welcomed and enjoyed.

Snow, LorenzoPPThe U.S. Supreme Court decision in the Reynolds case in 1879 introduced much uncertainty into Elder Snow's life and the lives of other Mormon polygamists. This case upheld the constitutionality of the 1862 antibigamy act and undercut the legal position of Elder Snow and his brethren that the 1862 act was void because it violated their freedom of religion. Their uncertainty escalated dramatically when congress passed the Edmunds Act in 1882. This bill added tough punitive and enforcement provisions to the 1862 act. The result was that Lorenzo and his brethren dropped into the underground to avoid arrest and prosecution.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow spent many months in northern California, living quietly and incognito. He mingled behind the scenes with members whom he could trust. In July 1885 he received an assignment from President John Taylor to work among the northern Indian tribes. In response, he labored among the Nez Perce, Umatilla, and Blackfoot tribes in Idaho and among the Shoshone and Arapahoe tribes in Wyoming. Receiving word that things had quieted down in Brigham City, he went home to visit in the autumn. When he learned that federal officials were in the area, Elder Snow took refuge in a concealed space below his bedroom. Armed with a warrant for his arrest, the officials inspected the house but found nothing. Upon leaving, they saw the Snows' dog, Nero, sniffing at a vent below the bedroom. Correctly assuming that a familiar smell wafted from the vent, they reentered the house and found Elder Snow. When he was satisfied their credentials were in order, he submitted to arrest.

Snow, LorenzoPPA reporter at the hearing noted that Elder Snow was "calm and dignified," that the "tenor of his disposition was unruffled," and that "he exhibited no trace of excitement whatever." He showed the same disposition throughout his eleven-month incarceration in the Utah Penitentiary. There he joined more than forty members of the Church who had been convicted of unlawful cohabitation. Lorenzo became their leader. These men reflected a character unlike that of other prisoners. Some wrote, some painted, some sculpted, and some composed. Others banded together to learn the manual arts or to study languages, mathematics, or history. And all of them devoted much time to studying the scriptures and to fasting and prayer. Included among the "cohabs" were Abraham H. Cannon of the First Council of Seventy; Rudger Clawson, a future Apostle; James Moyle, the patriarch of an influential family; and Andrew Jenson, assistant Church historian. During the April 1886 general conference, Elder Snow felt impressed to lead his brethren in the "Hosannah Shout," normally reserved for sacred ceremonies in the temple.

Snow, LorenzoPPElder Snow was released from prison on February 8, 1887, following a successful challenge to his conviction under a writ of habeas corpus. The U.S. Supreme Court decided that the procedure under which he had been tried was fatally flawed. A large crowd greeted him at the gates of the penitentiary. Later he was honored at a celebration in the Social Hall and at a meeting in the Tabernacle. There he rejoiced in the legal victory that had set him free, while cautioning the Saints about trials that lay ahead. "[We] must pass through the narrows and learn by sacrifice," he told the audience.

Snow, LorenzoPPOne of those trials emerged the following month when on March 3, 1887, the Edmunds-Tucker Act became the law of the land. This was the last and the toughest of the laws aimed at the Church and those who practiced plural marriage. It effectively ended the existence of the Church as an organized legal body in the United States, though the members retained the right of assembly.

Snow, LorenzoPPFollowing the death of President Taylor on July 25, 1887, the Manti Temple was dedicated in May 1888. Elder Snow, who was immune from further arrest, presided since President Woodruff was still living in the underground. These services were marked by unusual spiritual outpourings; some participants reported that they heard ethereal voices singing heavenly music and sensed the presence of Church leaders who had passed away earlier.

Snow, LorenzoPPWilford Woodruff was sustained as the fourth President of the Church at the April 1889 general conference. At the same time, Elder Snow was sustained as the President of the Twelve. A year later, President Woodruff announced the Manifesto, a revelation by which the teaching and practice of plural marriage were discontinued in the Church. At the general gathering where the Church members accepted the Manifesto, Lorenzo Snow made the motion of acceptance. In the years that followed, this action led to a gradual return to normalcy in the affairs of the Church.

Snow, LorenzoPPOn the recommendation of Elder Snow, Rudger Clawson became president of the Box Elder Stake following his release from the penitentiary. Although Elder Snow was the older of the two by forty-three years, there was an unusually close relationship between them. In March 1891 they joined in raising Ella Jensen from the dead. Ella had died at 10:00 a.m. on a Sunday morning. Her father, Jacob Jensen, Elder Snow's brother-in-law, traveled from his farm to Brigham City to tell Lorenzo. Called out of a meeting, he took Rudger Clawson with him. By the time they reached the farmhouse, Ella had been dead two hours. All were surprised when Elder Snow, after meditating, asked for consecrated oil. He had Rudger Clawson anoint Ella, and Lorenzo sealed the anointing. According to Brother Clawson, in the blessing Elder Snow said "in a commanding voice, 'Come back, Ella, come back. Your walk upon the earth is not yet completed, come back.'" An hour after Elder Snow and Rudger Clawson left, Ella's spirit returned to her body. She later married, gave birth to eight children, and lived to age eighty-six.

Snow, LorenzoPPIn April 1892 Elder Snow led the Hosannah Shout at the laying of the capstone of the Salt Lake Temple. And a year later, when the temple was dedicated, he was named the first president of the temple. He selected John Winder and Adolph Madsen as his counselors. President Snow's deep spirituality was a perfect fit for this sacred calling. His countenance and very presence radiated a celestial quality. He was much loved by the temple workers. After a year of service, they honored him at a ceremony in which he was eulogized and given an ebony black, gold-handled walking cane. He reciprocated by hosting them and the First Presidency on a "sacred excursion" to Brigham City and Mantua.

Snow, LorenzoPPIn August and September 1896, Lorenzo took his only known vacation. In company with his wife Minnie and their daughter, Maybelle, he traveled to San Francisco. During a two-week stay, they visited places of interest in the city and surrounding areas. He also met his brother, Samuel, whom he had not seen for many years. It was a joyous reunion. Boarding the coastal vessel Walla Walla, the vacationers sailed north to Vancouver Island, B. C., ferried to the mainland, then traveled by train to Lethbridge through the grandeur of the Canadian Rockies. They were driven by coach to Cardston, their ultimate destination. President Snow left Cardston in mid-September, leaving Minnie and Maybelle there with friends. A few months later, Minnie gave birth to another daughter, Lucille, the last of the forty-one natural children born to Lorenzo's nine wives. In addition, he raised Mary Adaline's three children of a previous marriage. President Snow was almost eighty-three years old when Lucille was born.

Snow, LorenzoPPOn September 1, 1898, Elder Snow learned that President Woodruff was gravely ill in San Francisco. He immediately went to the temple to pray for his recovery. As he walked through a hallway after he left the special room where he had prayed, President Snow was startled to see the Savior of the world, standing before him in the air, who gave him detailed instruction about the reorganization of the First Presidency. President Woodruff died the next day. On September 8, funeral services were held in the Tabernacle, where Elder Snow and others eulogized their friend. At a special meeting of the Twelve five days later, Lorenzo Snow was sustained as the fifth President of the Church. He was ordained and set apart on October 10 after being sustained at general conference.

Snow, LorenzoPPThe Church's shaky financial status was the major problem facing President Snow as he began his prophetic ministry. The Church had never recovered from its legal dissolution and the escheat of its properties before the Manifesto. Since then it had operated on borrowed money. Indeed, shortly after his ordination, President Snow had to borrow a million dollars to finance the administration of the Church.

Snow, LorenzoPPStruggling to find a solution to this problem, the prophet was impressed to go to St. George. He and his party traveled there in April 1899 to hold a series of meetings. "It was during one of these meetings that my father received the renewal revelation on tithing," wrote Leroi Snow, the prophet's son. "God manifested to him . . . [that] through strict obedience to this law . . . not only would the church be relieved of its great indebtedness . . . but this would also be the means of freeing the Latter-day Saints from their individual obligations."

Snow, LorenzoPPPresident Snow explained the significance of the occasion to the audience: "The word of the Lord to you is not anything new. It is simply this: The time has now come for every Latter-day Saint, who calculates to be prepared for the future and to hold his feet strong upon a proper foun dation, to do the will of the Lord and to pay his tithing in full." In other meetings in St. George he elaborated on this theme. On the return to Salt Lake City, he held many meetings along the way where the message was repeated. He repeated it again to the youth leaders at their conference in June. They approved a resolution, committing themselves to pay an honest tithe and to teach others to do likewise. In July President Snow convened a solemn assembly attended by stake and ward leaders. They made the same commitment. Afterward, he traveled widely holding many meetings in which he preached the law of tithing and urged members to obey it.

Snow, LorenzoPPThe results were astonishing. Within a year, the amount of tithing paid in the Church had doubled. Moreover, there was a notable improvement in the financial condition of individual members. While the finances of the Church did not change overnight, this inspired initiative marked the beginning of a new era in the Church. It saw the Church become wealthy with ample means to promote its interests and to expound its message on a global basis. It is a testimonial to the prophetic calling of President Snow and to the verity of Malachi's promise (see Malachi 3:10).

Snow, LorenzoPPCoincident with his move to increase the revenues of the Church, President Snow moved promptly to assert control of the management and the disbursement of Church funds. He dismantled a network of committees that had been set up to diffuse the control over Church finances and returned control to the First Presidency. He also canceled a lease that had given control over the Deseret News to an individual. Moreover, he became active in promoting the candidacies of George Q. Cannon for the U.S. Senate and Brigham H. Roberts for the House of Representatives. He wanted the Church to have a voice in those chambers that so long had passed legislation inimical to the interests of Latter-day Saints. He vigorously rejected complaints of critics who protested his support of political candidates, asserting that his role in the Church did not deprive him of his civic rights. Meanwhile, he initiated an expansion of missionary work, calling Heber J. Grant to open the work in Japan, and taught stake presidents to lead out in nurturing and training their people.

Snow, LorenzoPPThis flurry of activity by an eighty-seven-year-old man is reminiscent of another promise of Patriarch Joseph Smith Sr., who through inspiration had declared to Lorenzo that "age shall not come upon thee." President Snow retained vigor of mind and body and a youthful outlook upon life until the very end. The end came for the prophet on October 10, 1901, following a short illness with pneumonia. Funeral services were held three days later in the Tabernacle, which was decorated in a spectacular yet tasteful way that would have won his approval. The base of the massive organ was covered with white, draped bunting in the center of which hung a floral tribute in the form of the Salt Lake Temple. Above it was a full-sized portrait of President Snow, and above the portrait was the word UTAH and the Star of David. The elevated stands where the General Authorities and officers of the Church were seated were similarly draped with bunting, as were the balustrades of the choir seats and the front portions of the balcony on both the north and south sides of the building. Also, the four front columns supporting the balcony on either side of the building were wrapped with the white bunting in barber-pole fashion. Numerous floral displays adorned all levels of the stand, the most prominent one bearing the motto "As God Is, Man May Be."

Snow, LorenzoPPAfter the services in which President Snow was appropriately eulogized by his brethren, his body was taken to Brigham City, where he was buried in the Snow family plot in the city cemetery. There, with Mantua, Portage, and Snowville nearby, the prophet would have felt comfortable and at home in the place where he had performed some of his most significant work.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Lorenzo Snow: Spiritual Giant, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1982) and the sources cited therein.
