Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Six

Smith, Joseph F.PPJoseph F. Smith

Smith, Joseph F.PPMary Fielding, a convert to the Mormon Church from Canada, married Hyrum Smith, a widower with five living children, on December 25, 1837, in Kirtland, Ohio. Mary's first natural child, Joseph F. Smith, was born on November 13, 1838, in Far West, Missouri. At the time, his father was imprisoned in Richmond, Missouri, under false charges arising from the persecution of the Mormons by mobs and by Missouri's officialdom. Mary and her baby and the other Smith children were driven to Quincy, Illinois, under Missouri Governor Lilburn W. Boggs's order to exterminate the Mormons. Hyrum joined them there in April 1839. The parents then established a home at Nauvoo, originally Commerce City, Illinois.

Smith, Joseph F.PPFor several years Joseph F. lived a privileged life. Hyrum Smith, one of the most influential men in the community, was a counselor to his brother Joseph Smith, who was the President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The boy's security was shattered on June 27, 1844, when his father and uncle were murdered by a mob in Carthage, Illinois. "The bodies of the martyrs lay in their coffins," a mature Joseph F. Smith recalled. "I remember my mother lifting me up to look upon the faces of my father and the Prophet, for the last time." Two years later the Smiths suffered further trauma when they were driven from Nauvoo by enemies of the Church. Mary sold her Nauvoo real estate to purchase teams, wagons, and supplies for the trek west. At the reins of one wagon was a budding young teamster, Joseph F. Smith, age seven years, seven months.

Smith, Joseph F.PPAfter Hyrum's death, Mary Fielding Smith was both mother and father to the family. Her leadership showed both sensitivity and tough resilience. Joseph F. was impressed by her spiritual sense when he saw how she, through prayer, located a lost team of oxen and how she asked priesthood brethren to anoint and bless their feeble oxen on the trek to Utah. Joseph F. also was impressed by his mother's staunch independence, revealed when she stood up to a wagonmaster who sought to exclude her from his caravan because of concern she would cause delay. The spunky widow told her critic she would hold her own and would beat him into the valley, a prediction she fulfilled. These same qualities of spiritual sensitivity and forthright independence were evident in her son Joseph F. Smith throughout his life.

Smith, Joseph F.PPWidow Smith established a rustic home in the Mill Creek area of the Salt Lake Valley. Despite the prominence of her husband, she lived almost anonymously, quietly keeping the commandments and teaching her children. She died at age fifty-one on September 21, 1852, when Joseph F. was thirteen. "By the massacre of Carthage, June 27, 1844," read her obituary in the Deseret News, "she was left the sole guardian of a large family of children and dependants, for whom, by her indefatigable exertions, she provided the means of support, and removal, from Nauvoo to this peaceful valley of the mountains." Her example motivated Joseph F. Smith all his life.

Smith, Joseph F.PPJoseph F. Smith's boyhood ended at age fifteen when he was called to serve a mission in Hawaii. The call came from the stand of the Old Tabernacle during the April general conference in 1854. After being ordained an elder and endowed, he left for the mission field with twenty other elders on May 27.

Smith, Joseph F.PPBecause he traveled without purse or scrip, Joseph F. worked in San Bernardino and San Francisco, California, to earn money for his passage to Hawaii. After a rough voyage of nineteen days on the Vaquero, he arrived in Honolulu in late September. His mission president, Francis A. Hammond, assigned him to labor in Kula on the island of Maui, which consisted of a group of scattered villages. Here he began to exhibit a remarkable gift of tongues promised him when he was set apart. Very soon, aided by Elder Pake, a native companion, he learned to speak the Hawaiian language with eloquence. He also was endowed with a special gift of healing.

Smith, Joseph F.PPAt a conference in July 1855, sixteen-year-old Joseph F. Smith was called to preside over the island of Maui. Later he presided over the Hilo and Kohala conferences on the large island of Hawaii and over the island of Molokai. At Molokai he became very ill and was nursed back to health by a kindly Hawaiian woman, Ma Mahuhii. Years later when he returned to the islands as the President of the Church, Ma Mahuhii, then blind and very old, brought the prophet a few choice bananas, calling him by name, "Iosepa, Iosepa." He took the aged woman in his arms, kissed her, and patted her on the head, saying over and over, "Mama, Mama, my dear old Mama."

Smith, Joseph F.PPAs an orphan and because of his youth, Joseph F. occasionally felt lonely and inadequate. While in the islands, he had a vivid dream that soothed those feelings. In it he saw himself at the door of a mansion where he was admitted by the Prophet Joseph Smith, who said to him, "Joseph, you are late." He answered, "Yes, but I am clean, I am clean." Other aspects of the dream, in which he also saw his father, had a profound effect upon him. "When I awoke that morning I was a man although only a boy," he wrote later. "There was not anything in the world that I feared. I could meet any man or woman or child and look them in the face, feeling in my soul that I was a man every whit."

Smith, Joseph F.PPWhen Joseph F. returned to Salt Lake City on February 24, 1858, Utah was threatened with invasion by the United States Army. He soon joined the Nauvoo Legion and, under the command of Colonel Thomas Callister, was constantly in the saddle, "prospecting and exploring the country between Great Salt Lake City and Fort Bridger." He also served on picket guard duty under Orrin Porter Rockwell and helped to evacuate Salt Lake City.

Smith, Joseph F.PPWhen the war scare ended, he worked for the territorial legislature. Meanwhile, he courted his cousin, Levira Smith, a daughter of his uncle, Samuel Harrison Smith, one of the Eight Witnesses of the Book of Mormon. They were married on April 5, 1859. The following year, Joseph F. was called on a mission to Great Britain. One of his companions was Samuel Harrison Bailey Smith, Levira's brother. On the way to the East Coast, the Smith cousins stopped in Nauvoo. There they visited their aunt Emma, the Prophet Joseph Smith's wife, and her sons, Joseph Smith III, Frederick, Alexander, and David. While Emma and her children were friendly to the visitors personally, they were cold and critical as to the "Utah Church" and its leader, Brigham Young. The attitude of three sisters of Joseph and Hyrum whom the missionaries later visited in Colchester, Illinois, was far different. These aunts were grateful to their nephews for holding religious services with them in which Church doctrine was discussed.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThe arrival of two nephews of the Prophet Joseph Smith, one of whom was the son of Patriarch Hyrum Smith, created much excitement among the British missionaries. Soon the newcomers were admired not alone for their lineage but also for their performance. Joseph F.'s long service in Hawaii enabled him to be productive from the beginning. He was soon called as the president of the Sheffield Conference. Later he served as a "pastor" over several conferences, training and motivating the missionaries and instructing members of the branches. The eloquence he had shown in the Hawaiian language was duplicated in his native tongue. It was a gift that would distinguish him throughout his career. Many who had heard Church leaders speak in the Tabernacle for decades said none excelled Joseph F. Smith as a preacher of righteousness. The impact he made was a combination of fluency, a pleasing voice, his presence in the pulpit, his spirituality, and his emphatic delivery.

Smith, Joseph F.PPGeorge Q. Cannon's appointment as the president of the European Mission in May 1862 began a long association between him and Joseph F. Smith. They were instantly attracted to each other. Elder Cannon, who was then a member of the Twelve, took Elder Smith with him on a tour of Denmark and worked closely with him in Joseph F.'s role as a pastor. Later they would serve successively as counselors to Brigham Young, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and Lorenzo Snow.

Smith, Joseph F.PPJoseph F. returned to Salt Lake City in September of 1863. A few months later he was called on a third mission. President Young asked him to accompany Elders Ezra T. Benson and Lorenzo Snow of the Twelve to Hawaii to investigate reports of misconduct by a missionary, Walter Murray Gibson. Joseph F. served as translator. The party's schooner, the Nettie Merrill, anchored a mile from the harbor of Lahaina on March 31, 1864. A stiff wind was up, and the sea was running high, which warned Joseph F. there would be danger in trying to maneuver the schooner's small freight boat through the narrow, reef-guarded chan nel that led to the harbor. Ignoring his warning, the two Apostles decided to go ashore anyway to begin their work. Joseph F. refused to join them unless ordered to do so by priesthood authority. Not wanting to do that, the Apostles left him on the schooner and headed for shore with the freight boat's crew. The boat capsized when it was crushed against the reef. Elder Snow was drowned. He was revived after a rescue crew worked for an hour to resuscitate him. Elder Snow reported later that when Joseph F. refused to enter the boat, the spiritual impression came that Joseph F. would one day become President of the Church. The younger man's confidence in his own judgment as opposed to that of the Apostles, combined with his willingness to be subordinate to priesthood authority, revealed a character of unusual wisdom and faith.

Smith, Joseph F.PPWhen Gibson was excommunicated, Joseph F. Smith was placed in charge of the mission and Elders Benson and Snow returned home. Unfortunately, the apostate continued to exert strong influence on Lanai, where the Church had acquired property, the title of which had become vested in Gibson's name. Joseph F. remained in Hawaii a few months longer, helping reestablish order among members who had been confused by Gibson's apostate teachings. Later, on Joseph F.'s recommendation, the Church acquired a large plantation on the island of Oahu on which the Hawaii Temple and Church college were constructed.

Smith, Joseph F.PPJoseph F. arrived home in December 1864. He was employed in the Historian's Office, served as a secretary to the First Presidency and the Twelve, and was the recorder at the Endowment House. At the Historian's Office, he met, and with Levira's consent, courted and was sealed to Julina Lambson in plural marriage. Later Joseph F. Smith was sealed to four other wives: Sarah Richards, Edna Lambson, Alice Kimball, and Mary Schwartz. Except for Levira, who was unable to bear children, these wives bore forty-three children. In addition, there were two adopted children, and three children fathered by Alice's first husband, who were raised in the Smith home. Each child was loved and cherished by the father. "Children, the greatest of all earthly joys," he wrote. A great sadness in his life occurred when Levira, distraught because she was barren, separated from the family.

Smith, Joseph F.PPJoseph F. Smith's life was changed forever on July 1, 1866. On that day, following a meeting with the Brethren, President Young, moved by a spiritual impulse, ordained him an Apostle and set him apart as one of his counselors. Fifteen months later, he became a member of the Twelve. Still in his twenties, Hyrum's son was now on the path that would lead him to be President of the Church. Meanwhile, he gained prominence and sound reputation in civic circles, serving in the territorial senate and house and on the Salt Lake City Council. Charles W. Nibley left a description of Joseph F. Smith at this stage of his career: "I heard him preach in the old meetinghouse at Wellsville, and I remarked at the time what a fine specimen of young manhood he was—strong, powerful, with a beautiful voice, so full of sympathy and affection, so appealing in its tone, that he impressed me, although I was a youth of but eighteen. He was a handsome man."

Smith, Joseph F.PPAt the October general conference in 1873, Joseph F. was called to preside over the European Mission. He left Salt Lake City in late February 1874 and arrived at Liverpool on March 21. He would spend fifteen months there, living at 42 Islington. He had authority over all Church affairs in Great Britain and Europe. He was the editor-in-chief of the Millennial Star. He also was in charge of converts immigrating to the United States. For instance, he saw 150 off on the steamship Wyoming on October 14, 1874. A presidency of W. N. Fife, James Bywater, and V. King was appointed to shepherd the group to its destination. Elder Smith reported this was the sixth immigration company to leave Liverpool in 1874, totaling "1996 souls." His office duties, frequent travels, and multiple meetings usually kept his mind off home and family. Yet there were times of homesickness. "I had peculiar feelings," he wrote after receiving a letter and pictures from home, "went into my room and wept and prayed and wept again and felt relieved." His prayers were filled with expressions of gratitude for his family. "I live in the pure unsullied love of my darling children," he wrote. "My wives can trust me. . . . O! My Father, preserve me in Thy holy keeping from the power of temptation."

Smith, Joseph F.PPWhen he returned to Utah in the autumn of 1875, Elder Smith was placed in charge of the Saints in Davis County, north of Salt Lake City. In two years he prepared them for stakehood. The organization took place in June 1877. Meanwhile, at the dedication of the St. George Temple in April that year, he was called again to preside over the European Mission. His wife Sarah and their son, Joseph Richards, accompanied him. They arrived in Liverpool six weeks later. Sarah had barely begun to make a real home out of the barnlike building at 42 Islington when word came of President Young's death. They repacked their things and returned home.

Smith, Joseph F.PPFor a year Elder Smith was preoccupied with the Twelve, charting the course of the Church during another interregnum and sorting out the snarled condition of President Young's estate. The problem arose from intermixing Church assets and the prophet's personal assets because of unfair restraints imposed by the 1862 antibigamy act. Joseph F. served on the committee that worked out a settlement between the Church and the Young family. When that problem was resolved, he received one of the most enjoyable assignments of his career.

Smith, Joseph F.PPOn September 3, 1878, Joseph F. left Salt Lake City with Elder Orson Pratt for the East on a mission to gather historical data. Elder Pratt was the Church Historian and Elder Smith his chief assistant. Their first stop was Independence, Missouri, where they interviewed William E. McLellin, an original member of the Twelve who had been excommunicated, and Mrs. William Eaton, the remarried widow of John E. Page. Mrs. Eaton, who was abrupt and frosty, knew little of historical value. Mr. McLellin was critical of the "Brighamite" church but was friendly and helpful. He took the visitors on a tour of the city, pointing out things of historic interest. At Richmond, Missouri, the Apostles were pleased with the attitude of David Whitmer, who answered many questions about the early history of the Church. He described how the angel Moroni exhibited the plates. He also showed them the printer's copy of the Book of Mormon manuscript in Oliver's handwriting but resisted efforts to have it placed in the Church archives. At Far West Joseph F. saw, for the first time since his infancy, the place where he was born. The reception at Kirtland, Ohio, was chilly. Here Joseph F. paid homage at the grave of Jerusha Smith, his father's first wife.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThe high point of the tour came at Palmyra, New York. At Hill Cumorah the Apostles "prayed long and fervently for all Israel and for the interests of Zion." Afterward, they blessed each other. The main disappointment of the tour came on the way home at Plano, Illinois, where Joseph Smith III refused to show Joseph F. the Prophet Joseph Smith's revision of the scriptures. Unlike their meeting in the early 1860s at Nauvoo, the Prophet's son was cold and distant toward Joseph F. The main value of the tour was the preservation of valuable historical data; and for Joseph F. personally, the tour gave him a new sense of proximity with the past.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThree months after the eastern tour, the Church was thrown into confusion. This resulted from the Reynolds decision on January 6, 1879, in which the Supreme Court held that the 1862 antibigamy act was constitutional. This eliminated the legal basis on which the Church had ignored the 1862 act. Concern escalated when Congress passed the Edmunds Act in 1882, which added tough new provisions aimed at the Church and Latter-day Saint polygamists. An early decision interpreting the Edmunds Act held that each day one lived in plural marriage was a separate offense. This terrorized Mormon polygamists and hastened their flight into the underground to avoid arrest and prosecution. Joseph F. was especially vulnerable because he had charge of the Endowment House records. Thus extraordinary efforts were made to apprehend him, not only because he was Second Counselor in the First Presidency but also because he had information that could convict others. To avoid this, it was decided that President Smith would go into exile in Hawaii.

Smith, Joseph F.PPReturning from a trip into Old Mexico with President John Taylor and other Church leaders, Elder Smith separated from the party in California. He then waited in San Francisco for Julina and their baby. The three of them boarded the Mariposa on February 2, 1885. Arriving safely at Honolulu, they went immediately to the Church plantation at Laie across the island of Oahu. This would be Joseph F.'s home for more than two years.

Smith, Joseph F.PPHad it not been for the threat of arrest and the absence of most of his family, this would have been an idyllic period for President Smith. He was with a devoted wife and their child and among people whom he loved and who revered him. He had time to read, to reflect, and to write. There was opportunity to fulfill his apostolic duty by teaching and motivating the members and the missionaries at Laie. There was physical work on the plantation to provide a diversion and to help keep him fit. And there was leisure to enable him and Julina to explore the beauties of the islands. "It seemed like a new ethereal world," he wrote of a visit to Haleahala on Maui, "or as though we had started on an aerial flight to some distant sphere, and could behold our own terrestrial globe far below, wrapped in fleecy robes; and reflecting from its watery surface, through the rifts in the clouds, their beautiful and ever-changing light and shade." The beauty and precision of this writing belie the limited formal education of its author.

Smith, Joseph F.PPA few months after arriving in the islands, President Smith made a discovery that aroused his historical instincts. He learned that a man named L. L. Rice, an Ohio retiree who lived on Oahu, had the manuscript written by Solomon Spaulding. Enemies of the Church had said this was the origin of the Book of Mormon. Through lengthy negotiations, Joseph F. was able to borrow and to copy the manuscript. There is no real resemblance between the two documents. Finding the Spaulding manuscript exploded a false theory that enemies of the Church had promoted for decades. It was a satisfying find for a professional historian to make.

Smith, Joseph F.PPPresident Smith's daughter Donnette came to Laie to help her mother, who gave birth to a son, Elias Wesley, in April 1886. Later Donnette's duties expanded to nursing her father when he became very ill. A deep bronchial infection, accompanied by alternate sweating and chilling, sapped his strength and put him in bed. His refusal to stay down until he was fully recovered caused several relapses and needlessly prolonged the illness. After he had healed, it was decided that Julina would return to Utah with Donnette and the two babies. "When once alone," he wrote after seeing them off on March 15, 1887, "my soul burst forth in tears and I wept their fountains dry and felt all the pangs . . . of parting with my heart's best treasures on earth."

Smith, Joseph F.PPThe separation ended sooner than expected. When word came the following July that President John Taylor was critically ill, Joseph F. returned to Utah. He arrived on the eighteenth, a week before President Taylor died. After the prophet's death, the Church entered another interregnum, being led by the Twelve, who were sustained at the October general conference with Wilford Woodruff as their President.

Smith, Joseph F.PPPassage of the Edmunds-Tucker Act, which became effective March 3, 1887, increased the pressure on Elder Smith and other polygamists. He did not attend the October conference for fear of arrest. Further, he took special precautions to preserve his anonymity when walking on the streets and when traveling from Utah to Washington, D. C., in February 1888.

Smith, Joseph F.PPIn Washington, Elder Smith took charge of all Church affairs in the eastern United States. In addition to the usual duties of shepherding the Saints and missionary work, he directed the emigration of converts from Europe and led the team that lobbied for statehood. Most of this work was done behind the scenes. When he ventured forth, he made every effort to avoid being recognized. On a trip to New York, he negotiated a contract with a shipping firm to carry converts, then traveled to Newport News, Virginia, to inspect the ships. A veteran of many ocean crossings, this inlander knew more about ship accommodations than most maritime workers.

Smith, Joseph F.PPWhen the First Presidency was reorganized at the April 1889 general conference, Joseph F. Smith was sustained as Second Counselor to President Wilford Woodruff. "I would rather have taken a mission to Vandeman's land as an elder," he confided to his diary, "than to be called to the responsibilities of a counselor in the First Presidency if my own choice was to be consulted." He had no illusions about the work, nor aspirations to high office. He accepted the call willingly, determined to serve devotedly.

Smith, Joseph F.PPPresident Smith continued to work behind the scenes. He used an office in the Gardo House, located across the street from the First Presidency's offices. First Presidency meetings usually were held there so that he could stay out of sight as much as possible.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThere had been discussions among the leaders about discontinuing polygamy. All Latter-day Saints knew this could occur only through revelation. In September 1890 President Wilford Woodruff and his counselors, George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, spent two weeks alone in San Francisco discussing and praying about this sensitive matter. On September 25 President Woodruff was inspired to take the historic action. Known as the Manifesto, this revelation was approved at the general conference in October. President Woodruff later declared he would have continued teaching plural marriage forever "had not the God of Heaven commanded me to do what I did do; and when the hour came that I was commanded to do that, it was all clear to me."

Smith, Joseph F.PPThis action began a process of healing. It ended the underground for men like Joseph F. Smith who now could live normally. Polygamists were granted amnesty for plural marriages solemnized before the Manifesto. Church properties escheated to the government were returned. And judges and prosecutors administered the laws benignly so as not to disrupt relationships created before the Manifesto. While a small group of Saints rejected the revelation, the great majority accepted it, recognizing that the prophetic authority that began plural marriage could end it and that ending it did not imply it was morally or theologically wrong.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThe dedication of the Salt Lake Temple in April 1893 symbolized the dawning of a new day for the Latter-day Saints. It gave hope that the Church could go forward unimpeded to fulfill its global mandate to preach the gospel and to prepare a people ready to receive the Savior at His second coming. Yet that hope was overshadowed by two major problems facing the Church. One was political. The other was financial. Joseph F. Smith played a key role in solving both.

Smith, Joseph F.PPAfter the Manifesto, statehood for Utah was the main political goal for Church members. A barrier to that was the People's party, which was dominated by the Saints. Wise leaders like President Smith knew chances for statehood would increase if the People's party was dissolved and if its members joined the national political parties. That objective was achieved through the influence of men like Joseph F. Smith, although the action was taken as individuals, not under the umbrella of Church authority. After statehood was attained, President Smith was a key actor in formulating the Political Manifesto, which precluded General Authorities from seeking political office without the approval of the President of the Church.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThe fight over polygamy ruined the Church financially. For several years after the Manifesto, the Church operated on borrowed money. This condition existed when Lorenzo Snow became President of the Church in September 1898. At the April 1899 general conference, several of the Brethren talked about tithing. In his remarks on the subject, President Smith said in part: "I believe the Lord designs in this principle to test the obedience of the people." The Saints soon were put to that test in a remarkable way.

Smith, Joseph F.PPIn May, Joseph F. accompanied President Lorenzo Snow and other leaders to Dixie in southern Utah. The prophet had no exact purpose in making the trip but felt a strong urge to go. He learned why he was there during a talk in St. George. As he spoke, God revealed to him that the financial distress of the Church and its members would be lifted by keeping the law of tithing. "I knew," he explained later, "it was a command of the Lord that the people should repent and reform from the great neglect that we had all been guilty of more or less."

Smith, Joseph F.PPThis launched a tithing crusade. For months afterward, President Snow and his brethren used every opportunity to encourage tithing faithfulness. "We are doing [this]," Joseph F. explained in his talk at the October 1889 conference, "that there may be something in the storehouse of the Lord with which to meet the necessities of the people; for the necessities of the Church are the necessities of the people." The results were striking: tithing doubled during the first year, and within a few years, the Church was debt free and the members enjoyed increased prosperity.

Smith, Joseph F.PPPresident Smith now enjoyed the freedom to travel openly without fear. At this period he made separate trips to Old Mexico, Canada, and southern Arizona. When possible, he took members of the family with him. Alice and their two young sons accompanied him to Thatcher, Arizona, where they stayed with Alice's twin brother, Andrew Kimball, the stake president. Among the Kimball children was a ruddy-cheeked boy, Spencer, who one day would become President of the Church.

Smith, Joseph F.PPWhen President Lorenzo Snow died in October 1901, President Joseph F. Smith became the sixth President of the Church. He selected John R. Winder and Anthon H. Lund as his counselors. The prophet reemphasized the role of the priesthood and continued to stress tithing faithfulness. President Smith's impressive stature, his experience, his eloquence, and his exemplary family gave him great influence with the members of the Church.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThe prophet faced an ordeal when he was called to testify before the Senate Committee on Privileges and Elections that was considering challenges to the seating of Senator Reed Smoot. President Smith was on the stand three stressful days. When the hearings developed evidence that some Church leaders had performed plural marriages after the Manifesto, the prophet took disciplinary action against the offenders. And at the April 1904 general conference, President Smith announced the Worldwide Manifesto, which affirmed that the restraint on teaching and contracting plural marriages applied globally.

Smith, Joseph F.PPAs the centennial of the Prophet Joseph Smith's birth approached, President Smith decided on a memorial that would appropriately honor him. In July 1905 a granite monument thirty-eight and a half feet high was commissioned. Its height symbolized the Prophet Joseph Smith's age when he was martyred. President Smith led a party to Vermont to dedicate the monument. The ceremony took place on December 23, the Prophet's birthday. The inscriptions on the monument memorialized both martyrs, Joseph and his brother Hyrum. The event and the location—the state where both his father and uncle were born—produced a powerful emotional response in President Smith. In accepting a gift after the unveiling, his voice choked with emotion and his eyes filled with tears. "My heart is like that of a child," he told the audience. "It is easily touched, especially with love; I can much easier weep for joy than for sorrow. I suppose perhaps it is due to some extent to the fact that all my early remembrances were painful and sorrowful."

Smith, Joseph F.PPAfter the dedication, President Smith and members of his family visited Topsfield, Massachusetts, the place where Robert Smith, their first ancestor in America, had lived; Palmyra, New York, where they visited the home of Joseph Smith Sr.; and Kirtland, Ohio, where they visited the temple and the home of Hyrum Smith, where Joseph F. Smith was conceived. These experiences deepened his love for family and the Church and reinforced his testimony of the gospel, a testimony he never tired of repeating. While the words might vary, the essence of his apostolic message never altered: "I bear my testimony to you," he told a Tabernacle audience, "that the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth, that He lives and that His Son lives, even He who died for the sins of the world, and that He rose from the dead; that He sits upon the right hand of the Father; that all power is given unto Him; that we are directed to call upon God in the name of Jesus Christ . . . and every moment of our lives we should live so that the desires of our hearts will be a prayer unto God for righteousness, for truth and for the salvation of the human family."

Smith, Joseph F.PPAs the head of the Church, President Smith felt the need to share this testimony personally with as many as possible. He traveled often both locally and abroad for that purpose. On July 21, 1906, he left Salt Lake City with a party for a two-month tour of northern Europe. Their steamer, the Vaterland, took them to Antwerp, Belgium, where the tour began. A meeting in Rotterdam was attended by a young boy named John Roethoff, who was losing his sight and had had to leave school. He had told his mother that if the prophet would look into his eyes, he would be healed. The mother led her son to President Smith, who lifted the bandages and looked at the boy's eyes, saying something neither the son nor his mother understood. Later the boy's faith was rewarded—his sight was fully restored.

Smith, Joseph F.PPPresident Smith and his party traveled throughout Holland, Belgium, Germany, Switzerland, and France, holding many meetings with the Saints. They then crossed the Channel, touring in Scotland and England. In London the party was joined by four of President Smith's sons who were serving missions in Europe: Alvin Fielding, Heber Chase, Willard Richards, and George Carlos. It was a joyous reunion.

Smith, Joseph F.PPA few weeks after the group returned home, joy turned to sadness. Stirred up by former U.S. senator Thomas Kearns, who owned the Salt Lake Tribune and who blamed President Smith for his defeat, a suit for unlawful cohabitation was brought against the prophet. It stemmed from the fact President Smith had continued to acknowledge and support the wives he had married before the Manifesto. The prophet had never tried to hide this and had admitted it in testimony at the Smoot hearings. Earlier officials had been understanding and had not pressed these suits, not wanting to upset families. But the bitterness and influence of Mr. Kearns reversed this benign policy. President Smith admitted the charges and was fined but was not imprisoned. This incident did not end Mr. Kearns's mean-spirited attacks on the prophet.

Smith, Joseph F.PPIn an effort to reduce the negative publicity from this incident, the First Presidency issued an address to the Church and to the world. It outlined the events leading to the Manifesto and the efforts made later by members and nonmembers to solve a complicated problem with a minimum of upset. Reasonable people understood this. Others refused to try to understand. These rigid people harassed President Smith for several years without mercy.

Smith, Joseph F.PPIn a series of general conference talks, President Smith explained the role of the priesthood and the function of each office in the administration of the Church. He distinguished the priesthood and the keys of the priesthood, underscored the need for each one to learn and to perform his priesthood duty, admonished priesthood holders to be humble and teachable, and stressed that priesthood authority is a derivative power. "We are only instruments whom God may choose and use to do his work," he explained. So frequently did President Smith return to the theme of the priesthood that this aspect of his public speaking overshadows all others. Indeed, his whole ministry was characterized by a deliberate effort to strengthen and magnify the priesthood.

Smith, Joseph F.PPPresident Smith's many duties included service as chairman of the Church Board of Education. He took a lively interest in the secular as well as the doctrinal education of the Saints. While the rural character of most Mormon communities caused him to stress the mechanical and agricultural arts, he was an early advocate of professional schools for the Brigham Young Academy at Provo, Utah, which later became an accredited university. An academic crisis developed in Provo when members of the faculty began teaching classes on evolution. Complaints from students and parents prompted an investigation resulting in the dismissal of three professors. In an article explaining this action, President Smith wrote: "[We] are deciding a question of propriety and are not undertaking to say how much of evolution is true, or how much is false. . . . The Church itself has no philosophy about the modus operandi employed by the Lord in His creation of the world. . . . God has revealed to us a simple and effectual way of serving Him, and we should regret very much to see the simplicity of these revelations involved in all sorts of philosophical speculations."

Smith, Joseph F.PPIn the summer of 1910 President Smith again traveled to Europe and Great Britain. Numerous meetings were held with the Saints and the missionaries. Along the way he met his two missionary sons, Franklin and Calvin Smith, and his grandson Joseph Smith Nelson. The prophet loved his sons enough that he gave them needed counsel. "I am sorry you were not a little more discreet in responding to President Penrose," he wrote to Franklin. "Boys on missions should cultivate amity with all, and more especially with their file leaders and presidents." And, concerned about the length of some of Calvin's letters, he suggested that short letters, well digested, were preferable. Lest the son take offense at this mild reproof, he added a bit of droll humor: "I think you are a very good letter writer, only that your handwriting appears rather small for so large a boy."

Smith, Joseph F.PPReturning home, President Smith spent a month in bed because of a sciatic nerve condition that had bothered him during much of the tour. Being idle was hard duty, so he decided to leave the bed and tough it out. In time the pain abated. He traveled to Washington, D.C., in the summer of 1911 to testify before a congressional committee considering agricultural legislation that affected the Church. While there, Senator Reed Smoot introduced him to President William Howard Taft and other government dignitaries. Everywhere President Smith was received with respect. The changed attitude toward him and the Church was remarkable. It was the dawning of a new day. On the way home, President Smith stopped in Florence, Nebraska, the site of Winter Quarters. He was caught up in a reverie as he recalled the rugged pioneer days, so much in contrast with the luxurious private railroad car in which he was traveling West.

Smith, Joseph F.PPFreed from the restraints of poverty and persecution, and with more efficient means of transportation, President Smith became the most widely traveled of all previous Church prophets. Soon after returning home from Washington, he visited the Northwest, traveling on to British Columbia. On the way home, he detoured to Yellowstone National Park. Then came preaching and training trips to Payson, Utah; Los Angeles, California; Heber, Utah; Morgan, Utah; Cardston, Canada; Lehi, Utah; Chicago, Illinois; back to Los Angeles; to Arizona; and to West Point, Utah. In many places, he dedicated new chapels. In all places he talked mainly about priesthood and the family. His example and personality were as influential as his words. On one trip to Los Angeles, he had dinner with members of the George Romney family, who had been driven from Old Mexico during the revolution. A sixteen-year-old son, Marion, who later became a member of the First Presidency, said he would never forget that the prophet patted him on the head and said, "My boy, never be ashamed you are a Mormon." It was encouragement he sorely needed at the time. It lifted his spirits and gave him hope.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThe outbreak of World War I in 1914 presented new challenges to the Church. President Smith anguished over Latter-day Saints in different countries having to fight each other. He saw in the conflict a fulfillment of prophecy. Yet he made it plain that God did not design or will that war should come. "Men precipitate war and destruction upon themselves because of their wickedness," he explained, "and because they will not abide in God's truth, walk in His love, and seek to establish and maintain peace instead of strife and contention." Yet he was optimistic about the future. "This I do believe, with all my heart," he wrote, "that the hand of God is striving with certain of the nations of the earth to preserve and protect human liberty, freedom to worship him according to the dictates of conscience, freedom, and the inalienable right of men to organize national governments . . . and to choose their own leaders."

Smith, Joseph F.PPSeveral of the prophet's sons served in the army during the war. Only one, Calvin, saw action overseas. Chaplain of the ninety-first division, he was wounded several times. Hyrum M. also was in Europe during the war, serving as mission president. Because of his initials, H.M.S., he was arrested once on suspicion of being a British spy. This oldest son, who was ordained an Apostle in 1901 at age twenty-nine, died of peritonitis in January 1918. Had he lived, Hyrum M. Smith would have succeeded Heber J. Grant as President of the Church. His death was one of the great sadnesses of his father's life. "My soul is rent asunder," the Prophet wrote after Hyrum's death. "My heart is broken and flutters for life! O my sweet son, my joy, my hope! O I love him still. I will love him for evermore."

Smith, Joseph F.PPPresident Smith traveled to Hawaii frequently. In May 1915, while the war still raged in Europe, he made his seventh trip to the islands. The purpose was to discuss with sugar manufacturing executives the construction of a plant near the Church's plantation. While there, moved by a spiritual impulse, he dedicated the site for a temple. The Brethren later ratified his action. In each of the two succeeding years, he visited Oahu again to check on the plantation and the construction of the temple. "Smothered with leis and gifts of fruits, nuts and candy," he wrote in May 1917, "we boarded the ship (SS Maui) and bid good by to our friends and Honolulu, perhaps for the last time." The prophet provided that emphasis of finality in his journal, something he rarely did. The good-bye was indeed "for the last time." The Hawaii Temple was completed after his death and was dedicated by his successor, President Heber J. Grant. The same is true of the Alberta Temple: the site was dedicated by President Smith, but the temple was dedicated by President Grant after President Smith's death.

Smith, Joseph F.PPPresiding Bishop Charles W. Nibley accompanied President Smith on several of his last visits to Hawaii, as he did on other trips abroad. There was an unusual camaraderie between them. It was Bishop Nibley, a native of Scotland, who introduced President Smith to golf when the prophet was in his late seventies. The game brought out Joseph F.'s competitive instincts. Although he couldn't begin to beat the bishop at his own game, checkers was another matter. Joseph F. was an expert and enjoyed beating the bishop and making due record of his victories. This became their favorite sedentary sport, occupying many pleasant hours during long sea voyages. On the next-to-last voyage to the mainland from Hawaii, Bishop Nibley was making some progress in the game. "Played the Bish today," wrote the President Smith. "He got three out [of] nine games. He is gaining."

Smith, Joseph F.PPBishop Nibley was an astute businessman. Through his wise financial counsel, President Smith was able to augment the savings he had accumulated over a lifetime with wise investments so that in his later years he had a modest nest egg. Those savings enabled him to build an unpretentious second home at Santa Monica, California. He and members of his family spent many happy hours here, enjoying the beach and the nearby golf courses.

Smith, Joseph F.PPHyrum's death in January 1918 had a marked effect on the prophet's physical condition. "It is an unusual thing for me to attempt to make any apology for myself," he told the Saints at the April 1918 general conference, "but I am in a condition of health just at this time which may prevent me from taking so active a part at this session of our conference as I have usually taken." A few weeks later, the prophet went to bed, where he stayed for several months. Shortly before the October general conference that year, he had a remarkable vision. In it he saw "the hosts of the dead, both small and great." These, he said, were visited by the Savior, who "preached to them the everlasting gospel." He also saw that the Savior organized the spirits to preach the gospel to those to whom he did not personally preach. The composition of the group that was so instructed included the "great and mighty ones, . . . Father Adam, the Ancient of Days and father of all, and our glorious Mother Eve," as well as Abel, Seth, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and Nephite and Latter-day prophets. He also saw that the faithful elders of this dispensation continue their labors of preaching the gospel when they pass into the spirit world.

Smith, Joseph F.PPThis vision was accepted as a revelation of God by the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve on October 31, 1918. It also was accepted as such by the general conference of the Church on April 3, 1976, and is now included as section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants.

Smith, Joseph F.PPPresident Joseph F. Smith passed away quietly on November 19, 1918, six days after his eightieth birthday. He was surrounded by members of his large family and his apostolic brethren. Because of the flu epidemic, there was no public funeral, only brief graveside services. His undeviating service in the cause of the Master for over sixty years served as a fitting eulogy. He went to the grave honored by all.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Joseph F. Smith: Patriarch and Preacher, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1984) and sources cited therein.
