Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Seven

Grant, Heber J.PPHeber J. Grant

Grant, Heber J.PPWhen Jedediah M. Grant died on December 1, 1856, his son, Heber J. Grant, was nine days old. At his death, Jedediah, who was only forty, was President Brigham Young's second counselor. At the funeral, which baby Heber attended in the arms of his mother, Rachel Ridgeway Ivins Grant, President Young said, "The very sons of these women that sit here will rise up and be as great as any man that ever lived." Later, Heber C. Kimball, after whom the baby was named, prophesied that Heber would become an Apostle. And at a Relief Society meeting where little Heber was crawling on the floor, Eliza R. Snow, speaking in tongues, with an interpretation by Zina D. Young, predicted young Heber would become one of the high leaders of the Church. Rachel carried these predictions in her heart. As her son grew, she repeatedly told him he had special work to do and to guard his thoughts and words and actions. Heber often brushed these off as being the illusory yearnings of a widow for her only son.

Grant, Heber J.PPWhen Heber was seven, Rachel, along with Jedediah's other plural wives, was forced to vacate the Grant family home on Main Street in Salt Lake City where the ZCMI Center now stands. Heber wept at the news, but then, shaking his fist at the house, said, "When I'm a man, I'll buy you back." Later, as the head of a syndicate that controlled the ZCMI property, Heber J. Grant felt he had fulfilled that boyish vow. Herein is revealed a salient quality of the character of the man who became the seventh President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. This quality combined the visualization of goals and the persistent pursuit of them over long intervals. It surfaced at different stages of his life and under varying circumstances:

Grant, Heber J.PPÂ When classmates laughed at his poor handwriting, Heber pounded the desk and vowed he would learn to write as well as the professor of penmanship. Toiling for months to master the technical skills of his craft, he became a classical penman, earning extra money in his spare time writing greeting cards and invitations.

Grant, Heber J.PPÂ Humiliated when playmates mocked his clumsiness and called him a sissy, Heber boldly announced he would play on the baseball team that won the territory championship. Through incessant practice, throwing a baseball against Bishop Edwin Woolley's barn, Heber developed a powerful pitching arm, earning a place on the roster of the championship team. Unaware of what prompted Heber's merciless attack on his barn, the bishop declared Heber to be the laziest boy in the Thirteenth Ward. Upon learning the facts, he became one of Heber's strongest advocates.

Grant, Heber J.PPÂ Learning that bookkeepers at the Wells Fargo Bank earned the princely sum of $150 a month, Heber announced an intention to work there, which he did after perfecting his penmanship skills.

Grant, Heber J.PPÂ And as President of the Church, Heber J. Grant launched the Church's welfare program, promising the needy would receive care even though it might bankrupt the Church.

Grant, Heber J.PPInherent in this quality was a fundamental faith in God and a fundamental faith in his own ability, as a son of God, to achieve unusual things. One of his formulas for achievement was embodied in an aphorism of Ralph Waldo Emerson that Heber modified for his own use: "That which we persist in doing becomes easy, not that the nature of the thing has changed, but that our power to do has increased."

Grant, Heber J.PPWhen Heber completed high school at sixteen, he was hired as a bookkeeper by H. R. Mann, an insurance agent. Later, when Mr. Mann formed an insurance and brokerage partnership with Henry Wadsworth, manager of the Wells Fargo Bank, Heber did part-time bookkeeping for the bank, as he did for the Sandy Smelting Company. Both these men took a fatherly interest in Heber. He responded with hard work and absolute honesty. The Mann-Wadsworth agency was dissolved when the partners moved from Salt Lake City. Heber, who was twenty, had learned the business so thoroughly in five years and was so well acquainted in the community that he started his own insurance and brokerage business, acquiring most of the Mann-Wadsworth clientele. Soon after, his business contacts and influence were broadened when he replaced Bernard Schettler as an assistant cashier at Zion's Savings Bank while Brother Schettler filled a mission. President Brigham Young endorsed Heber's $25,000 surety bond, thereby enabling Heber to carry on his own business while working at the bank.

Grant, Heber J.PPDuring these formative years, Heber had other goals. He aimed to be mayor of Salt Lake City, a position his father had held, and also aspired to be a U. S. congressman. To this end, he avidly studied local and national politics. Given his intelligence and persistence, it is suspected he would have attained those goals had not a call to Church service interfered. Another goal was to be married before he reached age twenty-one. He reached this goal when he was sealed to Lucy Stringham on November 1, 1877, in the St. George Temple, three weeks before his twenty-first birthday.

Grant, Heber J.PPThe Church service call came in October 1880, when Heber was called as the president of the Tooele Stake. He was not yet twenty-four. While the call came as a shock, it relieved him of an anxiety stemming from a patriarchal blessing he had received as a boy that promised he would be called to the ministry in his youth. He had interpreted this to mean he would be called as a missionary in his teens. When this did not happen, he questioned the inspiration of the patriarch. Only after his call as stake president did he see the significance of the word ministry in the blessing.

Grant, Heber J.PPThe Tooele Saints also were shocked when the young man from Salt Lake City was presented as their new stake president. Some did not vote to sustain him, although they did not raise their hands in opposition. At lunch after the morning session, Joseph F. Smith, Second Counselor in the First Presidency, noted Heber had not borne testimony of the truth of the gospel. Heber said he had not done so because he did not know it to be true, only that he believed it. Turning to President John Taylor, President Smith said he felt they should reverse at the afternoon session what they had done in the morning because he did not feel a man should serve as stake president unless he had a testimony. "I did not seek this office," said Heber, "and I will be only too willing to be relieved of it." Addressing President Smith, President Taylor said with a chuckle, "That young man knows the gospel is true just as well as you and I. The only thing that he does not know is that he does know it."

Grant, Heber J.PPThis knowledge became evident to Heber when the Tooele Stake patriarch, John Rowberry, gave him a special blessing. When he had finished, the patriarch said, "I saw something I dared not mention." President Grant said later it was made known to him at that moment he eventually would become the President of the Church. He never divulged this to anyone until it became a fact.

Grant, Heber J.PPThe members of the Tooele Stake soon learned to love and to admire their new president. He was friendly, approachable, and diligent. He fulfilled the pledge made in his first talk never to ask others to do what he was unwilling to do. The members also found his experience and wisdom belied his age. He had been active in the business world for eight years, was married with two children, and was the sole support of his widowed mother. He was not a novice as some originally thought him to be.

Grant, Heber J.PPHeber's service in Tooele was short-lived. As he entered the Tabernacle in October 1882, he met George Teasdale, who extended his hand, saying, "Brother Grant, you and I are going to—" A coughing spell prevented him from completing the sentence. At that moment it was made known to Heber they would be called to fill the two vacancies in the Twelve. He assumed the action would take place at the conference. When it did not, Heber was unsettled. Eight days later he learned that the impression was correct but that his idea about the timing was wrong. At a meeting with the Brethren, a revelation President Taylor had received was read. Although Heber had been forewarned, he was shocked by the words, "Let my servants George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant be appointed to fill the vacancies in the Twelve." With that and the ordination and setting apart that followed, Heber's life was on a course foretold by prophecy.

Grant, Heber J.PPAlthough he was convinced of the divine origin of the call and accepted it without question, Elder Grant was troubled. Why had the call come to him and at such a young age? He also felt inadequate because he had not received the kind of spiritual affirmation he felt was necessary to qualify him as a special witness. He sought answers in fervent prayers. There was no response until several months later when he was with Brigham Young Jr. and others on a mission to the Indians in Arizona. One day as the party traveled on the Navajo Reservation, Elder Grant took a side trail alone. There he experienced an epiphany in which "he seemed to see" a council held on the other side of the veil where there was discussion about filling the two vacancies in the Twelve. He saw his father, Jedediah M. Grant, and the Prophet Joseph Smith in the council, both of whom wanted him to fill one of the vacancies. "It was also given to me," Heber wrote later, "that that was all these men . . . could do for me. From that day it depended upon me and upon me alone as to whether I made a success of my life or a failure." In his dream, Heber saw special significance in the presence of Joseph Smith, to whom his mother was sealed, having been married to Jedediah M. Grant for time only. Therefore, he considered himself to be the Prophet's son in the sealing line. This supernal experience swept away all doubt and clearly illuminated Heber's future path.

Grant, Heber J.PPDuring his early apostolic years, that path was strewn with many obstacles. The main obstacle initially was the government's determined campaign to enforce the antipolygamy laws. The most recent one, the Edmunds Act, had been passed during the year Heber became a member of the Twelve. While he was not a polygamist at that time, he became one two years later, in 1884, when he was sealed to Augusta Winters and Emily Wells. Because the Edmunds Act had been interpreted to mean each day one lived in polygamy was a separate offense, Heber and the other brethren were constantly on guard to conceal evidence of polygamous cohabitation. This entailed establishing residences for the wives in different communities. For a while Augusta lived in Colorado and Emily was in England, where her father, Daniel H. Wells, served as mission president. Heber and his brethren felt justified in this strategy because they insisted that the antibigamy laws, as well as the court interpretations of them, violated their religious freedom.

Grant, Heber J.PPThus Elder Grant performed his Church duties amid heavy pressures. Moreover, because the Church living allowance was minimal, he had to earn money to maintain his growing families. Consequently, he conducted his insurance and brokerage business on the side. He traveled extensively to visit stakes in the Intermountain West and to transact business in the major cities in the East and on the West Coast. In May 1883 Heber traveled to Chicago and New York to cement relations with his insurance contacts; and the following month found him in San Francisco, where he successfully settled an insurance claim for H. B. Clawson arising from an explosion of powder in the Clawson store. Numerous trips on Church assignments during 1884 included one to Sonora, Mexico, where meetings were held with the governor about establishing Mormon communities in Mexico. And in May Elder Grant joined other General Authorities at the dedication of the temple at Logan, Utah.

Grant, Heber J.PPConditions worsened in 1887 with the passage of the Edmunds-Tucker Act, under which the Church was disincorporated and its properties were escheated to the government. It was during this period that the syndicate Elder Grant headed acquired the ZCMI property on which the old Grant home had stood.

Grant, Heber J.PPAfter years of oppression, and in answer to fervent prayers, President Wilford Woodruff received the revelation to discontinue the teaching and practice of plural marriage in the Church. Received in September 1890, the Manifesto, as it was called, was accepted by the Church the following month. At the time of the Manifesto, Elder Grant's family included eight daughters and a son: Lucy had given birth to five daughters—Rachel, Lucy, Florence, Edith, and Anna—and a son, Heber Stringham; Augusta had a baby girl, Mary; and Emily had two daughters, Dessie and Grace. Three children were added to Heber's family after the Manifesto, all borne by Emily: Daniel Wells, Emily, and Frances. The two sons died as little boys.

Grant, Heber J.PPSoon after the Manifesto, Lucy became ill. The doctors were baffled at the cause and could prescribe no remedy. Long periods in the hospital did not help. Distraught, Heber spent many hours at her bedside. "I have shed some bitter tears this afternoon," he wrote in November 1892. "Lucy feels that she cannot get well and as she suffers so much she has little desire to recover." She died two months later. Heber was overwhelmed with grief. He experienced the same agony when Emily passed away in 1908. Augusta survived President Grant, as did all his children except the two sons and his daughter Emily, who died in 1929.

Grant, Heber J.PPThe Book of Mormon prophet Nephi was President Grant's hero. "No other individual has made such a strong impression upon me as did Nephi," he wrote. "He has been one of the guiding stars of my life." That influence was never more evident than during the economic panic of 1891 while Lucy struggled with her illness. The State Bank of Utah that Heber and others had organized badly needed cash to avoid bankruptcy. Before he left for the East, President Wilford Woodruff gave Elder Grant a blessing that promised more money would be offered to him than he needed. "I went out with a feeling of perfect assurance that I would be successful," wrote Heber. We may gauge the extent of his optimism knowing that he intended to sell, without discount, 6 percent ZCMI notes owned by the bank in a volatile market where interest of one-half of 1 percent per day was not uncommon.

Grant, Heber J.PPOn the way east a banker in Omaha, amazed at Heber's audacity, advised him how his bank might work out of its difficulty.

Grant, Heber J.PP"I told him it was money I was after and not advice," Heber later wrote, "and that I had to go east for $100,000 and that I intended to get it and I would stop on my way home and tell him where I got it." A banker in Chicago gave the same advice and received the same response. When a bank in New York, which earlier had solicited business of the State Bank of Utah, turned him down, Heber wrote a note to its board of directors: "If you do not want to buy notes guaranteed by thirteen reputable men and a bank of a half million dollars capital, take my advice and do not do business so far away from home." This caused a change in attitude and touched off a chain of events that enabled Heber to sell $88,000 worth of ZCMI notes without discount in just two days. Half in jest, he wired the banker in Chicago advising what had happened and asking whether he wanted to buy the last $12,000 note. He received a return wire, "Send the note." Later, through some of his insurance contacts, he had offers of loans that exceeded his requirements. "From the day that President Woodruff blessed me," Heber wrote, "and said I would get all the money I was going for and more if I needed it, I had a perfect assurance in my heart that his promise would be fulfilled, and it was fulfilled to the very letter."

Grant, Heber J.PPAfterward when President Woodruff was impressed to establish a sugar industry in Utah, Elder Grant became his chief agent in raising the capital needed to finance it. Once the prophet had decided to go ahead, Heber sold stock in the company with the same determination shown in selling the ZCMI notes, even though he originally had doubts about the success of the venture.

Grant, Heber J.PPAt the height of his family and business trials in the early 1890s, Heber also became deeply involved in politics. This seemed to be a carryover from his early aspirations for political office. When the People's party was dissolved in June 1891, Elder Grant joined the Democratic party. He became the party's finance chairman. At the urging of friends, he even considered running for governor and United States senator. He abandoned the idea when he learned that President Woodruff opposed it. Later he helped formulate the Political Manifesto, which precluded General Authorities from seeking political office without approval of the prophet. Two General Authorities, Moses Thatcher of the Twelve and Brigham H. Roberts of the First Council of Seventy, were unwilling to obey the manifesto and went forward with plans to run for federal office. Elder Grant and Francis M. Lyman of the Twelve were assigned to counsel with Elder Roberts. After spending hours with him, pleading and reasoning, he yielded. Elder Grant was ecstatic. "I made a copy of the letter from brother Roberts," he wrote, "and I did not walk across the road to read it to Brother Franklin D. Richards, but I ran over there." He then read it to everybody in sight. All had tears in their eyes. There was great sadness when Elder Thatcher would not yield.

Grant, Heber J.PPDuring the years Elder Grant struggled to save his bank from failure, he incurred heavy personal debt. He still carried this burden in 1900 when, without prior announcement, he was called to preside over the mission in Japan. The unexpected call came at a weekly temple meeting. Heber accepted willingly. Afterward Elder John W. Taylor came to him and said: "Heber, you have made a financial sacrifice today that is the equal, financially speaking, of Abraham offering up Isaac. . . . The Lord has accepted your offering. I know your condition financially, and I prophesy that you shall be blessed of the Lord and make enough money to go to Japan a free man financially." Elder Taylor then gave him the formula for reaching that goal: "I am inspired to tell you [that] you are not to plan to make money, but you are to get down on your knees every morning and tell the Lord you want to make money that day, and then go out and get it, and you will be astonished how easily you will make the money." Elder Grant followed this procedure faithfully for four months, after which he reported: "I paid my tithing on my profits for the four months, and the amount was forty-six hundred dollars. I had earned over two hundred percent more in only four short months than I had previously earned in any four months, and went to Japan a free man, financially."

Grant, Heber J.PPElder Grant left for the mission field on July 24, 1901, in company with three companions, Louis B. Kelsch, Horace S. Ensign, and Alma O. Taylor. They boarded the train at the Salt Lake depot at 11:00 p.m. and once on the sleeper gave vent to their enthusiasm by loudly singing all verses of three favorite Latter-day Saint hymns. This set the tone for Heber's mission in Japan. Sailing from Vancouver on July 30 aboard the Empress of India, they arrived in Yokohama a week later. Checking in at the Grand Hotel, they made arrangements for the translation and publication of some Church literature. Before actually starting their work, they gathered in a secluded wood outside the city on Sunday, September 1, 1901, where Elder Grant offered a prayer dedicating Japan for the preaching of the gospel.

Grant, Heber J.PPThe work was hard. Language was a main barrier. Communicating through translators was unsatisfactory, especially because the translators were not members and did not understand Mormon theology. Heber took language lessons. It was slow, tedious, unrewarding work, like hitching a thoroughbred racehorse to a plow. Strong opposition from established Christian sects posed other problems. Determined the Latter-day Saints would not succeed, they attacked the missionaries in the press and raised every possible barrier. Heber answered as best he could, but his efforts were ineffective. After six disappointing months, he decided to return to Salt Lake City to review strategies with the Brethren. As his ship, the Galic, eased away from the pier, two Japanese converts, the entire harvest of six months' work, stood with the missionaries waving good-bye. These converts later left the Church.

Grant, Heber J.PPHeber spent three months in Salt Lake City. He was much in demand as a speaker. He frankly admitted the work was hard and, to that date, unproductive. But he was optimistic about the future. "I have the assurance in my soul," he told the general conference audience in April 1902, "that there is to be a wonderful work accomplished in Japan; that there will be many, yea, even thousands of that people that will receive the Gospel of Jesus Christ." This prediction was not fulfilled during President Grant's life. It began to be fulfilled shortly after his death when, following World War II, Mormon servicemen started teaching the gospel to the Japanese.

Grant, Heber J.PPElder Grant returned to Japan in June 1902. Augusta and Mary were with him, along with several more missionaries. He remained there until September 1903. Life was much happier with members of his family present. But baptismal success did not follow. His greatest success as mission president came from training and motivating the missionaries. They never forgot the example of his persistence and drive and his faith in the future despite few immediate results.

Grant, Heber J.PP"I went out into the woods," Elder Grant wrote of his last days in Japan, "and got down on my knees and told the Lord that whenever He was through with me there, where I was doing nothing, I would be very glad and thankful if he would call me home and send me to Europe to preside over the European Mission." Soon after offering this prayer, he received a cable from the First Presidency, directing him to come home. He arrived shortly before the October general conference in 1903. At the conference it was announced that Elder Heber J. Grant had been called to preside over the European Mission.

Grant, Heber J.PPEmily and six of the girls accompanied Elder Grant. Because the Church-owned building at 42 Islington was in a rundown neighborhood and was inadequate for the Grant family, a new mission home was purchased at 10 Holly Road in Liverpool. President Grant did his work from there. He not only supervised personally the 114 missionaries laboring in the British Isles, but also edited the Millennial Star and directed the work of the mission presidents in Holland, Belgium, Switzerland, France, Germany, Austria, and Scandinavia.

Grant, Heber J.PPPresident Grant toured extensively throughout Great Britain and Europe, teaching and motivating the missionar ies and instructing the Saints. He usually took members of his family with him, exposing them to the cultural wealth of these ancient countries, visiting museums, libraries, and art galleries. This not only broadened his family's understanding but cultivated in him an appreciation for beautiful art that was later reflected in his purchase of many paintings and the encouragement of young, unknown artists.

Grant, Heber J.PPTraveling with President Grant was never dull. He was interested in everything and always ready for a novelty. Once while in Stockholm, Sweden, on July 4, he asked his companions what they would like to do to celebrate their country's birthday. When no one had an idea, he suggested they call on King Oscar, the monarch of Sweden and Norway, to extend greetings. He had credentials signed by American officials but had made no prior request for a royal interview. They approached the king's castle, and when the guard walked away from them, Heber went to the front door and asked to see the king. After he had shown his credentials and made his finest sales pitch, the king, unbelievably, came to the door. In the conversation the king told Elder Grant that because of favorable reports he had received about the way his former subjects had been accepted in Utah, the Church would have freedom to proselytize in his realm.

Grant, Heber J.PPUpon completing his mission, Elder Grant and his family returned to Salt Lake City in December 1907. He had been away from home almost five years and had dipped into his savings to maintain his family. Elder Grant worked hard to shore up his finances while continuing to fulfill his Church responsibilities. His business interests included insurance, real estate, banking, ZCMI, and the Utah-Idaho Sugar Company. When he had built up his resources, he fulfilled a promise made to Emily to build her a new home. It was located at Second Avenue and B Street in Salt Lake City. The happiness of the occasion was clouded by her illness. She had cancer and failed rapidly. "Unless there is a change for the better, she certainly cannot live but a few days," Heber wrote on May 23, 1908. She slipped away two days later. It was "one of the hardest blows" of his life. Quiet family funeral services were held in Emily's home, which she had personally decorated.

Grant, Heber J.PPElder Grant had the instincts of a good propagandist. These were revealed in two causes he took up at this time: prohibition and home manufacturing. Using the tools of repetition and dramatization, he turned often to these themes in general conference and other talks. His fight against liquor was broadened later to include speaking out against the use of tobacco, tea, and coffee. He talked about these things incessantly, telling pertinent and sometimes amusing stories to clinch his point. He became famous for quoting a poem titled "The Saloon Bar," which portrayed the evils of alcohol, and for telling a story about a cheap out-of-state suit he had bought that lacked the durability of the good suits made of cloth manufactured in Provo. He was offended once when Elder Francis M. Lyman, President of the Twelve, suggested he discontinue talking so much about liquor, because the people were getting tired of hearing about it. He soft-pedaled it for a while, but not for long. One of the great legacies he left to the Church was the strong emphasis he gave to the Word of Wisdom, the observance of which promoted good health and gave the Church a special mark of distinction.

Grant, Heber J.PPElder Grant intermingled his family, church, and business duties with recreations. He did this to preserve his health and to create a sense of well-being. He regularly worked out at the Deseret Gym and later in life took up golf. He also enjoyed sports as a spectator. These outlets helped him keep a proper perspective.

Grant, Heber J.PPWhen Elder Francis M. Lyman passed away in November 1916, Elder Grant became the President of the Twelve. A thirty-four-year apprenticeship had qualified him to lead the quorum. Soon after his call, he attended a stake conference in Parowan, Utah. Instead of returning home immediately afterward, he remained for several days, holding special meetings in the wards and branches. The enthusiasm created caused him to urge all members of the Twelve to do the same on their conference assignments. The result was a marked increase in the commitment of Church members everywhere.

Grant, Heber J.PPAs he lay dying, President Joseph F. Smith called Elder Grant to his bedside. Taking his hand and looking steadily into his eyes, the prophet said to him: "The Lord bless you, my boy, the Lord bless you. You have a great responsibility. Always remember this is the Lord's work and not man's. The Lord is greater than any man. He knows whom He wants to lead His church and never makes mistakes."

Grant, Heber J.PPHeber J. Grant was ordained and set apart as the seventh President of the Church on November 23, 1918. As he and his counselors, Anthon H. Lund and Charles W. Penrose, considered filling the vacancy in the Twelve caused by President Grant's ordination, they focused on Richard W. Young, grandson of Brigham Young and Heber's lifelong friend. A retired general of the army, a lawyer, and a former stake president, he had every qualification to serve in the Twelve. Deciding he was the man, President Grant wrote Richard W. Young's name on a slip of paper before going to the temple meeting where filling the vacancy was to be discussed. In the temple, he removed the paper with the name written on it, fully intending to present Richard W. Young to the council for approval. But for a reason he could never fully explain, he was unable to do so; instead, he presented the name of Melvin J. Ballard, president of the Northwestern States Mission, a man with whom he had had very little personal contact. This experience had a profound influence on President Grant. It taught him to heed the sudden flashes of insight that came to him in making decisions affecting the Church. This quality is reminiscent of his hero, Nephi, who moved forward, step by step, as God inspired him. It was a quality that would be especially important in the development of the welfare program when President Grant led the Church into an uncharted area, one step at a time, to create a vast mechanism to help provide for the needy of the Church.

Grant, Heber J.PPBecause of his many business associates who were not members of the Church, President Grant became a bridge to unite the Latter-day Saints with the non-Mormon community. He was a member of the Salt Lake Rotary Club and of the Bonneville Knife and Fork Club, a dinner club composed of both members and nonmembers. Such was his popularity that he was once introduced as being both the President of the Church and of the Gentiles in Utah.

Grant, Heber J.PPDespite his eminence as the President of the Church and his influential role in business, President Grant's basic personality never changed. He retained a democratic, down-to-earth attitude toward all. He had a childlike faith in the destiny of the Church and was excited about every advancement it made. The dedication of temples in Hawaii, Canada, and Arizona were occasions of special significance and cause for celebration. He spoke at every session of the dedications of these temples. Because he had personally known all the Presidents of the Church except Joseph Smith, and because his mother had known Joseph and was sealed to him, he used these occasions to reflect on the prophetic character of his predecessors. "I have attended, as a child, family prayers in the Lion House," he said at the dedication of the temple in Alberta, Canada, "and I have actually turned and looked when Brigham Young was praying, for it seemed to me as though the Lord must be standing there. He seemed to be talking as one man speaking to another when praying to the Lord. There are few men that I have ever listened to that seemed to me could get so close to the Lord in prayer as did Brigham Young." President Grant had the ability to make these past events and personalities come alive in the minds of his listeners. Occasionally he enlivened his talks by singing. Although he was tone-deaf, he had practiced so tenaciously that he was able to sing very well and enjoyed singing as much as his audiences enjoyed hearing him.

Grant, Heber J.PPA year before the market crash of October 1929, President Grant became concerned about the economy, even though on the surface it seemed to be robust. These anxieties were shared by other Church leaders and were reflected in policies adopted by the Church and the corporations it owned or controlled. New building and expansion were strictly controlled; indebtedness was eliminated where possible; and fixed assets or stocks were kept to a minimum. Also, members were taught to set their individual affairs in order, to live frugally, and to avoid debt. President Grant stressed the danger of installment buying, often quoting an amusing, satirical poem, "Simon Called Simple," about a boy who thought he could buy pie without cash. These precautions enabled the Church, and the members who listened, to enter the Great Depression in a condition as sound as possible. No one, even those who tried to prepare for it, was prepared for the depth of the Depression or for the despair it brought.

Grant, Heber J.PPNor was President Grant prepared for the personal shock caused by Utah's vote to repeal the Eighteenth Amendment in 1932. And he was humiliated that Utah's vote provided the margin of victory for the pro-liquor forces. He was confident that free access to alcohol would be a scourge to the nation. With loss at the ballot box, President Grant increased his efforts to persuade Latter-day Saints to observe the Word of Wisdom.

Grant, Heber J.PPThe 1932 election that eliminated prohibition also brought President Franklin D. Roosevelt to power and generated the flood of New Deal legislation intended to lift the Depression. President Grant strongly opposed those facets of the New Deal that encouraged dependency on government. He felt inspired to lead the Latter-day Saints in a different direction. The result was the creation of a system of Church welfare designed to abolish idleness and "the evils of a dole" and to create a sense of "independence, industry, thrift and self respect" among the Latter-day Saints. To help achieve his vision, President Grant engaged the assistance of able men, chief among whom were his counselors, J. Reuben Clark and David O. McKay, and a young stake president, Harold B. Lee. Over several years, and despite many obstacles, the welfare system became firmly established as an important feature of the Church, organized to aid its members in time of need. It stands as a monument to the vision and persistence of President Heber J. Grant.

Grant, Heber J.PPWhile President Grant worked to provide economic security for the Saints through Church welfare, he also promoted Church education. He was instrumental in establishing the Church seminary and institute program and discontinuing the system of Church academies where both religious and secular subjects were taught. As a sound businessman, he realized it was financially impossible for the Church to continue to provide secular education for its members. Two exceptions to this policy were Brigham Young University and Ricks College, which the Church continued to support. President Grant was one of their chief boosters.

Grant, Heber J.PPHe also supported other good causes with his time and his money. He seldom refused aid to anyone who sought it. And much of his charity was anonymous. He enjoyed paying off the mortgages of friends and widows who were in financial straits. One of the General Authorities who was the recipient of such a gift was overwhelmed by it. "President Grant was the most liberal and generous man with his personal means that I have ever known," wrote his long-time secretary, Joseph Anderson. "In fact, I doubt if any have excelled him in this respect. He was a man who thoroughly enjoyed making money, but not for the purpose of accumulating it. His only desire was to have money that he might do good with it."

Grant, Heber J.PPBrother Anderson was more than a secretary to President Grant. He also was his friend, his confidant, and his almost constant traveling companion. A trip they took to southern California in January 1940 marked a major turning point in President Grant's ministry. Following several vigorous rounds of golf, intermixed with Church and business meetings, President Grant suffered a stroke that paralyzed his left side and seriously impaired his speech. After convalescing for several months in California, he returned home.

Grant, Heber J.PPWhile the paralysis and the impairment to his speech were handicaps, they did not prevent President Grant from fulfilling his prophetic duties. He was able to work a few hours each day. He delegated many tasks he formerly performed himself. In this way he retained ultimate control, charting the course, while easing off on his personal involvement. For a while he entertained the thought he could recover his former strength. He began carrying a rubber ball in his left hand, regularly squeezing it to build up and tone the muscles. Eventually he accepted the fact his disability was permanent. This was a crucial incident; from that point he began to reorder his habits. The hours away from his office were spent reading, dictating, planning, and resting. He enjoyed taking rides around the valley or into the canyons. He always took others with him, members of his family or friends and associates. In good weather this was almost a daily occurrence. He enjoyed watching the changing seasons and seeing the animal and bird life in the mountains. For the first time, he developed a more calm and contemplative attitude toward life.

Grant, Heber J.PPThe prophet continued to speak briefly at general conferences until April 1942, when he spoke in public for the last time. Thereafter, his talks were read by others. During his last years he called three new members of the Twelve who ultimately became Presidents of the Church: Harold B. Lee, Spencer W. Kimball, and Ezra Taft Benson. He also called Mark E. Petersen to the Twelve during this period to fill the vacancy caused by the excommunication of Richard R. Lyman. The fall of Elder Lyman was one of the great sorrows of his life.

Grant, Heber J.PPNear the end of 1944 the prophet's health began to weaken. He discontinued making his daily diary entries. His condition continued to wane until May 14, 1945, when he quietly passed away. Because of his advanced age and his life of achievement and service, the funeral was almost like a valedictory. As the funeral procession proceeded east on South Temple, the bells of the Catholic cathedral at Third East tolled their acknowledgement while the priests stood on the sidewalk to bid farewell to their friend. The prophet was laid to rest in the cemetery high on the east bench, overlooking the valley he loved.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Heber J. Grant: Man of Steel, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1979) and the authorities cited therein.
