Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Eight

Smith, George AlbertPPGeorge Albert Smith

Smith, George AlbertPPWhen George Albert Smith was born on April 4, 1870, his grandfather and namesake, George A. Smith, was a counselor in the First Presidency of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. President George A. Smith's father, John Smith, who once served as an assistant counselor in the First Presidency, was a brother of Joseph Smith Sr., father of the Prophet Joseph Smith. And George Albert's father, John Henry Smith, who became a member of the Twelve Apostles when George Albert was ten, later became a counselor in the First Presidency. A patriarchal blessing George Albert received at age twelve intimated his eminence in the Church would exceed that of these three forebears, leading him to the prophetic office. "Thou shalt become a mighty prophet in the midst of the sons of Zion," he was told, "for none of thy father's family shall have more power with God than thou shalt have, for none shall excel thee."

Smith, George AlbertPPThe inconspicuous circumstances in which George Albert was reared belied this promise of future distinction. He was just one of the children of the many polygamous families who lived in the neighborhood near Temple Square in Salt Lake City, where he was born. He was an active, likable, friendly boy who enjoyed sports as well as home-staged theatricals. He also was known to have independent views that he defended vigorously. After his primary schooling, he was educated at the Brigham Young Academy in Provo, Utah, and at the University of Deseret in Salt Lake City. At Brigham Young Academy he came under the influence of Karl Maeser, whose admonition "Don't be a scrub" and whose teaching about personal responsibility, especially the control of one's thoughts, provided lifelong incentives toward personal excellence.

Smith, George AlbertPPGeorge Albert's serious eye injury at a summer job on the railroad while at the University of Deseret ended his formal academic career. For a while he held menial jobs at ZCMI. In time, his outgoing personality, his persuasiveness, and his genuine interest in people led him into sales. He became a successful salesman for ZCMI, with a route that took him from Salt Lake City to southern Utah. He became a favorite with the other salesmen because of his geniality, his singing ability, and his musical skill on the guitar and harmonica. He also acquired their respect for observing the Word of Wisdom, while not condemning others for disobeying it.

Smith, George AlbertPPLater, George Albert was called to serve a mission to work with young people in the same area where he had worked as a salesman. He and a companion attracted hundreds of youths to their meetings by their teaching and testifying as well as by their entertaining skits featuring music and colorful costumes.

Smith, George AlbertPPGeorge Albert married Lucy Woodruff, a granddaughter of President Wilford Woodruff, on May 25, 1892. Several weeks later, the groom left for the Southern States Mission. Lucy joined him there in a few months. Elder Smith served as mission secretary under Elder J. Golden Kimball, although he often was in charge of the mission during President Kimball's absences. In this way the future Church President learned about Church administration and proselytizing. He also learned about bigotry and anti-Mormon hatred. He once was threatened with death by angry mobbers who shot their guns into the corners of a cabin in which he and a companion were staying. And he learned about the love and faith of many other Southerners who befriended him and who joined the Church.

Smith, George AlbertPPThe Smiths had a belated honeymoon when they returned from the South via Niagara Falls. At home George Albert resumed his sales work at ZCMI and became active in politics. Indeed, he and his father, who was chairman of the Utah Constitutional Convention, were prime movers in organizing the Republican party in Utah. Afterward both of them unsuccessfully sought election to the United States Congress. However, the political prominence they gained resulted in George Albert's being appointed receiver of the U.S. Land Office in January 1898, one of the first Mormon appointees to important government office after Utah statehood in 1896.

Smith, George AlbertPPMeanwhile, Lucy gave birth to her first child in November 1895, a daughter named Emily. A second daughter, Edith, was born in November four years later; and six years after that, in September 1905, the Smith's last child, George Albert Smith Jr., was born. The father cherished his wife and children. And he was justifiably proud of his numerous ancestors and relatives who had filled high Church offices. Yet he abhorred nepotism and once at a stake meeting was heard to whisper that if one more Smith were presented for office, he intended to walk out. Just then his name was announced as a counselor in the Salt Lake Stake's Young Men Mutual Improvement Association (YMMIA).

Smith, George AlbertPPGeorge Albert again was surprised by a call and felt anxiety about too many Smiths occupying Church office when in October 1903 he was called to the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. He was not advised of the call beforehand and was not even present at the meeting. The nepotism issue weighed heavily with him because there were five Smiths among the twenty-six General Authorities. He feared that his father, who was then in the Twelve, had influenced the call. Assured this was not so, he later received spiritual confirmation that the call had come by divine inspiration through the prophet.

Smith, George AlbertPPDuring the first three years of his service in the Twelve, Elder Smith received assignments that usually kept him close to home. This enabled him to work at the land office during the week. After leaving employment there in 1906, his assignments began to entail heavy travel. Wherever he went, whether touring missions or presiding at stake conferences, he delivered upbeat messages of love, faith, and optimism. Karl Maeser's "don't be a scrub" philosophy found its way into many of Elder Smith's admonitions to missionaries and the youth. He also warned young people to guard their thoughts and "to stay on the Lord's side of the line."

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith began his long career in acquiring and promoting Church historical sites when in the summer of 1907 he negotiated the purchase of the Joseph Smith Sr. farm near Palmyra, New York, for twenty thousand dollars. He paid cash, which had been sewn into Lucy's skirt. His influence later resulted in the purchase of other Church historical sites in the Palmyra area, including the Hill Cumorah, which was purchased from the descendants of Pliny T. Sexton, whom he had befriended.

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith's health was fragile. His frequent travels and heavy speaking schedule took their toll. In February 1909 he returned from a tiring trip to the East to speak at a prohibition meeting in the Salt Lake Theatre. He retired the night of the twenty-fourth "feeling quite used up." The next day Elder Smith suffered a general collapse and was unable to rise from his bed. Several years of subsequent poor health prevented him from fulfilling his duties in the Twelve. The nervous tension at the root of his disability was worsened by worry he was shirking his duty. Doctors' orders that he should rest only intensified the problem. Finally yielding to the advice, Elder Smith went to Ocean Park, California, in April 1909, where he lived in a beach cottage for four months, resting as much as his conscience would allow. He showed no improvement. In November 1909 he went to St. George, Utah, and spent six months in a tent near a house where his family lived. His brother Nathaniel, who built the wood-floor tent, was a constant companion and an aide to assist Lucy in George Albert's care. During this stay George Albert never changed to street clothing. Still there was no improvement in his health.

Smith, George AlbertPPIn the summer of 1910 Elder Smith spent three months in a small apartment on the Saltair pier, where he enjoyed the buoyant waters of the Great Salt Lake each day. This regimen helped but did not effect a cure. He then spent several weeks in a sanitarium where special treatments were administered. This helped for a while, but after several months of activity, he suffered a relapse. In February 1912 George Albert returned to Ocean Park, where, except for brief trips to Utah and Arizona, he spent sixteen months. In the summer of 1913 he was able to return to his Church duties, although his health was still fragile.

Smith, George AlbertPPDuring the long months of George Albert's convalescence, two vivid dreams and a letter from his father were anchors of spiritual strength to him. In the first dream he saw his grandfather George A. Smith, who said, "I would like to know what you have done with my name." In answer, George Albert said, "I have never done anything with your name of which you need be ashamed." With that the powerful grandfather, who had weighed over three hundred pounds in life, took the frail grandson in his arms. When George Albert awakened, his pillow was wet with tears of gratitude that he could "answer unashamed." In the second dream he saw many of his relatives assembled, including his father, who had recently passed away. The spirit of peace and love that pervaded the scene was ever after a source of comfort to him. Elder Smith's frequent allusions to these dreams suggest the strong impact they had upon him.

Smith, George AlbertPPThe letter from his father arrived while George Albert was in St. George. These words were like a rod of iron to the son: "Keep up good fortitude and good faith; don't waiver in your determination to live. The bitter experience through which you are going is but designed for your purification and uplifting and qualification for an extended life work."

Smith, George AlbertPPOnce he was able to resume his apostolic duties, Elder Smith also became involved in a myriad of business and civic affairs. He became a member of the board of several corporations, including ZCMI and Utah First National Bank. He also became very active in the Sons of the American Revolution (SAR) and in irrigation and reclamation affairs. And for several years, President Joseph F. Smith called on him for special services.

Smith, George AlbertPPPresident Joseph F. Smith died in November 1918. George Albert chaired the committee for his funeral arrangements. Two months later, Joseph F.'s successor, Heber J. Grant, called George Albert Smith to preside over the European Mission. Elder Smith was excited by the call. Lucy was less enthusiastic, being concerned about her husband's health, which still was not robust. Nor did she relish leaving her new home at 1302 Yale Avenue. She was consoled by a prediction of President Grant that George Albert's health would improve in the mission field. The prediction was fulfilled, although a temporary relapse a few months after the Smith family arrived in Liverpool was cause for concern.

Smith, George AlbertPPEdith and George Albert Jr. accompanied their parents into the mission field. Emily was married to Robert Murray Stewart and remained in Salt Lake City. In Liverpool the family settled comfortably into Durham House, the mission home that also served as headquarters for the Millennial Star, which George Albert would edit.

Smith, George AlbertPPA shortage of missionaries caused by wartime restrictions was Elder Smith's most immediate concern. After several months of persistent diplomacy, that lack was remedied. Meanwhile, Elder Smith traveled extensively throughout the British Isles and Europe. Members of the family usually accompanied him. Albert, who had been set apart as a missionary, was his most frequent companion. The relationship between father and son replicated the close association between George Albert's father and grandfather, who had occupied adjacent homes across the street west of Temple Square. Such close living arrangements seemed to be a Smith family trait, reflected in George Albert's purchase of a vacant lot next to his Yale Avenue home where he hoped Albert ultimately would build after marriage.

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith's legacy to the European Mission was the sense of buoyancy and optimism his leadership imparted, especially to the young missionaries. His appointment as superintendent of the YMMIA when he returned home in 1921 positioned him to exert a similar influence upon young men throughout the Church. And the close working relationship he developed with the leaders of the Young Women Mutual Improvement Association (YWMIA) enabled him to extend that influence to the young women.

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith served as YMMIA superintendent for thirteen years. With the help of his counselors, Elders Richard R. Lyman and Melvin J. Ballard of the Twelve, and a board of distinguished educators and youth leaders, he effected a revolution in the activity programs of the Church. Churchwide basketball and other athletic programs, as well as music and dance festivals and the dramatic arts, flourished under his leadership. Most important, perhaps, was the emphasis he gave to Scouting and to the development of the Vanguard and M-Men programs. His leadership in this field drew national attention when he was elected to the National Executive Council of the Boy Scouts of America, the first Utahn so recognized. He was awarded the Silver Beaver and Silver Buffalo awards in recognition of his service to Scouting. The citation that accompanied the Silver Buffalo award acknowledged his "indefatigable" service and his "enthusiasm" for Scouting as largely accounting for "the fact that Utah stands above all other states in the percentage of boys who are Scouts."

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith's emergence as a national leader in Scouting was accompanied by an increased stature as an executive of the Sons of the American Revolution. He had been active in the Utah affairs of the SAR for several years. In 1922, when he attended its national convention, he was elected a vice-president general representing western states. This began twenty-six years of active service in the society's national leadership. He became a favored speaker among SAR groups around the country, known for his fluent delivery and anecdotal style. He won many friends for the Church among influential people across the land. And he was diligent in retaining contact with these friends, as also with other people of influence. On one trip east, for instance, to attend an SAR meeting, he stopped in Washington, D.C., to renew acquaintances with President Warren Harding, one of eight presidents of the United States with whom he was personally acquainted.

Smith, George AlbertPPThrough Elder Smith's influence, the national SAR convention was held in Salt Lake City in 1924. His handling of the event, which included a public meeting in the Tabernacle and interesting side activities for the delegates, drew wide praise. The flair for organization this event revealed found a further object for exercise the next year when he chaired the celebration of the fiftieth anniversary of the Mutual Improvement Association (MIA). Later, Elder Smith was appointed general chairman of the Church's centennial celebration. This featured the drama Message of the Ages, staged in the Tabernacle during April and May 1930.

Smith, George AlbertPPThese events foreshadowed a meeting in Elder Smith's home in August 1930. Present were several friends, members and nonmembers, who were interested in preserving history through monuments and markers. This led to the creation of the Utah Pioneer Trails and Landmarks Association the following month. Elder Smith was its first president and prime mover. It would occupy much of his time and effort during the remainder of his life. Under his leadership, the association placed 120 markers extending from Nauvoo, Illinois, to San Diego, California. The association's crowning achievement was the "This Is the Place" monument, dedicated in 1947 as part of the pioneer centennial. Brief, carefully researched statements on plaques succinctly tell the stories of historical events that occurred at or near the monuments. This means of communicating knowledge was fitting for one whose impaired eyesight precluded him from extensive study and writing.

Smith, George AlbertPPThe success of the association lay with Elder Smith's skill as a visionary, an organizer, and a publicist. He brought together people of different backgrounds with abilities in research, writing, art, engineering, and law, all of which was necessary to bring a project to fruition. He then infused them with his enthusiasm and vision and created wide interest by publicity he was able to generate through his influence and contacts. The willing support of nonmembers was guaranteed when the first project undertaken by the association was a marker at Provo, Utah, commemorating the Catholic priests Escalante and Dominguez, who were the first Europeans to trek through the area. And that ecumenical spirit was perpetuated in the creation of other monuments, especially the "This Is the Place" monument, which honored not only the Latter-day Saints but also early explorers, trappers, and missionaries who were not members of the Mormon Church.

Smith, George AlbertPPWhile Elder Smith's public life during the 1930s was rewarding as he chaired the centennial celebration and geared up for his work with the Trails and Landmarks Association, his private life was marked by trial and trauma:

Smith, George AlbertPPÂ His daughter Emily, who had been a member of the Primary General Board for many years, became involved in a controversy with the president of the Primary. It revolved around differences of opinion concerning how the Primary Children's Hospital should be administered. When Emily directly opposed the president, she was dropped from the board. Feeling that his daughter had been mistreated, Elder Smith sought to have her reinstated. This brought him into conflict with Elder David O. McKay, who was the adviser to the Primary and who felt obligated to support the Primary president. This controversy rocked along for many months, causing great emotional stress to Elder Smith. The matter was never resolved to his or Emily's satisfaction. Despite the temporary resentment this incident created, Elder Smith called Brother McKay as his Second Counselor in the First Presidency when he became the President of the Church.

Smith, George AlbertPPÂ Elder Smith's son-in-law George Elliott, Edith's husband, almost died from accidental asphyxiation from a faulty heater at his place of employment.

Smith, George AlbertPPÂ George Elliott and Elder Smith's brother Winslow Smith were indicted and convicted of mail fraud arising from the interstate sale of certificates issued by the mortuary where they were employed. While their innocence was vindicated later by a presidential pardon, the prolonged affair wore heavily on Elder Smith's fragile health and exhausted his resources in defense costs.

Smith, George AlbertPPÂ Over a period of several years, Lucy's health steadily declined. Weakened and distressed, she quietly passed away on November 5, 1937. Elder Smith was deeply distraught by Lucy's death. She had been such a bulwark of strength to him during his years of illness, always sympathetic, kind, and consoling. He felt lost.

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith mourned for two months, groping ineffectually for a new identity as a widower. President Heber J. Grant, desiring to give him a new focus, called Elder Smith to tour the missions in the South Pacific. He left in late January 1938 with a group that included Matthew Cowley, who had been called as president of the New Zealand Mission. In Hawaii, Elder Smith was joined by Rufus K. Hardy of the First Council of Seventy, who would be his companion during the tour.

Smith, George AlbertPPAfter holding a stake conference and other meetings in Hawaii, the two General Authorities traveled to Pago Pago, capital of American Samoa, where they participated in a huitau, the native version of a conference. Elder Smith was impressed by the friendliness of the people and was intrigued by their colorful costumes and dances.

Smith, George AlbertPPAfter a brief stop in Fiji, they traveled on to Auckland, New Zealand, where Elder Cowley was installed as the mission president. Then came touring in Australia with mission president Thomas D. Rees. Over a period of six weeks, missionary and member meetings were held in Sydney, Brisbane, Melbourne, Adelaide, and Perth. Returning to Auckland, they spent four weeks touring the New Zealand Mission with President Matthew Cowley. Most of the Saints there were Maoris, natives who had keen spiritual perceptions. This was illustrated at the death of Rufus K. Hardy in March 1945. His long association with them caused the Maoris to look upon Elder Hardy as "their" General Authority. As they mourned his passing, feeling bereft of a prized connection with Church headquarters, one spoke up and said: "There's nothing to worry about. When President Cowley gets home, he'll fill the first vacancy in the Council of the Twelve Apostles, and we'll still have a representative among the Authorities of the Church." Seven months after that prediction, Elder Cowley was called to the Twelve to fill the vacancy created when George Albert Smith became the President of the Church.

Smith, George AlbertPPAfter leaving New Zealand, George Albert and Elder Hardy completed their tour with visits to Tonga and Western Samoa.

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith returned home in mid-July. Six months in the South Pacific had helped to ease the sadness of Lucy's death and to crystallize his future plans. He decided never to remarry, which prompted the decision for Emily and her family to move into his home so that, with household help, she could care for his needs and act as a social hostess. This enabled Elder Smith to resume his Church duties without concern about the home and with the assurance of a warm, loving welcome when returning from his wide-ranging travels.

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith became a devotee of air travel in the 1930s when commercial flights were something of an oddity. He saw it as the transportation wave of the future. While presiding over the mission in Europe, he and Albert had flown from the continent to London. After that first flight, Elder Smith vowed he would never fly again, a resolve that faded when he realized how flying could multiply his effectiveness. He was the first General Authority to use air travel regularly, often flying to the West Coast and returning the same day, doing in one day what would have taken several days by train. He actively promoted air travel, writing and talking about it, giving airlines suggestions about improving passenger interest and safety, and taking a personal interest in legislation affecting it. As a result of this interest, Elder Smith was appointed to the board of directors of Western Airlines. This was not an honorary appointment, but one that brought to the board a seasoned traveler whose perspectives, influence, and dedication to flying were invaluable in setting policy.

Smith, George AlbertPPWhenever Elder Smith traveled, he always carried a briefcase stocked with an assortment of Church pamphlets and books. He distributed these to fellow travelers whose acquaintance he deliberately cultivated. And when he had a layover in a city away from home, he often would contact and introduce himself to influential people and, when appropriate, leave Church literature with them.

Smith, George AlbertPPAt home Elder Smith discharged his apostolic duty in a distinctive way. He was the classic good neighbor, calling on the sick, encouraging the lonely and misfits, and helping the disadvantaged. For many years he was president of the Society for Aid of the Sightless in Utah. His own sight problems gave him special empathy for those who couldn't see, and that empathy was broadened to include anyone who had problems. He was an easy mark for those who sought help, financial or otherwise. Hundreds of people were the recipients of his anonymous liberality. Once while walking along a Salt Lake City street on a cold winter day, he gave his overcoat to a vagrant. This trait was the reflection of a personal creed he formulated that included the sentiment "I would be a friend to the friendless and find joy in ministering to the needs of the poor."

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith's charitable efforts were driven by his benevolent nature and the mandates of his apostolic calling. He had a compulsion to help people. He seemed to have a sense of global responsibility to cure the ills of all mankind. In this he was a notable exemplar of the Savior's teachings. He went about doing good, and he went about trying to persuade others to do good and to rely upon the influences of God. When he taught missionaries how to follow the promptings of the Spirit in their work, he admonished them to "give the Lord a chance." He meant that if they, like Nephi, would begin to act, to move forward toward a goal, God would open doors and guide their steps in a miraculous way.

Smith, George AlbertPPThose whom Elder Smith could not influence in person he endeavored to influence by mail. His correspondence was voluminous, and never a one-shot affair. He would write again to those who did not respond to his letters. George Albert kept up a correspondence with one man in England for more than fifteen years. His letter writing had multiple objectives: to uplift another, to create a friend for himself or the Church, and to help bring about a conversion. If the conversion did not occur, he did not stop writing.

Smith, George AlbertPPSpecial objects of George Albert's writing and, where possible, his personal contacts, were dissident members of the Smith family. He mourned that many of his relatives failed to join the Mormon exodus west and became affiliated with the Reorganized Church or other splinter groups. He kept track of these cousins, and whenever he traveled to an area where they lived, he looked them up. So while he was in Brisbane, Australia, he contacted Ina Inez Smith Wright, a daughter of Alexander Smith, one of the sons of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Mrs. Wright, the mother of ten children, was a member of the Reorganized Church. At first she was reluctant to meet this official of the "Utah Church." However, Elder Smith's friendly, disarming manner soon dissolved her reticence as the pair enjoyed tracing relationships and sharing Smith family lore. George Albert also made special efforts to befriend Frederick Smith, one of the Prophet Joseph Smith's sons. Once he drove with him from Nauvoo, Illinois, to Independence, Missouri, following a ceremony celebrating the centennial of the creation of Nauvoo. During that long trip, George Albert spoke plainly to his cousin, emphasizing their common heritage and their shared convictions about the Restoration and urging that the Smith family come together under the umbrella of a single church. Of course, George Albert had The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in mind. Frederick did not concur. That dissent, however, did not deter George Albert in his efforts to bring the family together.

Smith, George AlbertPPThe year 1943 saw significant changes in Elder Smith's status. With the death of Rudger Clawson in June, George Albert became the senior member of the Twelve. This was officially recognized on July 12, when he was set apart as President of his quorum. Meanwhile, two new members of the Twelve were called during the summer: Spencer W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson. They filled vacancies caused by the deaths of Elder Clawson and Elder Sylvester Q. Cannon, who had passed away in May. The qualities of leadership Elder Smith brought to his new calling were noted by his cousin and associate in the quorum, Richard R. Lyman: "Under the direction of George Albert Smith the members of the Council of the Twelve are sure to be tied together by bonds of genuine affection, and unitedly and individually every member will have the freest possible opportunity, encouragement, and inspiration to do his best." This tribute by George Albert's friend and long-time assistant in the YMMIA made more poignant Elder Lyman's excommunication in November. It was one of the great sorrows of George Albert's life. He later gathered his family together to explain what had happened, to emphasize that high status in the Church does not guarantee immunity from temptation and error, and to warn them to be vigilant and obedient. Several months later, Elder Mark E. Petersen was called to replace Richard R. Lyman in the Twelve.

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith's new position brought new responsibility. He now coordinated and supervised the work of all members of the Twelve. He also continued to fill his share of stake conference and mission tour assignments. And he did not fail to administer to the needs of the sick and the downcast. Meanwhile, other responsibilities came with his new status. He was elected to the boards of a sugar company and the Heber J. Grant Company while he continued to serve on the boards already mentioned. The added pressures took their physical toll; he suffered intermittent attacks of nervous tension. Long experience had taught him how to combat them with added rest and a more relaxed approach to his duties.

Smith, George AlbertPPWhile Elder Smith sought to balance the demands of his new office with his physical limitations, he watched with sadness as President Heber J. Grant continued to weaken. The prophet had suffered a stroke several years before, which had slurred his speech and created partial paralysis. Although he had fought valiantly against these disabilities, he had progressively become more fragile and feeble. On April 30, 1945, when he returned from a stake conference in Vernal, Utah, Elder Smith received a telephone call from the home of President Grant advising the prophet wanted a blessing. Elder Smith took his brother Winslow with him. They found President Grant lying in bed. He seemed not to be in pain, but he was lethargic and restless. After President Grant weakly greeted his visitors, Winslow anointed him with consecrated oil and George Albert sealed the anointing, pronouncing a blessing of comfort, peace, and freedom from pain. It was the last time George Albert saw his old friend alive. Two weeks later, on May 15, as he traveled east by train, Elder Smith received word that President Grant had passed away.

Smith, George AlbertPPElder Smith's first act upon arriving in Salt Lake City was to visit President Grant's widow, Aunt Augusta Winters Grant. Later at the funeral he extolled the virtues and achievements of his lifelong friend. Shortly afterward, on May 21, 1945, at a meeting in the temple, he was ordained as the eighth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He selected J. Reuben Clark and David O. McKay as his counselors, the same counselors who had served President Grant.

Smith, George AlbertPPThe nature and quality of George Albert Smith's leadership as President of the Church was reflected in counsel he gave to his brethren at a meeting in the temple shortly after his ordination. "I counselled the brethren to love the people into living righteously," he wrote following the meeting. And later he told members of the Church at the October 1945 general conference, at which time he was sustained as President of the Church: "Let us love one another that our Heavenly Father may be able to bless us; and he will bless us if we love one another and do good to all his children." These sentiments characterized all of George Albert Smith's actions during the years he served as the President of the Church.

Smith, George AlbertPPTwo important events occurred between May and October 1945. First, in August the war suddenly ended in the Pacific, having ended earlier in Europe. This was an immense relief to all, especially to President Smith, a man of peace. Second, in September President Smith presided at the dedication of the temple in Idaho Falls, Idaho. "We pray that thou wilt accept this temple as a freewill offering from thy children, that it will be sacred unto thee," he said in his dedicatory prayer. The gleaming white building on the banks of the Snake River symbolized the three things most important to George Albert Smith: his God, his family, and the church over which he presided.

Smith, George AlbertPPThe death and destruction caused by the war had created chaos among the thousands of Latter-day Saints in Europe. President Smith's first prophetic initiative was to try to alleviate their suffering. He appointed Elder John A. Widtsoe of the Twelve to direct the relief effort. He and others accompanied Elder Widtsoe to Washington, D.C., to help clear away any government red tape. President Harry S Truman promised his cooperation. True to form, George Albert gave President Truman a leather-bound copy of A Voice of Warning before leaving the Oval Office. In doing so, he informed President Truman that the Latter-day Saints regularly prayed for him.

Smith, George AlbertPPWhen health problems later prevented Elder Widtsoe from filling his assignment, Elder Ezra Taft Benson was appointed to replace him. There was a close rapport between President Smith and Elder Benson: they shared an intense commitment to Scouting; they lived in the same neighborhood, attending the same ward; and they bore the names of ancestors who had preceded them in the apostleship. It was President Smith who had encouraged Elder Benson to use his full name to distinguish him from his great-grandfather even as President Smith had used his full name to distinguish himself from his grandfather.

Smith, George AlbertPPFor many years President Smith had primary responsibility for the Lamanites. After he became President of the Church, he delegated that responsibility to Elder Spencer W. Kimball of the Twelve, appointing him to chair a Lamanite committee that included Elder Matthew Cowley. Soon after this committee was organized, President Smith accompanied Elders Kimball and Cowley to the Navajo Indian Reservation to hold meetings with tribal leaders. Present were representatives of other churches who complained that Mormon elders had visited some of their members in the hospital. In his mild response, President Smith said: "My friends, I am perplexed and shocked. I thought people went to the hospital to rest and get well. If I were ill, it would please me very much if any good Christian missionary of any denomination would be kind enough to visit me and bind up my wounds and pour on the sacred oil." President Smith's diplomatic strategy in dealing with tribal leaders, a strategy followed by Elder Kimball, opened many doors that otherwise would have been closed.

Smith, George AlbertPPIn May 1946 President Smith turned his diplomatic skills to a complex problem in Mexico. For several years a group of excommunicated members who called themselves the Third Convention had created dissension among the Mexican Saints. Several General Authorities had failed to solve the problem. President Smith held a series of meetings with these dissidents in Mexico City. After hearing their complaints privately, his first step was to reduce the Church court sanctions against them from excommunication to disfellowshipment. Then in a public meeting he stressed that all were brothers and sisters, spiritual children of the same Heavenly Father, who should be charitable toward each other and reconcile their differences in love and forgiveness. As a result of these meetings and other similar meetings in neighboring cites, most of the dissidents returned to the Church. The qualities of love and compassion shown by the prophet in his words and actions were a powerful sermon to Church members, reducing the need for him to continually emphasize repentance, restitution, and confession.

Smith, George AlbertPPDuring the summer of 1946 President Smith joined a group that traveled from Nauvoo, Illinois, to Salt Lake City, paralleling, as far as possible, the route followed by the Latter-day Saints during the exodus. This was a prelude to the many events held the following year to commemorate the pioneer centennial. During the April general conference, whose sermons dwelled mostly on the pioneers and the legacy of their hard work and privations, President Smith expressed gratitude for the quality of life inherited from his ancestors. "I do not know of anybody who has ever had a happier life than I have had," said he. "I have not had very much money—maybe that is the reason I have been happy—but I want to tell you that I have had the comforts and necessities of life and the companionship of the best men and women and boys and girls that have lived upon the earth. And I have lived in an atmosphere of peace and happiness and stand here today to thank my Heavenly Father in your presence of that fact."

Smith, George AlbertPPPresident Smith knew he would not have enjoyed such a measure of peace and happiness had his early ambition for political office been realized. Therefore, he never regretted not having fulfilled that early ambition. Yet he retained a lively interest in politics throughout life, maintained a close acquaintance with politicians of both parties, and carefully monitored the public issues of the day. As President of the Church, he refrained from expressing political preferences. Yet as a matter of Church protocol, he never failed to grant interviews to politicians of either party requesting them. So during the 1948 presidential election campaign, he received President Harry S Truman and candidate Thomas E. Dewey, attending meetings in the Tabernacle for both while maintaining a discreet neutrality. A few months after the election, President Smith received former president Herbert Hoover, who asked for counsel about a study he was making of the federal government.

Smith, George AlbertPPPresident Smith's diplomatic skills shone again in 1949 when a tract highly critical of the Church and sponsored by a group of Catholics was widely circulated in Utah. President Smith quietly defused what could have been a volatile public issue by going to John Fitzpatrick, who was Catholic and publisher of the Salt Lake Tribune, to discuss the tract. Mr. Fitzpatrick went to the Catholic bishop, who advised the tract had no official church sanction. The bishop then took steps to discontinue circulation of the tract and to censure those responsible for it.

Smith, George AlbertPPAlthough the prophet had recurring health problems at the end of 1949 and the beginning of 1950 and was hospitalized for several weeks, he revived to have one of his most active years as Church President. In March he traveled to San Diego, California, to participate in a ceremony honoring the members of the Mormon Battalion; in May he dedicated a monument honoring Brigham Young at Whitting-ham, Vermont, President Young's birthplace; in June he dedicated a monument in the rotunda of the Capitol in Washington, D.C., further honoring Brigham Young; and later in the summer he spent two weeks in Hawaii to commemorate the centennial of the commencement of missionary work in the Hawaiian Islands. He then presided at the October general conference, speaking several times with vigor.

Smith, George AlbertPPOn October 20, 1950, he fainted. This fainting spell was President Smith's harbinger of death. He later suffered a stroke. Bedridden, he continued to be mentally alert but was unable to attend to his duties at the office. His counselors were in frequent touch to report and to receive instructions. Throughout this period he was more solicitous about those around him than about his own condition. On the day he died, April 4, 1951, his eighty-first birthday, Albert and others present turned him over in bed so he would be more comfortable. As they did so, he said, "Be careful that you don't hurt yourselves." These were his last words.

Smith, George AlbertPPPresident George Albert Smith's funeral services were held Saturday morning, April 7, 1951, in the Tabernacle on Temple Square. A general session of conference that had been planned before he died was canceled for the funeral. The essence of the great man's character and the basis of his universal appeal were captured by President J. Reuben Clark, who said: "His real name was love. I think no man that we have ever had in the church had a greater love for humanity than President George Albert Smith. He gave his love to all, . . . and the sense of the love which came from him . . . is what has brought together this great gathering to pay tribute to his memory." As the funeral cortege passed the Catholic cathedral on Third East in Salt Lake City, the cathedral bells pealed their salute to a great friend. The prophet was buried in the Salt Lake City Cemetery next to Lucy, his companion in life and in eternity.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book George Albert Smith: Kind and Caring Christian, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1990) and the sources cited therein.
