Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Nine

McKay, David O.PPDavid O. MCKay

McKay, David O.PPDavid Oman McKay was the son of immigrant parents. His father, David, was a native of Thurso, Scotland; his mother, Jennette Evans, was born in Merthyr Tydfil, South Wales. The McKay home, where David O. was born on September 8, 1873, was in Huntsville, Utah, in the Upper Ogden Valley. The father welcomed this oldest son and third child as one who in the future could help shoulder the burdens of his labor-intensive ranching and farming operation. David O. fulfilled that hope along with several brothers who later were born into the family.

McKay, David O.PPFrom their earliest childhood, the McKay children were taught to work. They also were encouraged to embrace the teachings of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, their parents' adopted religion.

McKay, David O.PPReligious principles were reinforced by the parents' exemplary Christian conduct, family prayers, scripture study, and attendance at Church meetings. Special focus was given to the Church when David left his family to fill a mission in his native Scotland and later when he was called to serve as bishop of the Huntsville Ward.

McKay, David O.PPWhen David O. completed his primary schooling in Huntsville, he was enrolled in the Church-owned Weber Stake Academy in Ogden, where he lived with his grandmother Evans. At the academy he came under the influence of Superintendent Louis F. Moench, a German immigrant and scholar who imbued him with a love for learning and a desire for higher education.

McKay, David O.PPAfter David O. taught school in Huntsville for a year, he and his brother Thomas E. and their sisters Jeanette and Annie enrolled in the University of Utah in Salt Lake City. At first they shared a rented house. Their tuition and other expenses were defrayed in part by a $2,500 legacy their mother had received. They worked to cover the deficit.

McKay, David O.PPDavid O., called "Dade" by his friends, soon emerged as a leader at the university. A member of the football team, he was elected class president; he also excelled at his studies. He formed many enduring friendships: James E. Talmage was president of the university; Richard R. Lyman and Joseph F. Merrill were on the faculty; and his class-mates included J. Reuben Clark, Stephen L Richards, and George Q. Morris. All these men later shared the apostleship with David O. McKay.

McKay, David O.PPWhile attending the university, David O. met his future wife, Emma Ray Riggs. At the time, he boarded at the home of Emma Ray's mother. There was no romantic involvement between David and Emma then, for she was dating another man. Their courtship and marriage came several years later.

McKay, David O.PPDavid O.'s plan was to teach school upon completing his education so he could help the family financially. He had received an attractive offer to teach in Salt Lake County, but an unexpected letter from "Box B" upset the plan. The letter from President Wilford Woodruff called him to serve a mission in Great Britain. He accepted willingly.

McKay, David O.PPAfter brief training, he was ordained a seventy and set apart by Seymour B. Young, endowed in the Salt Lake Temple, and assigned to accompany twenty other elders to England. They arrived in Liverpool on August 25, 1897. The mission president, Rulon S. Wells, immediately assigned Elder McKay to labor in Glasgow, Scotland. Living with several elders in the Glasgow conference house, he shared expenses, including the cost of hiring a housekeeper and cook. He soon was transferred to Stirling to labor with Peter G. Johnson.

McKay, David O.PPThe work there was slow and seemingly unproductive, which troubled Elder McKay. His sense of unease heightened following a visit to the Stirling Castle. Several hours spent touring this ancient building with Elder Johnson was enjoyable but made Elder McKay feel guilty. As they walked home, David saw an inscription above the door of an unfinished building: "What e'er Thou Art, Act Well Thy Part." The idea seemed to crystalize a resolve in his mind to work with more diligence and purpose. The idea also became a ruling principle that guided Elder McKay throughout his life.

McKay, David O.PPElder McKay was called as president of the Scottish Conference in June 1898. As such he supervised all the missionaries, directed all the members in Scotland, and was spokesman for the Church there. He served as conference president until his release in August 1899.

McKay, David O.PPAt a conference meeting near the end of Elder McKay's mission, James L. McMurrin, a counselor in the mission presidency, prophesied that if David remained faithful, he would eventually sit in the leading councils of the Church. This prediction and other spiritual phenomena evident in the meeting gave Elder McKay a personal testimony of the truthfulness of the Church, something he had prayed for since his youth. The experience convinced him that all sincere prayers are answered, sometime, someplace. Before leaving Great Britain, he was privileged to visit the birth places of his parents in Thurso, Scotland, and Merthyr Tydfil, Wales.

McKay, David O.PPWhen he returned home, David O. immediately joined the faculty of the Weber Stake Academy. Three years later he was appointed principal upon the retirement of Louis F. Moench. David O.'s tenure was marked by an expansion of the curriculum, the athletic program, and the student body, as well as by the construction of a new building, the funds for which he had to raise. Meanwhile, he courted Emma Ray Riggs, who was teaching school in Ogden. They were married on January 2, 1901, in the Salt Lake Temple. In the coming years, they had seven children, six of whom lived to maturity.

McKay, David O.PPSoon after returning from Great Britain, David O. McKay was appointed to the Weber Stake Sunday School Board, then as an assistant superintendent. Under his leadership the stake developed a creative system of teacher training that attracted wide attention, including the attention of Joseph F. Smith, President of the Church and General Superintendent of the Sunday Schools. In 1905 President Smith invited Superintendent McKay to write an article for the Juvenile Instructor, the organ of the Sunday School. The article was entitled "The Lesson Aim: How to Select It, How to Develop It, How to Apply It." At the 1906 April general conference, President Smith called thirty-two-year-old David O. McKay to the Twelve. He was ordained a high priest and an Apostle and set apart as a member of the Twelve on April 9.

McKay, David O.PPElder McKay continued to serve as principal of the Weber Stake Academy until 1908. Meanwhile, he filled his apostolic duties, meeting regularly with his brethren in Salt Lake City, attending stake conferences, and touring missions. Because of his youthful appeal, Elder McKay was sought by many young people to perform their temple marriages and to speak at their missionary farewells. His speaking style was measured and analytical, and the themes of his talks were reinforced both by scripture and by quotations from the writings of noted secular authors. This reflected his love for classical literature and his admiration for precise writing and expression.

McKay, David O.PPElder McKay's calm and assured manner in the pulpit masked an inner turmoil he suffered while speaking in public. Not long before he became President of the Church, he made this confession before a Tabernacle audience: "It is always more or less an ordeal for me to face an audience, and particularly a congregation in this historic Tabernacle. I've been in hopes for years that I would outgrow that feeling, but I still think, study, and pray in anticipation; I tremble as I stand before you with the sense of inadequacy to give a timely message as it should be given; and after it's over, worrying in self-reproachment for having failed to do justice to the cause."

McKay, David O.PPSoon after his induction into the Twelve, Elder McKay was called as an assistant to President Joseph F. Smith in the general Sunday School superintendency. In this role, he implemented a Churchwide system of teacher training and correlation used so successfully in the Weber Stake Sunday Schools. Emphasis also was given to gospel scholarship. He gathered around him a group of scholars and teachers who helped formulate and coordinate this innovative change. They included James E. Talmage, John A. Widtsoe, Stephen L Richards, Richard R. Lyman, and Joseph F. Merrill. After the death of President Joseph F. Smith in November 1918, Elder McKay was appointed General Superintendent of the Sunday Schools by President Heber J. Grant. He occupied this position until 1934, when he was called as Second Counselor to President Grant.

McKay, David O.PPElder McKay received an unusual assignment from President Grant in the autumn of 1920 when he was appointed to make a tour around the world. His instruction was to observe the operation of the Church in remote areas while strengthening and motivating members and leaders; to study the administration of the Church school system in the Pacific; and, if he felt inspired to do so, to dedicate China for the preaching of the gospel. Hugh J. Cannon was appointed to accompany him.

McKay, David O.PPThe travelers went by train from Salt Lake City to Vancouver, British Columbia, from where they embarked for Yokohama, Japan, on December 7, 1920, on the Empress of Japan. Accompanied by mission president Joseph M. Stimpson, the travelers visited education and government leaders in Japan, as well as members in Tokyo, Osaka, and Kofu. On to Peking (Beijing) via Korea and Manchuria, Elder McKay dedicated China for the preaching of the gospel on January 9, 1921. The site was a quiet grove within the walls of the Forbidden City. "A hallowed and reverential feeling was upon us," wrote Elder Cannon of the occasion. The companions then retraced their steps to Japan and from thence traveled to Hawaii, where they held meetings on several islands. On Oahu Elder McKay inspected the Church school at Laie and visited the temple. There followed stops in Fiji, Samoa, Tonga, New Zealand, and Australia. The Church college at Hastings, New Zealand, received Elder McKay's special attention. From Australia the companions traveled to the Holy Land via Batavia, Singapore, Rangoon, Delhi, Bombay, Port Said, and Cairo. Elder Cannon reported that Elder McKay was "deeply moved" by visits to the historic shrines in Jerusalem and around the Sea of Galilee. Traveling to Aintab (Gaziantep) from the Holy Land, Elder McKay delivered to the local Saints money raised by a special fast. They regarded the gift as providential because there had been great suffering among them following the war. After stops in Rome and in Lausanne, Switzerland, where Elder McKay greeted his oldest son, Lawrence, who was on a mission, the companions traveled to Liverpool, England. There they embarked for New York and from there traveled by train to Salt Lake City. They had been gone one year.

McKay, David O.PPAs the tour progressed, Hugh Cannon became more deeply impressed by Elder McKay's spiritual qualities. Paramount among these was a buoyant faith in the face of extreme uncertainty. An experience in Australia accentuated this trait. Elder Cannon had met difficulty obtaining travel clearance. Showing no concern, Elder McKay told him to remain to work on the problem and to meet him at another city, from where they would depart for Java. Gradually, doors that had been closed began to open. The documentation was issued just in time to leave for the rendezvous. "Herein lies an important lesson," wrote Hugh J. Cannon, "which Brother McKay never failed to emphasize. Even though a stone wall appears to cross your path, go as far as you can, and you will usually find an opening through which you can pass." This character trait surfaced often throughout Elder McKay's long career. It accounts largely for the success of many programs in which he was involved, especially the welfare program, which, in its early years, was developed through the faith, the tenacity, the will, and the self-confidence of men like David O. McKay.

McKay, David O.PPAnother test of faith came shortly after Elder McKay's return from the world tour when he was called to preside over the European Mission. The McKays, with children Lou Jean, Emma Rae, Edward, and Robert, left for Liverpool on November 8, 1922. The family settled comfortably into Durham House, 295 Edge Lane. From there Elder McKay directed missionary and member work in Great Britain and supervised the work in missions on the continent. His greatest challenge was to blunt the abusive attacks on the Saints and the Church by the press. His approach was to reason with editors, calling for fair play. He stimulated missionary work by initiating a program called "Every Member a Missionary." When he became President of the Church, this was adopted as a Churchwide program. His greatest contribution in Europe was imbuing the missionaries with the motivation to excel. And the power of his testimony was an incentive for them to seek a personal witness: "I accept Jesus Christ," said he, "as the personification of human perfection—as God made manifest in the flesh—as the Savior and Redeemer of mankind. So it is with the church which Christ has established. Since it is founded by the Perfect One, it follows that when properly interpreted it too approaches perfection." Elder McKay took the Savior as his exemplar and sought to fashion his life after him. He also sought to help the Church conform more fully to the Savior's commands.

McKay, David O.PPElder McKay's ability to exert influence on the structure and the performance of the Church was magnified when he was sustained as Second Counselor to President Heber J. Grant on October 6, 1934. At the same time his friend J. Reuben Clark was sustained as First Counselor, replacing Anthony W. Ivins, who had passed away. Eighteen months earlier, President Clark had been called as Second Counselor, filling the vacancy created by the death of Charles W. Nibley. Although their responsibilities would change, these friends would serve as companions in the First Presidency for exactly twenty-seven years, until October 6, 1961, when President Clark passed away.

McKay, David O.PPThe main problem facing the First Presidency in October 1934 was the poverty of many Latter-day Saints caused by the Depression. During the next two years, under the overall direction of President Grant, the First Presidency formulated what was first known as the Church Security Plan, later called the Church Welfare Plan. Since President Clark was away from Salt Lake City much of the time during those years, President McKay led out in laying the foundations of the plan under delegation of authority from the prophet. He was assisted by Harold B. Lee, who later became the managing director of Church welfare.

McKay, David O.PPThe plan was announced officially by President Grant at the October 1936 general conference. The prophet declared its purpose was to create a system "under which the curse of idleness would be done away with, the evils of a dole abolished, and independence, industry, thrift and self respect be once more established amongst our people." During the conference, President McKay said that "the greatest blessings that will accrue from the church security plan are spiritual" and that "permeating, inspiring and sanctifying" all welfare work "is the element of spirituality." He stressed this aspect of the plan repeatedly. Later, when his outside commitments diminished, President Clark became the member of the First Presidency chiefly involved in welfare matters. But President McKay always retained an active interest in them.

McKay, David O.PPDuring these years, President McKay also became intensely involved in business activities. This included service on the boards of directors of Zion's Securities Corporation, Utah Home Fire Insurance Company, the Heber J. Grant Company, Beneficial Life Insurance Company, and the Utah State National Bank. He also was involved in dealings with the Layton Sugar Company and the Amalgamated Sugar Company. Meanwhile, his family obligations continued to multiply. And at Church headquarters, he had principal responsibility to direct missionary work. He strengthened the work by counseling newly called missionaries in the temple and by teaching proselytizing skills in the mission home.

McKay, David O.PPPresident McKay spent his first day in the hospital as a patient in April 1938 at age sixty-five. It resulted from a painful kidney infection that struck him as he sat on the stand at general conference. Two weeks' rest in California restored him to health. Twenty months later he was hospitalized for a double hernia operation. Disabled for several months, he recuperated in California and Arizona. He returned to work to direct the recall of missionaries from foreign lands prompted by the outbreak of war in Europe. When possible, he met the ships carrying the recalled missionaries. In early November 1940, for instance, he met a ship in San Francisco carrying fifty-seven missionaries from the Pacific. A few weeks later he met a ship in New York carrying thirty-two missionaries from South Africa. He instructed these missionaries and directed their reassignment to missions in the United States.

McKay, David O.PPThe outbreak of war in Europe fueled the enlistment of many Latter-day Saints. As the numbers increased in early 1941, the First Presidency appointed Hugh B. Brown to coordinate the Church activities of LDS servicemen. He worked closely with President McKay. That association foreshadowed prophetic calls President McKay extended to Elder Brown to serve as an Assistant to the Twelve, as a member of the Twelve, and as his counselor in the First Presidency.

McKay, David O.PPPresident McKay traveled to Hawaii in August 1941 to dedicate a new stake center and tabernacle in Honolulu and to hold other meetings. A young teenager, Yoshio Komatsu, spoke impressively at one of them. Confusion with another Yoshio Komatsu later caused the young man to use the name Adney Y. Komatsu, the name by which he later became known as a General Authority of the Church.

McKay, David O.PPPresident McKay was stirred by the love he saw between members of different racial and cultural backgrounds in Hawaii. He also was impressed by the poise and dignity of Captain Mervyn Bennion, captain of the battleship West Virginia who invited him and his party to dine aboard ship. Less than three months later, Captain Bennion died in the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor. President J. Reuben Clark, the captain's father-in-law, was devastated. The incident deepened President Clark's pacifist views. He opposed United States involvement in the war in Europe and was reluctant about the United States responding to the Japanese attack at Pearl Harbor. President McKay, on the other hand, took a more pragmatic view, reasoning that retaliation was justified and that citizens were justified in serving in combat. Once the United States entered the war, the members of the First Presidency were unified. Everything possible was done to assist LDS servicemen and to affirm the duty of Latter-day Saints to respond to a call to arms.

McKay, David O.PPThe war created special problems in Utah as defense and military installations attracted many nonmembers. The First Presidency urged members to adhere to their standards while maintaining good relations with the newcomers. The war also created anxieties for the McKays when sons Edward and Robert and son-in-law Russell Blood entered the service. Their absence and the scarcity of farm labor imposed heavy duties on President McKay to maintain the family farm in Huntsville. "Worked sixteen hours today," he wrote four days before he turned seventy-one. "Cleared out an irrigation ditch up on the farm; hitched up a colt to a mower and dug out a lot of weeds that were irritating me." This was good therapy, providing a welcome break from his duties at the office. And such workdays were balanced with carefree days when David O. trained and rode his horses. One of these, Sonny Boy, was a favorite who would come running from the field at his master's command.

McKay, David O.PPEvents of the spring and summer of 1945 brought many changes: In early May the war ended in Europe. President Grant died on May 15. On May 21, George Albert Smith was ordained as the eighth President of the Church. He selected David O. McKay as his Second Counselor. After the two atomic bombs were dropped in Japan in August, the war in the Pacific ended. Edward was home on leave at the time, and he and his father celebrated in a way peculiar to the McKays: "Ned and I worked on the farm most of the day," wrote the family patriarch.

McKay, David O.PPA month later, President and Sister McKay joined other General Authorities and their wives for the dedication of the temple at Idaho Falls, Idaho. Five years earlier, President McKay had dedicated the site. It was the first temple dedicated in almost twenty years. The impressive white structure standing on the banks of the Snake River symbolized the things most important in the life of David O. McKay: God, family, and the Church.

McKay, David O.PPIn this and other temples President McKay performed hundreds of temple marriages and other ordinances. He often met a couple whose wedding ceremony he had performed years before. It was not uncommon to learn that children had been named after him. No story was as unusual as the one told by a couple who stopped him once as he left the Tabernacle. The couple recalled their wedding and then introduced their three children—two boys named David and Oren and a little girl named Kay. They explained apologetically that when Oren was named, they didn't know what the "O" in his name stood for. The humor of the incident was not lost on President McKay, who had a keen wit. He enjoyed, for example, retelling the story of the paper boy who was awed to shake hands with him on the elevator. The boy left the elevator and then, having run upstairs to greet the aged prophet as he exited on the floor above, said, "I just wanted to shake hands with you again before you die."

McKay, David O.PPAt the April 1946 general conference, President McKay delivered a comprehensive sermon detailing plans for the upcoming Pioneer Centennial. Eight years before, he had been appointed chairman of the Utah Centennial Committee. President McKay suggested that everyone spruce up their homes and yards for the event. He also offered support to law enforcement officers in efforts to clean up gambling and other vices. One gambling lord was heard to say, "The Mormon Preacher ain't going to tell us what we can do." He learned, however, that the moral persuasion of the "Mormon Preacher" was sufficient to direct what he couldn't do, at least during the centennial year, when gambling disappeared in Salt Lake City.

McKay, David O.PPPresident McKay underwent an emergency operation for a thrombosis (blood clot) shortly after conference. He convalesced for several weeks. By year's end he felt strong enough to attend the annual Rose Parade and Rose Bowl football game in Pasadena, California. The Pioneer Centennial events in Utah began on January 16, 1947, when Colleen Robinson was crowned Centennial Queen. In the following months, Utah was treated to an unusual series of commemorative events. These included a reception for pioneer immigrants who arrived before the continental railroad was completed in May 1869; a reception for state governors who were convened in Salt Lake City; the NCAA track championship; a national tennis tournament; a centennial performance of Shakespeare's Macbeth starring Orson Welles; a concert in the Tabernacle featuring Helen Traubel of the Metropolitan Opera; a state banquet where General George C. Marshall was the speaker; an original play, Promised Valley, staged outdoors for several weeks; the unveiling of the "This Is the Place" monument in the mouth of Emigration Canyon; and a gala parade on July 24. In addition, there were special celebrations in outlying communities: Tomato Days in Hooper, the Peach Festival in Brigham City, and parades in Loa, Murray, Manti, Ogden, and elsewhere. As chairman of the Utah Centennial Committee, President McKay attended most of these events.

McKay, David O.PPTaking place after President McKay's surgery, and being interspersed with his customary duties, the grand occasion of the Pioneer Centennial was for him an exhausting yet exhilarating time. "Still rejoicing over the success of the great events that have transpired in the past two days," he wrote following the Centennial Parade. "Now that the peak of the celebration has been reached, our worries will not be so great."

McKay, David O.PPBecause he always had been so vigorous, it was difficult for President McKay to adjust his activities to his age. The thrombosis surgery had slowed him only temporarily, and he continued with his physical activity on the farm. He paid the price. In the summer of 1948 he suffered a mild heart attack from overexertion; a few months later he fell while training a horse, severely bruising an arm and shoulder; and in April 1950 he suffered torn muscles and ligaments when a huge tree stump he was trying to remove with a team of horses fell on him. He was seventy-seven at the time. He promised to restrain himself but found the promise hard to keep.

McKay, David O.PPA year after this last accident, on April 4, 1951, eighty-one-year-old President George Albert Smith passed away quietly on his birthday. When President McKay administered to the prophet shortly before his death, the experience moved President McKay to tears, an uncommon occurrence for him. The funeral was held on April 7, and at a solemn assembly two days later, President David O. McKay was sustained as the ninth President of the Church.

McKay, David O.PPAll were surprised when Stephen L Richards was presented as First Counselor to President McKay and J. Reuben Clark as Second Counselor. President McKay explained the choice was dictated by spiritual promptings, by President Richards's seniority in the apostleship, and by President McKay's long association with President Richards as boyhood friends and in the Sunday School superintendency, and not because of any rift with President Clark. President Clark accepted the decision in good grace, saying the important thing is not where one serves, but how.

McKay, David O.PPIn May 1952 President McKay began the first of several lengthy tours he would make into the international areas of the Church. This would be a fifty-one-day tour to Great Britain and Europe that would take him into nine countries and ten missions. Although he was nearly seventy-nine years old and had undergone abdominal surgery and had suffered an inner ear problem during the previous year, President McKay was physically strong and had the appearance of a much younger man. Sister McKay accompanied him.

McKay, David O.PPSymbolically, he went first to Scotland, the land of the McKays and the place where he had served as a young missionary. There he dedicated chapels at Glasgow and Edinburgh, the first built by the Church in Scotland. On the continent he was entertained by Queen Juliana of Holland, had an interview with the President of Finland, and elsewhere met with many other leaders and officials. Meanwhile, he held Church meetings at every stop. At Rotterdam he recalled an experience in 1922 while serving as mission president when he enjoyed the gift of tongues. Back in England he attended a garden party given by Queen Elizabeth II at Buckingham Palace. Returning to Scotland, he announced the acquisition of a temple site in Switzerland where the first European temple of the Church would be constructed. At the time negotiations were under way to acquire a temple site in England. However, they had not progressed to the point to permit a public announcement. These were the first objective steps taken by President McKay to signal a deliberate effort to establish the international character of the Church and to encourage members to remain in their home countries. No longer would it be considered as merely an American church.

McKay, David O.PPBefore returning home, the prophet again visited Merthyr Tydfil. He found the small house and saw the tiny bedroom where his mother was born. "I thought, as Sister McKay and I stood in that small bedroom, how different life would be now if two humble elders had not knocked at that door a hundred years ago." His awareness of the benefits that accrue from Church membership was a constant spur to promote missionary work worldwide.

McKay, David O.PPPresident McKay returned to Salt Lake City amid a contentious presidential campaign. To avoid any hint of partiality, he met with the candidates of both parties, Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower and Democrat Adlai Stevenson. He also received other political luminaries, including President Harry S Truman, whom the prophet accompanied on a visit to Brigham Young University, and Senator Robert A. Taft. Following General Eisenhower's victory, he allowed Elder Ezra Taft Benson to accept the appointment as Secretary of Agriculture in the new cabinet. "The appointee's high character," said the prophet of his former missionary companion in England, "his experience in dealing with agricultural organizations and problems make him eminently prepared to render efficient service to our country." President McKay shared Elder Benson's concern about "the threatening clouds of Communism and Anti-Christ" and believed he would be able to exert strong influence against them in the cabinet.

McKay, David O.PPWhile his staff made plans for another trip abroad, President McKay participated in ceremonies honoring the Mormon pioneers at Omaha, Nebraska; attended President Eisenhower's inauguration; and received a briefing at the National Conference on U.S. Foreign Policy. This briefing confirmed his concerns about the threat of Communism.

McKay, David O.PPPresident and Sister McKay left in early August 1953 for their second trip to Great Britain. With them were son Llewelyn and the Church architect who made preliminary plans for the London Temple. The McKays went on to Scotland, where they visited Thurso, the birthplace of the prophet's father. They found the "Auld Hous," where his father was born, and located a native who remembered stories about the "Black Minister," his grandfather, so named because of his black hair and his Mormon priesthood. The travelers also visited Inverness and gathered valuable family history information there.

McKay, David O.PPBack home, President McKay presided at a solemn assembly in the Logan Temple and at a cornerstone-laying ceremony at the Los Angeles Temple. He also appointed a committee to lay plans for a film presentation of the temple endowment. The committee included Gordon B. Hinckley, now President of the Church, who then occupied a staff position at Church headquarters.

McKay, David O.PPOn January 2, 1954, their fifty-third wedding anniversary, President and Sister McKay left on their third trip abroad in twenty months.

McKay, David O.PPThey flew first to Johannesburg, South Africa, via London. After holding meetings in Johannesburg, Pretoria, and Cape Town and meeting with government officials, they flew to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, via Dakar. Their son Robert met them in Brazil and served as his father's secretary during the tour of South and Central America. This included meetings in Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina, Chile, Peru, Panama, and Guatemala. In Montevideo, Uruguay, the prophet laid the cornerstone of a new chapel. In Buenos Aires, he was warmly received by President Juan PerÃ³n, who made arrangements for the Church to use an ornate theater for its conference. At Santiago, Chile, the President was met by expatriates Brother and Sister Billy Fotheringham, the only known members of the Church in Chile at the time. Leaving Lima, Peru, the McKays traveled to Central America. Following his report at the April general conference in 1954, the Church News noted: "Seldom, if ever before, has the church been given a keener awareness of its universality, and of the great missionary work that is being done and that remains to be done."

McKay, David O.PPPresident McKay enhanced that vision of the universality of the Church by a trip he and Sister McKay took into the Pacific in 1955. Again they left on their wedding anniversary, January 2, 1955. Their itinerary took them to Hawaii, Fiji, Tonga, Samoa, New Zealand, and Australia. In Tonga he was pleased with the newly completed Liahona College, where Latter-day Saint youth could be trained. In Samoa he dedicated a new chapel at Sauniatu. There he found a monument that had been erected by the Saints following his tour in 1921. In Hamilton, New Zealand, he inspected the new Church college then under construction. While there he had impressions about the need for a temple. After returning home, he discussed this with his brethren and approval was given for a temple to be constructed in New Zealand. This, along with temples in Switzerland and England, would be the means of helping to anchor members to their own countries.

McKay, David O.PPWith only a short interval during which he presided at the April general conference and underwent surgery for the removal of a benign tumor, the eighty-two-year-old prophet continued his world travels. In mid-August 1955 he and Sister McKay left for Europe again. They were joined later by the Tabernacle Choir. Ground was broken for the London Temple, a new chapel and mission home were dedicated in Paris, and from September 11-13 the Swiss Temple was dedicated. Back in the United States, President McKay dedicated the Los Angeles Temple in March 1956; and in April 1958 he took another tiring trip into the Pacific where, on the twentieth, he dedicated the New Zealand Temple.

McKay, David O.PPBy this time, the London Temple was nearing completion. Before going there, President McKay underwent complicated eye surgery for the removal of a cataract. This healed in time to enable him to travel to London for the dedication on September 7-9. Because of illness, Sister McKay was unable to accompany him. He felt bereft without her. Another cataract surgery intervened before the prophet traveled to Hawaii for the dedication of the Church college in mid-December 1958.

McKay, David O.PPOnly two more overseas trips remained for the aging prophet: In February 1961 he traveled to London again for the dedication of the Hyde Park Chapel and the creation of the London Stake; and in August 1963 he traveled to Wales, where he dedicated the chapel at Merthyr Tydfil. The rendition of "I Know That My Redeemer Lives" by internationally famous contralto Annette Richardson Dinwoodey so touched the prophet that he was unable to speak. She sang a second number while he regained his composure. In his talk preceding the dedicatory prayer, President McKay, touched by memories of his mother, included anecdotal comments, something he rarely did. "I am reminded of a visit I made home when I was in college," he told the audience. "Mother was sitting on my left where she always sat at dinner and I said, 'Mother, I have found that I am the only [one] of your children whom you have switched.' She said, 'Yes, David O., I made such a failure of you I didn't want to use the same method on the other children.'"

McKay, David O.PPBy this time, the prophet was almost ninety. His health had been impaired by an accident three months before the trip to Wales. As the saddle blanket was placed on Sonny Boy, the horse became frightened and bolted. "I was knocked down and pulled along the ground for about a block," wrote President McKay. Still he was able to carry on. In September 1963 he received President John F. Kennedy during his visit to Salt Lake City. He was shocked and saddened when the young president was killed two months later. The prophet had maintained a good relationship with President Kennedy, as he had with President Eisenhower. Indeed, following a White House dinner President McKay had attended, Elder Benson quoted President Eisenhower as saying President McKay was "the greatest spiritual leader in the world." The relationship with Lyndon B. Johnson was even closer. President Johnson called President McKay often, stopped to see him in Salt Lake City, and once invited him to Washington for personal counsel. "Let your conscience be your guide," he told President Johnson. "Be true to yourself and your philosophy."

McKay, David O.PPThe last years of President McKay's life were marked by an understandable decline in his energy and personal output. For convenience, he and Ray moved from their gracious home on East South Temple to an apartment in the Hotel Utah. They also built a small cottage in Huntsville near the old family home as a hideaway. He continued, however, to give strong leadership to the Church. Work he previously had done personally he now performed by delegation through associates. Following the death of Stephen L Richards, J. Reuben Clark became his First Counselor and Henry D. Moyle was called as Second Counselor. Then followed a series of other counselors, who were called to fill vacancies in the First Presidency caused by death or called to help him fill special needs: Hugh B. Brown, N. Eldon Tanner, Joseph Fielding Smith, Thorpe B. Isaacson, and Alvin R. Dyer. He also called on members of his administrative staff, or on others as the need required, to accomplish his aims.

McKay, David O.PPPresident McKay passed away quietly on January 18, 1970, in his ninety-seventh year. Emma Ray and five of his six living children were at his bedside. He had fought the good fight and had kept the faith. He had served as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ for sixty-three years, nine months and nine days, longer than anyone else. He went to the grave crowned with honor, leaving behind an illustrious family and an unstained reputation.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book David O. McKay: Apostle to the World, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1986) and the sources cited therein.
