Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Ten

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPJoseph Fielding Smith

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPJoseph Fielding Smith, the tenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was a United States "centennial baby," born July 19, 1876, in Salt Lake City, Utah. He used his full name to distinguish himself from his father, Joseph F. Smith (whose middle name was also Fielding), the sixth President of the Church. The mother, Julina Lambson Smith, the first plural wife of Joseph F. Smith, had been promised that her first son would bear his father's full name. While other plural wives bore sons earlier, including one son named Joseph Richards Smith, none was allowed to use the full name. The name would always be a mark of distinction, recognizing not only Joseph Fielding's father but also his great uncle, the Prophet Joseph Smith; his great-grandfather, Joseph Smith Sr.; and his grandmother, Mary Fielding Smith.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPJoseph Fielding's childhood was scarred by family upset when his father was forced to leave home often to avoid arrest because of plural marriage. His father's frequent absences accentuated the parenting role of his mother. Julina once had worked in the Church Historian's Office, where she became immersed in Mormon history. There she first met her husband, who was a fellow employee. Of Mormon pioneer ancestry, she also was deeply religious and a keen student of the scriptures. Given the dominant influence of Julina during his youth, it seems apparent that Joseph Fielding Smith's lifelong love for the scriptures and Mormon history is largely a legacy from his mother. However, as her son matured, as he learned the significance of his ancestors' role in the Church, and as he acquired personal convictions about its validity, his father's influence became more pronounced.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe father's frequent absences in the early years were compensated in part by the presence of Joseph Fielding's numerous siblings and his many aunts, uncles, and other relatives. The Smith family was close-knit and never differentiated between the children of the several wives. No child was regarded as a "half brother" or "half sister." Indeed, members of the family would take offense if such designations were used. All were brothers and sisters without regard to the mothers who gave them birth. Among young Joseph's other relatives was Aunt Mercy Fielding Thompson, the sister of Mary Fielding Smith, who was personally acquainted with Joseph and Hyrum Smith and other early leaders of the Church. Joseph Fielding and Aunt Mercy were very close. From her he learned firsthand about the personalities, the problems, and the perspectives of the first-generation Latter-day Saints.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe Smith family lived frugally. The father, Joseph F., had been raised by a widowed mother who had little means. Ever since his mid-teens, when he was called on a mission to Hawaii, he had been engaged in Church service, which precluded the accumulation of wealth. Because living allowances to General Authorities were minimal, members of his family had to provide for themselves during his absences. Everyone worked. Julina was a skilled midwife who provided needed income. Young Joseph became her chauffeur, driving to and from the homes of her patients in a carriage pulled by their faithful horse Meg. Joseph enjoyed the work except when he had to drive at night or in bad weather. As a boy, it seemed to him that most babies were born at night.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe need to help provide for the family limited Joseph's formal education to primary school and two years at LDS College. When he became strong enough, he acquired a menial job at ZCMI that entailed hoisting heavy bulk goods. The repeated strain on his growing body caused one shoulder to be lower than the other. Later in his teens, he was able to compensate somewhat for his lack of formal education by serving as his father's secretary, writing letters, doing research, and serving as a sounding board for Joseph F.'s ideas. He considered this to be the best education of all because it laid the groundwork for his later apostolic career.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPFollowing the Manifesto and the amnesty granted to Mormon polygamists, life for the Smith family became more normal. The dedication of the Salt Lake Temple added a perceptible spiritual quality to the city. At age twenty Joseph was ordained an elder and was allowed to receive his temple endowment. He also received a patriarchal blessing, which among other things promised he would "preside among the people" and would "live to a good old age."

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe large Smith home was adjacent to the University of Utah. As a means of providing revenue, the family agreed to rent a room to Louie Shurtliff, a university student who was the daughter of Lewis W. Shurtliff, a stake president in Ogden, Utah. At first Joseph and Louie paid little attention to each other. She was immersed in her studies and he in his work. In time that changed. A casual friendship progressed to romantic love. They were married in the Salt Lake Temple on April 26, 1898. The following March, Joseph received a call to serve a mission in Great Britain. Louie returned to Ogden to live with her parents while he was gone. Joseph left Salt Lake on May 13, 1899, with a group of missionaries that included his brother Joseph Richards Smith.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPTraveling to Philadelphia via Niagara Falls and New York City, the missionaries embarked on a creaky old ship, the Pennland.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAfter thirteen turbulent days on the Atlantic, they arrived in Liverpool, England. Joseph Fielding regained his land legs at mission headquarters, 42 Islington. The mission president, Platte D. Lyman, then assigned him to labor in Nottingham.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPElder Smith first encountered the overt hostility and derision that were then directed toward Mormon missionaries when he arrived in Nottingham. Outside the conference house was a group of street urchins who taunted him, singing in parody to the music of a Church hymn, "Chase me girls to Salt Lake City where the Mormons have no pity." He found this attitude to be pervasive among people of all ages. He also was shocked at the widespread immorality. Wife swapping was commonplace, as were drunkeness and immoral acts committed openly in the public parks. "I have seen more wickedness here in two weeks than I have seen at home in all my life," he wrote.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPElder Smith lived in the Nottingham conference house with several missionaries. They cooked their own meals, sharing expenses and household duties. Their proselytizing consisted mostly of tracting and street meetings. The results were disappointing. Joseph did not baptize a single convert during his entire mission.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAfter a few months, Elder Smith was transferred to nearby Derby, where he served as senior companion to a missionary nine years his senior. The work there—as unfruitful as it had been at Nottingham—ended with a shock for Elder Smith when he was transferred back to Nottingham to serve as conference clerk under his junior companion, who was appointed conference president. To many this likely would have been a severe blow to self-esteem. It had no such effect on Elder Smith, although it was a disappointment. He served faithfully as conference clerk during the remainder of his mission.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAs clerk he handled correspondence, prepared reports, supervised travel arrangements, and directed the work during the absence of the conference president. Elder Smith also performed usual missionary work as time allowed. Most of his free time was spent studying the scriptures, which, combined with the training he had received at home, gave him a special status with the other missionaries, who turned to him for answers to gospel questions. Even the conference president deferred to Elder Smith in matters of doctrine or scriptural interpretation. Joseph also had the gift of healing, a gift promised in his patriarchal blessing. Many who were sick came to him for relief.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAt the urging of his father and with the permission of the mission president, Joseph Fielding, his brother Richards (who labored in Leeds), and other British missionaries were granted two weeks' leave to attend the World's Fair in Paris. In the French capital and in London where they stopped en route, they visited places of historic interest. At his father's request, Elder Smith also visited Topsfield in Essex County to obtain genealogical data about Smith ancestors.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAt home after his mission, Elder Smith was employed as a clerk in the Church Historian's Office. This began an association that continued during the rest of his life, including service as an assistant historian, Church historian, and President of the Church. He first served under Anthon H. Lund, the Church historian at the time, and with assistant historians Orson F. Whitney, Brigham H. Roberts, and Andrew Jenson. All these assistants were prolific writers, which served as a strong inducement for Joseph Fielding to improve his literary skills. He also gained wide experience as a researcher, helping to compile data to answer charges against the Church raised during the Smoot hearings in Washington, D.C. He also made trips into the field to gather historical data, including a trip to New England to check records about early Smith ancestors, and to Missouri to gather information about persecution against the Mormons in the early days.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPMeanwhile, Joseph and Louie built a new home on North Second West in Salt Lake City. Their first child, Josephine, was born on September 18, 1902. They were active in the Sixteenth Ward and the Salt Lake Stake, where Joseph served as a home missionary and as a president of his seventy's quorum. Later he was ordained a high priest and was called to the high council. At the same time he was a member of the general board of the YMMIA while continuing to perform secretarial tasks for his father.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPIn the secluded environment of the Historian's Office, Joseph began to develop both his research and writing skills. His first published work was a pamphlet, Asael Smith of Topsfield, which traced the history of the Smith family in New England. Then followed two other pamphlets, Blood Atonement and the Origin of Plural Marriage and Origin of the Reorganized Church and the Question of Succession. Later, twenty-two books containing President Smith's writings were published—the most prolific literary output to date of any of the modern Apostles. In all of his writings, he aimed for clarity by using simple words and declaratory sentences. He wanted to inform his readers, not impress them with his learning.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAs his reputation as an author grew, Joseph Fielding was more in demand as a speaker. His relationship to President Joseph F. Smith enhanced that demand. Yet he never sought to trade on his father's name or reputation. He was modest at the pulpit, being as economical with spoken words as he was in writing them.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPJust as he was coming into prominence, tragedy struck Joseph Fielding. Louie passed away unexpectedly on March 30, 1908, from complications of pregnancy. She left two young daughters, Josephine and Julina. Joseph was stunned. For a while he tried to manage with a housekeeper to tend the children during the day. It didn't work. He was persuaded to move into the Beehive House with his parents. This was unsatisfactory too. When President Smith suggested he ought to remarry, Joseph prayerfully sought a wife. He was attracted to a pretty young woman, Georgina Ethel Reynolds, who worked in the Historian's Office. She was the daughter of George Reynolds, a member of the First Council of Seventy. Ethel reciprocated Joseph's feelings, and they were married on November 2, 1908.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAs Joseph's domestic problems eased, his professional duties increased. He was appointed a board member and treasurer of the Genealogical Society of Utah. Then when the society decided to publish a magazine, he became its business manager and first editor. Soon after, on April 6, 1910, he was sustained as a member of the Twelve. He had no advance notice of the call. He told Ethel of the news with the comment, "I guess we'll have to sell the cow." Elder Smith's family and friends and other members of the Church were pleased with his call. He was overwhelmed by it. "Oh my Father, help me, guide me in Thy truth," he implored in his diary, "and fit and qualify me for I am weak."

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPNot everyone was pleased. A disparaging editorial in the Salt Lake Tribune entitled "The Church of the Smiths" viciously criticized the appointment and the Smith family. The basis of the editorial was that with Joseph's appointment, there were seven Smiths among the twenty-six General Authorities of the Church. "Joseph F. is losing no time unnecessarily in his well defined purpose and process of Smithi-sizing the Mormon Church," it began. After words of ridicule and mockery, it turned to accusations of fraud. Joseph refrained from responding until the October general conference, when he observed it was the heritage of the bigoted to sit in judgment on Church leaders "when it concerns them not at all."

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe duties of a General Authority in those days were rigorous. They entailed frequent travel, often under difficult conditions. Automobiles were scarce, and most roads were unsurfaced. Travel away from the railroad lines was by horse and carriage, and in some remote areas by horseback only. Accommodations usually were provided by local members. Sometimes they were meager. The diet varied from place to place. Yet the warm reception the Brethren received was uniform. They were honored everywhere, even revered. Elder Smith loved the people and appreciated every kindness they showed him.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPJoseph's preaching intermingled solid doctrine with practical instruction. In one remote stake he talked about the need to pipe drinking water into the homes. In others he urged more efficient farming practices and the development of cooperatives. He was strict in admonishing the Saints to live pure lives and "to endure to the end." His treatment of doctrinal subjects was always supported by scriptural citations. Away from the pulpit he was friendly and approachable and reflected a good sense of humor. He was known to engage in athletic competition with young men during conference visits, revealing a personal liking for sports. For many years he was an active member of the Deseret Gymnasium and encouraged his sons' participation in sports.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPElder Smith's duties at Church headquarters included work in the Historical Department and the Genealogical Society. He also served on several ad hoc committees and continued to assist his father as a secretary. His call to the Twelve enabled him to be of greater personal assistance to his father, for he could represent him officially when directed and could substitute for him in filling speaking assignments.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPElder Smith often traveled with his father. Their last lengthy trip together was in late 1914. Their itinerary took them through the Midwest and into the southern states. They traveled in a private railway car. At Independence, Missouri, the prophet dedicated a new chapel. One of the missionaries who helped prepare the chapel for dedication was President Smith's nephew, Spencer W. Kimball, a future President of the Church. While they were in Independence, President Smith, Joseph Fielding, and others paid a courtesy call on Joseph Smith III, the president of the Reorganized Church, who was in poor health at the time and died soon afterward.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThere was excellent press coverage wherever the party stopped. Joseph Fielding helped handle the public relations along the way and joined his father and others in the company in speaking to gatherings of Saints. "The trip through the South has resulted in much good," he wrote in summary, "and the results will be felt by the Elders for a long time to come. We have been entertained by the leading spirits in these communities; Mayors, Magistrates, Potentates, and many prominent men of national renown have paid their respects to President Smith. The newspapers throughout have spoken favorably, showing the great change in sentiment that has come over the people in recent years. Our trip has been most successful and encouraging to the Elders and Saints."

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAs a member of the Twelve and the son and namesake of the prophet, Joseph Fielding occupied a distinctive status among the General Authorities. This was enhanced by his service as an unofficial secretary and confidant of his father. He had open access to President Smith's office and was privy to his thoughts and plans. This unusual role ended on November 19, 1918, when President Smith died. One of Elder Smith's last services to his father was to record his vision of the dead, which now appears as section 138 of the Doctrine and Covenants. Joseph Fielding's status also had been altered earlier by the deaths of his brother Hyrum M. Smith, a member of the Twelve; John Henry Smith, a counselor to his father; and John Smith, the Church Patriarch. These changes largely ended the criticisms that had been directed toward Joseph when he was called to the Twelve in 1910. He was now regarded, both inside and outside the Church, as a man of ability and integrity and a distinguished leader in his own right. He would no longer work in the shadow of his illustrious father and other relatives but would stand on his own reputation.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAs a signal of this change in status, he now began to identify himself as Joseph Fielding Smith instead of Joseph F. Smith Jr. His influence extended into activities outside the Church organizations by service on several boards of directors, including the Beneficial Life Insurance Company and the Zion's Savings Bank. In 1921 he was appointed Church historian by President Heber J. Grant, who had succeeded President Joseph F. Smith as the President of the Church. And the following year his book Essentials in Church History was published. This useful work has gone through more than twenty editions and has been translated into several languages, including Spanish, German, and French.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPIn 1925 Joseph and Ethel built a new family home on Douglas Street on Salt Lake City's east bench. Provision was made for a tennis court and horseshoe pits to accommodate the athletic interests of the children. Two years after moving into their new home, the Smiths' last child, Milton Edmund, was born, bringing the number of children to eleven, which included Josephine and Julina, Louie's daughters. The other children were Emily, Naomi, Lois, Joseph, Amelia, Lewis, Reynolds, and Douglas. When friends were intermixed with the children, the Douglas Street home was alive with activity. Notwithstanding, Ethel's calm personality and literary bent brought a sense of peace to the home.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPOne of Elder Smith's headquarters assignments at this time was service on a reading committee. Its purpose was to review manuscripts written by General Authorities to assure there were no factual or doctrinal errors. A manuscript written by Elder B. H. Roberts speculated that there were pre-Adamite inhabitants of the earth. Elder Roberts refused to follow the request of the committee that these speculations be deleted and withdrew the manuscript from publication. (It was eventually published many years after Elder Roberts's death.) There followed a public dialogue between Elder Smith and Elder Roberts in which their conflicting views about pre-Adamites and the age of the earth were discussed. At the request of President Heber J. Grant, they discontinued the public discussion while retaining their private views. Years later, after the deaths of Elder Roberts and President Grant, Joseph Fielding Smith published a book entitled Man, His Origin and Destiny, which outlined his views on these subjects.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAs the children matured and the older girls were able to assume responsibility around the home, Ethel was able to travel more often with her husband, accompanying him to stake conferences and on mission tours. Because she was a member of the Relief Society General Board, she usually did so in an official capacity, giving training to the women and speaking in the public meetings.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPA memorable trip for them was a tour of the Central States Mission, which entailed visits to the Church historic sites in Missouri. To recall the sad events that occurred at Liberty Jail—where his grandfather Hyrum Smith and great-uncle Joseph Smith Jr. had been unjustly imprisoned—and to see the barren tract where the once thriving city of Far West was located aroused in Elder Smith a deep resentment toward the state of Missouri that never abated. Later visits to Carthage, Illinois, where Joseph and Hyrum were martyred, and to Nauvoo, from where his father and grandmother had been driven during the exodus, created similar enduring resentments toward the state of Illinois.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPJoseph Fielding and Ethel also took occasional vacation trips with their family. There was great love among them. The practice in President Joseph F. Smith's family of kissing each other upon meeting or parting was perpetuated in Joseph Fielding's family. This was an outward expression of a deep and abiding affection also shown in the kindly way they treated each other, in the family recreations they regularly shared, and in the parental support shown toward the children in their academic or athletic activities. Such closeness made even more poignant a debilitating illness that afflicted Ethel in the mid-1930s. It would not yield to medication or treatment, and numerous priesthood blessings provided only temporary relief. She passed away quietly on August 26, 1937. It was a sad and wrenching time for Joseph and his children, several of whom still lived at home. Because of his frequent travels and the urgent need for someone to supervise the single children, Elder Smith felt it unwise to delay remarriage unduly. After prayerful consideration, his thoughts turned toward Jessie Evans, the Salt Lake County recorder and a well-known contralto who sang regularly with the Salt Lake Tabernacle Choir.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPIt was awkward for sixty-two-year-old Joseph Fielding Smith to court this popular woman who was twenty-five years younger than he. Because she supported her widowed mother, Jessie Evans had never married. When, through spiritual means, Joseph Fielding decided Jessie was the one, he invented an excuse to contact her. As the Church historian, he offered to help fill gaps in the recorder's records about crucial dates in Salt Lake County's history. This opening led to a series of contacts with Jessie that Elder Smith unromantically referred to as "interviews." These culminated in social outings (he never called them dates), in informal visits with Joseph's children and Jessie's relatives, and, ultimately, in marriage, which was performed by President Heber J. Grant on April 12, 1938.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPJessie was an extrovert, full of fun and good humor. Her musical talent and political career had given her a public reputation quite apart from her husband. Despite differences in age and temperament, she and Joseph were unusally compatible. He enjoyed her singing and constant effervescence, and she appreciated his wisdom and kindness. In time she persuaded him to join her in singing duets, she playing the piano as they sat on the bench together. Because he had to be coaxed to join her in singing, he came to call these "do its."

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPSince Jessie was her sole support, Mother Evans moved into the Smith home. It was a good arrangement because she was available to care for the young boys when Elder Smith and Jessie traveled together. Their first long trip was to Hawaii shortly after their marriage. Joseph had received several Church assignments in the islands and took Jessie with him. Aboard ship, she was the life of the party, singing at social gatherings and generally adding zest to all shipboard activities. At meetings in Hawaii, and later at other meetings where he presided, Elder Smith always insisted she sing as part of the program. By his own admission, he was her most ardent fan.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPA year later, Joseph was assigned to tour missions in Great Britain and Europe. Jessie went with him. They left Salt Lake City on April 21, 1939, intending to be gone for four months. Because war broke out in Europe while they were there, the Smiths were gone for seven months.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe days spent in England were a time of nostalgic reflection for Elder Smith. He had not been there since his mission forty years before. The long track that led from his clerkship in Nottingham to his present position of eminence in the Church was a source of amazement to him. And to be in the land of his Smith forefathers aroused feelings of filial reverence.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPOn the continent, the Smiths visited all of the western European countries except Spain. They also toured missions in Scandinavia. The days spent in Italy were like a delayed honeymoon. There were no Church organizations there and few members aside from some expatriates. The Smiths were free, therefore, to enjoy the ancient cities with their treasures of art and architecture. Jessie's interest in music and art led Joseph to places he would never have visited on his own.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAs the tour progressed, there were ominous reports of impending war. They were awakened in Florence, Italy, on July 4 by the sound of the jackboots of Mussolini's Brownshirts as they marched beneath their hotel window. Tensions grew as they toured in Germany. After Germany and the Soviet Union signed a non-aggression pact on August 23, the First Presidency directed that all missionaries be removed from Germany. And when on September 3 England and France announced a state of war existed with Germany, instructions were given to remove all missionaries from Europe. Elder Smith went to Copenhagen, Denmark, where he spent two months directing the removal. He and Jessie returned home in November. In early March of 1940, Joseph met the ship in New York that carried his son Lewis, who had been serving as a missionary in Switzerland.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPBecause he had witnessed the outbreak of the war firsthand, Elder Smith closely followed its developments. After the fall of France and the crushing defeat of England at Dunkirk, and after the United States offered "Lend-Lease" aid to the British, he foresaw that the United States would be drawn into the conflict. He was concerned because several of his sons were eligible for military service. After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, it was apparent that some of his sons would be affected.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPLewis, who was drafted on March 4, 1942, was the first. "This brought sadness to us all," wrote his father on that day. "It is a shame that the clean and the righteous are forced into a conflict of world proportions, because of the wickedness of men." After repeating his conviction that the war not only resulted from disobedience to God's laws but also fulfilled ancient prophecies, he added, "May the Lord guide and protect the sons of the Latter-day Saints and all others who will live righteously." Later, Douglas also was inducted into the army and Reynolds into the navy.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPElder Smith's preoccupation with the war led him to study the ancient prophecies about the causes of war and the consequences of disobeying God's laws. This formed the basis of several talks he delivered at general and stake conferences. Because of the interest these created, he was asked to give a series of lectures in the Lion House, which he titled "The Signs of the Times." Later these lectures were moved to Barrett Hall to accommodate the large crowds who wished to hear them. The lectures were subsequently published in book form. Elder Smith also delivered a series of radio lectures that he titled "The Restoration of All Things," which embodied some of the themes developed in the earlier series. These also were published in book form.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe radio lectures were delivered on Sunday evenings during the last half of 1944. Because of the time needed to prepare them, Elder Smith was temporarily excused from attending stake conferences or conducting mission tours. Throughout this time and earlier, he had a feeling that his sons would survive the war. This and the hopes he had for their future made the events of December 29, 1944, so difficult to accept. "My son Lewis W. was killed today in the service of his country," he wrote under that date. "He was returning from an appointment which took him to India. He spent Christmas day in Bethlehem and from all we know was on his way back to his base somewhere in Western Africa when the plane crashed. We received word from the government January 2 at 5 p.m."

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe distraught father took comfort from the reports that his son had shown the character of a devoted Latter-day Saint to the very end. He was buried in Nigeria, West Africa. Later the body was exhumed and reburied in the Smith family plot in the Salt Lake City Cemetery. "Now we feel much better," wrote Elder Smith after the reburial, "knowing that it is here and we are happy because we know he was clean and was worthy in every respect and entitled to every blessing that can be obtained." The war ended only a few months after Lewis was killed. Germany surrendered on May 7, 1945, and the Japanese gave up the following August after atomic bombs were dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThese changes on the international scene were accompanied by significant changes in the Church. On May 14, 1945, President Heber J. Grant died. He was succeeded by Joseph Fielding's cousin, George Albert Smith. The next month, Joseph Fielding was appointed president of the Salt Lake Temple. He served there four years. The freedom from constant travel this assignment allowed provided a welcome break in Elder Smith's apostolic service. He loved temple work and the quiet reverence that prevailed in the sacred building. As a boy he had avidly watched as the temple walls were completed with huge stone blocks he had seen quarried from solid granite near the mouth of Little Cottonwood Canyon, twenty miles southeast of Temple Square.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe vicarious work performed in the temple coincided with his work in the Genealogical Society, whose research he supervised. It was under his direction that the extensive work of microfilming public records around the world was begun. The merger of these two major responsibilities in one man was unprecedented.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPFollowing the death of Elder George F. Richards on August 8, 1950, Elder Smith became Acting President of the Twelve. Then after the death of President George Albert Smith on April 4, 1951, he became President of the Twelve. As such he supervised and coordinated the work of the Twelve and the First Council of Seventy.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPBeginning in the early 1950s, President Smith exerted strong influence on the development of Brigham Young University in his role as chairman of the Executive Committee of the BYU Board of Trustees. Working with the president of the university, and under the overall supervision of the board, he was instrumental in promoting significant growth in the student body and the physical facilities and in upgrading the BYU faculty. He envisioned that the university would become "a great power for good" throughout the world.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPWhen Elder Smith became the President of the Twelve, the responsibility for missionary work was divided among several groups. In 1954, to avoid overlapping duties and to streamline the work, all authority for missionary work was placed under the Missionary Committee. This committee consisted of members of the Twelve with Joseph Fielding Smith as chairman. A few months later he began a lengthy trip to the Orient, which would have an important impact on missionary work.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAt the instigation of Jessie, who traveled with him, a festive party was held for Elder Smith aboard ship en route to Japan to celebrate his seventy-ninth birthday. Amid applause, waiters brought a birthday cake and placed it on Elder Smith's table. Atop the cake was a single candle, which he ceremoniously lit and then blew out as all the diners joined in singing the traditional "Happy Birthday."

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPElder Smith divided the Japanese Mission while he was in Japan, dedicated Korea for the preaching of the gospel while he was in Seoul, and then dedicated Okinawa, the Philippines, and Guam en route home.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPDespite his age, Elder Smith was active and vigorous. During this period he took up jet flying as a hobby, having become acquainted with several pilots who often took him on flights. He found flying to be exhilarating. This novel recreation continued for almost ten years, until he was nearing ninety. In recognition of his interest in flying, he received the honorary rank of brigadier general in the Utah National Guard, and at age eighty-eight he was given the Minuteman Award.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPAlso during this period, Elder Smith and Jessie sold the Douglas Street home and moved into the Eagle Gate Apartments, which were less than a block from his office. The Smiths also were near the Salt Lake Temple and Tabernacle, the theaters, and downtown shopping. Because Jessie's mother had passed away and all the children were married, this lifestyle suited the Smiths' personal needs and accommodated their heavy travel schedule.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPBetween 1958 and 1963, the Smiths made four lengthy international trips, in addition to numerous trips to stakes and missions within the United States. In September 1958 they traveled to England and western Europe. After participating in the dedication of the London Temple, they traveled to Switzerland, where Elder Smith counseled with the presidency of the Swiss Temple and held missionary meetings. Among the missionaries was a grandson, Douglas Myers, who was then laboring in Vienna. Returning to London, Elder Smith dedicated the London mission home before he and Jessie returned to the United States on the Queen Elizabeth.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPTwo months later, they flew to the South Pacific, where they spent three months touring missions and holding special meetings in New Zealand and Australia. They returned by ship from New Zealand to Hawaii and flew from there to the mainland.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPIn October 1960 the Smiths left Salt Lake City for an extended trip to South America. With them was Elder A. Theodore Tuttle of the First Council of Seventy. Flying to New York, they went by ship to Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. After holding meetings in Rio and SÃ£o Paulo with mission president W. Grant Bangerter, they traveled to Curitiba for a series of meetings with President Asael T. Sorenson of the Brazil South Mission. In turn, they toured in Uruguay, Argentina, Chile, Peru, Ecuador, and Guatemala. At the meetings held with missionaries, President Smith gave instructions about personal worthiness and spirituality while Elder Tuttle taught the missionaries finding and teaching skills. Arriving home in January 1961, Elder Tuttle "praised President Smith as a 'great traveler' who had energy to spare when other members of the party were tired." The Apostle was then almost eighty-five years old.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPPresident Smith and Jessie returned to Australia in November 1963 to hold a series of meetings. A chief inducement to return there was his daughter Amelia, who was in Australia with her husband, Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the First Council of Seventy. Elder McConkie was the president of the mission in Melbourne, Australia.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe following year, Elder Smith was called as a counselor to President David O. McKay, along with Elder Thorpe B. Isaacson, Assistant to the Twelve. At the time, President McKay's health was declining, and he needed extra help to carry the heavy workload of the First Presidency. President Smith's role was to provide insight in setting policy and to fill special assignments given him by the prophet. He continued to direct the affairs of the Council of the Twelve. In the summer of 1966, Joseph Fielding accompanied President McKay to Missouri to inspect sites of early Church history. Two years later, at the prophet's direction, President Smith dedicated monuments near the Far West Temple site and broke ground for a visitors' center in Independence, Missouri. Later that year, he represented the First Presidency at the annual Hill Cumorah Pageant. Meanwhile, President Smith was absorbed in efforts to maintain the missionary force at a workable level, while struggling with government restrictions on missionary calls occasioned by the Vietnam War. And the First Presidency, as well as all the Brethren, were involved in a major effort to prevent the passage of a Utah state liquor-by-the-drink law being pushed by liquor interests. Ordinarily, Church leaders avoided involvement in political issues, but they made an exception in this case because of its moral overtones.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPPresident David O. McKay passed away quietly on January 18, 1970. Five days later, Joseph Fielding Smith was ordained as the tenth President of the Church. He selected Harold B. Lee and N. Eldon Tanner as his counselors. The new First Presidency was sustained at a Solemn Assembly on April 6, 1970, in connection with the annual general conference.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPTo oversee the daily, ongoing affairs of the Church, ninety-four-year-old President Joseph Fielding Smith made broad delegations of authority to his younger, more vigorous counselors. However, he retained ultimate authority on all matters and devoted much of his time to temple functions. He installed new presidents in the Los Angeles, Arizona, St. George, and Idaho Falls Temples, while presiding at ground-breaking ceremonies for the new Provo and Ogden Temples. He also accepted a selected few of the numerous invitations he received to speak, conserving his strength for the more important aspects of his work. He also agreed to meet with special visitors who sought interviews, including General William C. Westmoreland and President Richard M. Nixon and others of like stature. President Nixon was in Salt Lake City in late July and spent an hour talking to the First Presidency and members of the Twelve about national and international affairs. With President Nixon were George Romney and David Kennedy, Latter-day Saint members of his cabinet.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPDuring the first months of his administration, President Smith and his counselors made important changes in organization and procedure: three new Church magazines without advertisements, the Ensign, the New Era, and the Friend, were approved; Neal A. Maxwell was appointed Commissioner of Church Education, and Dallin H. Oaks and Henry B. Eyring were appointed presidents of Brigham Young University and Ricks College, respectively; the Special Affairs Committee was created to monitor government activities that impacted the Church; and the Church departments of Internal Affairs and Public Communications were created. Also, steps were taken to keep the Twelve more fully informed about all aspects of the work by inviting key staff personnel to make reports in the weekly temple meetings.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPIn early 1971 plans were made to hold an area conference in Manchester, England. It was to be the first of several area gatherings, designed to expose members of the Church outside the United States to the General Authorities and to underscore the international character of the Church. These plans were threatened when President Smith's wife, Jessie, died unexpectedly on August 3, 1971. Following the funeral, the prophet, distraught over his wife's death, said he could not go to Manchester. After reflection, however, and realizing the keen disappointment of the British Saints were he not to attend, he changed his mind. President Smith arrived in Manchester on August 26, 1971, accompanied by his son Douglas; his personal secretary, D. Arthur Haycock; and his personal physician, Dr. Donald E. Smith. Other General Authorities arrived separately. The night before the conference began, a special meeting of the Council of the First Presidency and Quorum of the Twelve was held in the Piccadilly Hotel in Manchester, the first such meeting held outside the United States. It was a time of spiritual renewal and refreshment.

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPThe conference meetings were held in the Bell-Vue Centre, a municipal park in Manchester. In his keynote address, President Smith emphasized that the Church is a worldwide organization, that it had grown to the extent that area general conferences were necessary, and that there was no better place to begin them than in England. He repeated that theme in his concluding address: "We have attained the status and strength that are enabling us to fulfill the commission given by the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith, that we should carry the glad tidings of the restoration to every nation and to all people. And not only shall we preach the gospel in every nation before the second coming of the Son of Man, but we shall make converts and establish congregations of Saints among them." This theme was reinforced by the concluding song of the conference, composed by local members: "This Is Our Place."

Smith, Joseph FieldingPPWhen President Smith returned from England, he moved into the home of his daughter Amelia McConkie and her husband, Elder Bruce R. McConkie. Familiar pieces of furniture and other treasured things were used to furnish his private room, and he was made comfortable and given loving attention. He continued to attend his meetings, but not with the same zest as before. He was injured twice from falling, and he fainted twice. It was apparent the end was near. President Smith passed away quietly on July 2, 1972, seventeen days before his ninety-sixth birthday. As his patriarchal blessing promised, he had lived a long life, presiding among the people. He was eulogized reverently and was laid to rest beside the three noble women who had shared his life of selfless service. He had endured to the end.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Joseph Fielding Smith: Gospel Scholar, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1992) and sources cited therein.
