Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Eleven

Lee, Harold B.PPHarold B. Lee

Lee, Harold B.PPHarold Bingham Lee, the eleventh President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was the second of six children of Samuel Marion Lee Jr. and Louisa Bingham Lee. He was born on March 28, 1899, in Clifton, Idaho, a small farming community in the northern part of the Cache Valley, settled by Mormon pioneers in the 1860s. Harold's Irish and Scottish ancestors, who migrated to the United States seeking economic opportunity, also found a new religion that led them to settle in the mountain valleys of Utah and Idaho. There they worked persistently, helping to build new communities while obeying the strict principles of their religion and rearing large families.

Lee, Harold B.PPDespite the rural character of his early surroundings, Harold was raised in an atmosphere of culture and refinement. His mother had an artistic flair, and she used carefully chosen colors and fabrics and flowers to decorate the home. His father, who taught school and farmed, was studious and reflective; and as bishop of the Clifton Ward, he introduced qualities of spirituality and a sense of service into their home. The Lee children were given musical training, and Harold learned to play the piano while very young. Later he acquired skill with several wind instruments. The family worked early and late to wrest a living from their small, labor-intensive farm.

Lee, Harold B.PPAfter completing eight years of study at Clifton's grammar school, Harold enrolled at the Oneida Stake Academy in Preston, Idaho, several miles southeast of his home. During four years there he gained reputation as a scholar, sportsman, musician, debater, staffer on the school paper, and athletic manager. He formed many enduring friendships at the academy, including one with another young farm boy, Ezra Taft Benson, who was born in nearby Whitney, Idaho, five months after Harold's birth. The predictions of classmates about their future hardly envisioned this pair would become future Presidents of the Church.

Lee, Harold B.PPAfter graduating from Oneida, Harold lost no time in pursuing higher education. He immediately took a crash course to qualify him for admission to the Albion State Normal School. He successfully passed the entrance examination and was admitted for the summer semester in 1916.

Lee, Harold B.PPAlbion, Idaho, located two hundred miles west of Clifton, was a new world for Harold B. Lee. Except for brief trips with his parents to Salt Lake City, Utah, and Boise, Idaho, he had never been outside the Cache Valley. And he never before had been associated with students and teachers who were not members of the Church. Moreover, the curriculum, which was devoid of religion classes, included subjects unknown to him, such as educational psychology and political science.

Lee, Harold B.PPLiving off campus with a Latter-day Saint family, Harold devoted himself diligently to his studies. He was successful. At the end of the semester he received a secondary teaching certificate, which qualified him to teach in Idaho grammar schools. He immediately entered into a contract to teach in the Silver Star School near Weston, Idaho, a few miles south of Clifton. His salary was seventy-five dollars a month, which included fifteen dollars for room and board. He gave most of the salary to his father, as he did later when he taught in the Oxford school and earned ninety dollars a month. On weekends he traveled home on his horse. The Silver Star School included grades one through eight. Harold considered the discipline of instructing twenty-five students in eight different grades while maintaining order to be the most significant achievement of his teaching career.

Lee, Harold B.PPHarold returned to Albion the following summer for additional training. He then contracted to be principal of the larger school at Oxford, north of Clifton, where he also would teach. Assisted by two other teachers, he taught at Oxford for three years while serving as elders quorum president, directing a young women's chorus, and playing trombone in a dance band.

Lee, Harold B.PPIn September 1920 Harold was called to serve in the Western States Mission, with headquarters in Denver, Colorado. His native poise, his schooling, and four years as a teacher and school principal caused Elder Lee to stand out from the beginning. After nine months he was appointed president of the Denver Conference, the largest in the mission. Under his determined and caring leadership, the work thrived with large increases in convert baptisms, many of which were due to his personal efforts.

Lee, Harold B.PPMany who served under Elder Lee sensed a special spiritual quality about him. It was a quality that was evident from childhood. As a small boy, he was warned by a voice not to go near a collapsed barn. He obeyed that voice. Although it is not known whether harm would have resulted from exploring the barn, the incident suggests an early spiritual receptiveness. In the years that followed, he heard and obeyed that voice often. Once at a meeting in Denver, Sister Harriet Jensen saw an aura of light sur rounding Elder Lee's head as he spoke. This phenomenon was repeated years later and was witnessed by others. Afterward, Sister Jensen told Elder Lee, "You are going to someday be the President of the Church."

Lee, Harold B.PPElder Lee was admired by his mission president, John M. Knight. President Knight took Harold with him on trips outside the Denver Conference and once assigned him to conduct special meetings alone in another conference. When Elder Lee left the mission field in December 1922, President Knight accompanied him to Utah on the train. In Salt Lake City, they visited Church headquarters, meeting with several General Authorities. In one office President Knight told a secretary that Elder Lee would be called as the president of the Western States Mission. Although this did not come to pass, the statement revealed that John Knight was convinced Harold B. Lee was destined to fill important positions of leadership in the Church.

Lee, Harold B.PPPresident Knight had not been released as a counselor in the Ensign Stake presidency when he was called as a mission president. This enabled him to arrange for Harold to speak at the Ensign stake conference on December 22, 1922. President Heber J. Grant and other General Authorities lived in this stake. This unsought recognition was a fitting capstone to Elder Lee's mission.

Lee, Harold B.PPBefore going to Clifton, Harold visited several former missionary acquaintances living in Salt Lake City. Among them was Fern Tanner, who had served under him for a while in Denver. There was a special rapport between them. Later this developed into love and marriage. Among those he also visited was Freda Joan Jensen, the girlfriend of a missionary companion. By an intriguing coincidence, Joan Jensen remained single until she became the second wife of President Harold B. Lee following the death of Fern Tanner Lee.

Lee, Harold B.PPAn injury Elder Lee suffered in Clifton after his return from the mission field aggravated a hernia, requiring surgery. He went to Salt Lake City for the operation. At the invitation of Fern's family, he convalesced in the Tanner home. His acquaintance with Fern continued to grow when Harold moved to Salt Lake City permanently to work and to attend the University of Utah. By autumn 1923 he had qualified for a Utah teaching certificate and was hired as the principal and a teacher at the Whittier School. He later filled the same positions at the Woodrow Wilson School. This enabled him to marry Fern. The ceremony was performed by Elder George F. Richards in the Salt Lake Temple on November 14, 1923.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe newlyweds rented a home from Fern's parents in the Poplar Grove Ward of the Pioneer Stake. Five years later, after Harold became regional manager for the Foundation Press, they purchased a home in the stake. Meanwhile, he was active in ward and stake organizations, including service on the high council. He was surprised in October 1928 when, without prior notice, he was sustained as a counselor in the stake presidency. Two years later at age thirty-one, he was called as the stake president, the youngest in the Church at the time.

Lee, Harold B.PPDuring that time, Harold's mission president, John M. Knight, was a Salt Lake City commissioner. After a General Authority criticized Commissioner Knight in a Pioneer Stake meeting, President Lee publicly defended him. When they discussed the incident later, John Knight asked President Lee if he would be interested in filling the vacancy in the city commission caused by the death of another commissioner. After reflecting on it, Harold accepted. With the strong backing of John Knight and the endorsement of other influential people, he was appointed and installed in office on December 1, 1932. After running a skillful campaign, he was elected to a full term the following November.

Lee, Harold B.PPHis dual role as stake president and city commissioner vaulted Harold B. Lee into the public spotlight. This was magnified when he and his associates in the stake began to develop a program to help members impoverished by the Depression. A survey showed that more than half of them needed outside help to survive. The solution was to match resources with needs. A major resource was a large pool of idle manpower, which was drawn upon to help harvest farm crops in exchange for a share of the yield to distribute to the needy. Any surplus was canned or bottled and stored. Volunteer workers at a warehouse obtained by the stake also made clothing, bedding, and furniture. Withdrawals from the storehouse, as it came to be known, were made on the order of bishops. Rather than merely receive a dole, recipients were expected to work or to render service in exchange for commodities. Later a large garden was developed on a vacant lot within the stake and provided supplemental food. Also, idle manpower was employed to construct a gymnasium used for athletic, cultural, and social events. As the Depression deepened, authorization was given to retain tithing funds to help the needy, and some additional funds were provided by the First Presidency. The example of a group of people working together creatively to try to solve their economic problems drew widespread attention, both locally and nationally. At the center of this interest was Harold B. Lee, who was the directing catalyst to promote the group effort.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe members of the First Presidency were among those impressed by the welfare efforts in the Pioneer Stake. For several years some steps had been taken at Church headquarters to combat the deadening effects of the Depression among Latter-day Saints, but no ongoing program had been developed. As the Brethren sought to formulate a general plan, they invited President Lee to brief them on the welfare initiatives undertaken in the Pioneer Stake. He met with President Heber J. Grant and Second Counselor David O. McKay on April 30, 1935. President J. Reuben Clark was out of town but was aware of the meeting and its purpose. After several hours of discussion, President Lee was asked to draw up a general plan for Church welfare, based upon the model in the Pioneer Stake and the directions given by the First Presidency.

Lee, Harold B.PPOverwhelmed by the magnitude of such an assignment, President Lee sought divine guidance in humble prayer offered in a secluded grove up City Creek Canyon. It was revealed to him that no new organization was necessary, only the need "to put the priesthood to work." He submitted a preliminary report on June 1, 1935, then revised it in March 1936 at the request of the First Presidency. Through revelation, the First Presidency adopted this revised report as amended by them. A month later, on April 15, Harold B. Lee was called as managing director of the Church Security Department, later named the Church Welfare Department. He resigned from the city commission and was released as president of the Pioneer Stake in order to devote full time to his new calling.

Lee, Harold B.PPBrother Lee's responsibility was to implement the approved plan, creating welfare organizations in stakes throughout the United States and instructing them in welfare principles and procedures. He did this under the overall direction of the First Presidency, through a general committee chaired by a member of the Twelve. The members of the Presiding Bishopric, who had traditional duties to care for the needy of the Church, were members of the committee. In addition to the objective to help those in need, major goals of the program were to emphasize the overriding role of work in people's lives and to promote attitudes of industry, independence, thrift, and self-reliance.

Lee, Harold B.PPQualities of faith, tenacity, staying power, love for the disadvantaged, and indifference to criticism were necessary to establish a broad-based program of this kind. Harold B. Lee had these qualities in abundance. Criticism came from high and low places—criticism, for example, that he was too young and inexperienced or that the program was too unwieldy and complex. However, knowing he had the unqualified support of the First Presidency, Harold ignored the criticisms and stayed the course until the welfare program became an established part of the Church structure, fulfilling its purpose and promise.

Lee, Harold B.PPWhen the April 1941 general conference convened, there was a vacancy in the Twelve occasioned by the death of Reed Smoot the previous February. "Before I arose from my bed," wrote Elder Lee on April 5, "I received a definite impression that I would be named a member of the Quorum of the Twelve." He was called that night by President Grant, sustained the following day, and ordained and set apart on April 10. Because Elder Lee was only forty-two, while the average age of the other members of the Twelve was seventy-one, there was a general perception from the beginning of his apostleship that he would one day be President of the Church.

Lee, Harold B.PPElder Lee's role as a member of the Twelve was strengthened because of the good character and support of Fern and their two teenage daughters, Maurine and Helen. From the beginning of their acquaintance, Fern had the impression that Harold was destined for high position in the Church. She devoted herself to helping him in every possible way, creating a home of culture and refinement where he could escape from the stresses he faced daily. He reciprocated by showing constant kindness and love and by helping with house chores and maintaining the yards in an attractive manner. The girls were popular with their classmates, musically skilled, and wholly compatible with the high standards of their parents. It was a close-knit and exemplary family.

Lee, Harold B.PPThis family solidarity was essential to withstand the strains imposed by Elder Lee's busy travel schedule. He was away from home most weekends, attending stake conferences or touring missions. As he served in his demanding calling, he reflected the qualities of spirituality and persistence he had shown in other callings. Inner whisperings and promptings were dominant factors in counseling or making organizational changes. He was always conscious of his subordinate role and sought to do only what God dictated through the Spirit.

Lee, Harold B.PPAfter the United States entered World War II following the Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor, Elder Lee was appointed chairman of the Servicemen's Committee. Assisted by Elder John Taylor and the military coordinator, Hugh B. Brown, he supervised the tracking, instruction, and motivation of LDS servicemen. He traveled extensively to military bases, was active in encouraging those at home to write frequently to servicemen, and was instrumental in preparing pocket-size scriptures that could be easily carried in their uniforms.

Lee, Harold B.PPMeanwhile, Elder Lee continued to give direction to welfare work. In the autumn of 1941 he and Elder Marion G. Romney traveled to Safford, Arizona, to inspect the damage inflicted by a devastating flood in the Gila Valley and to review the welfare procedures followed in its aftermath. They counseled with the stake president, Spencer W. Kimball, who had directed the relief work. It was the first real test of the Church welfare program in a disaster situation. A year later, Elder Lee accompanied President J. Reuben Clark to the Gila Valley for the same purpose. In a meeting held in Safford, President Clark said it was likely that Elder Lee would one day become President of the Church. On the stand was Spencer W. Kimball, who the following year became a member of the Twelve and who would succeed Harold B. Lee as President of the Church. Elder Lee struggled to keep such predictions in perspective and to retain his humility. A forthright brother helped to foster that quality when he bluntly told Elder Lee he had spoken too long. "I thought so too," wrote the chastened Apostle.

Lee, Harold B.PPSpencer W. Kimball and Ezra Taft Benson were called to the Twelve in the summer of 1943. A year later Mark E. Petersen was called to fill the vacancy caused by the excommunication of Richard R. Lyman. Afterward, Matthew Cowley, Henry D. Moyle, Delbert L. Stapley, and others were called to the Twelve. These brethren, along with Elder Lee, were referred to as "the younger men" by President J. Reuben Clark, who also called Elder Lee "the dean of the younger men." Probably on the assignment of President Clark, Elder Lee was asked to indoctrinate the new members of the Twelve; and in the cases of Elders Kimball and Moyle, he was assigned to reorganize the stakes over which they were presiding when they were called to the Twelve. This reflected a special, unofficial status that Elder Lee occupied with respect to these men, and with others who were later called to the Twelve, which was apart from the official structure of the quorum.

Lee, Harold B.PPIn late 1944 the Lees and their daughters spent five weeks traveling in Mexico. Driving their own car, they were met at El Paso, Texas, by mission president Arwell L. Pierce and his wife, who then accompanied the Lees. Numerous meetings were held along the way with members who were awed by the presence of an Apostle. It was the last time Elder Lee and Fern were able to take a long trip with their daughters. Helen married L. Brent Goates in June 1946, and Maurine married Ernest J. Wilkins a year later. It was an emotional and rewarding experience for Elder Lee to be able to perform these sacred temple ordinances for his daughters.

Lee, Harold B.PPIn early 1945 Elder Lee gave several radio talks that were later compiled in a book titled Youth and the Church. He explained that Maurine and Helen were the "laboratory" from which he gained special insights into the needs and aspirations of the youth. He was popular among young people, and many sought him to perform their temple sealings. During one week in 1948, for instance, he performed twenty-three temple marriages.

Lee, Harold B.PPFollowing the death of Heber J. Grant in May 1945, George Albert Smith was ordained and set apart as President of the Church. While the war in Europe ended during that month, the war in the Pacific continued. In July Elder Lee was assigned to go to Hawaii for a stake conference and to check on facilities for Latter-day Saint servicemen. Because Elder Lee was going into a war zone, his father gave him a special blessing before he left. It was a touching experience for both of them. Elder Lee traveled to Hawaii on a crowded freighter but was fortunate to book return passage on a clipper flight.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe war in the Pacific ended the month following Elder Lee's trip to Hawaii. He and the committee then became heavily involved in helping Latter-day Saint servicemen integrate smoothly into civilian life. During 1946 Elder Lee and the Welfare Department geared up to provide massive assistance to the European Saints. And in early 1947 he was stressed when his companion, Elder Charles A. Callis of the Twelve, died in Jacksonville, Florida, shortly after they had created a stake there, the first stake in the South. Elder Lee presided and spoke at funeral services for Elder Callis held in Jacksonville, then accompanied the body to Salt Lake City.

Lee, Harold B.PPDuring the war, the number of missionaries had dwindled to include only sister missionaries and a few elders who were deferred from military service because of physical disabilities. At war's end, the Brethren moved promptly to rebuild the missionary force. As the numbers increased, Elder Lee received many assignments to tour missions. Among others, he toured the Western States, Texas-Louisiana, New England, Central States, Northwestern States, and California Missions. Each tour took from three to four weeks, during which meetings and interviews were held with all the missionaries, local leaders were instructed, and general meetings were held. Mission tours were interspersed with the usual stake conference meetings. When possible, stake conferences were scheduled to coincide with mission tours in order to curtail expense and to save wear on the General Authorities.

Lee, Harold B.PPIt was strenuous but rewarding and elevating work. Elder Lee could begin a mission tour feeling drained of energy; yet once the tour was under way, the weariness left as he began to mingle with the missionaries and to feel of their energy and dedication. The tour of the Western States Mission was especially rewarding. It aroused many memories of his own mission, especially as he met with the missionaries in the Denver mission home. It had been only twenty-five years since he had been a young elder laboring there. His reflections on all that had happened since then were tinged with a sense of nostalgia.

Lee, Harold B.PPAt New Haven, Connecticut, the home of Yale University, some missionaries suggested they should alter their presentation because of the high level of education there. Elder Lee disagreed, emphasizing that true conversion comes through spiritual, not intellectual, means. He also laid stress on the different levels of testimony noted in the forty-sixth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, urging those who lacked a personal, spiritual testimony to rely for the time being on the testimony of those who know (see D&C 46:11-14).

Lee, Harold B.PPOscar W. McConkie Sr., the father of Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, was president of the California Mission. Despite his distinguished legal career as an attorney and judge, and his notable gospel scholarship, Elder Lee found President McConkie to be humble, submissive, and companionable. As they traveled long hours together, they engaged in lengthy gospel conversations. Once Brother McConkie told of a vivid dream he had had in which Satan appeared to him. After reflecting on the incident and giving his interpretation, Elder Lee shared an experience about how he had rebuked the evil spirit in a woman, and the spirit spoke through her saying, "You are the head of the Church." President McConkie's interpretation of the incident as recorded by Elder Lee was "that the evil spirit in her had spoken, not of that which I now was, but of that which Satan knew I was ordained to become."

Lee, Harold B.PPOf the many stake reorganizations Elder Lee effected, none was more memorable than when he installed Aldredge Evans as president of the Ensign Stake. President Evans died a few weeks later. When some questioned the inspiration of calling one who would serve such a short time, Elder Lee explained that calls like this confirm foreordained calls given in premortal existence and that the quality of service, not the length of it, is the crucial thing. Our limited understanding may not grasp the importance of what one might accomplish in a short time, and such achievement may be something others could not do.

Lee, Harold B.PPPresident George Albert Smith died on his eighty-first birthday, April 4, 1951. Elder Lee and others were shocked when his successor, President David O. McKay, appointed Stephen L Richards and J. Reuben Clark as First and Second Counselors, respectively. It was a blow to President Clark, who had served as First Counselor to both Presidents Heber J. Grant and George Albert Smith. But President Clark taught the Church a great lesson when he emphasized that the quality, not the place, of service is paramount. During several years afterward, it was a concern to President Clark and Elder Lee that the growth of Church welfare was reined in and some basic changes were made in philosophy, such as when Church employees were placed under U.S. Social Security. This, however, did not affect the permanency of Church welfare, which was later expanded into the concept of provident living, embodying every aspect of life.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe scope of Elder Lee's vision of the Church's mission was enlarged when he was appointed to the executive committee of the Church Board of Education and to the Temple Committee. His experience as a professional teacher brought special insights to his new role in Church education, and his work on the Temple Committee led him into an in-depth study of the temple ordinances. For many years he gave instructions to new missionaries in the temple on the sanctity and significance of the endowment.

Lee, Harold B.PPAfter Elder Lee had served eleven years in the Twelve, his body began to rebel at the whirlwind pace he had maintained. In 1952 he suffered from serious abdominal distress and sinus trouble. The Brethren endeavored to give him some relief by sending him to Hawaii for two weeks. The several days' travel aboard the Lurline, in company with Fern and away from the telephone and meetings, was therapeutic. And a surgery performed later on his sinuses brought welcome relief.

Lee, Harold B.PPReturning from Hawaii, Elder Lee delivered the baccalaureate address at the Utah State University in Logan. The provocative title of his address, which he prepared while in Hawaii, was "I Dare You to Believe." At graduation exercises the following day, he received an honorary doctor of humanities degree.

Lee, Harold B.PPSoon after, Fern suffered a fractured hip in a fall at their home on Connor Street. Elder Lee was solicitous about her as she mended at home following her hospitalization. As she was beginning to move around, Elder Lee received an assignment to make a lengthy tour in the Orient. He was told to time his departure when Fern was well enough to accompany him. They left Salt Lake City on August 3, 1954. After a short stopover in Hawaii, where they stayed in the mission home with friends D. Arthur Haycock and his wife, Maurine, the Lees traveled to Yokohama, Japan, on the USS Cleveland. There they began a five-week tour, which included meetings with missionaries, members, and military personnel. Their itinerary included stops in many cities and military bases in Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, the Philippines, Okinawa, Guam, and Wake Island. Elder Lee met many military leaders who were uniformly compli mentary about the conduct of the LDS men under their command. One of these was General Maxwell D. Taylor, who later became the U.S. Army Chief of Staff. In Tokyo Elder Lee addressed a group comprising fifteen different religious denominations. The planned format was for him to speak and to respond to questions during an hour and a half period. They kept him for three hours and seemingly were reluctant to end it then.

Lee, Harold B.PPAs Elder Lee resumed his headquarters duties upon returning from the Orient, temple matters increasingly occupied more of his time. He had been given major responsibility to plan for the dedication of the Los Angeles Temple. President McKay had broken ground for this sacred building in September 1951. As it neared completion in early 1956, Elder Lee devoted much of his time to helping coordinate the complex details connected with the dedication. One night he had a vivid dream in which he saw President McKay giving instructions about the love of God. When President McKay offered the prayer dedicating the temple on March 11, 1956, Elder Lee was startled that the ending of the prayer repeated what he had seen in the dream. The impact on Elder Lee was profound and lasting. He felt it was a special message for him.

Lee, Harold B.PPA few months after the Los Angeles Temple dedication, Elder Lee was appointed to the board of directors of the Union Pacific Railroad Company. And shortly after that, he was appointed to the board of directors of the Equitable Life Insurance Company. His role in these two major corporations brought Elder Lee into regular contact with some of the premier business leaders of America. He considered the appointments to be a recognition of the Church and not of himself. Therefore, he looked upon this service merely as an extension of his apostolic responsibility. So the day before he was installed on the board of Union Pacific, he engaged in a special fast and prayer to the end that his service would be appropriate to his ecclesiastical calling and would benefit the Church. He served on these boards for many years, traveling regularly to New York for board meetings. He tried to arrange his Church assignments to coincide with the board meetings to economize on time and money.

Lee, Harold B.PPIn July 1957, while he was in New York for a board meeting, Elder Lee accompanied Elder Spencer W. Kimball to the office of a prominent physician and surgeon for an examination of Elder Kimball's throat. The doctor recommended surgery to remove a cancerous growth. Elder Lee emphasized the importance of Elder Kimball's voice and admonished the doctor to use utmost care to preserve it. Elder Kimball, grateful for Elder Lee's presence, felt it was the first time the doctor had truly understood his position in the Church and the need to do all possible to save his voice. Several months after the surgery, Elder Kimball accompanied Elder Lee on several conference assignments as Elder Kimball began to use his voice and to become accustomed to the amplifying equipment that was necessary to make it carry. From then on, a special bond of love existed between these two future Presidents of the Church.

Lee, Harold B.PPAccompanied by Fern, Elder Lee toured the South Africa Mission in the fall of 1958. Meetings were held, among other places, in Pretoria, Durban, and Cape Town, South Africa, and in Salisbury, Rhodesia. An electric feeling at a meeting in Durban caused the members to remain in their seats at its end. Only after Elder Lee had spoken a second time would they consent to leave. He found much uneasiness in South Africa because of the restrictive principles of apartheid. He deflected questions about the Church policy prohibiting blacks from holding the priesthood by explaining that any change would be based upon revelation from God. En route home, the Lees visited in Cairo, the Holy Land, Athens, and Rome. The historic sites in Jerusalem aroused great interest, especially the Garden Tomb, which Elder Lee felt was authentic. He did not have that feeling at other places.

Lee, Harold B.PPDespite a serious bleeding ulcer in the interim, which required massive transfusions, Elder Lee, accompanied by Fern, left the following August for a three-month tour of South America. He created the Brazil South Mission, headquartered in Curitiba, after which he spent nine busy days touring the mission with the mission president, Asael Sorenson, who, with his wife, had accompanied the Lees to Brazil. At Porto Alegre in southern Brazil, the gift of tongues was manifested when a young convert suddenly was able to understand Elder Lee perfectly, although she did not speak English. After holding numerous meetings in Uruguay, Paraguay, Argentina, and Chile, Elder Lee created the Andes Mission at a special meeting held in Lima, Peru. During his remarks, Elder Lee was quoted as saying the time would soon come when the descendants of Lehi would be inspired to accept the Book of Mormon and enter the Church in great numbers and that "the Pacific coast of the Americas will become the most fertile proselyting field of the Church." The later rich harvest of converts in Chile, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Central America, and Mexico validated this prediction. At Guatemala City, Guatemala, he had "a strong feeling that this place is without question the Lamanite capital of North America and that a temple for the Latin American people should be built here." That impression saw fruition on December 14, 1984, when a beautiful temple was dedicated in Guatemala City.

Lee, Harold B.PPNot long after returning from the tour of South America, Elder Lee was appointed chairman of the General Priesthood Committee and chairman of the All Church Coordinating Council. In these positions he began the vital work of coordinating the curricula of the Church and organizing all aspects of the work around the priesthood. This entailed creation of the Priesthood Missionary Committee, the Priesthood Welfare Committee, the Priesthood Genealogical Committee, and the Priesthood Home Teaching Committee. All this was done under the overall authority and direction of the First Presidency. His role in this represents one of the most significant contributions of Elder Harold B. Lee during his apostolic ministry.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe most stressful experience of Elder Lee's life occurred when Fern passed away on September 24, 1962. He grieved for months afterward, and life seemed to hold no meaning for him. Elder Lee began to recover from the shock when a friend on the board of Equitable Life, John A. Sibley, told him the loss of his wife was the most difficult ordeal he would ever face. Elder Lee began to heal from that moment. Later he was inspired to renew the acquaintance of Freda Joan Jensen, which culminated in their marriage on June 17, 1963. Joan Lee, who had acquired reputation as a professional educator, was a poised, gracious woman who filled a great void in Elder Lee's life. She provided love, companionship, support, and sound counsel during the remainder of his days. Both she and Elder Lee felt their marriage was destined to be. A priesthood blessing Joan had received years earlier hinted she would marry a distinguished man later in life.

Lee, Harold B.PPJoan Lee soon learned about the busy life of an Apostle when, not long after their marriage, she accompanied her husband on lengthy trips to Hawaii and Europe. She also learned soon about family trauma when Maurine Lee Wilkins passed away unexpectedly at age forty. Joan had been accepted into the family unequivocally and shared the deep pain of Maurine's loss with Elder Lee, who grieved over the death of his "Sunshine," the pet name he had given Maurine. And Joan also shared the concerns that Fern had had about Harold's health when, in April 1967, he underwent major surgery to remove part of his stomach damaged by an ulcer. This surgery and a later operation to remove a kidney stone mostly eliminated the headaches, weariness, and abdominal upset Elder Lee had suffered from over the years.

Lee, Harold B.PPLargely through the influence and recommendations of Elder Lee, the Regional Representatives of the Twelve were appointed in 1967 to provide continuing instruction in the field regarding missionary work, genealogical work, home teaching, and welfare. And the Training Committee, chaired by Elder Thomas S. Monson, was appointed to provide training modes for the Regional Representatives and for the General Authorities at stake conferences.

Lee, Harold B.PPFollowing the death of President David O. McKay on January 18, 1970, Joseph Fielding Smith was ordained as the tenth president of the Church. He selected Elder Lee and N. Eldon Tanner as his counselors. A pressing problem that faced the new leaders immediately was the varied and vicious attacks being made on the Church because of its policy that precluded blacks from holding the priesthood. It was decided to take steps to anticipate and to try to forestall such attacks in the future. President Smith authorized Elder Lee to take the lead in this effort. He convened a meeting in New York in February 1970 that included high leaders of the Church and Latter-day Saint leaders in business and the professions. The focus was on taking the initiative in media coverage regarding issues impacting the Church. There also was discussion about streamlining the procedures for preparing and distributing instructional materials throughout a rapidly growing worldwide church.

Lee, Harold B.PPOut of numerous meetings and discussions that followed, two new departments of the Church were created, the Internal Communications and External Communications Departments. Over the years the names were changed, but the functions remained the same: to take the initiative in media events affecting the Church and to simplify the preparation and distribution of instructional materials. The new First Presidency also took steps to relieve members of the Twelve of administrative responsibilities at Church headquarters; restructured the Church magazines to eliminate advertising; reorganized the Sunday School superintendency, replacing Superintendent David Lawrence McKay with Russell M. Nelson; combined the responsibility for constructing and maintaining Church buildings under the Physical Facilities Department; began a program for health service missionaries; and installed several new temple presidencies and arranged for the construction of new temples in Provo and Ogden, Utah.

Lee, Harold B.PPIn August 1971 President Lee joined President Joseph Fielding Smith, seven members of the Twelve, and other leaders in attending the first area general conference of the Church, held in Manchester, England. Thousands of Church members assembled from all over the British Isles. Talks given by President Smith and President Lee and others emphasized the international character of the Church and urged members to remain in their home countries.

Lee, Harold B.PPPresident Smith passed away quietly on July 2, 1972. A few days later, on July 7, Harold B. Lee was ordained and set apart as the eleventh President of the Church. Before the meeting in the temple where this occurred, President Lee spent long hours alone in the sacred rooms, seeking inspiration and guidance. At the press conference held afterward, he said he had no outlined plan to lead the Church but would rely on the inspiration of the Lord to guide him.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe following month he traveled to Mexico City to preside at an area conference that had been planned before President Smith's death. There he was sustained by a congregation as President of the Church for the first time. He ascribed the remarkable growth of the Church in Mexico to the Spirit of the Lord that "brooded over the land."

Lee, Harold B.PPBefore the October general conference, at which time the general membership of the Church sustained him President of the Church during a Solemn Assembly, he traveled to Europe and the Middle East with Sister Lee and Elder Gordon B. Hinckley and his wife, Marjorie. In Greece and the Holy Land he suffered severe back pains. And in Jerusalem, following an administration by Elder Hinckley and mission president Edwin Q. Cannon, he coughed up clots of blood, which ended his distress. President Lee felt his life had been miraculously preserved. Even so, he had the sense that his remaining days would be few.

Lee, Harold B.PPFollowing the Mexico Area Conference, the prophet spent long hours alone in the temple seeking inspiration about filling the vacancy in the Twelve caused by his selection of Marion G. Romney as his Second Counselor. It was revealed to him that Bruce R. McConkie should be called. When he presented Elder McConkie's name to his counselors, N. Eldon Tanner and President Romney, they confided that they had received the same inspiration. Elder McConkie was the only Apostle called by President Lee.

Lee, Harold B.PPAfter the Mexico Area Conference, President Lee received a threat of assassination from a group of apostates. This caused a tightening of Church security. Local and federal officers also became involved in trying to capture the criminals. This cast a shadow of apprehension over President Lee and his family that remained during the balance of his life.

Lee, Harold B.PPMeanwhile, he moved forward confidently in his prophetic role. At his direction the Aaronic Priesthood MIA and the Melchizedek Priesthood MIA were created. The APMIA, which was placed under the Presiding Bishopric, focused on youth activities through the existing Young Men and Young Women organizations. The MPMIA, which was headed by three Assistants to the Twelve—James E. Faust, Marion D. Hanks, and L. Tom Perry—focused on activities for single adults. Because of his lonely experiences as a single following Fern's death, President Lee took special interest in the work of the MPMIA.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe prophet was flooded with invitations to speak. Those he accepted reflected his leanings. Beginning a month after the Solemn Assembly, he addressed large groups of young people in Mesa, Arizona; Pocatello, Idaho; Billings, Montana; Long Beach, California; and Salt Lake City and Provo, Utah. The youth had an almost worshipful attitude toward him, reflected in the way they thronged him. Anxious that this not be overdone, President Lee sought to minimize it. There was no way to eliminate it except to discontinue speaking to them. Unwilling to do this, he later restricted the number of such talks.

Lee, Harold B.PPBut the prophet's magnetic appeal was not limited to the youth; it affected people of all ages. Marion G. Romney "was captivated by his magnetic presence" the first time he met Brother Lee. "I have never been associated with a man who drew more heavily upon the powers of heaven than Harold B. Lee. We who sat with him daily were frequently amazed at the breadth of his vision and the depth of his understanding."

Lee, Harold B.PPDuring the last months of his life, President Lee set in motion the initiatives for smaller temples, training by satellite, more careful budgetary control, and the renovation of the Church Administration Building. He also dedicated the new Church Office Building and hosted a reception there at which community leaders were welcomed.

Lee, Harold B.PPIn August 1973 President Lee headed a delegation from Church headquarters to attend the area conference in Munich, Germany. Afterward, he and Joan and Elder and Sister Gordon B. Hinckley visited missions in Vienna and England, where many meetings were held with Church leaders and missionaries.

Lee, Harold B.PPThroughout this period, there was much tension growing from the earlier threats of assassination. The threats came closer to home when a toxic material was found in President Lee's water pitcher. A diligent search failed to reveal the guilty party, thereby increasing the anxieties.

Lee, Harold B.PPAs the Christmas season approached, President Lee helped Joan shop and decorate their home. They also attended a series of Christmas parties—with the Deseret Industries and Beehive Clothing Mills workers, Church employees, and the officers and staff of Beneficial Life. At the Beneficial Life banquet, the prophet spoke briefly and offered a prayer. Douglas Smith, company president, said: "Most of us were extremely hesitant to open our eyes, because we knew he was talking with the Lord. His deep, compassionate love for all of the children of the Lord—Arab, Jew, and Gentile—was appealingly expressed." He never spoke in public again.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe day after Christmas, President Lee entered the hospital for a checkup that was thought to be routine. That night he suffered a cardiac arrest and passed away suddenly and unexpectedly. The shock of his death was heightened by the fact that most people were unaware of the serious physical problems he had coped with over the years.

Lee, Harold B.PPThe narrative of his life does not begin to tell the story of the impact that President Harold B. Lee had on his times and on his contemporaries, nor upon the organization to which he had devoted his life, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. As he had said when he came to the prophetic office, the true measure of his achievements will be found only in the hearts and the minds of those touched by his ministry.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Harold B. Lee: Man of Vision, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1993) and the sources cited therein.
