Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Twelve

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer W. Kimball

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer Woolley Kimball, the twelfth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was almost named Roberts Kimball. At the time of his birth on March 28, 1895, the baby's father, Andrew Kimball, was a member of the Utah Constitutional Convention. Andrew was so impressed by a talk B. H. Roberts gave to the convention that he wanted to name the baby after him. The mother, Olive Woolley Kimball, resisted the idea. She had nothing against Elder Roberts but emphatically rejected the theme of his talk, which opposed women's suffrage. Since Andrew only wanted to recognize the speaker's eloquence, not his political views, he yielded to Olive's feelings.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThe new baby had impressive family credentials. His father, a son of President Heber C. Kimball, was president of the Indian Territory Mission. His maternal grandfather, Edwin D. Woolley, a longtime bishop, was once a business agent for President Brigham Young. His uncle J. Golden Kimball was a member of the First Council of Seventy. And his father's twin sister, Alice, was one of the plural wives of President Joseph F. Smith, then Second Counselor in the First Presidency.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThe Kimballs' promising future in Salt Lake City, surrounded by influential relatives and friends, was interrupted in January 1898 when Andrew was called as president of the St. Joseph Stake in the Gila Valley of southeastern Arizona. Andrew moved his family there four months later. Among the five Kimball children was three-year-old Spencer, active, exuberant, and cherubic.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPFrom earliest youth, Spencer sought to emulate his parents, whom he idolized. No man stood higher in his estimation than Andrew Kimball. He said his mother was "faultless, . . . the epitome of perfection. Who could even mention one virtue she had not possessed?" They taught him faith in God, the efficacy of prayer, and the rewards of paying tithing, serving others, and observing the Word of Wisdom. They also taught him to work. Indeed, work became an obsession with Spencer W. Kimball. Except during occasional moments of relaxation or while on vacation, he seemed compelled always to be doing something. This characteristic was evident in all his activities. It was especially conspicuous when he became President of the Church. He sought to imbue all Church members with his penchant for work by encouraging them to lengthen their stride, quicken their pace, and extend their reach. Later these were combined into one punchy admonition: "Do It."

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer's industrious habits were first developed around the family home and farm. He graduated from house chores to outside jobs of planting, weeding, haying, and milking. His industry carried over into schoolwork and athletics, and he excelled in both. Popularity among his peers was enhanced by his ability to sing and to play the piano and was illustrated by his regular election as a class officer.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPAs the boy's character emerged, the father foresaw a distinguished future for him. "That boy Spencer is an exceptional boy," he told a neighbor. "He always tries to mind me, whatever I ask him to do. I have dedicated him to be one of the mouthpieces of the Lord. The Lord willing, you will see him some day as a great leader." Others had similar spiritual impressions about Spencer W. Kimball's future.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPAfter Spencer was baptized, he sought to keep the commandments exactly. He also responded eagerly to challenges. When a visitor from Salt Lake City urged the youth to read the Bible, he started that night and persisted reading in it each day until he had finished. And when he heard the prediction of a critic that the Church would begin to decline in the third generation, he adamantly declared it would not be so, he being of that generation. Such focus and tenacity were reflected repeatedly during his life.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer Kimball was exposed to sorrow early in his youth. During the period of a few months before he reached his teenage years, three of his sisters and his mother died. Olive's death hit him especially hard. He mourned and wept for many days and would not be consoled. The eulogies spoken at her funeral helped to ease the pain, but it was never erased completely. Even in his maturity, Spencer felt occasional pangs of loss at her passing.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThe need for a mother in the home and Olive's urging before she died caused Andrew not to delay remarriage. With the approval of the children, he courted and married Josephine Cluff, a schoolteacher and mother who had been married previously.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPAunt Josie, whom Spencer loved and admired, played an important role in his development. Her background in teaching helped him succeed at the stake academy he attended after completing grammar school. At the academy, he excelled academically and socially, as well as in sports. Yet he was not above boyish pranks. He and a partner once concocted a batch of rotten egg gas, which interrupted classes and earned Spencer a B in chemistry, the only blot on his otherwise perfect A record. He also led a protest against a school decree forbidding April Fools' Day jokes. Spencer and his friends skipped school and spent the day at a nearby resort.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPPerhaps concerned about his son's role in the protest, Andrew Kimball announced at the academy graduation that Spencer would not attend the university the next year but would go on a mission. Spencer was surprised but not displeased. He spent the summer working at a dairy near Globe, Arizona, to earn money. His original call was to the Swiss-German Mission, but his call was changed to the Central States Mission because of unrest in Europe.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer left Thatcher on September 30, 1914. During several days in Salt Lake City, he received his temple endowment, was ordained a seventy by his uncle J. Golden Kimball, and was set apart by Elder Seymour B. Young. He left Salt Lake City on October 21 destined for the mission headquarters in Independence, Missouri.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPMission president Samuel O. Bennion assigned Elder Kimball to temporary duty in Independence. He spent a month helping to spruce up the grounds and the interior of a new chapel that was dedicated by his uncle Joseph F. Smith, then President of the Church. Sporadically during this period he tracted and held cottage meetings. His first permanent assignment was to the Missouri East Conference, with headquarters in St. Louis. He first did country work in the Ozarks, then labored in St. Louis and Hannibal. Shortly before Christmas 1915, he was transferred back to St. Louis, where he was appointed acting conference president. It was a great challenge for a "temporary" leader not yet twenty-one to direct thirty-five missionaries, many of whom were older and more experienced than he. Spencer performed so well under pressure that his appointment was made permanent a few weeks later.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPHe led by example, never asking the missionaries to do anything he had not done or was not prepared to do. The work prospered under his leadership: baptisms increased, the local leaders and missionaries were carefully trained, and he supervised the acquisition and renovation of a chapel in St. Louis.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPEn route home after his release, Elder Kimball stopped in Independence, where President Bennion commended him for his work; in Salt Lake City, where he reported to the First Presidency; and in Los Angeles and Tucson, where he visited siblings Clare and Gordon and their families. He arrived in Thatcher on December 31, 1916.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer immediately enrolled at the University of Arizona in Tucson. Overcoming an initial sense of intimidation at such a large school, he competed hard and excelled. His aim to be a teacher was diverted when the United States entered World War I in April 1917. He completed the semester, registered for the draft, and then worked temporarily in Los Angeles and on a ranch near Thatcher, helping to drill a well. A newspaper he read at the ranch reported on plans for the coming school year at St. Joseph Stake Academy. The list of teachers included the name Camilla Eyring. Spencer received a spiritual impression that this teacher was to be his wife, though he hardly knew her.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer had decided to attend Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, while waiting to be drafted. After finishing the job at the ranch, he spent a few weeks in Thatcher. When he caught the jitney bus to Pima one day to visit a friend, Camilla Eyring was on the same bus going home. This began a hurried round of socializing. When Spencer left for Provo, Camilla gave him a box of homemade candy; and later at his request, she sent him her picture. They corresponded frequently. The draft board called up Spencer's number while he was in Utah. When he returned, expecting to leave any day, he courted Camilla, who accepted his proposal of marriage. Because it was not possible for them to travel to the faraway Salt Lake Temple at the time, they were married by the local bishop on November 16, 1917. Spencer wore his army uniform at the wedding. The nuptials were performed in the Eyring home, where they spent their honeymoon.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPChanges in army quotas delayed Spencer's call to active duty. When it appeared the delay would be indefinite, he was hired at the Citizens Bank. The newlyweds lived first with Spencer's parents, then with his sister Alice and her husband, George Nelson, and then rented a three-room house in Thatcher. Since Camilla had conceived shortly after the marriage, they wanted a temple sealing before their child was born. They traveled to Salt Lake City in early June for this purpose. The child, Spencer LeVan, was born August 26, 1918. Spencer was then reclassified in the draft, which made his call to active duty unlikely. Any question was resolved with the Armistice in November. When the Citizens Bank was reorganized and its name changed to the Arizona Trust and Savings Bank, the Kimballs moved closer to the bank in Safford and bought a home. After a daughter, Olive Beth, was born on July 31, 1922, their lives seemed picture perfect.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThis is not to say that they faced no challenges, however. Aunt Josie died in October, and Spencer leased the Safford home and moved his family back to Thatcher to live with his sorrowing father. Ten months later, when Andrew married Mary Connelly, they returned to Safford. Mary was a member of the YWMIA general board and editor of the Young Woman's Journal.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPFinancial upset occurred the following year when a recession caused the failure of the bank where Spencer worked. Spencer was fortunate to obtain employment at the Bank of Safford, but at a reduced salary.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPHe suffered deep anguish in 1924 when his father died. President Heber J. Grant spoke at funeral services in Salt Lake City, then traveled to Thatcher for final services where he spoke again. When the St. Joseph Stake presidency was reorganized at a special meeting held afterward, Spencer was sustained as second counselor.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPDissatisfied with his economic progress at the bank, Spencer formed a partnership with Joseph Greenhalgh in 1927. The firm dealt in insurance, bonds, and real estate. It prospered until the Great Depression, which was signaled by the market crash of October 1929. Conditions worsened for the firm when a bank in which it had deposits failed and when an insurance company that carried some of its policies went under. The Kimball-Greenhalgh Agency managed to survive by careful planning and strict economy. Spencer's meager income from the firm during this period was supplemented by accounting fees he received from several canal companies and a cotton growers' association.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThe economy in the Gila Valley improved some when legislation favorable to agriculture was passed by Congress after Franklin D. Roosevelt took office in March 1933. But later that year the Kimballs were rocked by personal tragedy when their three-year-old son, Edward, was stricken with polio. He was hospitalized in Los Angeles for ten weeks. Camilla lived in an apartment near the hospital. Spencer was there intermittently but returned often to Safford to attend to his Church and business duties and to be near the other three children, LeVan, Olive Beth, and young Andrew, who had been born in 1927.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThe heavy expense of Eddie's care almost ruined his father financially. The burden was lifted in part by help from the March of Dimes. Ever after the Kimballs were avid supporters of the March of Dimes and liberal contributors to its fund-raising drives.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThree years after Eddie was stricken, and as he was beginning to walk haltingly, he suffered a broken leg in a school-yard accident. Some wondered why an exemplary family like the Kimballs was burdened with such adversity. But the Kimballs did not regard it as a sign of retribution or unfairness. While deeply stressed by the circumstances, they looked upon it philosophically as being merely the natural consequences of living in a dangerous and uncertain world. This same philosophy provided stoic comfort during the many physical ailments Spencer W. Kimball suffered later.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer's leadership talents were showcased when he was appointed chairman of the St. Joseph Stake's golden jubilee celebration in February 1933. The event, which took place over four days, included parades, competitions, dances, dramas, musical performances, and religious services. The highlight was the participation of President Heber J. Grant, who had traveled there from Salt Lake City. Such was the effect of Spencer's expert direction of the jubilee that a member of the stake, Eli Abegg, was heard to say, "I want to tell you in the name of Jesus Christ that Spencer Kimball will one day become an Apostle of the Church."

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSpencer's increased stature in the Church was accompanied by a growing prominence in community affairs. In 1936 he was elected by acclamation as the Arizona district governor of Rotary International. He was the first Latter-day Saint to occupy this position. His tenure was marked by a significant growth in membership and a reemphasis on service to others. As a reward, the local Rotary Clubs financed Spencer's attendance at the international Rotary convention in Nice, France, in 1937. Camilla accompanied him at their own expense. The Kimballs also expanded the trip to include a tour of ten European countries over a period of ten weeks. Because Spencer had been released from the stake presidency after twelve years of service, he was able to go on the trip without hindrance to the stake president. Spencer's duties as stake clerk were easily handled by a subordinate.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThe Kimballs traveled to Nice via Montreal, LeHavre, and Paris. In Montreal they visited LeVan, who was serving as a missionary. At Nice they joined enthusiastically in all the events of the convention without compromising their standards. When fellow Rotarians who were not members of the Church learned about the Kimballs' commitment to the Word of Wisdom, they were understanding when the couple declined wines and liquors. They did so without any sense of self-righteousness or without impugning the habits of those of their friends who drank.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPAfter leaving Nice, the travelers toured in Italy, Yugoslavia, Hungary, Austria, Switzerland, Germany, France, the Netherlands, Belgium, and England. They took pictures, wrote in their diaries, and gathered literature wherever they went. And after arriving in New York on the return trip, they traveled across the United States, seeing many parts of the country they had never visited before. The experience changed their perceptions of the world forever.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPAt home again the Kimballs were invited to speak about their trip to several groups in and out of the Church. Because Spencer had been released from the stake presidency and had completed his term as district governor of Rotary International, the Kimballs felt sure they would never again occupy high-profile positions and that they could settle comfortably into their "little niche." To this end they planned and built their dream home with a Spanish and Indian motif and intended to enjoy the good life among their family and friends.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPTheir plans were somewhat altered a few months later, when the St. Joseph Stake was divided and Spencer was called as president of the new Mount Graham Stake. This role required that he regularly attend the general conferences of the Church in Salt Lake City. Present at the April 1941 annual general conference, Spencer saw Harold B. Lee sustained as a member of the Twelve. He knew Elder Lee well from their work together on welfare matters. This acquaintance became closer following a devastating flood on the Gila River in late September that year. The efficient way President Kimball applied welfare principles in helping victims of the flood and in mitigating the damage it caused attracted widespread attention, especially among welfare leaders in Salt Lake City. It was the first instance in which the welfare plan had been tested in a disaster situation. Harold B. Lee and Marion G. Romney visited Safford shortly after the flood to inspect the damage and to review the procedures President Kimball and his associates had followed. Elder Lee visited again in company with President J. Reuben Clark, and President David O. McKay visited later. Afterward when Spencer attended general conferences in Salt Lake City, he was recognized as he never had been before. On two occasions, for instance, he was invited to stay in the home of President J. Reuben Clark, who was his cousin through the Woolley line.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPIt was against this background that Spencer W. Kimball was called to the Twelve. At President Grant's request, President Clark extended the call by telephone on July 8, 1943. Brother Kimball was honored but overwhelmed. And he was troubled too. He wondered whether he had been called by revelation or whether it resulted from the publicity given to the flood or from his relationship to President Clark. He was authorized to travel to Salt Lake City to discuss it. On the way he and Camilla stopped in Boulder, Colorado, to visit LeVan, who was studying at the University of Colorado. Early one morning Spencer climbed alone up a mountain west of the city. As the result of anxious, struggling prayers offered there, he received spiritual confirmation that his call had come by revelation. President David O. McKay affirmed this when he met later with Spencer in Salt Lake City.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPDuring a period of several weeks, Elder Kimball closed out his affairs in Safford, selling the business, resigning from various boards and committees, and helping Camilla pack for the move to Salt Lake City. The family left by automobile for their new home on August 26, 1943. It was a sad but exciting time. While everyone was caught up in the adventure of the move, it was wrenching, especially for Camilla and the boys, Andrew and Eddie, to be uprooted and planted in a new place where they were relatively unknown, except for Elder Kimball's prominence as a General Authority. Over a period of weeks, the initial difficulties of relocating were solved as the family moved into a lovely home leased from Graham Doxey, who had been called as a mission president; as Camilla found relief from a nagging physical problem through treatment at the hospital; and as the boys formed friendships in their new schools.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPElder Kimball returned to Safford in September for the reorganization of the Mount Graham Stake presidency, with Elder Harold B. Lee presiding. At the October 1943 general conference, Elder Kimball was presented and sustained as a member of the Twelve; and he was ordained and set apart by President Heber J. Grant on October 7.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThe new Apostle was shocked a month after his ordination when Elder Richard R. Lyman of the Quorum of the Twelve was excommunicated. Elder Kimball learned that high position does not insulate one from temptation or from the consequences of transgression. Elder Harold B. Lee helped compose his feelings during a stake conference assignment they had together shortly afterward. Accompanying other Apostles like Elder Lee on assignment was an important part of Spencer's early training in the Twelve. As he began to conduct stake conferences or mission tours alone or with other Church leaders junior to him, Elder Kimball reflected his own leadership style. This was characterized by a careful analysis of local conditions and personnel and specific suggestions or challenges aimed at improving performance. He was earnest in his public addresses and avoided any hint of levity. In the early years he sometimes dramatized a talk by singing a song whose lyrics were pertinent to his subject. In the homes of the Saints he was jovial and friendly, sometimes playing the piano and singing for their entertainment. In rural areas, he insisted on helping with the chores, such as milking and feeding the animals. The members looked forward to his visits.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPShortly after becoming President of the Church following the death of Heber J. Grant on May 14, 1945, President George Albert Smith assigned Elder Kimball to the Lamanite Committee. On September 13, 1946, he appointed Spencer chairman of the committee and instructed him to "watch all the Indians . . . in all the world." This fulfilled a promise in Elder Kimball's patriarchal blessing about how his ministry would include important work among the Lamanites. A few weeks later while attending a stake conference in Pleasant Grove, Utah, Elder Kimball had a frightening experience with an evil spirit, which he banished from his bedroom by invoking the power of the priesthood. He equated this with Heber C. Kimball's experience with evil spirits in Preston, England, at the threshold of the work there. Thus began Spencer W. Kimball's lifelong work among the Lamanites and minorities throughout the world, whom he sought to lift and bless by changing attitudes toward them through publicity.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPIt was during a tour of the Navajo-Zuni Mission in May 1948 that Elder Kimball suffered his first heart attack. It was triggered when he and Golden Buchanan attempted to push their car out of the sand where it had become lodged. That night at the home of Glen Stapley in Phoenix, Arizona, he experienced massive chest pains after a bath. He ignored them and went on for eleven days traveling through rough country in several Indian reservations. Word leaked out what had happened, and the Brethren instructed him to end the tour. Ignoring the doctor's advice to rest, Elder Kimball later suffered another painful episode during a stake conference. This convinced him of the need to rest. He convalesced for several months, first at home, then on an Indian reservation in New Mexico, and finally at Long Beach, California. In late September he was permitted to resume work.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPElder Kimball worked steadily for fifteen months while suffering intermittent attacks of pain. He kept these to himself for fear he would be grounded again. However, in December 1949 they became so severe that he consulted a doctor. The Brethren excused him from all assignments and urged him to rest. He spent several weeks in the Gila Valley, followed by several weeks in California. By the spring of 1950 his condition was much improved, and he was ready to return to work.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPUnfortunately, the improvement in his heart condition coincided with the worsening of a hoarseness he had had for several months. It was suspected that he had cancer of the throat, and a biopsy operation was set for April 11, 1950. Although the specimen did not reveal cancer, Elder Kimball was despondent, especially because the operation had temporarily robbed him of speech. Shortly afterward, he received a blessing conferred by President J. Reuben Clark and Elders Harold B. Lee and Henry D. Moyle. He always considered the results to be a miracle. For six years he was able to use his voice normally without discomfort.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPWhen David O. McKay became President of the Church in 1951, he asked Elder Kimball to continue his work with the Lamanites. Spencer also began to travel extensively in the international areas of the Church. He toured in Mexico in company with Elder Harold B. Lee and in Central America with Elder Bruce R. McConkie. During the latter tour in October and November 1952, he dedicated Central America for the preaching of the gospel.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPElder Kimball's most extensive overseas assignment was in 1955 when he spent five months touring missions in Europe and Great Britain. He and Camilla left Salt Lake City in April after general conference. In Europe two things stood out as Elder Kimball instructed the young missionaries—their unusual capability in a new language and the inordinate amount of time being spent in non-missionary work like sprucing up chapels. He admonished them to concentrate on actual proselytizing and to work longer and harder. It was troubling when he learned that word of his message had preceded him into a mission and caused some to tune him out before he had begun. He wondered at first whether he was too strict. But the positive feedback he received from others convinced him the message was needed, so he continued to deliver it without restraint or apology.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPElder Kimball was shocked by the devastation wrought upon Germany during World War II, but he was pleased with the advances the Church had made in that land since then. He also was pleased and honored to dedicate a small chapel in Preston, England, where his grandfather Heber C. Kimball had begun the work abroad in 1837. His tour ended in Switzerland in September 1955, where he and Camilla were privileged to attend the dedication of the temple in Zollikofen, a suburb of Bern.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPWhile Elder Kimball was traveling to Safford for a stake conference in December 1956, his car slid off an ice-covered mountain road near Jacob Lake, north of the Grand Canyon, seriously injuring Camilla. She was taken to Kanab, Utah, where she remained in a clinic until Spencer returned on his way home. And two months later, Elder Kimball's throat problems flared up again. In February 1957 he traveled to New York, where Dr. Hayes Martin performed a biopsy. The patient was ordered not to use his voice for a month. Spencer was concerned because he had not consulted with President McKay before having the biopsy. He had thought the biopsy could be accomplished while he was on an assignment in the East and that he could continue his work without interruption and without troubling the prophet. His failure to consult President McKay created an awkwardness between them for a while. This ended when Spencer submitted a complete report explaining his actions.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPWhen Elder Kimball had to return to New York months later to undergo extensive surgery on his throat, President McKay asked Elder Harold B. Lee to accompany him when he visited the doctor. Elder Lee explained Elder Kimball's role as an Apostle and the vital need to retain the ability to speak. Spencer felt this was the first time the doctor had fully understood his role and the critical nature of the surgery. He was ever grateful to Elder Lee for his presence on that occasion.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPOver a period of months following the surgery, Elder Kimball gradually began to use his voice again. He first called it a "still small voice"; later he called it a gruff voice. It actually was a mellow, appealing voice that reminded audiences of the physical trauma he had suffered and caused them to listen to his words more intently. His first talk after the surgery was given at a stake conference in Safford, Arizona, where he told his old friends he had gone east and had fallen among thieves and cutthroats. Later he accompanied Elder Lee to Texas and Louisiana for a series of meetings where he tested his voice under all the conditions he would face when he returned to full duty.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPBy late 1958 Elder Kimball was ready to accept overseas assignments again. In December he was asked to tour South America. He and Camilla left Salt Lake on January 16, 1959. During a ten-week period they visited and held meetings in Brazil, Uruguay, Paraguay, Argentina, Chile, Peru, and Bolivia. When he returned to Salt Lake City, he was an unabashed booster for South America. He said that Horace Greeley's famous statement—"Go west young man, go west"—should be changed to "Go south young man, go south." He recommended the creation of three new missions in South America and expressed the opinion that in the not-so-distant future, stakes should be created in Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina. These recommendations were implemented later.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPWhile Elder Kimball was determined in moving the work along, he was usually mild mannered in talking to members and leaders. However, if he detected a spirit of rebellion or obstinacy, he was outspoken in condemning it. Such a situation arose while he toured a mission shortly after returning from South America. "We carried our call to repentance over nearly twenty minutes into the priesthood meeting time," he wrote, "and left it on a note of warning. I told them it was the first step to apostasy and bore down weightily." There were steel and fire in this man that usually were concealed under a cloak of benign goodwill.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPIn October 1960 the Kimballs left for the South Pacific. Elder Kimball created two new stakes in Australia and two in New Zealand. He also held a stake conference in Sydney, Australia, reorganized the Auckland New Zealand Stake, and toured the New Zealand and New Zealand South Missions. Originally he also was assigned to tour two missions in Australia but was excused from that when word reached Salt Lake City that he seemed to be tiring. He could have returned home in time for Christmas. Instead, he decided to go around the world and headed west instead of east. During two months, Spencer and Camilla saw things they had only dreamed about and never thought they would see. Ever after, names like Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Saigon, Bangkok, Rangoon, Calcutta, Delhi, Karachi, and Beirut conjured up images of places they had seen in person. They were especially impressed with Egypt and the Holy Land, where they visited the major historic sites. Elder Kimball questioned the authenticity of some of them but felt the Garden Tomb in Jerusalem was authentic. Stops in Greece, Italy, Spain, and Portugal completed their world tour.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPFor several years Elder Kimball's international travels were centered largely in South America. In addition to the trip in 1959, he made eight lengthy tours there in the 1960s, holding numerous meetings with missionaries and members and training local leaders in the skills necessary for stakehood. His efforts were rewarded when on May 1, 1966, he organized a stake in SÃ£o Paulo, Brazil, the first stake in South America. Six months later he organized a stake in Buenos Aires, Argentina; and on November 12, 1967, he organized an additional stake in Montevideo, Uruguay. Meanwhile, other missions were created in South America, fueling a growth in Church membership that would literally explode in the years ahead. Doubtless contributing to that future explosion were impressions planted in Elder Kimball's mind as he saw the sadness created when members of black ancestry were precluded from full Church blessings because of the Church policy on priesthood.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPIn 1968 Elder Kimball was released from his duties in South America and was given apostolic responsibility for the missions in Great Britain. He made several lengthy tours there, urging missionaries and members to work harder, more efficiently, and more purposefully. He also encouraged the members to remain in their own communities and to build up the Church locally.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPAfter President David O. McKay died on January 18, 1970, Elder Kimball was set apart as the Acting President of the Twelve. Harold B. Lee, who was called as the first counselor to President Joseph Fielding Smith, was also the President of the Twelve. Elder Kimball was sustained as the Acting President of the Twelve at the April 1970 General Conference.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPAfter recuperating from prostate surgery in October 1970, Elder Kimball toured extensively in the Pacific, holding meetings in Tonga, Samoa, Fiji, and Hawaii. Then in August 1971 he traveled to Manchester, England, where he joined with members of the First Presidency and the Twelve and other General Authorities in holding the first area general conference.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPOn returning from England, Elder Kimball suffered a recurrence of both his throat and heart problems. Deciding to try to stabilize the throat problem first, he underwent twenty-four cobalt treatments during November and December 1971. Then on April 12, 1972, he underwent open-heart surgery. The lead surgeon, Dr. Russell M. Nelson, said he had the spiritual impression at the time that Spencer W. Kimball ultimately would become President of the Church.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPFollowing the death of President Joseph Fielding Smith on July 2, 1972, Elder Kimball was set apart as President of the Twelve. At the same time, Harold B. Lee was ordained and set apart as the eleventh President of the Church, with N. Eldon Tanner and Marion G. Romney as his counselors.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPWith his heart and throat problems temporarily under control, President Kimball was imbued with a great sense of enthusiasm as he directed the affairs of the Twelve. He wrote once as he went to the temple, "My heart is singing." He accompanied a group of Church leaders to Mexico City in August 1972 for the second area general conference, made a lengthy trip to the Orient for a series of important meetings, and attended the third area general conference in Munich, Germany, in August 1973.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPPresident Kimball was stunned, as were members of the Church worldwide, when President Harold B. Lee passed away suddenly on December 26, 1973. Being four years older than President Lee, and seemingly in poorer health, he never expected to survive him. He seemed to be in a state of shock when he was ordained and set apart as the twelfth President of the Church on December 30. In the press conference that followed, he said he intended to carry out the policies and programs of his predecessors.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPThe prophetic mantle publicly fell upon President Kimball on April 4, 1974, as he addressed a Regional Representatives' seminar. There he called for a greater emphasis on missionary work, asked the members of the Church to lengthen their stride and leave the plateau of achievement they had lingered on too long, and urged a stronger effort in reactivation. He repeated and enlarged on this message at the Regional Representatives' seminar in October 1974. And in a major talk delivered in general conference, he touched on more than a dozen subjects, including a campaign to clean up homes and farms, a warning against polygamist cults, the Word of Wisdom, Sabbath shopping, card playing, food storage, the virtues of work, frugality, living within one's means, the evils of blasphemy and profanity, avoidance of pornography, the destructive effect of abortion and adultery, and a warning against the evil influences of satanic forces. These themes and others also were developed in the many area general conferences held afterward.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPIllustrating what he meant by a lengthened stride, President Kimball announced there would be not one but seven area general conferences during the following year: in Scandinavia, SÃ£o Paulo, Buenos Aires, Tokyo, Manila, Taipei, and Seoul. He explained that since the Church belonged to the people, he intended to take the conferences to members throughout the world, encouraging them to "stay where they are and build Zion." President Kimball continued to hold area general conferences in all parts of the world for another five years. In planning them, he insisted there be no gaps in the scheduling for extra rest. He had an interesting definition of the term rest. He said the word was not synonymous with relaxation but meant the feeling of joy and satisfaction that one receives from doing one's duty.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPDuring President Kimball's tenure as the head of the Church, twenty-six temples were dedicated or rededicated. He emphasized the need for templegoers to be worthy. He also emphasized that temples were not only places of peace and quiet where patrons could find rest and renewal but that they were workplaces. He envisioned the time when work would be carried on in the temples day and night.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPSignificant organizational changes occurred while he presided. A needed decentralization took place when stake presidents were authorized to ordain bishops and patriarchs. Auxiliary general conferences were discontinued and area, regional, and stake gatherings emphasized. In October 1975 the First Quorum of Seventy was reinstituted when three members in addition to the seven presidents were called. In addition, high priests were called to the Seventy, resolving questions of whether this aspect of organization, which had existed since the early days of the Church, was appropriate in modern times. Later, all Assistants to the Twelve were transferred to the Seventy. Three executive councils were created and given responsibility to oversee certain duties at headquarters and the work in areas throughout the world. Area presidencies were put in place, answerable to the executive councils and, through them, to the Twelve and the First Presidency.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPAlso, fifty-eight solemn assemblies were organized and carried out under President Kimball's direction. In these special meetings instructions were given to local priesthood leaders about crucial issues facing the Church.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPPresident Kimball's most significant and enduring contribution to the work was the revelation on priesthood he received and which was announced on June 9, 1978. This made the priesthood and its blessings available to all worthy male members of the Church. The announcement was preceded by months of fervent prayers offered by the prophet in the temple and with his brethren. On May 4, following a council meeting, Elder LeGrand Richards told the Brethren that during the meeting he had seen a personage, whom he thought to be President Wilford Woodruff, dressed in white and sitting in the room. "I thought at the time," Elder Richards said, "The reason I was privileged to see him was probably that I was the only one there who had ever seen President Woodruff while he was upon the earth." (Lucile C. Tate, LeGrand Richards: Beloved Apostle [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], p. 292.) President Woodruff had wrestled with the problem of plural marriage nearly a hundred years earlier, and that matter was resolved through revelation, as the priesthood question would also be resolved.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPCulminating this process, the First Presidency and the Twelve met in the upper room of the temple, and a powerful, confirming spirit came to the Brethren as they prayed together. All the General Authorities accepted and sustained the revelation, as did the members of the Church assembled in a general conference. Latter-day Saints around the world greeted the revelation with joyous approval.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPShortly after the revelation on priesthood was announced, President Kimball dedicated the Monument to Women in Nauvoo. The prophet was most supportive of the aims of women. While recognizing that childbearing and childrearing are a woman's most important duty, he urged them to become educated and to develop their innate talents to the maximum extent.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPIn September 1979 President Kimball underwent surgery for a subdural hematoma, and he later underwent two other such operations. He also suffered from cataracts, ear problems, hernias, and back pains. These disabilities impeded the performance of his duties but did not disrupt them. He continued to direct the work, mostly by delegation through his counselors. When his counselors, N. Eldon Tanner and Marion G. Romney, developed physical problems, he called Elder Gordon B. Hinckley to the First Presidency in July 1981. At the death of President Tanner in November 1982, Brother Romney became President Kimball's First Counselor and Brother Hinckley became Second Counselor. As President Romney's health waned, President Hinckley directed the ongoing affairs of the Church through delegation from the prophet. He never exceeded his delegated authority and always obtained President Kimball's approval and direction before actions out of the ordinary were taken.

Kimball, Spencer W.PPPresident Kimball passed away quietly on November 5, 1985. The eulogies at his funeral appropriately lauded his character and achievements. Nothing was said, however, or could have been said, to memorialize him better than the example he set of constant, concerned and unwearied work in the cause to which he had dedicated his life.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Spencer W. Kimball: Resolute Disciple, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1995) and the sources cited therein.
