Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Thirteen

Benson, Ezra TaftPPEzra Taft Benson

Benson, Ezra TaftPPEzra Taft Benson, the thirteenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, already had a famous name when he was born on August 4, 1899. The name also belonged to the baby's great-grandfather Ezra Taft Benson, who served as a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles from July 16, 1846, to September 3, 1869. Later in life, Ezra Taft Benson always used his full name to distinguish himself from his ancestor, who customarily was called Ezra T. Benson.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPEzra T. was the descendant of a long line of American farmers, beginning with John Benson, who arrived in Boston from London in 1638. He became a member of the Mormon Church on July 19, 1840, being baptized with his wife, Pamelia Andrus Benson, in the Mississippi River at Quincy, Illinois. The Bensons joined the exodus when the Mormons were driven from Nauvoo in February 1846. During the trek across Iowa, Ezra T.'s plural wife Adeline, the sister of Pamelia, gave birth to a son named George Taft Benson while lying in a wagon box at Garden Grove. This baby became the grandfather of President Ezra Taft Benson.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPEzra T. was ordained an Apostle at Council Bluffs, Iowa, on July 16, 1846, was the captain of the second company of ten in Brigham Young's 1847 pioneer company, helped build Salt Lake City for a decade, and in 1857 was called to lead the Mormon settlements in the Cache Valley in northern Utah and southern Idaho. There the Benson family multiplied and thrived. Ezra T.'s six wives gave birth to thirty-eight sons and daughters. George T., the baby born in Garden Grove, Iowa, became an expert farmer and served as bishop of the Whitney, Idaho, ward for more than twenty years. His son George T. Jr. followed his father into farming, married Sarah Dunkley, and fathered eleven children, the oldest of whom was Ezra Taft Benson. This son came to be called "T" by family and friends alike.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThat Ezra survived his birth was considered a miracle by the family. Because he weighed eleven pounds, he was delivered by instruments. Bloody and seemingly lifeless, the baby was laid aside while the doctor cared for the mother. Seeing the emergency, the two grandmothers took the baby into an adjoining room and alternately bathed him in cold and warm water. He began to cry lustily, either in protest or loud gratitude.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPFrom infancy Ezra was introduced to the family routines of worship and work. Prayers were a daily ritual. Fasting was taught as a tool of charity and a builder of spirituality. Attendance at all Church meetings in the little Whitney Ward was mandated, though not forced. In time the boy was introduced to the scriptures, especially the Book of Mormon. He was taught to emulate chief characters in it, like Nephi. The book became a lifelong companion, even an obsession, of Ezra Taft Benson. It also became the lodestar of his prophetic ministry.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPFarm chores came to young Ezra almost as soon as he could walk. He graduated from feeding the chickens, to hoeing, weeding, planting, harvesting, and milking. Unlike most farm boys, he not only did the work but also liked it—indeed, he loved it. In all of his growing-up years, he never aspired to be anything but a farmer like his ancestors.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPNew responsibilities came to twelve-year-old Ezra when his father was called to serve a full-time mission to the northern states. A man was hired to work the row-crop acreage on shares, and responsibility for the dairy herd and the pasturage fell on Ezra. To provide a nest egg for his family, the father sold part of his farm. The example of sacrifice for the Church this reflected had a lasting influence on the eleven Benson children, all of whom filled missions.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAfter completing grade school in Whitney, Ezra enrolled at the Oneida Stake Academy in Preston. His classes were weighted toward topics that would be helpful in farming. He excelled academically and in athletics. He also made many new acquaintances, including that of Harold B. Lee, called Hal by classmates. These two future Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were born in the Cache Valley only five months and several miles apart.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPWhile in his teens Ezra began a lifelong association with Scouting when he became Scoutmaster in the Whitney Ward. A memorable troop outing was a hike across the mountain to Bear Lake, celebrated as a reward for winning a singing competition. Because of a dare, the Scouts sported crew cuts for the trek while their leader was shaved bald. The camaraderie this created lasted throughout life. As an adult, Ezra became an outstanding leader of the Boy Scouts of America, receiving some of its most distinguished awards.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAfter the United States entered World War I, Ezra left Oneida to train with a military group at Utah State Agricultural College (now Utah State University) in Logan, Utah. He contracted influenza there during the 1918 epidemic. Bunk mates on either side of him died of the flu. Ezra believed his life was miraculously saved because of priesthood blessings and because he heeded spiritual promptings to leave camp a day early.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPHaving graduated from Oneida, Ezra enrolled at Utah State Agricultural College. While on a visit to arrange for the school year, he saw a beautiful coed driving a sporty little car. He told friends this was the girl he would marry. They scoffed because Flora Amussen, a member of a wealthy family, was one of the most popular and talented students on campus. This did not deter Ezra, who later began to date Flora. The relationship was interrupted when he received a mission call to serve in Great Britain. When Elder Benson left Salt Lake City for the mission field in July 1921, Flora rode with him to Ogden so they could visit alone. It is inferred that while they were not officially engaged, they had an "understanding."

Benson, Ezra TaftPPArriving at mission headquarters in Liverpool, England, Elder Benson was assigned by his mission president, Orson F. Whitney, to labor at Carlisle in the Newcastle District. President Whitney, after whom Whitney, Idaho, was named, exerted a profound influence upon Ezra Taft Benson. He later performed Ezra's temple marriage to Flora. The Apostle's testimony of having seen the Savior in vision electrified and motivated Elder Benson.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPMissionary work in the Newcastle District was impeded by bitter anti-Mormon literature and by a lurid film titled Trapped by Mormons. It portrayed missionaries as degenerates who wanted to lure women to Utah for immoral purposes. Despite the opposition to the Church this material generated, Elder Benson and his companion worked diligently and effectively.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPLater Elder Benson was transferred to Sunderland to serve as conference clerk and president of the Sunderland Branch. And when David O. McKay succeeded Elder Whitney as the mission president, Ezra was appointed conference president. Under President McKay's leadership, Elder Benson taught the concept "every member a missionary" and urged the Saints not to migrate to America but to remain in England to build up the Church locally. He was much loved by the British Saints, who fondly called him "our Benson."

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAfter his release, Ezra toured for a month in Europe with a companion. In Lausanne, Switzerland, where his uncle Serge Ballif was mission president, he was reminded of his Swiss ancestry. Ezra's great-grandfather had been a prominent Swiss cleric before his conversion to Mormonism.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPIn Salt Lake City on the way home, Ezra received a blessing from the Church Patriarch, who promised him he would live to "a goodly age" and that his name would be held in honorable remembrance throughout time.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPEzra studied for a semester at the college in Logan and then transferred to Brigham Young University in Provo. Meanwhile, he resumed dating Flora. Apparently wanting to build her spiritual strength through service and also to avoid a premature marriage that might thwart Ezra's education plans, Flora sought to fill a mission and was called to Hawaii. While the "understanding" between them remained intact, it was agreed that Ezra would be free to socialize during Flora's absence, as she had done during his absence.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAlthough he carried a heavy academic load at BYU, Ezra excelled at his studies while engaging in a full round of social activities. Graduating with honors in the spring of 1926, he was voted Most Popular Man on campus and the one most likely to succeed. He also received a scholarship to pursue a master's degree at Iowa State College in Ames, Iowa. When Flora was released from her mission in June, they began dating in earnest. They announced their engagement on July 12 and were married in the Salt Lake Temple on September 10, 1926, by Elder Orson F. Whitney.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAfter a wedding breakfast in the President's Suite of the Hotel Utah, the newlyweds left for Ames in their Model T Ford, packed to the limit with their belongings. The twelve hundred-mile trip took eight days. Ezra completed the work for a master's degree in a year, graduating with honors. He specialized in agricultural economics and marketing while taking all the basic courses in farm management. The Bensons returned to Whitney in July 1927.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPFor twenty-two months, Ezra and Flora labored to make the Benson farm a showplace. Ezra applied all his technical knowledge in making the farm operation efficient and productive while Flora spruced up the home with flair and imagination. In the interim their first child, Reed Amussen Benson, was born on January 2, 1928.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPIt was hard for Ezra to give up his dream of operating a successful farm. But because of his distinguished academic background, he accepted an appointment as agricultural agent for Franklin County. The family moved to Preston in the spring of 1929. Meanwhile, the second child, Mark Amussen Benson, was born on May 2.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPEzra brought new insights and techniques to Franklin County farmers. He instructed them individually and held seminars in modern farming practices. He also taught them marketing strategies and the value of cooperatives, helping to organize the Franklin County Grain Growers' Association. His achievements attracted the attention of professionals at the University of Idaho who persuaded him to become the agriculture economist and specialist for the state of Idaho. This position enabled him to extend his influence and share his expertise statewide. It also entailed moving his family to Boise.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPEzra continued to give individual and group instruction, traveling throughout the state to teach modern farm techniques and to help solve local problems. He published a bulletin to keep farmers up-to-date. He also became executive secretary of the Idaho Cooperative Council, an umbrella organization that helped foster and train local cooperatives like Franklin County's Grain Growers' Association.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPWhile he disagreed with the council's underlying philosophy, Ezra initially instructed farmers on how to obtain subsidies under the federal Agriculture Adjustment Act by curtailing production. However, when the government began directing farmers to kill baby pigs to restrict production, Ezra balked and spoke out against it. His action stirred up such loud political controversy that he was forced to conform.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPSeveral months after being sustained as first counselor in the Boise Stake presidency, Ezra received from the Giannini Foundation for Agricultural Economics a fellowship grant that enabled him to do graduate work at the University of California at Berkeley. He moved his family—which now included the two sons and a daughter, Barbara—to Berkeley, where they remained nine months. Ezra's intensive studies focused on farm cooperatives and marketing techniques. His crowded schedule became heavier when he was called to the high council, even though he had not been released from the Boise Stake presidency.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPDaughter Beverly was born in September 1937, a few months after the family returned from Berkeley. On November 27, 1938, Ezra was sustained as president of the Boise Stake. With so many moves in such a short time, Flora and the children looked forward to settling down permanently in their attractive Boise home, amid friends and associates. It was not to be. In January 1939, after clearing with the General Authorities of the Church, Ezra accepted the position of executive secretary of the National Council of Farm Cooperatives (NCFC). This required a move to Washington, D.C. Following his release as stake president on March 26, 1939, and a round of farewell testimonials, he traveled to Washington alone. Flora and the children joined him after school ended.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe NCFC was an umbrella organization that provided a voice in Washington for four thousand agricultural cooperatives throughout the country. These, in turn, represented a million and a half farmers. With the aid of a staff and members of NCFC standing committees, Ezra was spokesman for the interests of these many cooperatives and their members. This work involved participation in congressional hearings and negotiations with the Department of Agriculture and with other associations having interests in common with the NCFC.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe Bensons planned and built a new home in the Edgemoor district of Bethesda, Maryland. There the standards of an exemplary Latter-day Saint home were perpetuated with family prayer, family home evening, scripture study, and regular fasts. The family was augmented by the birth of Bonnie in March 1940. And three months later, Ezra was shocked when he was called as the first president of the Washington D.C. Stake.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPBecause he was new to the area, Ezra tried to dissuade Elders Rudger Clawson and Albert E. Bowen of the Twelve from calling him to the position of stake president. The effort failed. Once installed, he completed the organization; made broad delegations of authority and responsibility to his counselors, Sam Carpenter and Ernest Wilkinson; eliminated all unnecessary meetings; and focused on missionary work, the law of tithing, and training leaders.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe entry of the United States into World War II after the bombing of Pearl Harbor revolutionized American agriculture. Farm shortages rather than farm surpluses became the challenge. The problem was aggravated by the movement of many farm workers into the military. These changes impacted on Ezra Benson's work with the NCFC. He now lobbied for more critical resources and supplies to be made available to farmers, and he fought against price controls. He also became a member of several key committees dealing with American agriculture. The most prestigious one was the National Agricultural Advisory Committee, which met regularly with President Franklin D. Roosevelt.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPOn June 21, 1943, Ezra and his son Reed left Washington for a trip west. They spent two weeks in California visiting NCFC members and local cooperatives. They returned via Utah, where Ezra made courtesy calls on some of the Brethren, and then Ezra took Reed to visit relatives in Whitney and Preston, Idaho. Returning to Salt Lake City on July 26, Ezra was told that President Grant wanted to see him before he left for the East that evening. The prophet was at a cabin up Emigration Canyon, and Ezra and Reed were driven there by one of President Grant's sons-in-law and then shown into President Grant's private room. The prophet called Ezra as the youngest member of the Twelve. The new Apostle was overwhelmed. After an hour's visit, during which he was counseled to remain with the NCFC as long as necessary to make a smooth transition, Elder Benson and Reed left for Washington by train.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAccompanied by Flora, Elder Benson returned to Salt Lake City for the October general conference, at which time he and Elder Spencer W. Kimball were sustained as members of the Twelve. They were ordained and set apart on October 7, 1943, by President Heber J. Grant. Because the prophet still showed some ill effects of a stroke he had suffered several years before, he remained seated for the ordination while the new Brethren kneeled in turn before him. It was the only time in the history of the Church when two men who later became Presidents of the Church were ordained and set apart on the same day.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPElder Benson continued to serve as president of the Washington D.C. Stake until March 5, 1944, when he was released at a stake conference presided over by Elder Kimball. About that time he was also released as executive secretary of the NCFC, although he continued to serve on its board of directors.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe Bensons purchased a home in the Yale Ward of the Bonneville Stake in Salt Lake City. Beth, the sixth and last child, was born on August 12, 1944. Confident his family was secure among caring neighbors, Elder Benson settled into the apostolic routines of stake conferences, mission tours, and headquarters duties.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe end of World War II and the death of President Heber J. Grant in 1945 brought immense changes in those routines. George Albert Smith, President Grant's successor, called Ezra to minister to the needs of the European Saints who had been ravaged by the war. He and a traveling companion, Frederick W. Babbel, left Salt Lake City on January 29, 1946. Establishing headquarters in London, England, the Apostle made numerous trips around Europe and the British Isles during an eleven-month period. He was stunned by the devastation he found, especially in Germany. Allied bombing had literally pulverized its major cities, had killed tens of thousands of civilians, and had terrorized the survivors. He made arrangements to distribute welfare commodities shipped from the United States to needy Saints, strengthened lines of priesthood authority and responsibility, trained local leaders and missionaries, and brought comfort and hope to the members through his optimism and his stirring sermons.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe experience confirmed Ezra's hatred of dictatorships and increased the energy with which he fought Communism in the years ahead. It also strengthened his reliance on spiritual promptings, which often had guided him in what to say and what to do.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe impact of his European experiences was shown in a talk he gave to the American Institute of Cooperation in August 1947. He emphasized America's status as a land choice above all other lands; warned that peace was fragile and that dangers lurked ahead; deplored the tendency toward indifference; and admonished all Americans to be more faithful, prayerful, and loyal. With variations dictated by the makeup of his audience, Elder Benson delivered that same message at the Church's general conference in April 1948. He also published an article in the Improvement Era titled "Survival of the American Way of Life." And over the years, he developed similar themes in talks given to audiences both inside and outside the Church. These were delivered with a sense of urgency that revealed Elder Benson's concern and that caused many to follow his counsel.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPMeanwhile his prominence, gained in the NCFC and in his outspoken talks about postwar perils faced by the United States, brought Elder Benson to the favorable attention of Republican politicians. During his presidential campaign in 1948, New York Governor Thomas E. Dewey sought Elder Benson's advice on farming and other matters. It seems likely that Ezra would have become U.S. secretary of agriculture in Dewey's administration had Dewey won the U.S. presidential nomination.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPElder Benson's prominence never diverted his attention permanently from the thing most important to him: his family. In December 1949, for instance, he and Flora made a special trip to New York to attend the performance of a missionary chorus that their son Mark directed. And several months later, after Reed had been released from service in the British Mission and Mark from the Eastern States Mission, Elder Benson went east with Barbara and Beverly and, joined there by his two sons, then traveled back across the country visiting places of historic interest.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAfter Dwight D. Eisenhower's election as U.S. president in November 1952, Elder Benson was asked if he could accept an appointment as secretary of agriculture in the new administration. The inquiry was a surprise to Elder Benson, who had not been consulted on that matter during the campaign. President David O. McKay authorized him to accept if the invitation came "in the proper spirit." Following an interview with President Eisenhower in New York City, Elder Benson accepted after being assured he would not be asked to promote any policy with which he disagreed.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAnnouncement of the appointment created a stir. Knowing of his work with the NCFC, farm organizations generally were favorable. Democratic congressmen were wary, knowing of the appointee's opposition to fixed price supports. Some were critical because of his religious affiliation. Most were noncommittal, willing to judge him on his performance.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPSoon after taking office, Secretary Benson became embroiled in controversy when he restructured the USDA headquarters organization and began to lay out his views on farm subsidies. Although he was obligated to maintain fixed price supports until 1954 because of an Eisenhower campaign promise, he made it plain he intended to press for flexible supports after that. He was attacked in Congress and in the press. The furor increased when he refused to recommend subsidies for beef and eggs. Many Republican congressmen from farm states joined in the criticism. Pressure was put on President Eisenhower to dismiss him; there was fear that his presence in the cabinet would be a drag in the 1954 election campaign.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPWhile he questioned the timing of some of Secretary Benson's public statements, President Eisenhower agreed with his views on agriculture subsidies and price supports. Ezra took heart when the president publicly supported the Agricultural Act of 1954, which contained a provision for flexible price supports. The secretary then spent five weeks on the road, drumming up support for the legislation. Critics, including many Republicans, thought the administration was courting disaster. Most observers believed the legislation would be defeated overwhelmingly. There was a sense of disbelief when it passed the Senate 49-44. "The principle of flexibility is established to replace rigidity," read the Kiplinger Letter for August 14, 1954. "To ram this through Congress took guts . . . in both Benson and Eisenhower. Benson was David against Goliath [and] Eisenhower was his firm backer, contrary to much political advice. It was principle vs. politics, and much of the betting was on politics. Yet principle won."

Benson, Ezra TaftPPSuddenly Secretary Benson became a political superstar. Many congressmen running for reelection sought his endorsement and were anxious that he come into their districts to campaign for them. He accommodated as many of them as his schedule would permit.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPTypically, Ezra Benson attributed most of the success of this political victory to spiritual influences. Flora and the children had joined him in fasting and prayer that attitudes would be changed so as to bring about a result that would be in the best interests of the country as a whole. He felt those prayers had been answered.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAs attitudes toward Secretary Benson changed, he and his family received much favorable media coverage. An Edward R. Murrow television show that featured the Bensons reportedly received a more favorable response than any of his other programs.

Benson, Ezra TaftPP With the concept of flexible farm supports in place, Secretary Benson's major problem was farm surpluses. Government warehouses bulged with commodities acquired under Washington's farm subsidy programs. In reviewing the options available to help ease this problem, Ezra decided the best course was to try to increase exports. A useful tool was Public Law 480, passed in 1954, which authorized the sale of farm surpluses for foreign currencies and provided for bartering and donations to the poor. Other strategies included cooperative arrangements with trade and agricultural groups, participation in international trade fairs, and diplomatic efforts to lower trade barriers against U.S. farm products.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPWith the approval and encouragement of President Eisenhower, Secretary Benson decided to lead out in this effort. Designating himself "salesman at large," he began to conduct international tours to monitor and stimulate these programs. The first one was to the Caribbean and South America in February 1955. Later that year he spent eighteen days in Great Britain and Europe. At every stop he met with government and local agricultural leaders, endeavoring to break down barriers and to create friendships so as to provide openings for the introduction of U.S. farm products. He emphasized there would be no attempt merely to dump excess commodities but that his government would compete aggressively and fairly for its share of international markets. In time these efforts resulted in significant increases in U.S. farm exports. Later the "Food for Peace" program augmented the government's export strategy. Under it agricultural surpluses were selectively given to foreign nations to cement friendly relations. In 1960 alone, over sixty-two million people in ninety-two foreign countries received donations of surplus food under this program.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThere were beneficial aspects of these trips unrelated to their main purpose. Flora and other members of the family usually accompanied Ezra, which fostered family unity and provided an unusual educational opportunity for them. He always tried to make contact with members of the Church in foreign lands; and he created lasting friendships with leaders around the world, as with Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru of India and Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion of Israel. He also gained important insights into local attitudes, for instance, when in Moscow he attended and spoke at a meeting in the Central Baptist Church. The warm reaction of the people to his message convinced Elder Benson that the Communist repression of religion had not worked and would never work.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPMeanwhile, political turmoil at home swirled around him again. Opponents criticized Secretary Benson for making so many trips and for taking members of his family with him. There were periodic demands for his resignation, although they diminished temporarily after the sweeping Republican victory in 1956. But they revived with force after many Republican congressional seats were lost in 1958. Vice President Richard Nixon laid much of the blame for that upset on Secretary Benson, which accounted for much of the coolness that later developed between them. Secretary Benson took no part in the 1960 presidential race, closing out his career with international trips to Europe, South America, and the South Pacific. His service was memorialized when he was inducted into the Agriculture Hall of Fame at a ceremony conducted by the Sirloin and Saddle Club in Chicago, Illinois.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPElder Benson was convinced the Soviet Union was bent on world domination through subversion. Concerned about the drift of foreign affairs, he delivered a talk at the Church's semiannual general conference on September 30, 1961, titled "The American Heritage of Freedom." In it he pointed to Book of Mormon warnings about secret combinations; cited Joseph Smith's prophecy that the U.S. Constitution would hang by a thread, then be saved by the priesthood; and said the "Socialist, Communist Conspiracy" presented an ominous threat to the liberty of Americans. He urged Church members to become informed about the danger and to become active in trying to thwart it. During the following nine years, thirteen of his eighteen general conference talks dwelled on this theme or variations of it. He also wrote several books on the subject and referred often to literature published or recommended by the John Birch Society, a group devoted to the study and advocacy of constitutional principles. While Elder Benson never joined this group, his son Reed Benson was an official and an active promoter of it. This relationship caused some Church members to assume erroneously that Elder Benson was a member of the John Birch Society and that his approval of its literature constituted Church endorsement. This prompted the First Presidency to issue a statement denying that the Church endorsed the John Birch Society, while acknowledging the right of Church members to study its literature and to join if they wished.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPPresident McKay also acknowledged Elder Benson's right to continue to speak out about Communism. However, the frequency and the fervor of his comments caused some leaders and members to question the propriety of his devoting so much time to the subject, which to them seemed foreign to his apostolic calling. Elder Benson ignored the criticism because the issue for him entailed nothing less than the eternal conflict between good and evil, a subject he deemed worthy of one who had been called as a special witness of Jesus Christ. It was a case of honest disagreement between men of goodwill.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe conflicts this caused were ended temporarily when Elder Benson was called to preside over the European Mission on October 18, 1963. The two years he spent in Europe on this occasion were marked by a skillful revamping of the mission organizations and procedures, a reemphasis on missionary work using the public media, and a renewal of faithfulness and commitment among members.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPSoon after Elder Benson returned from Europe, the 1776 Committee urged him to become a candidate for U.S. president in 1968. President McKay told him to allow the committee to proceed but that he should not become actively involved. He complied, although he commenced to give many talks on the same subjects as before. When the efforts of the 1776 Committee stalled, Elder Benson was asked to become a presidential candidate for the Independent Party. And later, Governor George Wallace asked him to become his vice presidential candidate. Nothing came of these initiatives, which ended any thought of his becoming involved as a political candidate.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPWhile Elder Benson continued to watch the political scene closely, his Church assignments claimed priority. In August 1968 he was given responsibility to supervise the work in the Far East. Over the next two years he made several trips there. He was assisted by Elder Bruce R. McConkie of the First Council of Seventy. At first it was felt advisable that he not visit Vietnam because of his high political profile. Later he did make a trip there, holding meetings with servicemen. He was concerned about the government's policy of slow escalation of the war, hoping instead for a negotiated settlement. Afterward a book he wrote strongly criticized that policy. During his tenure in the Far East, Elder Benson oversaw the completion of the Church exhibit for Expo '70 in Osaka, Japan, and dedicated the land of Indonesia for the preaching of the gospel.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAfter the death of President David O. McKay in January 1970, Elder Benson moderated his public talks, avoiding the strong anticommunist rhetoric of previous years. This was because President Joseph Fielding Smith and his counselors, Harold B. Lee and N. Eldon Tanner, did not share his views about the preeminent importance of this issue. Thereafter, his conference talks developed more conventional gospel themes. During this period he also became involved in the supervision of the Church-owned farms in Florida, California, and New Zealand. And at headquarters he was appointed to the important Expenditures Committee and to the board of Bonneville International Inc., the umbrella corporation that controlled the Church-owned radio and television stations.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPWhen President Harold B. Lee died unexpectedly in December 1973, Elder Benson became President of the Twelve, serving under President Spencer W. Kimball. In this position he directed the work of the Twelve and had some supervisory authority over the Assistants to the Twelve, the First Council of Seventy, and the Presiding Bishopric. His leadership style reflected the many years he had spent as a Church and government administrator. He took a special interest in those whom he directed, creating something akin to a family relationship. He also made broad delegations of authority. He did not like long meetings and disapproved of "dog and pony shows," presentations long on visuals but short on real substance. When he felt a discussion had run its course, he might suggest there was enough hay down and that it was time to do some baling. The ruling criterion he applied as to any proposed action was "What is best for the Kingdom?"

Benson, Ezra TaftPPAdded distinctions came to Elder Benson when the Ezra Taft Benson Agriculture and Food Institute was created at Brigham Young University and when he was appointed to the White House Forum for Domestic Policy and was given the Freedom Foundation Award. The satisfaction he received in being so honored paled in comparison to the joy he felt when President Kimball announced the revelation on priesthood in early June 1978. He rejoiced with his brethren of the Twelve that the Lord had spoken to resolve a complex problem the Church had faced for so long.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe following month, President Benson suffered a broken hip when a horse he was standing close to reared and fell on him. Only six months later he left for a tour of South America. He returned there not long afterward to create the first stake in Bolivia, at Santa Cruz. A month later he organized the one thousandth stake in the Church at Nauvoo, Illinois.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPDespite the discomfort caused by the fractured hip, President Benson made four lengthy and tiring trips during the next year—two to South America, one to the Middle East, and one to Europe. Nagging problems with the hip dictated a hip replacement operation in October 1981. While convalescing and learning to walk with the artificial hip, he fell, fracturing his pelvis. While recovering from this accident, President Benson suffered a series of dizzy spells that were first diagnosed as a stroke. Later it was found they were caused by a circulatory problem, which was solved by implanting a pacemaker.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPMeanwhile, changes were made in the First Presidency when Elder Gordon B. Hinckley was called as an additional counselor because of physical problems suffered by all three members of the First Presidency. Then when President Tanner died in November 1982, President Hinckley became Second Counselor. Since Presidents Spencer W. Kimball and Marion G. Romney had physical disabilities and were limited in what they could do, President Hinckley administered the daily affairs of the Church under delegations of authority from President Kimball. President Benson and the other members of the Twelve were very supportive of President Hinckley in this delicate situation as he led out in areas within the scope of his delegated authority while always seeking direction from President Kimball on matters beyond that scope. Feeling the need for counsel on certain matters pertaining to temple ordinances and disciplinary councils, President Hinckley invited President Benson to meet with him on a weekly basis to handle them. A close working rapport developed between them. This was reflected when, following the death of President Kimball on November 5, 1985, President Benson called President Hinckley as his First Counselor. Elder Thomas S. Monson was called as Second Counselor.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPPresident Benson's first trip out of Utah following his ordination as the thirteenth President of the Church was to Washington, D.C., in early January 1986. There he divided the Annandale Virginia Stake and reorganized the presidency of the Washington Temple. During an address at the stake conference, he discussed the Book of Mormon at length. In the year that followed, he delivered twenty-eight major talks on this subject. He quoted the Prophet Joseph and emphasized that the book was a new witness for Jesus Christ, that it contained the fulness of the gospel, that it was the keystone of our religion, and that a person could get closer to God by reading it and following its teachings than in any other way. He also expressed the opinion that his ministry would be best remembered by his emphasis on the Book of Mormon, just as President Lorenzo Snow's ministry is best remembered because of his emphasis on the law of tithing.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPDuring the first months of his ministry, President Benson also extended an invitation to all disaffected members to return to full fellowship, permitted worthy persons married to unendowed spouses to enter the temple to receive their endowments, discontinued stake seventies quorums, changed stake conferences to enable stake presidents to preside over one of the two conferences in their stakes each year, and dedicated a new temple in Denver, Colorado, while authorizing his counselors to dedicate temples in Buenos Aires, Argentina, and Lima, Peru.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPThe prophet's main discourse at the April 1987 general conference again admonished diligence in reading the Book of Mormon regularly. It also counseled prayerful study of the Doctrine and Covenants, which he called the capstone of our religion.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPA few days after that conference, President Benson suffered a mild heart attack, which slowed him for several months. However, on February 27, 1988, he broke ground for the temple in San Diego, California. The major sermon he delivered at the April general conference a few weeks later dwelled on the pure love of Christ, the theme exemplified by the temple ordinances and suggested in the beautiful, heavenly appearance of the San Diego Temple. He said the pure love of Christ represented a "total commitment of our very being—physically, mentally, emotionally, and spiritually—to a love of the Lord. The breadth, depth, and height of this love of God extend into every facet of one's life. Our desires, be they spiritual or temporal, should be rooted in a love of the Lord. Our thoughts and affections should be centered on the Lord."

Benson, Ezra TaftPPPresident Benson's sermons at the semiannual general conference six months later were the last ones he delivered in the Salt Lake Tabernacle. In them he called for a "massive flooding" of the earth with the Book of Mormon. He also bore "pure testimony and witness" of that which he knew to be true. In a litany of nineteen declarations that followed, each beginning with the words "I testify that," the prophet bore solemn testimony about, among other things, our premortal existence; the way God leads his children through revelation; the birth, ministry, and sacrifice of the Savior; the Apostasy and Restoration; the Book of Mormon; the favored status of America; the role of living prophets; the conflict between good and evil; the need for the Saints to be actively engaged in the work; and the Final Judgment and cleansing that will take place. He ended with these words: "I testify to you that a fulness of joy can only come through the atonement of Jesus Christ and by obedience to all of the laws and ordinances of the gospel, which are found only in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints." It was a fitting climax to the thousands of sermons spoken by Ezra Taft Benson during the long life promised him in his patriarchal blessing.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPNot long after that conference, President Benson suffered a stroke that prevented him from ever speaking again from the Tabernacle pulpit. He was able to communicate to his family and to his brethren in short, simple phrases and to give direction on any matters requiring his prophetic approval. While limited in his capacity to communicate with words, his benign countenance and loving gestures conveyed meanings beyond verbal expression. And the power of his testimony and his intellect continued to be shown when his words spoken and written earlier in life were repeated by others.

Benson, Ezra TaftPPPresident Benson's beloved wife, Flora, died in August 1992. His own health continued to deteriorate, and he passed away quietly on May 30, 1994. He had lived a long, productive, and distinguished life, the outlines of which were traced by those who spoke at the funeral in the Tabernacle. President Howard W. Hunter captured the essence of President Benson's years of apostolic leadership in his remarks. "He spoke to everyone and had concern for all," said President Hunter. "He gave wonderful, personalized counsel to the entire membership, whatever their personal circumstances. Those sermons will continue to sustain us and guide us as we reflect upon them."

Benson, Ezra TaftPPPresident Benson was buried in the small cemetery in Whitney, Idaho, beside Flora. All along the route from Salt Lake City, people waited beside the highway or at overpasses to greet the funeral cortege—people of all ages, some waving flags and all with heads bared to show their respect to this son of the soil who had grown to become a prophet of God. His grave was near the place where he was born, surrounded by the fields he had tilled and by the relatives and friends whom he loved.

Note

This chapter is based on Francis M. Gibbons's book Ezra Taft Benson: Statesman, Patriot, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, in press) and authorities cited therein.
