Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Fourteen

Hunter, Howard W.PPHoward W. Hunter

Hunter, Howard W.PPBoyhood qualities of character often appear in the grown man in a magnified form. Such is the case with Howard William Hunter, the fourteenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The poise and self-possession shown by the man in two dramatic incidents had their roots in the boy who was born and grew up in Boise, Idaho: first, when he fell in mid-sentence at the Salt Lake Tabernacle pulpit, then recovered and continued without missing a word or making an explanation; and second, when he stood, unmoved and silent, before an audience in Provo, Utah, as a man threatened him with what appeared to be a bomb and a detonator.

Hunter, Howard W.PPFrom the earliest days after his birth on November 14, 1907, this boy, the son of John William (called Will) and Nellie Rasmussen Hunter, was disposed to go his own way and to seek his own counsel. Taught early to pray and to have faith in God by a devoted Latter-day Saint mother, he yet honored and was obedient to his father, who was not a member of the Church and who would not allow him to be baptized at age eight. However, when he saw twelve-year-old Howard's keen disappointment at being unable to pass the sacrament with his friends in Boise's small branch, Will Hunter relented and allowed his son to be baptized. The ordinance took place on April 4, 1920. He was ordained a deacon on June 21. Howard's early dedication to the Church was shown when he was the first to make a pledge—twenty-five dollars—toward the construction of a new chapel. The amount was significant to one whose hourly wage was computed in pennies. Perhaps influenced by his obedient son, the father later joined the Church and was sealed to Nellie, after which the children, Howard and Dorothy, were sealed to them.

Hunter, Howard W.PPThat the Latter-day Saints were a small minority in Boise, derided and maligned by some, had no negative effect on Howard. He lived within himself, fed by the security he found in his family and the Church. The parents encouraged scholarship. The encyclopedia and other books found at home were read with the children, as were many other books borrowed from the public library. A piano, which the children learned to play, encouraged musical interests and introduced a cultural quality into the family. Howard later learned to play several other instruments, which led him to a temporary career in music.

Hunter, Howard W.PPAs he grew, Howard presided over a menagerie of pets—dogs, cats, and rabbits; collected birds' eggs, stamps and coins; helped cultivate a family garden and orchard; held a variety of jobs, among which were selling newspapers and working as a "cash boy" at a department store; and began to keep a diary. He also became absorbed in Scouting, receiving the second Eagle Scout Award given in Boise. We gain insight into the competitive fires that burned within this young man from a statement he made about the boy who was Boise's first Eagle Scout: "The race was on between Edwin Phipps of Troop 6 and me," wrote Howard, referring to their scramble for merit badges, a prelude to the Eagle award.

Hunter, Howard W.PPHoward's competitiveness was always accompanied by genuine friendliness and goodwill. He never seemed to be competing. He was always genial and kind, the sort of young man who tipped his hat to adults on the sidewalk and who, like a good Scout, surrendered his seat to the elderly on the streetcar.

Hunter, Howard W.PPIn high school, academics had to compete for Howard's attention with ROTC, music, and after-hours employment. Eventually he was commissioned a major, the highest ROTC rank at his level. He learned to play the marimba, drums, saxophone, clarinet, trumpet, and violin, in addition to the piano; and he worked alternately as a golf caddy and in a pharmacy, an art store, and a hotel. His versatility in music led him, in his junior year of high school, to organize a band called Hunter's Croonaders, which played at dances and concerts throughout the area.

Hunter, Howard W.PPAfter Howard graduated from high school in June 1926, the band's success led to a job providing dance and concert music and accompaniment for silent movies aboard the SS President Jackson during a two-month luxury cruise to the Orient. Embarking from Seattle, Washington, on January 5, 1927, the five-man combo played not only aboard ship but also in several hotels at stops along the way. At ports of call in Yokohama and Kobe, Japan; Shanghai and Hong Kong, China; and Manila, the Philippines, the young Americans were exposed to foreign cultures and economies as they toured these ancient, exotic cities. While at Yokohama, Howard and two companions traveled to Tokyo, where by chance they saw the body of deceased emperor Yoshihito lying in state at a Buddhist temple near the royal palace. They also saw the emperor's oldest son, Hirohito, who succeeded him. There was unrest at Shanghai caused by conflicts between communist and nationalist troops outside the city. Within a few years, during World War II, the names of Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek (commander of the nationalist troops) and Hirohito would become household words throughout the United States.

Hunter, Howard W.PPFollowing his return from the Orient, Howard tried his hand at several things: selling shoes at Falks Department Store, working with a partner to open a supper club called the Plantation Roadhouse, and engaging in an advertising promotion that involved posting attractive placards featuring local businesses and containing announcements and time schedules.

Hunter, Howard W.PPSince none of these ventures held the prospect of a permanent career path, Howard, while mulling over his options, traveled to Los Angeles, California, in March 1928 for a short vacation. Attracted by the climate and by the energy and the optimism that seemed to infuse everything and everybody, he decided to stay permanently. He soon obtained employment at the Bank of Italy and began living with a great-uncle and great-aunt, Edward and Lyde Nowell. Howard became a member of the Huntington Park Ward and enrolled in night classes at the American Institute of Banking. When his parents and Dorothy moved to Los Angeles a few months later, he lived with them, transferring his membership to the Adams Ward.

Hunter, Howard W.PPIn Los Angeles Howard became acquainted with an energetic and attractive group of young people who shared his religious values and his zest for life. He also came under the influence of an able Sunday School teacher, Peter A. Clayton, who opened his mind to an understanding of gospel principles. "I think of this period of my life as the time the truths of the gospel commenced to unfold," Howard later recalled. It also was a time when his mind began to open to the prospects of marriage. His social group included an attractive young woman named Clara May Jeffs, who was called Claire by her friends. Howard and Claire dated over a period of three years, intermittently at first, then exclusively. By the spring of 1931, they knew they wanted to be man and wife and began to plan for marriage. As Howard looked to the future, he decided that the erratic schedules and negative associations of a dance band musician (an activity he had continued to pursue as a sideline) were incompatible with a successful Latter-day Saint family. So on June 6, 1931, after playing his last engagement, he packed up his band instruments and never used them again, except occasionally in a family setting. He and Claire were sealed in the Salt Lake Temple four days later by Elder Richard R. Lyman of the Twelve.

Hunter, Howard W.PPTwo incidents connected with the marriage revealed a certain flair for the unexpected that surfaced often during Howard's life. First, before going to Salt Lake City, he surprised Claire with a new black Chevrolet sport coupe with a rumble seat and red wheels and loaded with extras. He paid cash, approximately seven hundred dollars, plus his old Model A Ford. Second, when they returned to California, they moved temporarily into a pricey furnished apartment at the beach, where they enjoyed a honeymoon while working at their jobs, he at the bank and she at a department store. After the honeymoon, they moved into a small, economical, unfurnished apartment.

Hunter, Howard W.PPThe first four years of marriage were strenuous. The effects of the Depression struck home when the bank Howard worked for at the time, the First Exchange State Bank, collapsed in January 1932. After a year of makeshift jobs that offered no permanency or hope for the future, the couple moved in with Claire's parents to save on rent. They remained there for three years. Father Jeffs died in 1933. The presence of the Hunters in the home was a comfort to the mother. In January 1934 Howard's prospects improved when he was employed in the title department of the Los Angeles County Flood Control District. When this employment exposed him to lawyers and to legal procedures and concepts, Howard decided to make the law his life's career. He soon enrolled in night courses at Southwestern University. After a year he satisfied the entrance requirements, and in September 1935 he was admitted to the university's law school.

Hunter, Howard W.PPMeanwhile, joy and then sorrow visited the Hunters when their first child, Howard William Hunter Jr., was born on March 20, 1934, but died seven months later. The parents' grief was particularly acute for Claire, who did not have a helpful distraction as did Howard with his work and school responsibilities. So to help take her mind off the empty nest, she worked temporarily at Bullocks, an upscale department store.

Hunter, Howard W.PPAlthough the four years Howard spent in law school were strenuous, they were filled with hope for the future. His studies required focus, intelligence, and discipline so he could successfully compete with younger students who did not have family responsibilities and full-time employment as he did. He graduated cum laude in June 1939, third in his class. After passing the bar and being admitted to practice in early 1940, he rented an office from an established attorney and for a while divided his time between his practice and work with the county. In time he devoted himself exclusively to the law.

Hunter, Howard W.PPDuring this interval, major changes occurred in the Hunter family and in Howard's personal life. In May 1936 the second son, John Jacob Hunter, was born; in June 1938 the third son, Richard Allen Hunter, was born; and in August 1940 Howard was shocked to be called as the first bishop of the El Sereno Ward. He was ordained a high priest and a bishop by Elder Joseph F. Merrill of the Twelve.

Hunter, Howard W.PPServing for six years, Bishop Hunter was known for his kindness, for his interest in the youth, and for his foresight in developing a building fund, even though war restrictions prevented construction at the time. After his release in November 1946, he was called as the president of the stake high priests quorum.

Hunter, Howard W.PPDuring the years that followed, Howard established himself as a successful corporate lawyer, as an exemplary husband and father, and as an effective priesthood leader. His legal practice was weighted toward real property matters and counseling businesses. He served on the boards of directors of many companies. One of these, the Watson Land Company, controlled property interests that traced to a Mexican land grant. Howard served as a director of this company from the mid-1940s until the time of his death. In the 1950s he also was appointed to the board of the Beneficial Life Insurance Company headquartered in Salt Lake City. Howard seldom litigated in court. When he did, he was always well prepared, was poised and self-confident, and was usually successful. He was never abrasive or unpleasant, although he never yielded a point easily and was tenacious in protecting the interests of his clients.

Hunter, Howard W.PPAs Howard's professional reputation increased, so did his personal wealth, accumulated not only from legal fees but from wise investments. In 1948 the Hunters purchased a new ranch-style house in Arcadia. There they created an exemplary Latter-day Saint home, marked by family prayer, love, and mutual respect. They held regular family home evenings, even though that program had not yet been readopted Churchwide. Howard and Claire encouraged their sons in music, academics, and sports and helped them become Eagle Scouts like their father.

Hunter, Howard W.PPIn February 1950 Elders Stephen L Richards and Harold B. Lee of the Twelve called Howard W. Hunter as president of the Pasadena Stake. As stake president, he took part in many fund-raising and building projects, including a stake center, the Los Angeles Temple, and a welfare farm. As the regional council chairman, President Hunter spearheaded special regional MIA conferences held in Los Angeles that featured musical events and worship services in the Hollywood Bowl and dance festivals in school stadiums. The featured speaker at the 1954 conference was President David O. McKay. In 1955 President Stephen L Richards was featured, as was President J. Reuben Clark in 1956.

Hunter, Howard W.PPDuring the nine and a half years Howard served as stake president, he and Claire hosted the General Authorities who came for stake conferences. They had a special room in their home reserved for the visitors. In this way, the Hunters became personally acquainted with most of the General Authorities.

Hunter, Howard W.PPPresident Hunter was a skilled executive who delegated broadly and who expected performance from his associates. He was always thoughtful of the feelings of others, avoiding negative comments, except as they were necessary to strengthen the work. Later, as a member of the Twelve, reporting on conference visits or mission tours, he was noted for avoiding critical comments and focusing instead on the positive things he observed. His attitudes reflected, in part, the impact on him of Napoleon Hill's writings, who dwelled on the power of thought to create wealth or to influence conduct. This seems to account for the small gadget inscribed with "Think" that was often seen on Howard Hunter's desk.

Hunter, Howard W.PPHoward was surprised following the morning session of general conference on October 9, 1959, when he was told that President David O. McKay wanted to see him. He was shocked and overwhelmed with emotion when the prophet told him the Lord had spoken and that he had been called to the Twelve. He was sustained the following day and ordained and set apart on Thursday, October 15. The whole experience had a dreamlike quality about it for Howard. Reality set in when he and Claire had to close out their affairs in California and move to Utah. It took almost two years to do this. In the interval, Elder Hunter traveled to Salt Lake City each week by train or air for the Thursday temple meetings. Soon after his ordination he also began to fill stake conference and other apostolic assignments. He was released as stake president in late November 1959.

Hunter, Howard W.PPArriving in Salt Lake City in April 1961, the Hunters lived in rented facilities until their new home in the Oak Hills district was completed. They moved into it on July 22, 1963.

Hunter, Howard W.PPIn the interval before moving to Salt Lake City, Howard and Claire traveled to the South Pacific to meet Richard, who had completed his mission in Australia. They then spent two months traveling around the world with their son. They had done the same with John when he completed his Australia mission in the autumn of 1958. The Hunters' global views were enriched when in late 1961 they traveled to the Middle East with Elder and Sister Spencer W. Kimball. The two Apostles and their wives spent several weeks tracing the paths of the ancient patriarchs and the Savior and his disciples. They traveled to Iraq, reminiscing about Abraham's life in Ur of the Chaldees. They visited Egypt, where they recalled the experiences of the Savior and his parents and of Abraham, Joseph, and the children of Israel in that ancient land. And they traveled the length and the breadth of the Holy Land, reading the sacred accounts of the Savior's birth, ministry, crucifixion, and resurrection at the places where the events occurred. Elder Hunter's life and the perceptions of his ministry were never the same after this experience. Before returning home from this trip, Elder Hunter toured in Great Britain and Europe, holding meetings in seven missions.

Hunter, Howard W.PPElder Hunter's early travels to the Orient with the Croonaders, his two trips around the world with Claire and their sons, and his tour through the Middle East with Claire and the Kimballs gave him a global perspective of the Church and its mission. That perspective was broadened later as he traveled extensively in Mexico and Central America, in South America, in Africa, in the islands of the Pacific, in the Soviet Union, and in China and Japan. In all his travels, Elder Hunter showed unusual zest and enthusiasm. He liked to arrange his own itinerary, relying on his own knowledge of places and travel accommodations. And he enjoyed doing unusual things, such as when he led a BYU group riding on camels up Mount Sinai and when he spent a night in Carthage Jail with a group of mission presidents to enhance his understanding of what Joseph Smith and his companions suffered. Wherever he went, Elder Hunter kept foremost in mind his role as a special witness of Jesus Christ in all the world. In all places he bore sincere testimony of the divinity of the Savior, the truthfulness of the gospel, and the preeminence of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints among the world's religions.

Hunter, Howard W.PPThe nature of his travels in Mexico and Central America changed markedly after his appointment as chairman of the advisory board of the New World Archaeological Foundation in 1961. For several years he made annual visits to archaeological sites in those areas, traveling into remote places by primitive means. He enjoyed getting out into the open and seeing the magnificent scenery and ancient structures and artifacts. He also was fascinated by correlations between scientific archaeological findings and the Book of Mormon.

Hunter, Howard W.PPElder Hunter became president of the Genealogical Society in January 1964. During his tenure, vast changes in methods of storing and accessing genealogical data were made after the advent of electronic retrieval systems. He took special training in computer technology so that he was knowledgeable about the technical changes being made. He directed the World Conference on Records held in Salt Lake City in August 1969, marking the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Genealogical Society. The event enhanced the position of the Church as the dominant organization in genealogy in the world. Elder Hunter also conducted the ceremony dedicating the mountain storage vault, where many genealogical records are kept, in Little Cottonwood Canyon on June 22, 1966. The dedicatory prayer was offered by President Hugh B. Brown.

Hunter, Howard W.PPFollowing the death of President David O. McKay on January 18, 1970, President Joseph Fielding Smith was ordained and set apart as the tenth President of the Church. Soon after, Elder Hunter was surprised when he was appointed Church historian and recorder, succeeding President Smith, who had served in that position for several decades. It was a position for which he was eminently qualified by training, temperament, and interest. Elder Hunter had been a careful and precise diarist from the days of his youth in Boise. He respected the role of history in explaining the past and in providing a focus for the future. After a change in procedure regarding the role of the Twelve in headquarters assignments resulted in his release as Church historian and recorder in 1972, he continued to serve as an adviser to the Historical Department until 1978.

Hunter, Howard W.PPA wry sense of humor lurked beneath the surface of Elder Hunter's benign and dignified exterior. He once asked a stake president whether one of the Brethren senior to him in the apostleship would be present at a stake conference. When told no, he said, "Good, we'll do what we want to do." This was accompanied by a genial smile and a gentle chuckle. When the circumstances were appropriate, he enjoyed light repartee and a good story. But his humor was always kindly and never had a hard edge to it. In filling assignments, Elder Hunter was bold to act as he was prompted even if it seemed drastic. So it was in Mexico City that he once created fifteen stakes out of five. His judgment was vindicated when the new stakes thrived and when one of them had to be divided again in two years.

Hunter, Howard W.PPIn January 1965 Elder Hunter was appointed president and chairman of the board of the Polynesian Cultural Center. Created fifteen months earlier to provide work opportunities for Polynesian students attending the Church college at Laie, Hawaii, the center was running a deficit at the time Elder Hunter was appointed. It soon began to be self-sustaining and then to produce good surpluses. During the eleven years he served, the center expanded its operations until it became one of the most popular attractions on the islands. Tourists thronged there to see the students dance, sing, and perform in their native costumes. The center not only provides work opportunities to help students gain an education, but it helps showcase Church spiritual and intellectual values, exemplified by the nearby temple and the college. When President David O. McKay broke ground for the college in Laie in February 1955, he predicted that "millions of people" would come there eventually "seeking to know what this town and its significance are." Laie attracts about a million visitors annually.

Hunter, Howard W.PPThere was a cosmopolitan quality about Elder Hunter, seemingly a native endowment enriched by his global travels. This quality, which added to his negotiating and diplomatic skills, prompted the First Presidency to give him principal responsibilities in funding and developing the Orson Hyde Memorial Gardens on the Mount of Olives and in developing the Jerusalem Center for Near Eastern Studies, which also is on the Mount of Olives adjacent to Hebrew University's Mount Scopus campus. The Orson Hyde memorial commemorates the prayer Orson Hyde offered on the Mount of Olives in 1841, dedicating the land of Palestine for the gathering of Abraham's posterity. The Jerusalem Center houses living quarters and classrooms to accommodate Brigham Young University's study-abroad students and also has facilities for the Jerusalem Branch of the Church. Elder Hunter made numerous trips to Israel during the development of these two projects, meeting with government, religious, and business leaders as the diverse problems were worked out. He was aided by many able people who provided expertise in various fields. His empathy for both Jewish and Islamic groups and his understanding of their concerns helped bridge many problems. He attended and conducted the dedicatory services for the Orson Hyde Memorial and participated in the dedication of the Jerusalem Center in May 1989.

Hunter, Howard W.PPWhen this center was dedicated, Ezra Taft Benson had been President of the Church since November 1985. He was the fifth prophet under whom Elder Hunter had served and would be the last. Howard had been a member of the Twelve for more than ten years when President David O. McKay died in January 1970. Special ties bound Howard Hunter to President McKay. The younger man had received his call to the apostleship through that prophet. Their world travels were equally extensive, and there was a similarity in the courtly quality that characterized their personal relationships. They were always poised and genial in meeting others, were careful in their personal grooming, and enjoyed a good chuckle. Despite President McKay's advanced age and ailments, Elder Hunter deeply mourned his passing, referring to him as "this great, sweet, kindly man."

Hunter, Howard W.PPAt the time of President McKay's death, Elder Hunter had been for a decade under the immediate direction of Joseph Fielding Smith, who was President of the Twelve. Their shared interest in Church history brought them close, as did their penchant for care and precision in writing and speaking. Howard gave President Smith the same loyalty he had given to President McKay. That carried over to President Harold B. Lee, whose influence on Elder Hunter was pronounced from the time he called Howard as a stake president in 1950. And the love and special rapport that existed between Elder Hunter and President Spencer W. Kimball was a bond strengthened during their lengthy tour of the Holy Land and the Middle East. He loved all of these men, as he did President Ezra Taft Benson, and he sought to serve them and to emulate them. Following the ordination of President Benson as President of the Church, Elder Hunter was set apart as Acting President of the Twelve, because of the disabilities of Marion G. Romney, who was the quorum President.

Hunter, Howard W.PPHoward's love for the prophets was exceeded only by his love for his family. All his efforts were aimed ultimately toward creating a family unit that would exist eternally in a celestial setting. In concert with Claire, he spared no effort in laying the groundwork for that eventuality. Their home was a place of culture and refinement where love, reverential worship of God, scholarship, good music, and good conversation abounded. Howard's skill in law and business enabled him to accumulate enough wealth to help his sons obtain a good education and to become established. Both sons graduated from law school and acquired legal stature, John as a judge and Richard as a successful practicing attorney. These sons and their wives, Louine and Nan, are the parents of eighteen children, a progeny which, in time, may expand Howard and Claire Hunter's family to Abrahamic proportions. Howard and Claire cherished each of these special people, lavishing upon them all the love and attention of which they were capable. Meanwhile, both John and Richard became bishops in the Church and served in other priesthood callings.

Hunter, Howard W.PPElder Hunter's love of family extended to those outside the immediate circle and embraced both the living and the dead. He was an avid genealogist who spent much time and money gathering family history data and additional effort in performing or securing the performance of temple work in behalf of deceased ancestors.

Hunter, Howard W.PPAnd Howard Hunter was a good householder and a good neighbor who was handy with tools in fixing things in his own home or in helping neighbors with their odd jobs. No honest task was too menial or too unimportant for him to give it his careful attention.

Hunter, Howard W.PPExcept for the death of their first son and for John's brush with polio at age six, the Hunter family was free from any further trauma or serious illness until the early 1970s. At that time, Claire began to suffer severe headaches and some loss of memory, resulting in a diagnosis of hardening of the arteries. Her condition did not yield to treatment or medication and became progressively worse. After several years of intermittent hospitalizations, tests, and treatments, she underwent shunt surgery in the hope of reducing the pain. It produced little change. As Claire became incapacitated, special care was provided for her at home by an aide who lived in the basement apartment. After Claire suffered cerebral hemorrhages in 1981 and 1982, it became necessary to transfer her to a nursing care facility where she could receive more constant and skilled attention. Juggling his heavy Church assignments, Elder Hunter visited her at least once and usually twice a day, talking to her quietly and soothingly. Although she could not respond in words, her facial expressions and mannerisms bespoke of the love she had for her husband. It is said she responded that way only to him. She died in October 1983 after more than ten years of dire, debilitating illness.

Hunter, Howard W.PPDuring the later years of Claire's illness, Elder Hunter also began to suffer physical problems. They began in February 1977, when he contracted the mumps. While his contracting this so-called children's illness induced much good-natured banter among the Brethren, it was no laughing matter when his recovery period included serious complications. Months later he underwent abdominal surgery for the removal of a benign tumor; and while recovering, he suffered a heart attack. As a result, Elder Hunter followed a disciplined regimen of walking, the benefits of which warded off serious illness for several years. When the heart problem flared up again in October 1986, quadruple-bypass surgery was required. Seemingly recovered, he and Richard traveled to Europe and the Middle East in January 1987. On returning, he began to suffer severe lower-back pains, diagnosed as the deterioration of a spinal disc. While assessing the need for back surgery, he was operated on for a bleed ing ulcer in April. Having recovered from that, he underwent back surgery in June, the effect of which was to relegate him to a wheelchair. This made it necessary to deliver his October 1987 conference address while seated. Determined to walk again, he began a disciplined therapy program. He finally graduated to a walker, an accomplishment that was largely the result of faith and supreme mental toughness. It was during this period that Elder Hunter fell while speaking at the Tabernacle pulpit and yet was able to complete his address, his audience unaware that he had been injured during his fall.

Hunter, Howard W.PPAfter the death of President Marion G. Romney on May 20, 1988, Elder Hunter was set apart as President of the Twelve. He then began a series of lengthy international trips, including the May 1989 trip to the Holy Land to attend the dedication of the Jerusalem Center.

Hunter, Howard W.PPOn Thursday, April 10, 1990, President Hunter made an announcement to the Twelve that was so typical of the unexpected twists his life had taken in the past. He told the Brethren he would be sealed that afternoon to Inis Stanton by President Gordon B. Hinckley. Only the couple, President Hinckley, and the two witnesses—President Thomas S. Monson and Inis's bishop—would be present. Inis was an acquaintance of President Hunter and Claire from the days when he lived in El Sereno, California. She had been married before and had lived in Salt Lake City since the early 1970s, working as a hostess in the Church Office Building. A poised, attractive, and friendly person, Inis became a perfect companion for President Hunter, filling, insofar as possible, a void that had existed since Claire's passing.

Hunter, Howard W.PPInis was soon introduced to the nomadic lifestyle of an Apostle. During the first two years after their marriage, she accompanied him on trips to South America, Alaska, Hawaii, Central America, Japan, Korea, China, Africa, Jerusalem, and England. He enjoyed acquainting her with these countries and their peoples, in introducing her to the members of the Church, and in seeing her respond to challenges wherever they went. He was pleased with the skill and sensitivity she displayed in speaking to the Saints and in mingling with them.

Hunter, Howard W.PPFollowing the trip to England in May 1992, Inis underwent knee surgery, which temporarily curtailed their travels. As soon as she recovered, however, they were at it again when in September they traveled to Russia, the Ukraine, Armenia, and Austria. While in Vienna on September 12, 1992, President Hunter dedicated the country of Austria. Following the October general conference, the Hunters attended a regional conference in England and participated in the rededication of the London Temple. The following month they traveled to the Pacific.

Hunter, Howard W.PPAfter returning from the Pacific, President Hunter suffered internal bleeding. He was hospitalized for two weeks and spent the remainder of the year convalescing and handling routine matters at headquarters. Following the incident at the BYU Marriott Center in Provo in February 1993, when he was threatened by an assailant and yet remained calm and dignified, President Hunter, accompanied by Inis, traveled to Australia, Singapore, and Japan. In March they went to Brazil, and in April they attended the dedication of the San Diego Temple.

Hunter, Howard W.PPA few weeks later, President Hunter underwent what was expected to be routine gall bladder surgery. It became complicated, however, when he failed to regain consciousness. He remained in a deep sleep for twenty days, then revived. Some thought he would never recover. He not only recovered but, after a few months, was able to resume his apostolic duties.

Hunter, Howard W.PPPresident Ezra Taft Benson died on May 30, 1994. Six days later, on June 5, Howard W. Hunter was ordained and set apart as the fourteenth President of the Church. While his tenure was less than a year, it was significant. He presided over ceremonies in Nauvoo, Illinois, commemorating the 150th anniversary of the martyrdom of Joseph Smith and Hyrum Smith; traveled to Europe; created the two thousandth stake of the Church in Mexico City; dedicated temples in Orlando, Florida, and Bountiful, Utah; and spoke at other special gatherings. Most significant, however, was the spiritual tone he set, asking all to be more kind, more courteous, more patient, and more forgiving. He invited the members of the Church "to establish the temple of the Lord as the great symbol of their membership and the supernal setting for their most sacred covenants." He also expressed the hope that "every adult member would be worthy of and carry a current temple recommend, even if proximity to a temple does not allow immediate or frequent use."

Hunter, Howard W.PPShortly after the dedication of the Bountiful Temple in January 1995, President Hunter was hospitalized with bone cancer. He passed away quietly on March 3, 1995, at age eighty-eight. Born in obscurity in Boise, Idaho, he lived to become the head of an international church, loved and admired by its more than nine million members. He was eulogized at ceremonies held in the Salt Lake Tabernacle and was laid to rest beside his beloved Claire.

Note

This chapter is based on Eleanor Knowles's book Howard W. Hunter (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1994); the diaries of Francis M. Gibbons, 1970-94; Howard W. Hunter, Prophet of God (Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1994, videocassette); and articles in the Ensign and the Church News about President Hunter.
