Francis M. Gibbons, Dynamic Disciples, Prophets of God: Life Stories of the Presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints ( 1996)

Chapter Fifteen

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPGordon B. Hinckley

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPAn understanding of President Gordon Bitner Hinckley, the fifteenth President of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, is helped by knowing of his ancestry, which extends into early American history. One ancestor, Stephen Hopkins, was aboard the Mayflower on its maiden voyage. Stephen's family, a wife and three children, was the largest among the company. A fourth child, fittingly named Oceanus Hopkins, was born at sea. The father was one of twelve "Masters" who signed the Mayflower Compact, men who were considered to be the aristocrats of the company.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThomas Hinckley, another early American ancestor, was governor of the Plymouth Colony from 1681 to 1692. He was the last governor of the Old Colony, which was later absorbed into the Massachusetts Bay Colony under its royal charter. Along with his administrative abilities, Governor Hinckley was said to have been "addicted to writing poetry," implying good language skills. The governor's grandson Thomas Prince, pastor of the Old South Church in Boston, was obsessed with collecting early Plymouth documents, which he compiled in a manuscript titled "Ms History of the Plantation of Plimouth." The Prince manuscript later disappeared from Old South, perhaps during the Revolutionary War. It resurfaced in 1844 when it was discovered in the library of Fulham Palace on the outskirts of London.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPBoth Stephen Hopkins and Thomas Hinckley were of English descent, the former having been born in Wotton-under-Edge, Gloucestershire; and the latter having descended from Samuel Hinckley, who arrived in America in April 1635 from Harrietsham, Kent.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe Hinckley presence in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints traces to Ira Nathaniel Hinckley, born October 30, 1828, whose family was converted in Ontario, Canada, by John E. Page and an Elder Sherwood. Orphaned while young, Ira moved with the Judd family to Nauvoo in 1843, where he learned the blacksmith trade and became imbued with a testimony as he heard Joseph and Hyrum Smith and other Church leaders speak. In Utah, after the Saints' exodus from Missouri, he lived first in Salt Lake City and then in Coalville, where he was a builder. President Brigham Young, needing a man of "sound practical judgment and experience," called Ira to build Cove Fort in Millard County, Utah, where he and his family lived for several years. Later he was called as president of the Millard Stake and so moved to Fillmore. He presided for twenty-five years and was then called as stake patriarch. He was a man of few words, wise, thoughtful, and persistent.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPIra's son, Bryant Stringham Hinckley, Gordon B. Hinckley's father, was born on July 9, 1867. A prominent educator, Church leader, and businessman, Bryant was an eloquent speaker and a lucid writer. For many years he was the principal of LDS Business College in Salt Lake City, while teaching both there and at LDS University. He also supervised the development and construction of the Deseret Gymnasium, which he then managed for twenty-five years. He served as a counselor in the Liberty Stake presidency and then as president of the stake. For several years he was a member of the YMMIA General Board, and in the mid-1930s he presided over the Northern States Mission. Afterward, he worked closely with President Heber J. Grant, writing books, manuals, and articles; handling sensitive correspondence; and filling personal assignments received from the prophet.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPBryant Hinckley's first wife, Christine Johnson, died in July 1908, having given birth to ten children, two of whom died in infancy. Thirteen months later he married Ada Bitner, who was a member of the LDS Business College faculty. Ada, a "brilliant and lovely woman," had fourteen sisters and four brothers in two families, a fact that helped her assume the direction of the Hinckley household with confidence. She also bore five children, the oldest of whom, Gordon Bitner Hinckley, was born on June 23, 1910.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPGordon was a frail child. While a toddler of two he caught whooping cough, which was aggravated by the pall of smoke created by Salt Lake's coal-burning stoves. To alleviate his condition, the Hinckleys purchased five acres in East Millcreek, above the city smoke, where they built a summer home. With other nearby acquisitions, this residence grew to a thirty-five-acre farm. The family soon developed the routine of spending eight months each year at the city home and four months at the summer home. At the farm, Gordon learned to work, harvesting fruit from the orchard, planting, weeding and watering the garden, and tending the animals. But there also was time for play and for reflection on the miracle of the growth cycle from seed to fruit. He also became intensely aware of the magnitude and the orderliness of God's heavenly creations as he was able to see the night sky clearly, unobstructed by smoke or undimmed by city lights.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe city home had a library whose walls were lined with books. It was furnished with a large oak table, comfortable chairs, and a good lamp. The ambience of this room and the studious habits of the parents provided strong impetus toward scholarship. Gordon was always drawn to this library where he was first introduced to the great literature of the world. Yet as a boy, he had what he later called a "trenchant dislike" for school. Such was his aversion that he rebelled against enrolling at the Hamilton School at age six. He started there at age seven and was soon advanced to his proper grade. In time he adjusted well to school routines, completed seven grades at Hamilton and grades eight and nine at Roosevelt, and graduated from the Church-operated LDS high school in Salt Lake City and later from the University of Utah.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe Hinckleys' city home was in the First Ward, which embraced several blocks north of Liberty Park between Sixth and Ninth East. It included fifteen hundred members and had five deacons quorums. Instruction in priesthood meetings and Sunday School, along with numerous activities, dances, plays, and athletics, broadened Gordon's knowledge and interests. His social skills developed, and his spiritual senses were sharpened. Once at a priesthood meeting, Gordon received a profound spiritual witness of the truthfulness of the restored Church as the brethren sang a favorite hymn, "Praise to the Man." The self-possession and eloquence of a young neighbor, Marjorie Pay, as she gave a reading in Primary, made a lasting impression. Their youthful acquaintance would later evolve into courtship and marriage.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPRepeatedly Bryant S. Hinckley urged his children to "be somebody." It was a call to personal excellence. The notable achievements of his descendants suggest the admonition had no small impact. As Gordon entered the University of Utah, he aimed toward a career in journalism. He took every writing course available to him at the university. He also became absorbed in English literature, avidly reading the classics. His minor was in ancient languages, Latin and Greek. He earned his way through the university by working nights at the Deseret Gym as an electrical and plumbing maintenance man. There he learned to use good tools—"And I love them," he has said, a love that has been shown throughout his life, wherever he has lived.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PP Influences in the home, a natural bent, and his university training have endowed Gordon B. Hinckley with rare language skills. These have been an important factor in his life's work. He respects words and their meanings, and he uses them selectively and sparingly. His preference runs to short words that clearly convey meaning to the ordinary reader or listener. Long training in the proper usage of the written word has spilled over into President Hinckley's speaking so that a transcript of extemporaneous remarks usually reveals the same disciplined structure as his writings.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPAfter graduation, Gordon and a friend briefly harbored the idea of spending a year in the South Pacific, writing about life in the islands as Robert Louis Stevenson had done. This fantasy quickly gave way to plans to attend graduate school at Columbia; and these plans soon yielded to the urging of Bishop John C. Duncan that Gordon fill a mission.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe call was to the European Mission. It came during the depths of the Depression when money was scarce. A small savings account his mother had left, money he had saved, and his father's and brother's backing provided the necessary financing. In June 1933 he entered the Missionary Home, which stood north of the Beehive House on State Street in Salt Lake City. When Elder David O. McKay, then a member of the Twelve, spoke to the missionaries, he asked them to write a paper on what it means to be a missionary. Later Elder McKay invited Gordon to his office and told him his was the best paper on the subject he had ever read. As we shall see, the incident had implications for the future.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPGordon was set apart by Elder George Albert Smith of the Twelve. Before he left Salt Lake City, Gordon's father handed him a small card with the inscription "Be not afraid, only believe" (Mark 5:36). This admonition, and another one received from his father in the field, had a marked influence on him during his mission and afterward.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPEn route to the East Coast, Elder Hinckley stopped in Chicago, where the World's Fair was in progress. Embarking in New York City on the SS Manhattan of the U.S. Lines, he crossed the Atlantic to Plymouth, England. He was assigned to labor in Preston, Lancashire, where the first Latter-day Saint baptisms in England had been performed in the River Ribble in 1837.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe historic significance of Preston could not diminish Elder Hinckley's feeling of loneliness as he traveled there, nor his sense of failure after he had labored there for several weeks. Discouraged and ill, he wrote home saying his mission seemed a waste of time and money and suggesting he ought to return to Salt Lake City. His father's unexpected answer had a bracing effect. It simply told Gordon to forget himself and to go to work. And the next morning as he studied Mark 8:35 with his companion, Elder Hinckley resolved to tough it out. It was a turning point in his mission and his life.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPAfter five months in Lancashire, Elder Hinckley was called to the mission office in London to serve as assistant to the European Mission president, Elder Joseph F. Merrill of the Twelve. He spent the remainder of his mission there. It was a crucial period of growth for the future prophet. His writing skills flowered as he wrote for the mission publications. He learned to speak extemporaneously with poise and precision despite the heckling crowds he addressed in Hyde Park. And his deftness in diplomacy and discretion was sharpened. This last quality shone when President Merrill assigned him to confer with a publisher whose firm had republished as fact a repugnant anti-Mormon book. Told at first the editor would not see him, Elder Hinckley persisted until he obtained an interview. His explanations were so persuasive that the executive recalled the books at considerable expense in order to insert a statement in them that the work was fictional. Equally important, a friendship grew between this man and Elder Hinckley, resulting in an exchange of Christmas greetings over many years. It was Gordon Hinckley's reputation for tact and persuasiveness that caused President Merrill to ask him to meet with the First Presidency on his return home to explain problems in the missions of Europe.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPWhen his mission was completed, Elder Hinckley and two companions traveled through Europe. They rode the trains third-class at night and walked to see the sights during the day. Returning to America on the SS Manhattan, Gordon purchased a new car in Detroit for his father, a Plymouth that cost $740. Weary when he arrived in Salt Lake City in 1935 and weighing only 126 pounds, he said he had no desire "ever to travel again." Indeed, he felt that a promise in his patriarchal blessing, "the nations of the earth shall hear thy voice," had been fulfilled.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPAt the request of the former publisher of the Deseret News, Gordon interviewed with the manager of the paper, seeking employment. He was told quite bluntly there was no opening and that if there were one, others more qualified than he were available to fill it. Far from being dejected, the thought occurred as he left the office that one day he would direct the Deseret News. Whether the impression was revelatory or merely a reflection of Gordon B. Hinckley's innate character, it proved to be correct when he later became the chairman of the board of Deseret News Publishing Company.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPMeanwhile, he was granted an interview with the First Presidency to outline Elder Merrill's concerns. He was told he had fifteen minutes. He was there more than an hour answering questions. The next day President David O. McKay, then a counselor to President Heber J. Grant, doubt less remembering the theme he had written while in the Missionary Home, invited Gordon to his office. Out of this came an invitation for Elder Hinckley to write for the Church and to serve as executive secretary of the Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee. Thus began what at this writing is sixty years of continuous service at Church headquarters, broken only by an interval during World War II when he was employed by the Denver & Rio Grande Railroad.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee, chaired by Stephen L Richards of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles, was composed of six members of the Twelve. Under the overall direction of the committee, Gordon Hinckley "pioneered the making of visual and audio materials for use in the missions and handled the radio work for the Church." Over the years, this work entailed writing hundreds of scripts for radio, filmstrips, and motion pictures, as well as pamphlets and other written materials for use in the missions. He also instructed groups in the Missionary Home about radio and publicity strategies.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPAt first Gordon was paid $65 a month, which was supplemented by $35 a month received for teaching seminary an hour each weekday. Later his earnings increased to $150 a month, not a bad salary during those days of Depression. With this slender income Gordon and Marjorie were married on April 29, 1937. The ceremony was performed in the Salt Lake Temple by Elder Stephen L Richards. They fixed up the summer home in East Millcreek, where they lived while Bryant S. Hinckley presided in the Northern States Mission. Meanwhile, Gordon was called to the Sunday School General Board. In this role he wrote manuals and traveled extensively throughout the Church.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPAt the end of World War II, Elder Stephen L Richards persuaded Gordon to leave his promising employment with the railroad and to return to work with the Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee. Soon after Gordon was called as second counselor in the East Millcreek Stake presidency. Two years later he became the first counselor, and in 1956 he was called as the stake president by Elders Harold B. Lee and George Q. Morris.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPAfter Stephen L Richards was sustained as First Counselor to President David O. McKay in April 1951, he invited Gordon to assist him in supervising the Missionary Department. The association had a lasting effect on Brother Hinckley. President Richards, a skillful attorney and law professor, was reputed to be among the most brilliant of the graduates of the University of Chicago law school. When he began to direct the missionary work, the Korean War had created many thorny problems arising from missionary quotas imposed by local draft boards. As President Richards sought to involve his assistant in solving them, Gordon protested because he lacked legal training. President Richards assured him this was not an impediment but an advantage, because a lawyer might try to solve the problems through litigation, something he wished to avoid. He said he would provide any necessary legal counsel and that what was needed was someone with negotiating skills who could work around problems with finesse. This was the strategy Gordon Hinckley used as he sought to solve draft problems during the remainder of the Korean War. In reality it was an expression of innate qualities in his character, proved in practice and guided by a brilliant tactician almost without peer. Habits developed or confirmed during this period became an ingrained part of Gordon B. Hinckley's approach to problems during his tenure as a General Authority. His inclination is to compose differences and to avoid confrontations where that can be done consistent with principle.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPIn 1954 President David O. McKay called Brother Hinckley to find methods to present the temple ceremonies in various languages. This led to producing the temple ceremonies in fourteen languages using film. During the pro duction period, Brother Hinckley spent much time in the assembly room on the fifth floor of the Salt Lake Temple where the first film of the temple ceremonies was prepared. He used one of the nearby rooms as an alternate office.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPWhen the film was completed, he personally carried it to Switzerland, where it was first used in the Swiss Temple following its dedication in September 1955. Since then, President Hinckley has had an unequaled involvement in the dedication or rededication of temples around the world. Of the forty-seven temples now in use, he has dedicated or rededicated more than half.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPOn April 6, 1958, President Hinckley was sustained as an Assistant to the Twelve; and on October 5, 1961 he was ordained an Apostle and inducted into the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. His skills and his long experience at Church headquarters enabled him to render significant service from the beginning. He played a key role in setting up the program for the first worldwide seminar for mission presidents in 1961, working with President Henry D. Moyle. In the summer of 1962, he and President Moyle toured twenty-one missions in Europe during a twenty-three-day period, holding day-long seminars with the missionaries. Meanwhile, as a member of the Missionary Executive Committee, he helped to work out a plan to divide missions into various areas to be directed by members of the Twelve. Elder Hinckley's first assignment under this plan was to supervise missions in Asia. He served there for eight years, traveling back and forth twenty-one times. Among other things, he organized the Korea Mission, opened missionary work in the Philippines, dedicated South Vietnam and Thailand, traveled through Vietnam during the war, secured permission to send the first missionaries to India, and participated in creating the Tokyo Stake in March 1970, the first stake in Asia.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPHe was then assigned to supervise missions in South America. There he created new stakes in Brazil and Peru and received authorization to create new stakes in Chile and Brazil. He also opened missions in Ecuador and Colombia. Later Elder Hinckley supervised missions in Germany, Switzerland, Austria, and Italy, as well as scattered groups in the Middle East and Africa.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPMeanwhile, during the first decade of his service in the Twelve, Elder Hinckley filled numerous headquarters assignments, including membership on the BYU Board of Trustees, the Church Board of Education, the Church Information Committee, the Correlation Executive Committee, the Military Relations Committee, and the Missionary Executive Committee. He also served as chairman of the Priesthood Committee, chairman of the Children's Correlation Committee, and as an adviser to the Primary and the Sunday School. Moreover, during this same period, he became president of the Deseret News and served on the boards of the Newspaper Agency Corporation, the Beneficial Life Insurance Company, Zion's First National Bank, Utah Power & Light Company, radio station WNYW in New York, radio and television station KIRO in Seattle, Bonneville International Corporation, and the radio and television station KSL in Salt Lake City. As regards the last two, he also served as a member of the executive committee; and he served as committee chairman and chairman of the board for Bonneville International Corporation.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPA highlight of Elder Hinckley's service under President Joseph Fielding Smith was attendance at the first area conference of the Church, held in Manchester, England, in August 1971. During the conference, he and President Spencer W. Kimball, then Acting President of the Twelve, traveled to nearby Preston to visit again the key historic sites connected with the first missionary effort there in 1837, which President Kimball's grandfather Heber C. Kimball had directed.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPA year later, in September 1972, President Harold B. Lee, who had succeeded President Joseph Fielding Smith in July following President Smith's death, invited Elder Hinckley to accompany him to Europe and the Holy Land, his first overseas trip after becoming the President of the Church. A special bond tied this pair together. In 1936, when Harold B. Lee became managing director of Church welfare, he was assigned an office next to Gordon Hinckley on the second floor of the Church Administration Building. Gordon had commenced working with the Radio, Publicity, and Mission Literature Committee the year before. For five years afterward, they worked side by side as headquarters staff personnel until Brother Lee was called to the Twelve in 1941. In Jerusalem, following visits in London and Athens, President Lee became severely stressed from a lung congestion that caused violent coughing. After Elder Hinckley administered to him, the prophet expelled two blood clots, which gave him relief. President Lee considered the incident to be "a miracle in this land of even greater miracles."

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPElder Hinckley also accompanied President Lee on his last overseas trip. In August 1973 the prophet invited Gordon and Marjorie to accompany him and his wife on an eight-day trip following the area conference in Munich, Germany. Meetings were held on the continent and in England, including meetings with members and missionaries and with workers at the London Temple. Four months later, President Lee died unexpectedly. Elder Hinckley was one of the principal speakers at his funeral, eulogizing the friend and companion whom he had welcomed to the Church Administration Building almost forty years before.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPElder Hinckley served as the first chairman of the Special Affairs Committee and as an adviser to the Department of Public Communications during most of the 1970s and until 1981, when he was called to the First Presidency. In these positions he played a key role in several Church initiatives affecting the public and having moral implications. Chief among these were the contest over the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) and the fights against pornography and liquor-by-the-drink legislation in Utah.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe Church opposition to the ERA was not founded on a denial of women's rights but on the conviction that both men and women were already guaranteed full civil rights under the Constitution and that passage of the amendment would create needless confusion and might lead to interpretations on abortion, homosexuality, and other issues pressed by radical feminists that would be contrary to the teachings of the Church.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe Church also feared that a failure to restrict pornography would increase problems such as immorality, sexual deviancy, and crime. Elder Hinckley and his committee worked aggressively on these issues with significant success. It is believed that the nationwide influence of the Church, exerted through the Special Affairs Committee, was a major factor leading to the defeat of the ERA.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPElder Hinckley was called as a third counselor to President Spencer W. Kimball in July 1981. Earlier there were incidents that suggested the prophet's confidence in Elder Hinckley and that foreshadowed his call to the First Presidency: Elder Hinckley accompanied President Kimball to Fayette, New York, for the events connected with the sesquicentennial celebration of the Church in April 1980. There Elder Hinckley read a proclamation to the world from the First Presidency and the Twelve. In March 1981 Elder Hinckley accompanied the prophet to Washington, D.C., for a personal interview with President Ronald Reagan. In May 1981 a statement crafted by Elder Hinckley and the Special Affairs Committee, opposing construction of the MX missile site in western Utah and eastern Nevada, was approved and signed by the First Presidency.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPWhen Elder Hinckley was called to the First Presidency, all three of its members had serious physical problems, although their mentality was unimpaired: President Kimball, in addition to long-standing heart, throat, and other problems, had undergone two recent operations for subdural hematomas; President Tanner suffered from Parkinson's disease and was losing his sight; and President Romney was quite feeble and practically blind. Thus the responsibility to carry on the day-to-day work of the First Presidency fell largely on President Hinckley, acting under delegations of authority from the prophet. That responsibility increased markedly when President Tanner died on November 27, 1982, and President Hinckley became chairman of the Budget Committee, the Personnel Committee, and the Investment Committee. These added responsibilities had a crushing effect at first, causing weariness and a sense of oppression at the ever-mounting problems. The crisis came to a head in February 1983, when one morning, upon entering his office and seeing the large volume of paperwork on his desk, President Hinckley fell to his knees and implored God for strength and direction. In answer there came into his mind the words "Be still and know that I am God" (Doctrine and Covenants 101:16), and with that came a calm assurance that the problems would be solved in time and one at a time.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPDuring the years President Hinckley served as a counselor to President Spencer W. Kimball, he walked a fine line. He was careful not to exceed the limits of his delegated authority. Yet he was unwilling to allow the Church to drift or stagnate. As a result, several major initiatives were undertaken that originated with him but were endorsed and authorized by President Kimball.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPIn March 1982, for instance, three executive councils were created and given policy jurisdiction over headquarters organizations falling under the captions of Missionary, Priesthood, and Temple and Genealogy Work. Also the ecclesiastical units throughout the world were divided into three groups, with each executive council having jurisdiction over one of them. Originally each council was composed of three members of the Twelve, two members of the Presidency of the Seventy, and a member of the Presiding Bishopric, with a member of the First Presidency as chairman. Later, members of the Twelve were appointed chairmen. At this time the Coordinating Council was dissolved. This action simplified and improved headquarters administration and provided a direct-line access to specified General Authorities from the field. Any matter an executive council could not resolve was referred to the Twelve or to the Council of the First Presidency and the Twelve.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe international administration of the Church was further improved in August 1984 when the world was divided into thirteen areas, each to be presided over by an Area Presidency composed of three members of the Seventy. In time the directors of temporal affairs in the international areas were placed directly under the Area Presidencies.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThese two key changes provided for greater integration and control of the administrative machinery of the Church while allowing for more latitude and independence in the field as the Area Presidencies were able to provide direct and consistent supervision on the ground. And the format was flexible so that as the Church grew, new areas were created by divisions.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPAs these changes were implemented and as the work moved forward, President Hinckley reported regularly to President Kimball, keeping him fully advised and seeking his direction on any matters beyond the scope of his delegated authority. And he regularly briefed the Twelve so that all were apprised of the status of affairs.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPBeginning with the April general conference in 1983, President Hinckley called on President Ezra Taft Benson, president of the Quorum of the Twelve, to conduct some of the sessions and to carry a heavier speaking load. A few months later he also invited President Benson to meet with him weekly as he considered sensitive cases dealing with temple blessings and appeals from judgments of local disciplinary councils.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThe effective manner in which the Church continued to progress, despite the disabilities of two members of the First Presidency, is a testament to the inspired nature of the Church organization, the apostolic unity among the First Presidency and the Twelve, and the skill and persistence of Gordon B. Hinckley.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThese qualities were clearly evident as he handled a wide variety of duties with composure. For instance, in August 1982 he dedicated twelve of the restored homes in Nauvoo; a few weeks later he hosted President Ronald Reagan in visiting a Church cannery in Utah; on April 3, 1983, he rededicated the Assembly Hall on Temple Square; two days later he dedicated the N. Eldon Tanner Building on the BYU campus; and in September 1984 again hosted a visit to Salt Lake City by President Reagan. President Hinckley spoke at many funerals, including those of President Tanner and Elder Bruce R. McConkie, and was the featured speaker at special Church and civic gatherings. During the same period, he was often away from Salt Lake City dedicating or rededicating temples in various parts of the world; and in the spring of 1984 he held a series of solemn assemblies in which priesthood leaders were given special instruction. He continued to serve on the board of directors of many Church-owned or Church-controlled corporations, as well as on the boards of the Utah Power and Light Company and Zion's First National Bank.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPThis hectic routine ended with the death of President Spencer W. Kimball on November 5, 1985. Soon after, Elder Hinckley was called as First Counselor to President Ezra Taft Benson. Although he was eighty-six years old at the time, President Benson was in relatively good health and was able to lead out. And President Thomas S. Monson, the other counselor, was in excellent health and was a seasoned and able leader after having served for twenty-two years as a member of the Twelve. For a while this First Presidency functioned in a normal way with each member assuming his share of the duties. Later when President Benson's health began to wane, it became necessary for the counselors to pick up most of the presidential duties, which they performed under delegations of authority from the prophet. For President Hinckley, the burden of responsibility was lighter than before because President Monson was there to share the load.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPDuring this period, a vicious campaign of vilification was waged against President Hinckley by a group of apostates and enemies of the Church. Their efforts were thwarted when a committee of the Twelve employed a distinguished nonmember attorney to study the charges. Using a team of investigators, the attorney found they were based on lies and misrepresentations. Yet the affair took its toll on President Hinckley and his family, who were stressed by the nature and the unfairness of the attacks. In retrospect, the incident appears to have been but another link in the chain of events qualifying Gordon B. Hinckley to occupy the prophetic office.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPFollowing the death of President Ezra Taft Benson on May 30, 1994, President Hinckley was called as First Counselor to President Howard W. Hunter. This role was essentially the same as the one he served under President Benson. But it was one of much shorter duration, for President Hunter died on March 3, 1995. President Hinckley loved Howard W. Hunter. They sat side by side in the circle of Apostles for twenty years. "A majestic tree in the forest has fallen," said President Hinckley at the funeral, "leaving a place of emptiness. A great and quiet strength has departed from our midst."

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPIn accord with custom, the Twelve gathered in the upper room of the temple on Sunday, March 12, to consider the reorganization of the First Presidency. There Gordon B. Hinckley was sustained and ordained as the fifteenth President of the Church. He selected Thomas S. Monson and James E. Faust as his counselors. The next morning the new prophet faced members of the media at a press conference in the Joseph Smith Memorial Building. He responded patiently and eloquently to many questions. He did not announce any new initiatives. He merely said he intended to build on the foundations laid by his predecessors. He said he would do this in a spirit of faith and optimism. "You can't, you don't, build out of pessimism or cynicism," he told the audience. His later words and his actions have confirmed this philosophy. He has traveled widely and has spoken often since then. Invariably he sounds a note of happiness and optimism. Occasionally his remarks contain nuances of a wry and uplifting sense of humor.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPExcept for these initial hints, it is too early to see the outlines of President Gordon B. Hinckley's prophetic ministry. However, one significant step has been taken already whose impact on the Church will be profound. Effective August 15, 1995, the office of Regional Representative of the Twelve was eliminated to be replaced by the office of Area Authority. The Area Authorities, who will serve for a period of years while continuing their normal occupations, will be line officers functioning under the direction of Area Presidencies. Already, some Area Authorities have been designated as members of Area Presidencies.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPWhatever form President Hinckley's prophetic ministry ultimately takes, it certainly will reflect the qualities of faith, perseverance, and creativity that have marked his life thus far. And his myriad experiences during long years of service at Church headquarters, including the refining and challenging obstacles he has had to overcome along the way, will lend a quality of charitable understanding to the decisions he will be called upon to make.

Hinckley, Gordon B.PPMany of the fine qualities seen in the character of President Gordon B. Hinckley have been enhanced, if not molded, within his family circle. He and Sister Hinckley are the parents of five children: Kathleen, Richard, Virginia, Clark, and Jane. Well educated and happily married, they all are building strong Latter-day Saint families. Despite the aura of distinction surrounding their ancestry and the achievements of their husband and father, they have maintained attitudes free from conceit or vanity. Their gatherings are marked by the same jovial feelings that existed when President Hinckley was relatively unknown throughout the Church. The gentle humor and the love evident among them is illustrated by an incident arising from the trauma he faced while trying to pare down the size of his library in the move to a condominium. At the time his wife, Marjorie, was heard to say, "You would think he would be able to give up his eighth-grade algebra book, wouldn't you?" The incident may provide a metaphor for the future—a reluctance to part with things of the past combined with a willingness to make changes that circumstances require.

Note

This chapter is based on manuscripts covering the lives and families of Ira Nathaniel Hinckley, Bryant S. Hinckley, and Ada Bitner Hinckley; diaries of Francis M. Gibbons, 1970-95; miscellaneous articles in the Ensign and the Church News; and George F. Willison's book Saints and Strangers (New York: Reynal and Hitchcock, 1945).
