Purpose and Organization

The Aaronic Priesthood helps God’s children prepare to return to His presence. It holds “the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism” (Doctrine and Covenants 13; see also 3.3.2 in this handbook).

Aaronic Priesthood quorums help young men make and keep sacred covenants and deepen their conversion to Jesus Christ and His gospel.

A quorum is an organized group of priesthood holders. The purpose of a quorum is to help priesthood holders work together to participate in God’s work of salvation and exaltation. In their quorums, Aaronic Priesthood holders serve others, fulfill priesthood duties, build unity, and learn and live doctrine.

The Aaronic Priesthood quorum theme can help each young man understand his divine identity and his purpose as a priesthood holder. Young men and their leaders repeat the theme at the beginning of quorum meetings and at other quorum gatherings. The theme reads as follows:

“I am a beloved son of God, and He has a work for me to do.

“With all my heart, might, mind, and strength, I will love God, keep my covenants, and use His priesthood to serve others, beginning in my own home.

“As I strive to serve, exercise faith, repent, and improve each day, I will qualify to receive temple blessings and the enduring joy of the gospel.

“I will prepare to become a diligent missionary, loyal husband, and loving father by being a true disciple of Jesus Christ.

“I will help prepare the world for the Savior’s return by inviting all to come unto Christ and receive the blessings of His Atonement.”

The bishop organizes Aaronic Priesthood holders into quorums as described below. (See also Doctrine and Covenants 107:85–88.)

Young men join the deacons quorum beginning in January of the year they turn 12. At this time they are also eligible to be ordained deacons if they are prepared and worthy.

A member of the quorum who is an ordained deacon serves as the quorum president. Where possible, one or two counselors and a secretary may serve with him. The counselors and secretary must also be deacons.

The duties of a deacon are described in Doctrine and Covenants 20:57–59; 84:111. Other duties include passing the sacrament and assisting the bishop in “administering all temporal things” (Doctrine and Covenants 107:68).

Young men join the teachers quorum beginning in January of the year they turn 14. At this time they are also eligible to be ordained teachers if they are prepared and worthy.

A member of the quorum who is an ordained teacher serves as the quorum president. Where possible, one or two counselors and a secretary may serve with him. The counselors and secretary must also be teachers.

Teachers have the same duties as deacons. They also prepare the sacrament and serve as ministering brothers. Additional duties are described in Doctrine and Covenants 20:53–59; 84:111.

Young men join the priests quorum beginning in January of the year they turn 16. At this time they are also eligible to be ordained priests if they are prepared and worthy.

The bishop is the president of the priests quorum (see Doctrine and Covenants 107:87–88). He calls one or two quorum members to serve as his assistants. A secretary may also be called. The assistants and secretary should be ordained priests.

Priests have the same duties as deacons and teachers. Additional duties are described in Doctrine and Covenants 20:46–52, 73–79.

See General Handbook: Serving in The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 10.1–10.1.3.3, Gospel Library.
