“We are all connected, and we have a God-given responsibility to help make life better for those around us,” taught President Russell M. Nelson. He continued: “We don’t have to be alike or look alike to have love for each other. We don’t even have to agree with each other to love each other. If we have any hope of reclaiming the goodwill and sense of humanity for which we yearn, it must begin with each of us, one person at a time.”

Church leaders have spoken in general conference about how we, as disciples of Jesus Christ, can make a difference to our neighbors, friends, and communities through unity, service, and love. They have also shared messages about these topics on social media, including the following:

“You might think that because you are young, you cannot do great things. Maybe you think that Heavenly Father’s work is only for adults. But I want you to know that Heavenly Father sees things differently than we do. His ways are very different from ours. He has said, ‘By small and simple things are great things brought to pass.’ The Lord can use you—yes, each of you—to do His amazing and important work.

“So, what are some of the ‘small and simple things’ you can do to make a big difference in the world? You can help someone in need. You can learn the teachings of Jesus Christ and abide by them. You can share what you know about the Savior. You can keep His commandments and prepare now to go to the temple and be baptized for your ancestors. When you do any of these things, you are helping Heavenly Father to gather His children back to Him.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, Feb. 21, 2021 (video), facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“During my earlier career as a heart surgeon, I stood in an operating room thousands of times. I even cared for wounded soldiers in MASH units during the Korean War. I have literally touched the hearts of men and women of many races and nationalities around the world. My prayers to God for His guiding help, and the subsequent inspiration I received from Him, were vital in every instance. In those operating rooms—where life hung in the balance—I came to know that our Heavenly Father cares deeply for every one of His children. That’s because we are His children.

“Differences in nationality, color, and culture do not change the fact that we are truly sons and daughters of God. And as a follower and witness of Jesus Christ, I have only come to understand that divine truth more deeply. Together, we proclaim the nobility of each precious son and daughter of God. I have stated before and repeat today that racism, sexism, and a host of other ‘isms’ are universally and tragically limiting in the way we regard and treat each other. Any abuse or prejudice toward another because of race, nationality, gender, sexual orientation, culture, or any other identifiers is offensive to our Maker and defies the first and second great commandments—that we should love God with all our hearts and our neighbors as ourselves.

“We firmly believe in the fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man. We do not have to act alike or look alike to love each other. We can disagree on a matter without being disagreeable. If we have any hope of creating the goodwill and sense of humanity for which we all yearn, it must begin with each of us, one person and one interaction at a time.

“May we as sons and daughters of God, as eternal brothers and sisters, do all within our power to build up each other, learn from each other, and demonstrate respect for all of God’s children. May we link arms in love and brotherhood.”

President Russell M. Nelson, Facebook, Apr. 13, 2023 (video), facebook.com/russell.m.nelson.

“Face global conditions and your personal challenges with hope. Refuse to accept the world for what it appears to be. Shine the brightness of your hope on it and make it what it ought to be. Be that light you were brought to earth to be, never to be extinguished.”

President Jeffrey R. Holland, Facebook, Jan. 11, 2023, facebook.com/jeffreyr.holland.

“Church should be a place of blending. Though we are different, we are all one family. We are all in this together. Small things—like having a short visit with some ice cream, enjoying a meal together, or taking a walk around the village pond—can make such a difference in the life of someone who would otherwise not have those feelings of friendship and belonging. It certainly did for me.

“Our role as brothers and sisters in the gospel is to recognize that there is always someone who needs a friend. Gestures of friendship and belonging help more than we sometimes realize. You don’t have to be lonely to appreciate friendship. Focusing on ‘the one’ makes us complete as a community of Saints—and as children in the family of our Heavenly Father.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, July 30, 2021, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“As disciples of Jesus Christ, we have a critical role to ‘succor the weak, lift up the hands which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees’ (Doctrine and Covenants 81:5).

“Having been a refugee twice before the age of 12, on this World Refugee Day, I remind you to lift those around you.

“Extend a welcoming hand. To all of God’s children, extend a special measure of humanity, compassion, and charity so that they feel, at long last, they have finally found home.”

Elder Dieter F. Uchtdorf, Facebook, June 20, 2023, facebook.com/dieterf.uchtdorf.

“Many of you reading this are part of Generation Z. You have grown up with a natural knowledge of the internet, smart devices, social media, and other related technologies that we older generations have had to make an effort to learn. For you, ‘liking,’ ‘sharing,’ and ‘direct messaging’ are as common as calling, knocking, and writing a letter was for generations before you. But along with your vast knowledge of the digital world around you, you have something even greater in your possession—you have the foundation to be the most capable generation ever for advancing our Heavenly Father’s plan of happiness to all of His children. And we need your help.”

Elder Quentin L. Cook, Facebook, Jan. 26, 2023, facebook.com/quentin.lcook

“The Mormon Battalion is a very apt example of doing hard things and doing them well. They had challenges that we can barely comprehend—physical challenges and some spiritual, I’m sure. But they handled them. They didn’t complain. They went to work. When they got to what is now San Diego, [California, USA,] they transformed the town by laboring hard to dig wells, build a school, and strengthen the community.

“The lessons learned then are needed today as much as ever. Each one of us has his or her own challenges and opportunities to face. But we can do so with faith in Jesus Christ that we will receive guidance and assistance as we face them as well as faith to look outward and bless others. To me, it’s an interesting thing that it takes faith to begin to do something. But when you do act on faith, it increases the faith you started with.”

Elder D. Todd Christofferson, Facebook, Feb. 2, 2022, facebook.com/dtodd.christofferson.

“I’ve been thinking about World Faith Harmony Week and reflecting that people of faith, any faith, tend to make a very positive contribution in their society, in the world. They volunteer in their communities. They have strong families, typically. They support education. They serve. They’re willing to just really make a contribution for good on the basis of their faith and their belief. We want to share and invite all to hear the restored gospel of Jesus Christ. But in all events, at a minimum, we hope all people will strengthen their commitment—their activity—in whatever church or faith they may choose to follow.

“I was some years ago at a luncheon with Elder L. Tom Perry, where he had invited religious leaders around the Salt Lake Valley to get together, in part, to thank them, to get to know them a little better. But I was very struck—toward the end of our luncheon, he almost pounded the table, but he said, ‘You need to get your people more active. You need to make sure that you bring everybody you can into activity and participation and strengthen their faith and build them up in faith. It can only help the community. It betters all of us.’ And I believe he’s absolutely right. All of us are blessed by the faithfulness of people of all faiths.”

Elder D. Todd Christofferson, Facebook, Feb. 1, 2023 (video), facebook.com/dtodd.christofferson.

“As disciples of Jesus Christ, our covenant belonging with God and each other invites us to be good and do good. As you know, our Church provides humanitarian assistance without regard to race, religious affiliation, or nationality. We work with partners of all faiths or of no faith. We respond to immediate and long-term needs. We feel heaven’s blessings as we express our love of God in doing all possible for our brothers and sisters, His sons and daughters, everywhere in every way we can.

“If you are looking for ways to become a better ‘you,’ consider downloading the JustServe.org app to find opportunities near you.”

Elder Gerrit W. Gong, Facebook, Feb. 12, 2021, facebook.com/gerritw.gong.

“In his general conference address, Elder Ardern shared: … ‘Despite our every effort, you and I won’t heal everyone, but each of us can be the one who can make a difference for good in the life of someone. It was just one lad, a mere boy, who offered the five loaves and two fishes that fed the five thousand. We may ask of our offering, as Andrew the disciple did of the loaves and fishes, ‘What are they among so many?’ (John 6:9). I assure you: it is sufficient to give or to do what you are able and then to allow Christ to magnify your effort’ (general conference, Oct. 2023).

“I testify that your time, talents, compassion, materials, and financial resources are part of the Lord’s storehouse. Though it may seem meager, your contribution, offered in love, will bless His children in every corner of the world. He will magnify our efforts!”

President Camille N. Johnson, Facebook, Oct. 9, 2023, facebook.com/RSGeneralPresident

“Be a difference maker.

“On our first day of seminary my junior year, the teacher challenged us to become friends with someone new by the end of the semester.

“I like a challenge, so I chose someone who was as different from me as I could.

“I was shy, had the same friends since elementary school, and loved seminary.

“Kevin sang the songs at the top of his lungs and told Brother Howell he would come every day if he promised to give him an F on his report card. (His friends didn’t think seminary was cool.)

“I decided to walk with Kevin to and from seminary every day. Just across the parking lot. It seemed easy. He always walked alone. As soon as we got to the school building, we both went our separate ways.

“It didn’t take long to realize Kevin didn’t have a lot of friends. In fact, over the next few months I realized he only had two. He ate lunch with them, walked the halls with them. And sluffed class with them. But not seminary.

“One day, Kevin and his two friends walked up to me at my locker. Kevin told me he was on a scavenger hunt and needed one of my shoes. I was wearing sandals. It was against the rules to go barefoot in school. But Kevin wasn’t a rule-keeping kind of kid. I debated it for a minute and then reached down to take off my sandal. Then I told him I had to have that shoe back by the end of second period, no matter what.

“I will never forget what happened next. It’s been over three decades, and I still remember as if it were yesterday.

“‘That’s OK,’ he said, ‘I don’t really need your shoe.’ Then he turned around to those two friends and said the words I will never forget: ‘I told you there was one person in this school who believed in me.’

“Who needs you to believe in them today?

“Who needs an extra friend?

“Who could you walk through the parking lot with?

“Sometimes, standing as a witness of Christ means eating lunch with someone who needs a friend, stopping to talk with someone new, meeting someone where they are, and extending love to them.

“Become a difference maker.

“The Lord needs you.

“And in case you need this reminder today, I believe in you.”

President Emily Belle Freeman, Facebook, Aug. 22, 2023, facebook.com/youngwomenworldwide.
