"'Tis better to have loved and lost, than never to have loved at all."

"Has Mr. Edgeway gone away for long?" asked Mr. Mellor of Betty.

"He did not say for how long," returned Betty. "He said he was called away very suddenly, and would write me as soon as he reached his destination, and tell me particulars. I am expecting a letter tonight surely—it is two days now since he went."

Betty's mind dwelt little with Frank. She wondered slightly what could have called him away, but she was rather relieved at his absence. Her thoughts of George were so intense, and her conflicting emotions so difficult to contend with, that she feared she might betray her secret to Frank, who seemed ever watching her every word and look. Sometimes she almost believed he held some suspicion of her trial. She was determined to be true to him, and make him the man he was capable of becoming.

Her sacrifice was great, and as yet, the days were too young, for her to feel much joy in her resolve. She seemed groping in the dark, sure that the course she had taken was right, but seeing no light ahead. But she knew that the day would come, when she would enjoy the happiness of right doing.

When Frank had said goodbye, he had been unusually calm and gentle. His wild love for her seemed subdued. She felt its power, more than that of his usual passionate adoration. His last words came to her with sudden force:

"Betty, you have taught me how to live. What greater thing could a man ask from the woman he loves?"

A letter awaited her as she surmised. When she went to her room, with a new interest she turned to the letter before dressing for supper.

"I must be more interested in you, dear boy," she thought rather regretfully, "I hope I can learn to give you more and more."

She opened and read:

"My own beautiful good one:—This is the last time I may write 'My Own.' Yes, dearest Betty, you are too beautiful and good to be sacrificed upon the altar of one man's selfishness!"

"From this day I shall glory in your freedom. Yes, poor, selfish me has suddenly found out the joy of forgetting self,—a strange, new joy, emanating from your own lovely self!

"At first I was mad with the joy of loving you. But the mad joy wore itself out. Then I beheld my loved one, fair and pure, dragging through life a bleeding heart!

"The vision never left me, night or day. It tortured me and I knew no rest, even in your sweet presence.

"Then, the fire of a greater love kindled in my heart. I desired to see you glowing with perfect happiness. This desire grew stronger and stronger until it evolved a way by which it could be satisfied. That way has been accomplished. I am far, far away from the dearest girl on God's fair earth. She will never see me again, but the vision of her shall be the inspiration of my life!

"Soon you will forget the man to whom you have given new life and strength to bear all things.

"Your Frank."

Betty laid the letter down with a sense of relief at her release. Then a sudden pity for Frank brought a mist to her eyes. But she seemed to hear him say again,

"You have taught me how to live—what more could a man ask from the woman he loves?"

The words comforted her, she had not harmed him, then,

"God keep him strong and good!" she said fervently.

Slowly and thoughtfully she dressed. Then she noticed another letter which she had not seen before. It was from Ephraim. With great anxiety she read, that her mother was very ill, and she must come home directly.

So Betty's mind instantly planned for her sudden departure for the West and once more, her own trials were forgotten in thinking of others.

***********
