LETTER FROM ELDER SECRIST—ORDERED TO LEAVE ZURICH—ARRESTED AND IMPRISONED IN A FILTHY DUNGEON—TAKEN TO BETTER QUARTERS—RELEASED.

About this time I received letters from several of the brethren in other parts the mission, from which I learned that we in Zurich were not the only ones who were being persecuted. From Bro. Secrist's letter, written at St. Louis, France, I copy the following:

"You may think it strange to hear from me, an outcast (not on the island of Patmos, but in the kingdom of France) for the testimony of the truth and of the gospel, which we preach. I hardly know how to begin my history. I left Geneva sick, yet complained little. It was with much difficulty and distress of body that I arrived at a good sister's house in Thun, where I had a severe time for about three days. About one week after, President Tyler came to see me. We ordained three to the Priesthood. I kept myself hidden from strangers, and traveled from place to place after night, and as the Saints are very much scattered, frequently walked twelve miles after dark. I felt after a time that something was not right, and as the reigning Stadthalter wished to see me to learn from me concerning our doctrine, I went to see him. About this time he received a note from Berne, stating that 'Secrist had left the canton and if he were to show himself, to see after him and send him to Berne,' yet he (the Stadthalter) gave me the privilege of going to Berne by myself, instead of sending me by a policeman.

"I went, expecting to get a hearing, but this was denied me. They wished to know where I wanted to go. I answered to Thun. They replied, 'You cannot go to Thun,' and got into a passion and sent me to prison, where I remained nine days. The brethren did all they could for me to get the authorities to hear me, stating that the preacher at Siglerswyl (who complained against me) did not represent the thing as it was. They had encouragement to have a re-hearing for me, till last Friday. They had petitioned testifying that I had not brought a strange doctrine in the land, etc., but all to no purpose; in short, on last Saturday morning, I was transported by a policeman, and never got clear until at the dividing line of Switzerland and France."

I first made the acquaintance of Elder Jacob F. Secrist in Geneva, and found him to be a very humble and devoted missionary. He had just commenced to lay the foundation of a permanent work in Berne and Thun (a town some fifteen miles distant from the former) where he had by the blessing of God, after enduring many hardships, baptized a number of good people and established one or two branches. He was honorably released to return to Zion, but did not live to enjoy the happiness of a re-union with his family in this life, as he died somewhere in the States on his way home.

For four or five weeks during these exciting times I kept no journal, as it was not prudent under the circumstances to do so. In a country where a man may be arrested and imprisoned at any movement, as we then expected to be, and without a knowledge, on his part, of any charge being made against him, it was not safe to write and carry evidence of one's movements and connections. Although there was nothing wrong about our acts or intentions, as our only desire was to remain that we might teach our brethren and sisters and preach the gospel, as required by the revelations of God; we wished to avoid bringing trouble on others, if we had to feel the effects of prejudice and persecution.

About this time Elder C. R. Savage, now of Salt Lake City, whose field of labor was at Lausanne, visited us. I was greatly pleased to see him. He was an old acquaintance, as we had been fellow-laborers in the Southampton conference in England.

While daily expecting to hear from the police-authorities, we occupied all the time we could in straightening up Church records and accounts of Church books received from and sent to different places, which was somewhat difficult as we had to estimate values in different kinds of money.

As the time passed, Elder Mayer was busy visiting and preaching to the Saints and strangers, who attended our meetings, and I assisted him to the best of my ability. I had studied hard and was steadily improving in a knowledge and use of the German tongue. We anticipated trouble from the authorities, in consequence of rumors prevailing, but we trusted in the Lord who had sent us to warn this nation, and we waited with confidence coming events.

About December 16th, Elder Mayer and myself received notice from the police to leave the canton of Zurich within eight days. Elder Mayer made application to the American consul, who would do nothing for him, and I wrote to the British ambassador at Berne. In my communication I claimed protection as a British subject and stated how I had been treated by the authorities of the canton in which I then was, they even refusing to give any reason for the unjust course pursued in regard to me.

He gave an almost immediate reply in which he stated that he had asked for explanation concerning the course pursued towards me, and had also used his influence to have the order of banishment suspended for a time. He then asked me to write him fully, as I afterwards did, any and all causes which I might think had led to the action of the authorities.

Elder Mayer, as the American consul would do nothing for him, had to leave and was shortly afterwards honorably released to return home to Zion: and notwithstanding my protest, the act of expulsion against me remained in force and I had also to leave or go to prison, and remembering the advice of the ambassador, to comply with the orders of the police until the matter was fully investigated, I concluded to comply with the requisition.

Brother Mayer was the first missionary sent to Zurich in this dispensation. He was an example of industry and perseverance in his ministry and was the means of accomplishing a great deal of good. He baptized quite a number and organized a branch of the Church in Zurich and another in Weiningen. He left, carrying with him the blessings and good feelings of both Saints and strangers who knew him.

I concluded, waiting the final issue of the ambassador's negotiations, to remove to Badan in a neighboring Catholic canton. Brother Savage, who could not speak German, decided to go with me for a few days before returning to his field of labor in Lausanne. The grief of the Saints was visible on every countenance, they felt discouraged, it seemed to them that, in the departure of the Elders, the last link connecting them with the body of the Church was about to be severed and that they were soon to be left without a shepherd.

The excitement about the "Mormons" had been considerable, the newspapers, as usual, printing all manner of falsehoods concerning us and those of Zurich printing a notice of our expulsion and advising the authorities in neighboring cantons to look after us. The Protestant cantons manifested their opposition to us the most, and the excitement among them was general. The Catholic cantons showed little interest in the matter, therefore we thought it best to take refuge in one of them.

Extremely little has ever been accomplished by the Elders among a Roman Catholic population, in consequence of the dense ignorance, in a general sense, of the mass of the people and their unwillingness to examine anything religious apart from their own faith—the result doubtless of an education which shackles thought and crushes out aspirations which would lead to religious freedom. A few days experience, surrounded by an unfriendly influence, inclined us to accept an invitation to visit a family of Saints in Weiningen, the same with whom I had lodged at a former period and in whose house I had been mobbed. That place was, however, within the boundaries of the canton of Zurich and therefore dangerous to our liberty. We had been considering the propriety of Brother Savage returning to Lausanne and my going into one of the other Protestant cantons where there were a few scattered Saints, but I thought it would be better to reserve my visit in that direction until the excitement was somewhat allayed that I might be able to remain for a season.

At this juncture the invitation reached us from Weiningen. Our friends promised us the utmost secrecy and care, as they, of course, understood that I had been banished and was in danger, if found in the canton. I finally concluded to go to Weiningen, and as the distance was short Brother Savage accompanied me. We got within two or three miles of our destination as it was getting dark, and, as arranged, were met by two of the brethren who came to pilot us into town in safety. On our arrival at Brother Hug's residence we were met by kind friends whose glad countenances testified to the happiness they felt at beholding us. Supper was ready and we all sat down to partake of the blessings provided by this kind family when suddenly the door was thrust open and a policeman, with several assistants, walked into the room and arrested Brother Savage and myself.

They next proceeded to relieve us of such things as our pockets contained, all the while asking questions which we did not answer, and congratulating each other upon the capture they had made. I had quite a sum of mission money in large silver pieces which I intended to send to Geneva by Brother Savage. As our visitors commenced to relieve us of such articles as we had, the Hug brothers (there were several of them) interposed, which led to considerable wrangling, when I thought of the money, and backing against brother Jacob Hug, drew nearly all of the money out of my pocket, unobserved, and, as I thought, put the money into his, but the outside opening of his trousers led down his leg as well as into his pocket, and, unfortunately, in the hurry the money went the wrong way, making a noise and scattering all over the floor. The police, amazed, cleared the floor and picked up most of the coin. Brother Jacob Hug claimed the money, however, and as the police could not prevail upon me to own it, Brother Jacob had it returned to him the next day. Without partaking of the good supper which had been set before us we were escorted to temporary quarters for the night at the house of a village policeman. On the way a remark was made by one of us when we were at once ordered not to speak. We were placed in a large room and against the door inside was pushed a heavy table, on which were placed a loaded musket, a bottle of wine and a loaf of bread. The contents of the first for us if we attempted to escape, and of the two latter for the benefit of the policeman and his assistant, who sat up all night to take care of us.

Our guards felt elated over their wine and our capture, the circumstances connected with which seemed to please them very much. I wondered how our arrival in the village was known, and so soon, but learned all about it from the conversation that took place between them. Some persons had accidentally seen us meet the brethren who came to guide us into the village.

Not having answered their questions when they arrested us, they took it for granted that we did not understand German, so they spoke freely. The policeman pointing to me said, "That is a fine fellow, he used to pretend to give English lessons, how could he, when he cannot speak any German?"

We were hungry, at least I was, and supposed Brother Savage was also. I dared not ask him as we might have been separated, but when it grew late and there was no sign of anything for us to eat, I distinctly asked in German if we were to have any supper. The effect of this very natural request was most remarkable. The policeman sprang to his feet and without a word walked over to where I sat, put his fist to my face and hissed out the word, "I thought you could not speak German."

I replied, "O yes, I can sometimes."

"Then why did you not answer me in Mr. Hug's house?" he asked.

I answered, "Because I did not choose to do so."

He was very angry and appeared ready to strike me, but he thought better of it and walked back to his seat, stating that we would get no supper. Just at this time his wife looked in at the door and with great kindness plead with him to allow her to give us something to eat, but he would not. He at length got up and offered me a piece of crust of the bread in a very surly manner, which I declined. I then told him we were ready to go to bed. He pointed to the floor and said we might lie there, but his wife again interfered in our behalf, and after considerable sharp talk on her part, as well as his, she was permitted to bring in a bed and bed clothes, when we lay down and spent the night very comfortably, as we were tired.

Early in the morning we were ordered to get up, and without breakfast and marched to Zurich, six miles distant. Like Brother Secrist, we had to go before, the policeman walking behind with his musket over his shoulder. As we reached Zurich our procession attracted the attention of the citizens, and, before we reached the jail, had quite a following. At the jail Brother Savage and I were separated. I was taken to an underground cell and locked in. Its size was about eight feet by six, with one small window on a level with the street; but worst of all, the cell was abominably dirty. The furniture consisted of a narrow bench and one or two old rugs, the place being used to confine persons in temporarily, until they were taken away for trial. During the day a number of prisoners were unceremoniously pushed in and shortly afterwards taken away again, and although most of them were anything but pleasant companions, the changes made broke the monotony of the long prison hours. They were all hand-cuffed and some looked as if it were a very proper precaution. Some were bound with great severity and begged me, as soon as we were alone, to adjust the small chain which was round their wrists, in the hope of obtaining relief.

As the day wore on the polluted atmosphere of the cell sickened me. The foulness of the place was beyond description, the very walls as high as a man could reach were covered with filthiness. I grew tired, as there was no resting place, being on my feet all day, and hungry, as I had not eaten anything for about thirty hours. At seven o'clock at night I was taken out of the den and brought before my former acquaintance, the Stadthalter, with whom I had quite a friendly conversation, more seeking information on his part than as an examination. I complained bitterly about the place of my confinement, which I think had not been known to him, and he told me that he would send me to a more comfortable place; he also said he did not desire to punish or expel me, but he was obliged to meet the wishes of the priests, whose influence was very great. A policeman was now ordered to take me to new quarters.

How fresh and invigorating was the air when we stepped out into the street! The extreme pleasure in some degree compensated me for what I had endured. I walked alongside of my new conductor until we reached a prison situated in the upper part of town, where I was received by the jailor and introduced to four genteel looking young men, who occupied two rooms in the building. My new friends were quite pleased to see me, and, bringing up their seats close to mine, inquired in a friendly and confidential way "what I was in for." I told them it was for preaching, which caused them to look at each other rather dubiously, as much as to say, "that story won't do," but I afterwards explained matters more fully, and I think satisfied them with the facts.

There were two beds in one room and one in the other, all clean and neat, although made every morning by the prisoners themselves, this labor being one of the duties of the prisoners. My companions desired me to occupy the single bed while they occupied the two in the other room. This was kind and acceptable, and before I lay down I rejoiced in expressing my great thanks to God, the giver of all good, for His kindness unto me, and in so ordering, that I had an opportunity of sleeping in peace. Indeed, although it may seem strange, I was grateful for the privilege, of resting from the anxiety and suspense to which I had so long been subjected. It was a kind of relief to be in prison under the circumstances, especially as I felt that I had done all the good my opportunities permitted, although there were some serious doubts in my mind as to when I might obtain my freedom.

It should be remembered that in Switzerland then, and in other European countries, a man might be imprisoned on suspicion at any time, without any certainty as to when he might be liberated. I slept well, and arose early, agreeable with our prison regulations. Our first work was bed-making, which had to be done well, as it was afterwards inspected. It was here I took my first lesson in that domestic labor, and as I appeared awkward in my first movements, one of my companions kindly offered to assist me. My companions were all respectable-looking and well-dressed young men, and supported by the canton, as they told me, for stealing. Three had been hotel waiters. They were cheerful and entertaining, and, during the time I remained with them, treated me with the utmost consideration. One of them, a mimic, diverted us daily with exhibitions of the walk and social manners of men of different nationalities, which were exceedingly good and helped to pass away the time, and I, when opportunities offered and sometimes at their own request, encouraged them to live a better life, and taught them some of the principles of the gospel.

There was one serious trouble; we were always hungry, being only half fed. Our meals were served with due regularity, and consisted of a little gruel and a small portion of bread for breakfast, of potatoes and sometimes sour krout with a very small piece of meat for dinner, and gruel and bread, as a change, for supper, but not half enough at any time. No matter what position we occupied, or what we were doing, as soon as the key rattled in the door about meal times we were on the alert and ready. I had spent four days and three nights in prison, when one day the jailor came in at an unusual time and said, "Mr. Budge, you are at liberty to go." I was not told why I was imprisoned, nor why I was set at liberty, and I asked no questions, but, taking leave of my companions, walked out into the street a free man. I found Brother Savage at liberty. The Saints had only that morning learned where we were in custody. Brother Savage, after the first day's imprisonment, had been obliged to consort with vile characters and in addition to other inconveniences had to endure the noise of their riotous conduct. In a day or two he left for Lausanne, expressing the natural kindliness of his disposition towards me and wishes for my safety, as I thought it best to remain in Zurich, at least until I received another notice to leave.

There was still no news from Berne with regard to myself, although I looked for immediate results after the dispatch of my last letter to the ambassador, and I continued to attend meetings and instruct the people, taking special pains to inform them in regard to the organization of the Church and the jurisdiction of the Priesthood in its varied callings, foreseeing the probability of their being left to themselves, at least for a time. I was naturally in a state of suspense, although the authorities made no new movement. I moved about very quietly among the Saints and others, subjecting myself to such inconveniences as were necessary to enable me to do my duty, the newspapers in the meantime still keeping the people in a state of excitement about the "Mormons."
