Church members across the African continent spent Saturday, August 21, 2010, improving their communities as part of the 2010 All-Africa Helping Hands Day.

This year, the Aba Nigeria Stake invited several community-based youth groups to partner with them, bringing together more than 1,000 people. In the Umuahia Nigeria District, more than 100 members from six branches cut grass, trimmed flowers, and cleaned the gutters and grounds of the Broadcasting Corporation of Abia State.

In Accra, Ghana, branches were assigned to clean up various areas, including hospitals, children’s schools, and police stations. Some members were assigned to fill potholes or to clear storm drains that had become clogged.

Wherever the members went in their Helping Hands vests, grateful communities welcomed their help. The rector of Abia State Polytechnic told the volunteers, “In an era where everybody is asking what the government will do for them, it is a welcome development to have an organization that continuously provides service to humanity.”

An Indonesian version of the triple combination is now available, making it possible for Indonesian speakers to have the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price bound together in their own language. A new edition of the Book of Mormon in Indonesian is also available.

The Indonesian triple is also available online. The online version includes footnotes, maps, and photographs and allows readers to mark the scriptures and perform key word searches. It can be accessed at scriptures.lds.org/ind.

There are more than 6,000 Indonesian-speaking members of the Church worldwide, most of them in Indonesia, Malaysia, and the United States. Indonesia is the fourth-most populous nation in the world.

The First Presidency has encouraged members to acquire their own scriptures and to use them in regular study, in Church meetings, and for Church assignments.

Music and the Spoken Word, the weekly broadcast of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, has been inducted into the Radio Hall of Fame in the United States. The broadcast was selected after a board of officials nominated programs for induction and the public voted for their favorite programs and personalities.

Music and the Spoken Word won the National Pioneer category, which honors broadcasters who have given at least 10 years of service to the radio industry and have been leaders in developing or improving radio programming at the national level.

Music and the Spoken Word is the longest-running radio broadcast in the United States. The first broadcast took place on July 15, 1929.

The program is carried on more than 2,000 radio stations, television stations, and cable systems. It is also available online at musicandthespokenword.org. From the home page, click on Listen Live and follow the link for online streaming.
