Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

Preface

President Spencer W. Kimball once observed, "While marriage is difficult, and discordant and frustrated marriages are common, yet real, lasting happiness is possible, and marriage can be more an exultant ecstasy than the human mind can conceive. This is within the reach of every couple, every person." [^1] (Italics added.)

This statement of President Kimball's offers perspective and should give married couples both hope and confidence. I hope that what is contained in the pages that follow will contribute in some small way to help husbands and wives attain the fulfillment and even ecstasy that President Kimball spoke of.

A few months ago I had just finished a seminar on marriage for Brigham Young University Conferences and Workshops when one of the husbands who had attended approached me. "When are you going to write the blue book?" he asked. "Blue book?" I replied. "Yes, the blue book," he answered. I was puzzled for a moment and didn't know what he meant. Then he smiled and said "You wrote the pink book, What Wives Expect of Husbands, for men to read. Now why don't you write the blue book, What Husbands Expect of Wives for women to read?"

After What Wives Expect of Husbands was published in April 1982, I was constantly asked that same question or ones like it. Now, for those who are interested, I am happy to have completed the blue book, What Husbands Expect of Wives. And I trust it will be helpful, not as a list of things wives are expected to do, but as a guide to improve couples' relationships.

In many ways, What Husbands Expect of Wives has been more difficult to write than the previous book. I have learned that many husbands are a little more hesitant to share their thoughts, feelings, and expectations than are wives. While most husbands are willing to fill out a checklist of expectations, relatively few are willing to write to any great extent their thoughts and concerns. This, in and of itself, was a significant finding. (And, by the way, it is why relatively few quotations from husbands will be found in this book.)

I was interested that husbands ranked communication number six in importance in marriage while wives far and away ranked it number one! Wives appear to have a higher need to discuss things with husbands than do husbands with wives. This finding simply verifies what Dr. Joyce Brothers recently noted in her bestselling book What Every Woman Should Know About Men. She wrote, "Men talk about themselves less." I agree.

Another difficulty with this book is what I call overkill. In many ways contemporary husbands and wives are overstimulated with the vast number of books, magazine and newspaper articles, television and radio talk shows, and the numerous admonitions from a variety of people on how to be better husbands, wives, and parents. Some even resent the constant bombardment from so many sources.

In planning and writing this book, I have often wondered if it would be just another source adding to the confusion or if it would actually be helpful. It seems that most women (particularly LDS women) do not need another book on how to be wonderful. I appreciate the humor and candor of Afton Day, who wrote the recent book How to Be a Perfect Wife, and Other Myths. Just for perspective, perhaps wives should read her book before proceeding with this one.

So why am I writing? There are several reasons.

First among them is the wide acceptance What Wives Expect of Husbands had with a number of people. Comments from many readers of that book have given me the encouragement to write this one.

Second, the many contacts I have had the past few years with husbands in classes, seminars, marriage counseling, and a Deseret News survey have convinced me that the chapters included here do cover some of the common expectations of most husbands. While husbands have been hesitant to write a great deal, more than three hundred have completed "Understanding Your Expectations" (appendix A) and indicated from a pool of twenty items that the ones included in this book are significant to them. (See appendix B.)

A third stimulus for writing has been my contact with many readers of my column on marriage in the Deseret News. During the past four years many readers have taken the time to write and share some of their thoughts and concerns about marriage. While I enjoy the academic life and its environment, I don't think anything gives me more incentive to write than reading some of the letters I receive. I do want to assist wherever possible and also desire to honor the trust and confidence demonstrated when readers share their concerns and questions about marriage.

Fourth, I feel those in the field of marriage and family, or wherever they may be, have an obligation and even responsibility to share their knowledge, skills, and insights. And writing a book like this one is one way this may be accomplished.

Finally, one statement by Elder Hugh B. Brown has given me considerable thought during the past few months about specific reasons why husbands and wives should become aware of each other's expectations and make genuine efforts to make these expectations realities. In his book You and Your Marriage, Elder Brown observed, "This program of enjoying things together, which begins in courtship, should not lapse, but continue through the early, middle, and later married years. The couple should not wait until the days of their active parenthood are past before undertaking their joint project of enriching life. If they have not learned along the way to be delightful, lively, interesting, and inquisitive, then when their active parenthood days are past, there is danger of their seeking the chimney corner, where, as querulous old people, they may huddle and commiserate." [^2]

If this book gives just a few insights to husbands and particularly wives on how to be "delightful, lively, interesting, and inquisitive" in marriage, then I think the book is justified. But the reader will have to be the ultimate judge.

Footnotes

Love

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. Spencer W. Kimball, Marriage and Divorce, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1976, p. 16.
[^2] 2. Hugh B. Brown, You and Your Marriage, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1960, p. 107.
