Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

1

Love

It should come as no great surprise to wives that husbands want to be loved, more so than anything else. It is a natural, basic need of all human beings. Many of the three hundred husbands who responded to my questionnaire in the Deseret News and during marriage seminars ranked love as the most important thing they expected from their wives.

In his book The Art of Loving, Dr. Erich Fromm has noted, "Love is the only satisfactory answer to the problem of human existence. Yet most of us are unable to develop our capacities for love on the only level that really counts—a love that is compounded of maturity, self-knowledge and courage. Learning to love, like other arts, demands practice and concentration. Even more than any other art it demands genuine insights and understanding." [^1]

Periodically, it is good for husbands and wives to explore how they love each other and the way they express their love. Literally hundreds of books and articles have been written on love, so we will not resolve the whole issue of love in just one short chapter. But Dr. Fromm mentions that love "demands genuine insights and understanding," which I will attempt to give in the pages that follow.

Myths About Love and Marriage

Many couples become confused about marriage because they do not know if they are "really" in love or able to stay in love with the person they marry. Much of the time they judge what they are experiencing against what they think marriage should be like. It is just possible, however, that we believe some myths about love that can lead to marital turmoil.

At the beginning of our own marriage, Susan and I spent three weeks of wedded bliss before we had our first major disagreement. We were disappointed afterward because we both had somehow acquired the notion that there is little or no conflict in a good marriage. This idea, however, we later discovered to be one of the several myths we would encounter in marriage.

In their book The Mirages of Marriage, William J. Lederer and Dr. Don J. Jackson write, "We believe that if men and women were acquainted with the realities of marriage before they entered it, the divorce rate in the United States would diminish markedly." [^2]

The authors then describe what they believe to be some of the major myths about marriage. See if you agree:

In his article "Marriage of the Future," Dr. David H. Olson from the University of Minnesota has also written about marriage myths. He observes that "one of the reasons that the marriage institution does not live up to its expectations is because of the many myths and unrealistic expectations that individuals bring to marriage." [^3] Dr. Olson lists what he thinks are some marriage myths:

You may or may not agree that all of the above are myths about marriage. There may be exceptions to each. It is evident, however, that many people are unhappy in their marriages and therefore many question their love because they have unrealistic expectations. Susan and I like this quotation of Robert Lewis Stevenson: "Marriage is one long conversation, chequered by disputes."

If You Love 'em, Tell 'em

Not long ago, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints conducted three consecutive meetings on the theme "If You Love 'em, Tell 'em." One was held on Temple Square and the other two at Brighton High school in south Salt Lake City. I was invited to participate. At their meetings, the Church showed the best of their television Home Front series, which centered on the importance of telling family members you love them.

Some wives and husbands don't often say "I love you" to each other because they feel they bungle the job when they try. I once explained to a group that there are magic words in marriage we ought to say more often. These words are "Please forgive me," "I love you," and "I'm sorry." One wife called me up the next night and said the magic words didn't work.

"Exactly what did you say?" I asked. She said she walked up to her husband, took a deep breath, and blurted out, "I'm sorry I love you; please forgive me. " I told her she had the content but her timing was off.

How are you and your marriage partner doing in the verbal expression of love? Do you express it often? Do you express it enough? Talk it over, and you may be surprised with what you find out.

I sincerely believe the vast majority of husbands and wives genuinely love each other. And I also believe "if you love 'em, tell 'em." Most marriage partners do not require a great deal of love to be satisfied in marriage. Rather than quantity, they just need a constant supply.

Love and the First Year of Marriage

Most engaged couples frequently tell each other of their love, and this trend usually continues into the first year of marriage. And what happens during that first year is of major concern to marriage educators and counselors. Which is the most critical year of marriage? Most husbands and wives would say, "The one we are in!" But there is increasing evidence that the first year of marriage is especially important.

Alexander Pope wrote, "As the twig is bent, the tree is inclined." And his statement is apparently true of marriage.

William George Jordan observed:

In the days of courtship two may feel that they thoroughly understand each other, and that no matter how many marriages may fail their happiness together is absolutely assured. Yet courtship is only the kindergarten class of matrimony. Courtship is the preliminary canter, not the real race. It is the matrimonial shopping; marriage is the acceptance of the unreturnable delivered goods. Courtship is the joyous, sunshine launching of the craft of hope; marriage is the long cruise across uncharted seas. The two now pass under the test of new conditions; they face new problems and enter a life of finer attunement, of constant call on patience, tolerance, forbearance, concession, kindness, sympathy and wise understanding. [^4]

It is significant that approximately 40 percent of all marriages in any one year that end in separation or divorce may do so by the end of the first five years. The causes of these broken marriages are often the unwise choice of marriage partners and the inability of the couple to meet life's problems during the first year of marriage.

It is interesting that the first year of marriage was so important to the ancient Hebrew family that young couples were given one year free from civic and other major responsibilities to adjust to each other and develop their love. In Deuteronomy 24:5 we read, "When a man hath taken a new wife, he shall not go out to war, neither shall he be charged with any business: but he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he hath taken."

I recently read an article by Edward Bader and Carole Sinclair, "The Critical First Year of Marriage." They claim it is probably impossible to overestimate the importance of the first year of marriage.

So many key decisions and adjustments need to be worked out. For instance, will there be a dominant and a submissive role? Or will a balance of power be established? How will the money be managed? What frequency or pattern of lovemaking will be established? How will quarrels be resolved? Whatever patterns are established at the beginning of marriage will likely continue for many years, and the way these patterns develop can greatly influence the future of the marriage. [^5]

If there is an appropriate time that professional, religious, civic, and other interested parties can extend help to married couples, the first year of marriage appears to be that time. I was impressed to learn that a church in Kansas City, Missouri, has recently started a successful education program for newlyweds, similar to the LDS Church's Family Relations class.

Most married couples can remember their first year of marriage. A few would prefer not to. But we learn how to have a good marriage over a period of time. Newlyweds ought not to become unduly discouraged during the first few months of their marriage. Just remember: Crisis + Time = Humor.

Remembering the Positive Things

Even though some difficult moments and times of adjustment occur during the first few years of marriages, there are some very pleasant times as well. We need to be careful to focus on the strengths of our marriages, not our weaknesses.

In my marriage classes and seminars we do an interesting exercise called "Marriage Strengths and Memories." The purpose of this exercise is to help couples recall together in writing some of the pleasant aspects of their marriages. Even when I am counseling couples who are on the verge of divorce, I can usually get them to realize they have had good times as well as bad. If we focus only on the difficult times, the marriage is viewed from a distorted perspective.

You and your spouse could complete the following sentences in writing and then share your responses with each other.

Memories

If you have a difficult time trying to determine your marital strengths, you may be interested in the findings of Dr. Herbert Otto. In his book More Joy in Your Marriage, Dr. Otto lists twelve qualities commonly reported by many couples as their marital strengths. [^6] While no couple would likely have all of these strengths, each couple probably has one or more. See if any of these strengths are, or could be, characteristic of your own marriage.

If some of these aspects of your marriage could be improved, perhaps you and your partner could agree on one or more of them and work toward strengthening them during the coming year. It may be that you already enjoy the relationship you have. But we need to remember the 4-H motto: "To make the best better." And we ought not to fear change.

John Steinbeck wrote, "It is the nature of man as he grows older to protest against change, particularly change for the better." Similarly, Mignon McLaughlin noted, "It's the most unhappy people who most fear change."

Your Marriage Lifeline

Another way to gain perspective of your marriage and the maturation of your love is by doing an exercise called "Marriage Lifeline." It is from the book I Need to Have You Know Me by Roland and Doris Larson of Minneapolis, Minnesota. [^7] This exercise will help you recall the times in your marriage when you have been very happy and felt close to each other.

Follow these instructions individually. Then share your responses with each other.

H = a very Happy experience you had together

T = an experience that brought you close Together

S = a period of Stress

C = the year your first Child arrived, or the year you plan to have a child.

Now you are ready to share items 1-5 with your partner. As you do so, you should learn more about each other and your marriage. But to learn, you need to listen to each other and encourage each other to talk about what you have written. One way to do this is to ask clarifying questions such as "Can you tell me more about . . . ?" Or, "When did you first discover . . . ?" Or you might ask questions such as "How do you feel about that now?" Invent your own questions by trying to focus on the other person so he or she will want to respond to your questions.

It is wise, on occasion, for husbands and wives to look back over what they have experienced and perhaps endured in marriage over the years. More importantly, however, couples should also look toward the future and not only anticipate but also plan for some fulfilling and good times together to nurture their love.

Perhaps your marriage has been less than fulfilling in the past. But the past must no longer be used as an anvil for beating out the present and the future. Regardless of previous experiences, each couple has differing amounts of time left together in their marriage to learn to love. Some have decades, while others may have years, months, or only weeks. The point is that all married couples have some time left to plan and share. And we should make the most of that time, no matter how long it is.

Albert Schweitzer once wrote, "The tragedy of man is not that man dies, but what dies within man while he is living." If we work hard at developing love in our marriage, the present can become the good old days that the next generation will hear so much about in the future.

A Truly Happy Marriage

I was talking to a friend recently, and she posed a question I could not answer: "Just how many people are happily married nowadays?"

Most of us are realistic enough to know that not everyone who stays married is necessarily happy. One national study indicated that 80 percent of the married couples surveyed stated that under the same circumstances they would marry the same person again.

Whether or not this particular sample was truly representative is not known. But it does reflect similar findings of a study done in Ohio a few years ago.

John Cuber and Peggy Harroff interviewed nearly five hundred married people and from those discussions derived the following classifications and percentages: vital marriages (17 percent), congenial marriages (33 percent), devitalized marriages (33 percent), and combative marriages (17 percent). [^8]

The vital marriages were those in which the partners were truly significant to each other. They liked being together, enjoyed each other's company, and had much going for them in their relationship. People in vital marriages placed great emphasis on each other as individuals rather than the services they rendered to each other.

The congenial marriages were those in which the couples got along and had a few differences or confrontations, but the vitality present in the vital marriages was missing. The people in congenial marriages emphasized maintaining a well-functioning home so their family members could participate in their community, occupational, civic, or church activities. In congenial marriages a marriage partner often became a means to an end so the events in life could be dealt with in an orderly fashion.

The devitalized marriages were those where a married couple once had something of significance, perhaps vitality, but somewhere along the way they lost it. The difference between congenial and devitalized marriages was that the congenial marriages never had any vitality nor was it expected. Devitalized marriages, on the other hand, once had vitality but were not able to retain it. Some devitalized couples explained, "That's just the way life is."

The combative marriages were those in which frequent confrontations and arguments occurred. Such became the rule rather than the exception. The couples verbally assaulted each other, often for months on end. And couples in combative marriages seemed to thrive on the one-upmanship that was required to keep the confrontations constant.

It should be noted that in all four categories of marriage the couples were still together and had no immediate intentions of divorce. The couples preferred the type of relationship they had over divorce. Otherwise, they could have chosen separation as an option.

My friend and I decided that there are many kinds of happiness and many types of marriage. We can learn to tolerate a marriage partner much as we would tolerate an obnoxious guest, live together in serenity with nothing more in common than cell mates in prison, or develop a love relationship from which both partners can derive genuine satisfaction.

Perhaps I am an eternal optimist, but I believe the vast majority of married couples can be in the latter category if both partners choose to do so.

Maybe the grass does often look greener on the other side of the marital fence. But someone once observed that the grass is greener where you water it.

How Do You Keep Your Marriage Vital?

John Cuber and Peggy Harroff noted in their study the phenomenon that the vitality once present in many marriages has either diminished or is missing altogether.

Almost all marriages start out with a high degree of hope, enthusiasm, optimism, and vitality. As young couples repeat their vows on their wedding day they epitomize such love and commitment.

But, as Cuber and Harroff observed, something happens to many couples along the marital path. For one thing, it is very difficult to maintain the high degree of personal attention and romantic involvement that brought the couple together. The authors call this loss of attentiveness and interest "devitalization."

The same study indicated that devitalization in marriage is usually dealt with in one of two ways. First, as previously noted, the couples may accept it as a fact of life. To them, that is just how marriage is supposed to be. Jobs, children, and outside activities such as excessive community and church involvement often become so demanding that the marriage has to be put on the back burner while either or both spouses try to meet these many obligations. Such couples usually do little to try and change the events, trends, or priorities.

The other way couples confront devitalization in marriage, according to Cuber and Harroff, is to guard against it. Even though the vast majority of married couples experience some degree of devitalization, many are not content to let their marital relationships give way to the daily demands of life. Such couples make conscious and often creative efforts to keep each other first, even though it means making some concessions or even sacrifices in other areas. Such endeavors usually turn out to be preventative rather than corrective in nature.

Has your marriage become devitalized? If so, are you accepting or fighting the devitalization? Think about it.

On a similar note, Dick and Paula McDonald have written a book called Loving Free. In it they note, "Boring, stale, deadly, dull, stagnant—these are words that we use to describe books, breads, ponds, and people. Occasionally those same words can be applied to marriage." [^9]

The McDonalds caution, "To assure that a relationship stays alive and vital, the two people concerned have to actively look for ways to keep themselves interesting and retain the electricity in their lives together."

Many marriages in the United States lose the original zest the bride and groom seemed to have at the beginning of the marriage. The McDonalds ask them,

Remember when you two began dating and were eager to share everything? You never wanted to go home no matter how late the hour, because you had a genuine desire to learn as much as you could about each other. Time flew by. You didn't feel tired nor were you ever bored with each other. And you never seemed to run out of things to discuss. . . .

Those were the days when all of us were actively reaching out to know each other and to be close. Did we quit growing because it took away time from our babies and from our heavy work schedule? Did we stop trying to learn about each other because we thought we knew everything—or knew enough? When that day comes in marriage, boredom sets in, and your life together can become nothing more than a sad, lonely ritual, a prison for two people tied together by familiarity, children, and possessions.

As I talk to numerous married couples of various ages, I am impressed with the efforts so many have made to keep their love and marriage vital and alive.

I once wrote a column in the Deseret News about the importance of keeping a marriage alive and vital. I asked readers to write and tell me ways they have kept the zip in their marriage over the years.

I received 140 letters with some good ideas. The vast majority said they simply got away for a few days WC (Without Children!). Some took a short vacation (a second honeymoon, it was often called), went camping, or drove to a nearby city for a day or two of rest in a hotel or motel. Others indicated they did not go on or could not afford extended two- or three-day trips but periodically went out together.

Many others simply arranged to spend time together at home, often after the children had gone to bed, to talk and spend some time in mutual activity such as reading, playing card games, or any general activity where they were in each other's presence alone.

Several other activities were mentioned, such as prayer, weekly devotionals, and church attendance, to increase the overall spiritual dimensions of the marriage and the home.

Other joint activities included daily walks or jogging together, participating in dancing or study groups, playing racquetball or tennis, modifying (increasing or decreasing) community and church activities, increasing the frequency of touch, giving backrubs, and making a conscious effort to improve their sexual relationship.

Following is one letter typical of the 140 I received:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

I found your article on vitalizing your marriage interesting. Not only was it our fourth anniversary, but my best friend just announced that she and her husband are getting divorced. It caused me to think.

We haven't done any one big thing to revitalize our relationship, but we have done several small ones. First, we try to keep communication channels open. This can be difficult at times. But sometimes I just leave small notes around the house to surprise my husband.

Frequently we go out. We leave our son with a babysitter and have made it a policy to leave our household problems at home and not discuss them while we are gone. We spend the evening talking about mutual interests, much as we did when we were dating.

I have begun to develop my interests so I can talk to him about things outside our home. We have also tried to keep our sex life alive. We are open about our affection for each other and find it easy to discuss these matters.

Above all, we try to keep each other in the highest esteem. We care about each other and emphasize loyalty. And our relationship is treasured above all else and above all others.

One wife, however, gave the following caution:

I wonder sometimes if we expect too much excitement in marriage. As Archie Bunker once said to Edith, "Bein' bored is an important part of bein' married." I am not saying that we should not try to keep marriage interesting and exciting at times. But I really feel that some couples expect too much. Perhaps we need to learn to enjoy the simple things in life and not expect too much excitement. Excessively high expectations in marriage put a lot of pressure on both husbands and wives.

She then enclosed the following beautiful excerpt about love from the book War Within and Without by Anne Morrow Lindbergh:

Charles is gone again. The three days when he was here were so full and intense it seems they weighed more than the days before or after. And it is difficult to record them. They had that kind of premarriage intensity and preciousness that is difficult to capture. With the dull pain of departure—like a threatening thunderstorm over an afternoon—the light is more beautiful on an afternoon like that. The green is more green, the earth more vivid. But this is an unreal light.

These days are not marriage. They are being in love, but not the casual give and take, the wonderful blending of silence and communication, sharing and solitariness, being bored and being stimulated, disputes and agreements, the everyday and the extraordinary, the near and the far—that wonderful blending that makes for the incredible richness, variety, harmoniousness, and toughness of marriage.

Marriage is tough, because it is woven of all these various elements, the weak and the strong. "In loveness" is fragile for it is woven only with the gossamer threads of beauty. It seems to me absurd to talk about "happy" and "unhappy" marriages. Real marriages are both at the same time. But if they are real marriages, they always have this incredible richness for which one is eternally joyful and grateful.

It is strange, I can conceive of "falling in love" over and over again. But marriage, this richness of life itself, I cannot conceive of having again—or with anyone else. In this sense marriage seems to me indissoluble. [^10]

---
Notas:
[^1] She should "murmur not." (Verse 4.) 1 don't know if women are more inclined to complain than men, but it is significant to me that women are cautioned about frequent complaints. When I have mentioned this to women, many of them remind me that there is a difference between murmuring and righteous concern. And they are correct. Wives should convey to husbands concerns they have about many matters. But to avoid the appearance of complaining, they should consider the timing, tone of voice, frequency, importance, and clarity of the concern they express to their husbands. (See chapter 6 on communication.) Joseph Smith, Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, selected by Joseph Fielding Smith, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1938, pp. 255-56.
[^2] Emma was encouraged to "be for a comfort" for her husband. (Verse 5.) It is also of interest that she was to do this during the times of his afflictions, using consoling words. Like wives, husbands often need to be nurtured during difficult moments. And marriage affords us many opportunities to render this service to one another. Stephen L Richards, Conference Report, April 1920, p. 96.
[^3] Emma was counseled to "go with [Joseph] at the time of his going." (Verse 6.) This is particularly significant when we realize how often Joseph and Emma moved and the many trials and heartaches they suffered for the gospel's sake. At Brigham Young University I have the opportunity to talk to young wives whose husbands are about to graduate. Many of them are anxious about where they will move to find employment. Some are hesitant about moving away from family, friends, and familiar surroundings. We often read together the Lord's counsel to "go with him at the time of his going." David O. McKay, Conference Report April 1920, p. 116.
[^4] Emma was counseled not to fear or worry. (Verse 9.) 1 firmly believe that wives are given the gift of concern about many matters we husbands often overlook. But with that gift sometimes comes the inclination to worry excessively. Jesus taught us to live life from day to day and not become overly worried about things of the future: "Do not worry about tomorrow, for tomorrow will worry about itself. Each day has enough trouble of its own." (Matthew 6:34, New International Version.) Harold B. Lee, Ensign, February 1974, p. 77.
[^5] Emma was admonished to "lay aside the things of this world, and seek for the things of a better." (Verse 10.) In other words, Emma was to place emphasis on the spiritual rather than the temporal things of life. This is more difficult than it appears. Most women would like a better or newer home, better furniture, dishes, clothing, and other things for herself and her family. This is understood, normal, and largely a part of the culture we live in. Just listen to one night's advertising on television and read the ads in daily newspapers, and you will soon realize that the desire for new and better things does not always arise from within. Most husbands want their wives and children to have the best they can offer or provide. But some wives, often unknowingly, cause their husbands much mental anguish because they desire and seek the "things of this world" more rapidly than they can be provided. I know of many families who have almost gone under financially because the wives were so caught up in keeping up that no amount of resources could quench their desire for newer and better material things. The advice given to Emma and other wives a century and a half ago seems even more relevant today. Spencer W. Kimball, Church News, January 5, 1974, p. 14.
[^6] Finally, Emma was warned against pride or arrogance. (Verse 14.) 1 believe this is particularly important for contemporary women. Many wives have told me that they feel they have "outgrown" their husbands. Perhaps because I work in an educational setting, I frequently see a man working hard to provide for his wife and family while his wife continues her education. In most cases, this does not negatively affect the marriage. David O. McKay, Conference Report, April 1920, p. 116.
[^7] Journal of Discourses 13:175.
[^8] Lloyd Saxton, The Individual, Marriage, and the Family, Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1968, p. 258.
[^9] Edward J. Rydman, in Handbook of Marriage Counseling, Ben N. Ard, Jr., and Constance Ard, eds., Palo Alto: Science and Behavior Books, Inc., 1969, p. vii.
[^10] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed., Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1939, pp. 286-87.
