Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

2

Spirituality

Something very significant to me as a Latter-day Saint is our claim that the restored gospel of Jesus Christ has the answers or solutions to life's problems. Among these many problems are those related to marriage and family life.

The Prophet Joseph Smith once remarked, "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God." [^1]

Recently we have realized more than ever that human beings need social, emotional, and spiritual needs filled in order to survive. And many husbands indicated they expected their wives to help them attain their spiritual needs in order to be happy.

The Gospel Has the Answers

As early as 1920, Church leaders were teaching that "the gospel has the answers." During the April general conference of that year, Elder Stephen L Richards stated, "The gospel of Jesus Christ is the power of God unto salvation. . . . I believe that within the plan of the gospel are laid down all of the laws and principles that underlie our lives, here and hereafter. It sets forth a rule of action for our conduct that leads us to happiness and joy in this life, as well as to exaltation in the life to come." [^2]

During that same conference, Elder David O. McKay stated, "I believe, too, that every world problem may be solved by obedience to the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ." [^3]

On a similar theme, Elder Harold B. Lee later noted, "It is wonderful when we come to realize that within the revealed gospel of Jesus Christ and from the teachings of our Church leaders in this dispensation may be found the answer to every question and a solution to every problem essential to the social, temporal, and spiritual welfare of human beings, all of whom, of course, are the children of our Heavenly Father." [^4]

And after becoming President of the Church, President Kimball stated, "We have the positive approach. We believe that we have in this church the answer to all the questions, for the Lord is the head of the church and He has given us this program. We believe that if you take the commandments and go right down from one to ten (Exodus 20:1-17) everyone will be furthered by living the commandments as we are teaching them. We feel that we have a program that will overcome the evils of the day." [^5]

All of us who believe that the gospel has the answer to life's major problems have a major task ahead. And it will be at a time when there appears to be so much turmoil in the world in the areas of marriage and family. Elder David O. McKay noted, "The responsibility of showing to the world that the gospel of Jesus Christ will solve its problems rests upon the men [and women] who make the claim." [^6]

A Revelation to Wives

If the gospel has the answers to marital problems, one would expect it to have a message for wives as well as husbands. The Lord gave at least some of this counsel in the twenty-fifth section of the Doctrine and Covenants. Most of us think of this section as the "hymnbook section," in which Emma Smith was counseled by the Lord to accumulate hymns to be used in the Church. (Verses 11-13.) Actually, this section contains much more than that. It is a revelation to Emma in particular and to all women in general. (See D&C 25:16.) And much of the revelation is about a wife's relationship with her husband.

Among the things revealed to Emma were the following:

The ability of many husbands to provide for their families has been severely hampered by wives who are unwilling to move or stay moved once they arrive. Such attitudes sometimes add additional burdens to marriage.

But on occasion I have seen relationships in which the wife becomes well-educated and feels that her husband can no longer keep up with or appreciate her new views on life. (I also see this happen to husbands who attend graduate school, graduate, and then become arrogant and divorce their wives for similar reasons. While we were attending graduate school, my wife, Susan, informed me that if I ever left her after getting my Ph.D., she would personally track me down and dissect me in public!)

The simple truth is, both husbands and wives have strengths and weaknesses. And we should avoid assuming that we are more than or less than each other. Emma and all women were encouraged, "Let thy soul delight in thy husband." (Verse 14.) By diligently working at their relationship and keeping it high in priority, both husbands and wives can delight in each other.

The Ideal Wife

Additional insights for wives are also given in other scriptures. Some people think of the Bible as a dusty old book written thousands of years ago with no relevance for today. While it is true that some of the language may be antiquated, I am amazed at the relevance of most of the Bible teachings for contemporary life. Brigham Young once noted, "Follow out the doctrines of the Bible and men will make splendid husbands, women excellent wives, and children will be obedient." [^7] In the Bible, then, are some guidelines for present-day marriage and family living. What are some of them for wives?

The book of Proverbs mentions an otherwise unidentified man named Lemuel. Like any other woman, Lemuel's mother was concerned about the kind of woman her son would someday marry. His choice, however, was particularly significant since one day he would become a king, and his wife, consequently, a queen, a thought that bears some significance for Latter-day Saints. What was his mother's advice? What kind of woman should Lemuel marry? What should a husband expect of a wife?

In the thirty-first chapter of Proverbs, Lemuel was admonished to find a woman who was virtuous (verse 10) and whom he could trust (verse 11). She should do good (verse 12) and be willing and able to work with her hands (verse 13). Lemuel was encouraged to find a woman who was knowledgeable about foods and willing to prepare and serve a variety of them to her household. (Verses 14-15.) The woman he was to marry should have some knowledge of purchasing land, which implies an understanding of money management and financing. She should also be familiar with agriculture in that she could plant and reap from her own vineyards. (Verse 16.)

Lemuel's wife was to be physically fit and healthy, even strong, in that she "girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms." (Verse 17.) She was to be knowledgeable in consumer economics and able to trade wisely. (Verse 18.) Not only that, she was expected to know how to produce some of her own goods without having to purchase all of them. (Verse 19.)

The new bride was expected to be charitable, with a genuine concern for the poor and needy. (Verse 20.) Her children were to be well-clothed and prepared for inclement weather. (Verse 21.) And she herself was to dress fashionably. (Verse 22.) She was to be supportive of her husband and to be cognizant of his reputation. (Verse 23.) She was encouraged to become involved in merchandising both in production and selling. (Verse 24.) And the woman Lemuel married was to be well-educated, in that she "openeth her mouth with wisdom." (Verse 26.) She was not to have a harsh tongue (verse 26), and was to be attentive to the needs of those in her household through her diligence (verse 27).

She should be honored and praised by her children and husband (verse 28) and excel in many aspects of life (verse 29). And perhaps most important, she was to be a woman who loved the Lord. (Verse 30.)

In capsule form, then, this is what many husbands, ancient and modern, expect of wives. And what a delight such a wife would be! Truly, "her price is far above rubies." (Verse 10.)

Loving Leadership in the Home

One of the recent criticisms of the current women's movement is that men have traditionally been "the head of the home," supposedly to the detriment of some women. Since the Church continues to teach, and I believe rightfully so, that the husband should provide the leadership in the home, we will likely continue to be criticized.

But it also concerns me that many men and women in the Church raise some question about the validity of the man presiding in the home in what we often call the patriarchal order of marriage. It may well be that such a marriage is the answer, or one of the answers, the restored gospel provides for stable marriages and family life.

A recent college textbook on marriage and family relations contained an interesting section called "The Peculiarities of American Marriage." Discussing the power structure of marriages, the author wrote, "One of the greatest peculiarities of American marriage, as compared to almost all other societies, is the relative dominance of the American wife." [^8]

The recent transition in the United States from a patriarchal to a democratic or even a matriarchal family organization has had its consequences. Dr. Edward J. Rydman, past executive director of the American Association of Marriage and Family Counselors, noted:

There has been a profound shift from the authoritarian family in which the husband-father had the major control over his wife and children. Most of the family power, decision-making responsibility, and authority rested upon him, as did the responsibility for supporting the family economically. The shift from the authoritarian to a more equalitarian family has profoundly affected the position of the head of the family as women have entered the economic marketplace in ever-increasing numbers and especially as even larger numbers of mothers take their place in offices, assembly lines, and other occupations and professions. As women assume more responsibilities outside the home so stresses, strains, and problems within the family relationship proliferate. [^9]

The recent trend in family government is also a departure from biblical teachings. The apostle Paul admonished, "Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands." (Ephesians 5:22; see also Colossians 3:18.) He also taught that "the husband is the head of the wife." (Ephesians 5:23.) It is true that in some Latter-day Saint homes the wife or mother must assume a major portion of the responsibility in governing family affairs. Such would be the case, for example, if the father were absent because of death or divorce or if he were incapacitated through illness or injury. But what about Latter-day Saint homes where both father and mother are still together? What should be the relationship between a Latter-day Saint husband and wife, particularly if the husband holds the priesthood?

In 1902, shortly after becoming sixth president of the Church, President Joseph F. Smith stated:

There is no higher authority in matters relating to the family organization, and especially when that organization is presided over by one holding the higher Priesthood, than that of the father. The authority is time honored, and among the people of God in all dispensations it has been highly respected and often emphasized by the teachings of the prophets who were inspired of God. The patriarchal order is of divine origin and will continue throughout time and eternity. There is, then, a particular reason why men, women and children should understand this order and this authority in the households of the people of God, and seek to make it what God intended it to be, a qualification and preparation for the highest exaltation of his children. In the home the presiding authority is always vested in the father, and in all home affairs and family matters there is no other authority paramount. [^10] (Italics added.)

Do such teachings have relevance for contemporary Latter-day Saint marriages and families? Questions immediately arise as to how the patriarchal order operates in a Latter-day Saint home. Both the validity and the practical application of the principle need careful evaluation.

In what manner does a Latter-day Saint husband act as "head" over his wife? Must a woman "obey" her husband at all times in all things? Does a wife have any part in the decision-making policies in her marriage and family? (See chapter 6 on communication.) Is a patriarch similar to a dictator who rules with absolute control and often in a domineering way?

President Kimball once observed, "We have heard of men who have said to their wives, 'I hold the priesthood and you've got to do what I say.' Such a man should be tried for his membership. Certainly he should not be honored in his priesthood. We rule (preside) in love and understanding." [^11]

A Latter-day Saint husband or father presides over his wife and family in much the same way that a bishop, stake president, elders quorum president, Relief Society president or Primary president presides over the specific group to which he or she is called. Each acts with counselors and seldom makes decisions without carefully consulting those called to assist.

A counselor may be chosen to officiate in the absence of the appointed leader. Even in the presence of the leader, the counselor may conduct by appointment while the leader presides. In a similar manner, according to President Joseph F. Smith, "in the home the presiding authority is always vested in the father." He explained why:

This patriarchal order has its divine spirit and purpose, and those who disregard it under one pretext or another are out of harmony with the spirit of God's laws as they are ordained for recognition in the home. It is not merely a question of who is perhaps the best qualified. Neither is it wholly a question of who is living the most worthy life. It is a question largely of law and order, and its importance is seen often from the fact that the authority remains and is respected long after a man is really unworthy to exercise it. [^12]

Imagine the confusion that would result if two bishops were appointed over a ward and the first got up in sacrament meeting and announced that the following Sunday sacrament meeting would be held one hour earlier than usual. While he was making his announcement, suppose the second bishop stood up and expressed his desire that the meeting be held at the usual time. With two people presiding, would democratic principles work? Suppose you had two stake presidents, two elders quorum presidents, two Primary and Relief Society presidents presiding over each of the priesthood quorums, groups, or auxiliaries. How would the Church function? Would "law and order" prevail? Similarly, should two people preside over each other in a marriage, particularly when one holds the priesthood and has been divinely designated to preside?

We can better understand the similarity of presiding over a home or a ward by examining some of Paul's teachings. He taught that for a man to be ordained a bishop, he must be married and be "one that ruleth well his own house, having his children in subjection with all gravity." (1 Timothy 3:4.) He should have "faithful children not accused of riot or unruly." (Titus 1:6.)

By proving himself capable of presiding over his primary responsibility—his wife and family—a man could assume a second stewardship in the priesthood. Paul reasoned, "For if a man know not how to rule his own house, how shall he take care of the church of God?" (1 Timothy 3:5.)

Paul stated there was a "great mystery" associated with the patriarchal order. (See Ephesians 5:32.) The mystery may not be so much in the manner in which a wife submits herself to her husband as, in fact, the way a husband will preside over and interact with his wife and family. President Joseph F. Smith observed, "This authority carries with it a responsibility and a grave one, as well as its rights and privileges, and men can not be too exemplary in their lives, nor fit themselves too carefully to live in harmony with this important and God-ordained rule of conduct in the family organization." [^13]

The apostle Paul urged, "Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it. . . . So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. He that loveth his wife loveth himself. For no man ever yet hated his own flesh; but nourisheth and cherisheth it, even as the Lord the church. . . . Let every one of you in particular so love his wife even as himself; and the wife see that she reverence her husband." (Ephesians 5:25, 28-29, 33.) Most wives would willingly submit to husbands who loved them in this manner.

Modern revelation declares how one holding the priesthood should officiate and preside, particularly over his wife and family. (See D&C 121:36-46.)

By strengthening the patriarchal order in Latter-day Saint homes, not only will the husband-wife relationship be enhanced, but the parent-child relationship will improve as well. When a wife challenges the right of her husband to officiate in the home, is it not a logical consequence that the children will challenge that right also? Furthermore, is it possible that a child will then not only challenge the right of the father but also that of the mother to make decisions affecting his life?

Again, Dr. Edward J. Rydman, the noted marriage counselor, has stated:

Little scientific evidence is in at this time, but there is concern expressed in some quarters that the growing rebellion of youth is a logical extension of the shift toward equalitarianism. In a new way and in ever increasing numbers, the youth today are demanding a voice in education, marriage, sexual expression, and other significant areas of life. As woman challenges the authority of man, so youth challenges the authority of the family and all other related social institutions. [^14]

Latter-day Saint parents may be facing a critical era. We have been commanded to teach our children gospel principles, to have faith in Christ, to repent, and to be baptized and receive the Holy Ghost. In essence, parents should "teach their children to pray, and to walk uprightly before the Lord." (D&C 68:28.) Failure to do these things has its consequences.

Paul also taught that "in the last days perilous times shall come. For [children] shall be . . . disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy." (2 Timothy 3:1-2.) If Latter-day Saint families are going to survive the last days of "disobedience," we need to carefully examine those principles by which our families are governed and maintained.

The Lord commanded ancient Israel to "honour thy father and thy mother" (Exodus 20:12), a principle to be taught not only to children but to be demonstrated by the mother honoring the father as head of the household, and the father, in turn, honoring the mother.

When a husband and wife show honor and respect for each other, their children learn through their example to honor their parents. The commandment to honor father and mother, according to President Joseph F. Smith, is binding upon every member of the Church today, for the law is eternal.

If the patriarchal order of marriage is practiced as outlined by Church leaders and the scriptures, there is little question that Latter-day Saint husbands and wives will experience happier, more stable and satisfactory marriages. Furthermore, important guidelines for raising children can be used effectively in such a relationship. President Smith admonished:

Wives and children should be taught to feel that the patriarchal order in the kingdom of God has been established for a wise and beneficent purpose, and should sustain the head of the household and encourage him in the discharge of his duties, and do all in their power to aid him in the exercise of the rights and privileges which God has bestowed upon the head of the home. . . .

The necessity, then, of organizing the patriarchal order and authority of the home rests upon principle as well as upon the person who holds that authority, and among the Latter-day Saints family discipline, founded upon the law of the patriarchs, should be carefully cultivated, and fathers will then be able to remove many of the difficulties that now weaken their position in the home. [^15]

Additional insights on the patriarchal order of marriage were recently given by Elder Dean L. Larsen of the Presidency of the First Quorum of the Seventy. His excellent article "Marriage and the Patriarchal Order" was printed in the Ensign, September 1982, pages 6-13. I think every Latter-day Saint husband and wife should read and reread the entire article. In it he notes:

A superficial reading of the Old Testament account can easily leave one with the feeling that women were the property of men, consigned simply to do the bidding of their husbands and masters. There was much about the culture and the customs of ancient Israel that contributed to this general impression, and occasionally we encounter men of our own time who have allowed their knowledge of those ancient customs to influence their view of the patriarchal order.

Elder Larsen continues:

One whose views of the husband-wife relationship is based upon the prevailing customs and culture of the Old Testament people is capable of creating much unhappiness for himself, his wife, and family. To qualify his view, he should give careful consideration to the counsel of prophetic leaders who have taken pains to instruct us correctly in these matters. [For instance, see "In the Image of God," by President Marion G. Romney, Ensign, March 1978, pages 2-4.]

Elder Larsen encourages Latter-day Saint husbands and wives to carefully study Doctrine & Covenants 107:27-30 as a model for making decisions together in marriage and then gives a final admonition that goes hand-in-hand with the theme of this book. He writes: "I am convinced that there is something so absolutely sacred in the eyes of the Lord about the marriage covenant that he expects every energy and resource in our power to make our marriage endure. For those who do, even in the face of great challenges and difficulties, I am certain there will be ultimate blessings realized that are beyond our present comprehension."

A Prayer of Love

One of the teachings of our Church is, "If there is anything virtuous, lovely, or of good report or praiseworthy, we seek after these things." (Article of Faith 13.) During the past few years it has been my distinct pleasure to review many articles and books by numerous religious leaders that are praiseworthy and of good report. For example, a statement of love and commitment was written by Reverend Larry Hof and William R. Miller for married couples and was sponsored, in part, by the Saint Andrew's United Methodist Church and the Marriage Council of Philadelphia. The sentiments, I believe, should also be considered by Latter-day Saints. They are:

Our marriage is not a finished product. It is an experience, a relationship that is being created continually. It is an ongoing process to which we must commit ourselves each day, making again the decision to share life together. The vows we have made serve as a reminder to us that in the midst of all the possibilities of separation which are open to us, we have decided again to be faithful to the commitment which we have made to each other in the presence of God. [^16]

Hof and Miller also wrote this prayer of love:

Dear God:

I give to my husband/wife a love that, in the words of Paul, is patient, a love that is kind, a love that endures. I pledge a love that is not jealous or possessive, a love that is not proud or selfish, a love that is not rude or inconsiderate. My love will not insist on its own way, will not be irritable or resentful, and will not keep account of wrongs or failures. It will rejoice when good prevails. Our love will know no limit to its endurance, no end to its trust, no fading of its hope. It will outlast everything. Our love together, will have three great qualities: faith . . . hope . . . and love, but the greatest of these will be our love for each other. In the name of Him who embodies love, Jesus Christ, Amen. (See I Corinthians 13:4-13.) [^17]

One of my favorite biblical passages is 1 John 4:7-11. John could have been speaking to married couples when he wrote:

Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another.

In an age of uncertainty, particularly in the realm of marriage, husbands and wives seem to be searching for something on which they can build a solid foundation in their relationship. And learning to love one another, as outlined in the scriptures, is the answer. Through the ages we have been told, "Charity [love] never faileth." (I Corinthians 13:8; Moroni 7:46.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Economic problems. Although most husbands and fathers are relatively well off by many standards, most husbands are under constant economic pressure to support a wife and children. This is particularly true with the constant bombardment from the media that the family must continually have "more and better" things. Note the huge increase in consumer credit during the past few years or the personal bankruptcy notices in the daily paper. E. E. LeMasters, Parents in Modern America, Homewood, Illinois: Dorsey Press, 1970, pp. 138-56.
[^2] Marital problems. When a husband experiences conflict or turmoil in his marriage, it also affects many other things such as his work, his role as father, and his relationship with others. Marital tensions for husbands, and wives for that matter, are enormous at the present time, with some 40 percent of marriages ending in divorce and with some couples choosing to stay married in what LeMasters and others term "holy deadlock." Ibid., p. 149.
[^3] Sexual problems. Because sexual fulfillment is such an important part of masculinity for husbands, sexual problems and disruptions can be a major source of frustration for them. In his chapter "The American Father," LeMasters notes that men are expected to find sexual fulfillment with their marriage partners. Many do. Some do not. Ibid., p. 152.
[^4] Drinking and drug-related problems. Under stress, an increasing number of husbands and fathers turn to alcohol or other drugs as an escape. LeMasters notes that men are three to six times more likely to drink alcohol excessively in our society than are women. Joyce Brothers, What Every Woman Should Know about Men, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1981, p. 55.
[^5] The male peer problem. LeMasters notes that husbands need and seek the company of other men during much of their spare time. While this is widely accepted, it has caused some problems. A great many women view marriage and parenthood as a joint partnership and do not readily accept "male only" activities. In the past, men have preferred to spend some of their leisure time with other men, and giving up these associations can cause strain. If a wife refuses to make any concessions while the husband demands "the night or weekend with the boys," problems abound. On this matter, LeMasters concludes, "To resolve this sort of strain the American male has to be domesticated more than he ever has in the past. To what extent this has been accomplished, or can be accomplished, we don't know. But some men are difficult to harness, as their wives have discovered. When this is the case it seems likely that the father's (and husband's) role is diminished or affected negatively in some way." [^3] Richard K. Kerckhoff, "Marriage and Middle Age," Family Coordinator, January 1976, pp. 5-10.
[^6] Finally, Emma was warned against pride or arrogance. (Verse 14.) 1 believe this is particularly important for contemporary women. Many wives have told me that they feel they have "outgrown" their husbands. Perhaps because I work in an educational setting, I frequently see a man working hard to provide for his wife and family while his wife continues her education. In most cases, this does not negatively affect the marriage. David O. McKay, Conference Report, April 1920, p. 116.
[^7] Journal of Discourses 13:175.
[^8] Lloyd Saxton, The Individual, Marriage, and the Family, Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1968, p. 258.
[^9] Edward J. Rydman, in Handbook of Marriage Counseling, Ben N. Ard, Jr., and Constance Ard, eds., Palo Alto: Science and Behavior Books, Inc., 1969, p. vii.
[^10] Joseph F. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, 5th ed., Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1939, pp. 286-87.
[^11] Edward Kimball, Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982, p. 316.
[^12] Smith, Gospel Doctrine, p. 287.
[^13] 13. Ibid., pp. 287-88.
[^14] 14. Rydman, Handbook, p. vii.
[^15] 15. Smith, Gospel Doctrine, pp. 287-88.
[^16] 16. Hoff and Miller, Marriage Enrichment, p. 155.
[^17] 17. Ibid., pp. 156-57. (Adapted.)
