Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

3

Support

Wives should be aware that their husbands want and need support. In the questionnaire "Understanding Your Expectations" (appendix A), the item "She supports me in my endeavors both at home and at work" was ranked very high by many husbands in my survey. In fact, support was ranked third.

I do not believe that a husband's ego is necessarily more vulnerable than his wife's. In What Wives Expect of Husbands, women indicated that they need sensitivity, which may be another way of saying they need support. Rather than argue whether husbands or wives need support the most, we may simply conclude that all people need support, encouragement, sensitivity, and appreciation.

Remember the Lord's counsel to Emma Smith to be "a comfort unto my servant, Joseph Smith, Jun., thy husband, in his afflictions, with consoling words, in the spirit of meekness." (D&C 25:5.) Perhaps because of his awareness that married couples would undergo great stress in the latter days, the Lord encouraged husbands and wives to love and nurture one another.

Tough Times for Husbands

I do think these are tough times for many husbands. In his book Parents in Modern America, E. E. LeMasters has written a chapter entitled "The American Father." [^1] In it he documents some of the serious problems of fathers and husbands:

For the 20 to 30 percent of husbands and fathers who are in the lower levels of the economic system, financial problems are even more of a reality. According to LeMasters, such husbands are faced not only with the daily realities of being able to provide food, clothing, and housing for their families, but with the knowledge that in a society in which many are reasonably well off, they are not.

LeMasters believes, however, that almost all husbands presently suffer from economic problems of one kind or another. If the problem is not how to get enough money, it is often what to do with it or how to hold on to it. He concludes, "Only those who have sweated out economic problems know how they can affect family life; the quality of the husband-wife relationship, the feeling of the children for their parents, and the attitude of the father and mother towards being parents. A man's self-image in our society is deeply affected by his ability to provide for his family. Many times, the self-image is not too positive." [^2] (Italics added.)

Many wives, I believe, are not fully aware of the degree to which they can bless or burden a husband in his activities. Latter-day revelation urges wives to "murmur not." (D&C 25:4.) And with regard to financial matters, wives have been counseled to "lay aside the things of this world." (D&C 25:10.)

Some wives live for many years with the illusion that nothing is wrong with their relationship. Then after several years of married life, they find themselves seriously contemplating divorce. A student of mine came by my office recently and wanted to talk for a few minutes. He was a handsome young man and appeared to be very intelligent. And he was concerned. He told me that after nearly thirty years of marriage, his parents were getting a divorce.

As we sat in my office that morning, he reflected, "It is one thing to get a divorce after several years of struggling with a bad relationship. But my parents had a picture-perfect marriage all the years I was growing up. We had a large family, a hard-working father, and a sensitive, concerned mother, and all of us regularly participated in church activities. How could a divorce happen?"

I've had that kind of conversation more than once during the past few years. Young men and women about to marry find their parents seeking a divorce. The separations occur after what appeared to be ideal marital relationships. And the question is asked time and time again: Why?

I told the young man that I did not know the reasons why picture-perfect marriages sometimes come unframed. But I am starting to form some opinions. And my opinions are centered around the picture-perfect marriage concept. Many believe, or are misled to believe, that they have an ideal marriage. Since they now have it, they may think they don't have to do anything to keep it. And that just may make the difference.

During the past few years, I have participated in several marriage education seminars. It is refreshing to meet with many couples who are deeply committed to marriage. During these seminars, however, I did not find picture-perfect marriages. What I did find were couples of all ages who deeply loved each other and were consequently willing to struggle together to keep their good marriages functioning.

Someone once observed that it is better to have a heart attack and then learn to take care of your health than to live without knowing you have heart problems. So it is with marriage. Working to improve a somewhat less-than-perfect marriage may be far better than living under the illusion that we have the ideal marital relationship.

When sexual disruption occurs at home, some husbands feel they have the right to seek elsewhere for sexual fulfillment, and sexual fidelity in marriage appears to be decreasing in the United States and other places.

LeMasters does not, nor do I, condone the intentions or actions of men seeking sexual fulfillment outside of marriage. Husbands and wives share a joint responsibility to fulfill each others sexual needs. If husbands do not receive sexual fulfillment or if they are unfaithful, according to LeMasters, their role as fathers or husbands will suffer.

When a husband and father drinks, it affects his family in at least four ways: (1) the drinking becomes a real strain on the family budget; (2) the quality of the marriage almost always suffers; (3) when the husband is at home he is not able to function normally—he is either too good to the children or he is abusive; and (4) the attitude of his children and his wife usually changes from positive to negative. Perhaps similar trends occur with the misuse of other drugs.

Some wives resent husbands who want time away from home and family for even a short period of time. I would remind such wives that in my book What Wives Expect of Husbands one frequent expectation of wives was autonomy. Wives wanted and expected time alone or in the company of friends. I believe that what is good for the goose is also good for the gander. Apparently, both husbands and wives need a periodic break to be alone with others.

Husbands Change

If you are not convinced by now that husbands need support, you may want to consider the thoughts of Dr. Joyce Brothers. Dr. Brothers, a noted psychologist, recently wrote the book What Every Woman Should Know about Men. In it she has several pages on "The Fragile Sex," documenting the many differences between men and women and the ways that men are often more vulnerable. And she also notes that men pass through several stages of life. She writes:

In recent decades so much attention has been lavished on the stages of childhood—from the terrible twos through the teenage tyrants—that the adult stages were almost completely ignored. It was as if once a boy emerged from adolescence, he was a man and that was that and nothing much more happened until he began the inevitable descent into old age. True, every woman knew that a man in his forties was almost as unpredictable as an adolescent. But that was about it. No one paid much attention to the years between twenty and seventy-five. [^4]

Dr. Brothers notes that times have changed and that many professionals have turned their attention to the adult male. They have discovered that men go through at least five stages with the first and third stages being the most crucial as well as the most difficult. These are:

Stage 1: Onward and Upward. These tension-ridden years are from about age twenty-one to about thirty-five. During this time a man concentrates on establishing himself at work, marrying, and starting a family.

Stage 2: Consolidation. This period lasts from the mid-thirties to the mid-forties and is the time when a man pulls together the accomplishments of the previous period.

Stage 3: The Pivotal Decade. During this time, which occurs from the mid-forties to the mid-fifties, a man senses the arrival of middle age, which is usually characterized by physical and psychological stress as he reorients himself. Dr. Brothers believes that the quality and character of the rest of a man's life are largely determined during this pivotal decade.

Stage 4: Equilibrium. From the mid-fifties until retirement a man goes through the years of equilibrium, which can be very rewarding. Problems not resolved during the Pivotal Decade can carry over into this stage, which may prolong the Pivotal Decade and shorten the Equilibrium Stage.

Stage 5: Retirement. Depending on what happens during the Pivotal Decade and the Equilibrium stage, this fifth stage can be a time of major satisfaction and serenity. Or, it can be a time of resentment, disappointment, and fear.

Dr. Brothers believes that the woman who understands what a man is going through during these different stages will be able to better deal with her husband as he passes through them. Or at least she may be able to cope more easily with the behavior changes and mood swings as he goes from one stage to the next. Husbands need particular support during stages 1 and 3 but evidently need it in one form or another throughout the years of marriage.

The Middle Years

My wife, Susan, and I have been confused trying to determine when the middle years are. The United States Census Bureau has defined the middle years as those between thirty-five and fifty-five, and yet another research project suggested that the middle years were those between fifty-five and seventy-five.

The logical conclusion could be drawn that anyone over thirty and under seventy-five is middle aged, but this is not necessarily so. One investigation of people over eighty years of age found that only half of them reported themselves as being old, and the other half defined themselves as being in the middle years of life. So if you are between thirty and somewhere near eighty years of age, you are in the middle years.

According to Dr. Joyce Brothers, the middle years are critical for husbands. And apparently that is where Susan and I are right now. Like most married couples we experience our moments of identity crisis. This happened not long ago when we realized we were no longer young but were not yet willing to concede that we were really old. We finally came to the rather logical conclusion that we are experiencing the middle years of marriage.

Trapped somewhere between puberty and paralysis, other married couples like ourselves may also be facing similar situations and asking some of the same questions. Having spent our youth, must we be reconciled to the idea that the best of life and marriage is over? Or, is it possible that the most rewarding part of marriage is yet ahead? Are those of us in the middle years of marriage approaching the summit, or are we over the hill?

What do the middle years hold for marriage? Some research indicates that the middle years are a time of challenge, frustration, transition, and change. Many middle-aged people report feeling caught and pressured. Economists have described the tremendous financial pressures on middle-aged couples. All of these thoughts would lead us to believe we are on the other side of the mountain longingly looking back at better times. While these trends may be true for some married couples, they need not be for all.

Dr. Richard Kerckhoff of Purdue University recently noted that the middle years of marriage can be, and often are, the best. According to Dr. Kerckhoff, they can be a time of recognition of our value, not a time to doubt our worth. The middle years can be a time of reassessment, of withdrawal from energy-consuming activities to which we were never really committed.

Dr. Kerckhoff suggests that during this time in our marriage we focus on the things we now feel are really worthwhile. [^5]

The Four Cs of Support

Since husbands do need support, how might it be given? This is a logical question most wives may ask. Of course, husbands may differ in the amount and kind of support they need, so before trying to give specifics, I might suggest four general roles a wife might play to support her husband. They all start with the letter c.

Confidante. Almost all husbands want someone with whom they can share their deepest thoughts and innermost secrets. Every husband needs one person to whom he can open his heart, mind, and dreams. Such confidence usually tends to draw a husband and wife closer to each other.

Companion. A husband needs friends, and a wife ought to be his very best one. The Lord said, "It is not good that . . . man should be alone." (Genesis 2:18.) A husband needs someone he can talk to, someone who will listen to him and keep his confidences, and someone to accompany him through life.

One of the frequent complaints of husbands is that wives talk too much and do not listen enough. Many extramarital affairs begin because a man finds someone other than his wife who will listen to him when his wife won't. This listening turns to empathy, empathy to sympathy, and sympathy to desire. Such a woman, who may not necessarily be physically attractive, actively listens and by so doing wins the man's heart. If wives want their husbands to be faithful to them, they should learn to listen to them in a sympathetic way.

Conscience. A husband needs a wife he can trust and with whom he can clarify some of his thoughts. In my own marriage I have had ideas that needed clarification, review, or revising. My wife, Susan, is my contact with reality and in many ways my social conscience. Often in writing my column for the Deseret News, I will have some idea or thought that may be controversial or could be misunderstood. I will share the idea with her, and I know what she will say in advance: "When in doubt, leave it out!" Her philosophy has spared me much misunderstanding in my writing. And when I give a talk to a group or audience, I know I can trust her judgment on how well I have or have not done. I have benefited in many ways because Susan knows that I, like the vast majority of husbands, need another conscience, one who will help me with my thoughts and actions. Hopefully, I can do the same for her in some small way.

Climate controller. There is little question in my mind that the wife sets the general tone or climate of the home. And husbands appreciate and want wives who can help make this climate positive and pleasant. Because wives are around their children so much more than husbands, I believe they determine much of the atmosphere in which their children thrive and live. Of course, they are not totally responsible. But the simple fact is that women can and do accomplish much in creating the environment in the home.

A Crucial Question

While these are general ways wives might support their husbands, you may want to ask your own husband this crucial question: "How might I be more supportive of you as a husband and father?" Then, be willing to listen. You may be surprised and even informed.

One husband wrote:

I think it is imperative that my wife supports me at home as well as at other places, because if she has an apathetic attitude, it is most likely that her attitude will rub off on me. Sometimes I think, "If she doesn't care then why should I?"

Support from a wife can come in many ways. It might be a simple "How was your day, dear?" But it shouldn't stop there. She should continue to ask him questions to find out what really went on. If he had a bad day, maybe she can help him realize it wasn't quite so bad. If it was a good day, she should ask questions about that too.

I really feel my wife's support when she gets out of bed and sees me off to work in the morning. I appreciate it when she fixes my breakfast. One of my friends leaves for work every morning after a dish of cold cereal while his wife lies in bed. I know how he feels about it too, and he doesn't feel good.

A wife can also show support for her husband through touch. Even though we won't admit it, men need and want to be touched as much as do women.

In summary, one of the most effective and painless ways to strengthen your marriage is to find out how you can better support your husband and then do it.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Discipline can only be effectively taught when there is mutual respect between parent and child. Reserve some time for yourself. At least once a week spend a few hours on yourself or simply "waste" an occasional afternoon. James Dobson, Dare to Discipline, Wheaton, Illinois: Tyndale House Publishers, 1970, p. 23.
[^2] Take the opportunity for communication and discussion with a child after a child has been disciplined. Don't struggle with things you cannot change. While a mother does make a difference in her children's lives and that of her husband, there are some things she just can't do or change. One of the first principles of mental health is to learn to accept the inevitable. Ibid., pp. 20-21.
[^4] Don't saturate your child with excessive materialism or"things." Write down a list of duties to be performed. This will help remind you of your most important tasks. In addition, you can then set priorities for your items and start on those that seem to be most important. Then, at the end of the day, you can look back at the list and have the satisfaction of knowing you did one, two, or perhaps more of the things you decided were important. Journal of Discourses 10:360-61.
[^5] Avoid extremes in the application of both love and control. [^3] Seek divine assistance. Dr. Dobson, a devout Christian, notes: "The concept of marriage and parenthood were not human inventions. God in His infinite wisdom, created and ordained the family as the basic unit of procreation and companionship. The solutions to the problems of modern parenthood can be found through the power of prayer and personal appeal to the Great Creator." [^5] Dobson, Dare to Discipline, pp. 218-24.
