Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

4

Motherhood

Apparently the vast majority of husbands feel that the roles of wife and mother are intertwined. It is very difficult to separate marriage from parenthood and family. They all affect each other and are interrelated. But the fact remains that a woman can be a better mother than wife, and vice versa, depending on which role she gives top priority. Most do adequately at both.

Most husbands expect their wives to be competent mothers. Of the twenty items in appendix B, "She gives our children adequate emotional and physical care" was ranked fourth by husbands. A wife should realize, therefore, that how she functions as a mother will also affect her marriage.

Discipline

One of the scriptures that most interests me indicates that in the last days children will be disobedient to parents. (See 2 Timothy 3:2.) And we may now be observing this sign of the times. While both fathers and mothers contribute to the discipline of children, or lack of it, mothers are usually with the children much more often than are fathers. What mothers do, therefore, or fail to do to discipline is of major importance.

All too frequently discipline comes in the form of "Wait until your father gets home," which takes the responsibility of disciplining away from the mother and unduly burdens the father. Both husbands and wives need to help discipline their children.

In his popular book Dare to Discipline, Dr. James Dobson notes:

Methods and philosophies regarding control of children have been the subject of heated debates and disagreements for centuries. The pendulum has swept back and forth regularly between harsh, oppressive discipline and the unstructured permissiveness of the 1950's. It is time that we realize that both extremes leave their characteristic scars on the lives of young victims, and I would be hard pressed to say which is more damaging.

Unfortunately, the prevailing philosophy at a particular time seems to be more influential on parental approaches to discipline than does common sense. [^1]

Elsewhere in his book, Dr. Dobson observes:

Love in the absence of instruction will not produce a child with self-discipline, self-control, and respect for his fellow man. Affection and warmth underlie all mental and physical health, yet they do not eliminate the need for careful training and guidance. The greatest social disaster of this century is the belief that abundant love makes discipline unnecessary. Respectful and responsible children result from families where the proper combination of love and discipline is present. Both these ingredients must be applied in necessary quantities. [^2]

Dr. Dobson then gives five major guidelines he believes are essential in teaching children self-control:

In marriage and family seminars I am frequently asked about spanking as a means of disciplining children. I reply that if spanking is the only means by which you can control your children, then do it. But frankly, Susan and I have found spanking to be quite ineffective in changing the behavior of our children. It seldom has positive long-range consequences.

Many people equate non-spanking with non-discipline, and for some parents that may be true. But there are other, more effective ways to discipline a child without having to spank.

Brigham Young once stated:

Kind words and loving actions towards children, will subdue their uneducated natures a great deal better than the rod, or, in other words, than physical punishment. Although it is written that, "The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left to himself bringeth his mother to shame," [Proverbs 29:15] and, "he that spareth his rod hateth his son; but he that loveth him chasteneth him betimes;" [Proverbs 13:24] these quotations refer to wise and prudent corrections. Children who have lived in the sunbeams of parental kindness and affection, when made aware of parent's displeasure, and receive a kind reproof from parental lips, are more thoroughly chastened, than by any physical punishment that could be applied to their persons. . . . When children are reared under the rod, . . . it not unfrequently occurs, that they become so stupefied and lost to every high-toned feeling and sentiment, that though you bray them in a mortar among wheat with a pestle, yet will not their foolishness depart from them. [^4]

One of the best insights I have found on parent-child relationships is found in Doctrine and Covenants 121:43: "Reproving betimes with sharpness, when moved upon by the Holy Ghost; and then showing forth afterwards an increase of love toward him whom thou hast reproved, lest he esteem thee to be his enemy."

This revelation suggests that we should reprove or chastise clearly, concisely, and betimes (quickly) when moved upon by the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost will be our guide. Then our discipline will be controlled and consistent. (Remember that Jesus braided a whip before he cleansed the temple. You can crochet or do a little needlepoint before you are tempted to let your child have it!)

After reproving your child, be sure to show him an increase of love, "lest he esteem thee to be his enemy."

I know, as do many parents, what it means to be esteemed as an enemy. But if there has been one thing I have constantly tried to do, it is to show an increase of love after discipline. And in so doing I have learned the power of that scripture.

How to Survive as a Mother

Dr. Dobson also notes:

It is not uncommon for a mother . . . to feet overwhelmed by the complexity of her parental assignment. For each child she raises, she is the primary protector of his health, education, intellect, personality, character, and emotional stability. She must serve as physician, nurse, psychologist, teacher, minister, cook, and policeman. Since she is with the children longer each day than her husband, she is the chief disciplinarian and main giver of security and love. She will not know whether or not she is handling these matters properly until it is too late to change her methodology.

Furthermore, Mom's responsibilities extend far beyond her children. She must also meet her obligations to her husband, her church, her relatives, her friends, and in some cases her employer. Each of these areas demands her best effort, and the conscientious mother often finds herself racing through the day in a breathless attempt to be all things to all people. . . . Certainty there must be occasions in the life of every mother when she looks in the mirror and asks, "How can I make it through the day?"

To help mothers "make it through the day," Dr. Dobson suggests the following:

You Have to Grow with Your Children

Someone once noted that rearing children is like making pancakes—you have to practice on the first one. Most parents readily concede that we practice becoming fathers and mothers on our first child. And in so doing we probably make mistakes with our first child that we don't make on those that follow.

The age of the first child also determines where we are in the family life cycle. Several years ago Dr. Evelyn Duvall outlined eight stages of family life. [^6] They are:

Stage 1: Married couples (without children).

Stage 2: Childbearing families (oldest child between birth and thirty months).

Stage 3: Families with preschool children (oldest child between two-and-a-half and six years of age).

Stage 4: Families with school children (oldest child between six and thirteen years of age).

Stage 5: Families with teenagers (oldest child between thirteen and twenty years of age).

Stage 6: Families launching young adults (oldest or first child leaves home).

Stage 7: Middle-aged parents (empty nest to retirement).

Stage 8: Aging families (retirement to death of one or both spouses).

As you will note, as the first child matures, the entire family is launched into a new stage of development. The change sometimes requires new or additional skills for successful family living.

This may be why the oldest child is often perceived as an inconvenience or even a threat to some parents. We may sometimes feel uncomfortable with our oldest child because as he or she changes, so must we. About the time we become used to the way our first child functions physically, emotionally, and socially, he changes, through no fault of his own. Simply put, he is growing up.

This point was vividly brought to my attention a few years ago when we were living in Wisconsin. My friend Dr. Frank Bockus and I were traveling to Madison to conduct a seminar on family life. Frank, a successful marriage and family therapist, told me that he and his wife, Alice, had learned something very important about their son, Keith, as he was growing up. About the time they would get used to him at one particular age, say age ten, he would soon become twelve, and frustrations would arise when they tried to treat their twelve-year-old son the way they did when he was ten. And after they accommodated to the world of their twelve-year-old, he soon became fourteen.

Dr. Bockus suggested that some of our problems in families come from parental lag. This is the inability or unwillingness of parents to keep up with or adjust to the development of their children. But if we parents expect to survive the next decade, we must change along with our children.

Of his eldest child, the biblical Jacob said, "Reuben, thou art my firstborn, . . . unstable as water." (Genesis 49:3-4.) This statement may be more revealing of Jacob and Leah than it is of Reuben.

Education for Mothers

The vast majority of the young women in my classes at Brigham Young University are marriage oriented. They want to marry, and most of them will. In addition, they are very committed to having and rearing children of their own.

But young coeds sometimes wonder about combining education, career, marriage, and motherhood. They want it all, but can they have it? And, they constantly ask, should their college education lead toward employment if they plan to marry and have children? They and I have struggled with these concerns, and still do.

Recently I had the opportunity to discuss these issues in more detail with one of my students. She is a mathematics major with a scholarship and is very intelligent and attractive. And she plans to obtain her master's degree. But she asked me a question I could not answer. It was, "Dr. Barlow, do I need a master's degree in math to be a good wife and mother?" She knew I am solidly behind marriage and family life because of the courses I teach. But she also knows I am on record as favoring advanced education or training beyond high school for both young men and young women. So her concern has become mine, and we have not yet resolved it.

One day she brought me two quotations by Brigham Young that have helped her with her dilemma. These thoughts should be of interest to all young LDS women and particularly to those who, like my student, have an interest in mathematics.

Brigham Young stated:

As I have often told my sisters in the Female Relief societies, we have sisters here who, if they had the privilege of studying, would make just as good mathematicians or accountants as any man; and we think they ought to have the privilege to study these branches of knowledge that they may develop the powers with which they are endowed. We believe that women are useful, not only to sweep houses, wash dishes, make beds, and raise babies, but that they should stand behind the counter, study law or physic [medicine], or become good book-keepers and be able to do the business in any counting house, and all this to enlarge their sphere of usefulness for the benefit of society at large. In following these things they but answer the design of their creation. [^7]

On another occasion, Brigham Young noted:

The ladies can learn to keep books as well as the men; we have some few, already, who are just as good accountants as any of our brethren. Why not teach more to keep books and sell goods, and let them do this business, and let the men go to raising sheep, wheat, or cattle, or go and do something or other to beautify the earth and help to make it like the Garden of Eden, instead of spending their time in a lazy, loafing manner? [^8]

I believe that education can and should help young women become better wives and mothers. And perhaps as Brigham Young noted, it can also help them develop the powers with which they are endowed and enlarge their sphere of usefulness for the benefit of society. In addition, it may help them answer the design of their creation. But education need not be only in preparation for employment.

I referred to these statements by Brigham Young in one of my columns in the Deseret News and received the following letter:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

I was interested in your column in which you discussed a woman enlarging her sphere of usefulness.

Phyllis McGinley wrote a book that is fascinating and that I have enjoyed for years. It is called Sixpence in Her Shoe and extols the rewards of homemaking and defends those who prefer to stay at home instead of using their education and experience in the marketplace. I refer you to the chapter entitled "A Jewel in the Pocket." A few quotations from the chapter will tell you how much value an education is to a woman, whether she chooses to have a career outside of the home or to be a full-time homemaker: "Learning is a boon, a personal good. It is a light in the mind, a pleasure for the spirit, an object to be enjoyed. It is refreshment, warmth, illumination, a window from which we get a view of the world. Housewives more than any others deserve well-furnished minds. They have to live in them such a lot of time.

"We who belong to that profession (housewife) hold the fate of the world in our hands. It is our influence that will determine the culture of coming generations. We are the people who chiefly listen to the music, buy the books, attend the theater, prowl the art galleries, collect for the charities, brood over the schools, converse with the children. Our minds need to be rich and flexible for those duties. And even if we had no such duties, we could still honorably wear our education as the ornament it is, with no other excuse than it becomes us. Or if we prefer to keep it in an apron pocket to finger like an amulet, that is also our right. The jewel need not wear out or lose its value or grow dull there, so long as we understand its worth. It is something we have earned by our own efforts. And not even the clamor of household voices or the complaints of a fulminating college dean can destroy for us our job in its possession."

Doesn't she state it well! I have read and reread this book and loved it anew. This book was copyrighted in 1960, but its views never seem to grow old.

Two of my five children are now out of the household, and I have been most grateful for the education I did have in rearing them. I had three years of college before marriage and may finish some day. But a woman can never have too much education. It can only enhance her life if seen in perspective and enjoyed.

When Mothers Work

If LDS wives and mothers do choose to work outside the home, they have serious matters to consider. During the April 1982 general conference, Barbara B. Smith, president of the Relief Society, discussed some of these concerns. Her address, "Her Children Arise Up, and Call Her Blessed," was later printed in the May 1982 Ensign. [^9] President Smith noted:

The ideal for a family is, and always has been, to have a mother in the home to be with the children, to care for them and to help them grow, to coordinate and correlate the family's activities, and to be a stay against intrusions of unrighteousness. There are times, however, under unusual circumstances, when, in order to help provide for even the basic needs of her family, a mother may be required to accept employment outside her home. As President Ezra Taft Benson has stated, "Many of you often find yourselves in circumstances that are not always ideal . . . who, because of necessity, must work and leave your children with others."

. . . The challenges facing the working mother of small children are many. First, she must find someone to give good care to her child. Next, she has to decide what to do in an emergency situation when there is an accident or sickness. She must rely on the help of an understanding employer, a relative, a neighbor, a schoolteacher, or someone else to help in those times of crisis.

We find that most working mothers organize their time by advance planning, shopping, scheduling, and assigning chores to include each member of the household. They realize the importance of having meals that provide essential nutrients and the warmth of gracious family dining—even though fast food establishments appeal to and even cater to the working-outside-the-home mother as an easier alternative.

We are well aware, however, that the real challenges for many working mothers come in their responsibility for guiding children through periods of questioning and decision making in their times of trouble. These challenges come in being able to sense the unexpressed needs of children and those of which young people, in their immaturity, may not themselves be aware. A mother may not always be on hand when her child's needs seem most acute. But we find that many working mothers take every opportunity to be with their children—to work with them in accomplishing household duties; when it is appropriate, to shop, plan, and play together; and sometimes just to be in the same room so that they have the sense of being with someone who loves them.

It might be a temptation for a working mother to plan special outings and play times as the so-called "quality" time she has with her children. But many are aware of the danger this poses in giving them a distorted picture of life by using all their time together in recreation. It is important for children to see the balance that is necessary between work and play. They need to know that special events are more meaningful when daily routines are established and when assigned duties are completed. . . .

Even though a working mother cannot be the full-time model she might be if she were home with her children, she can help them learn the personal discipline that comes with daily, routine responsibilities, and, afterward, the well-being resulting from praise for work well done.

A woman who must work to care for the needs of her children should learn the essential purposes of life and come to know the Lord and feel his love and direction. Then she can help her children know him and grow to feel secure in our Heavenly Father's love. . . .

Mothers have the special opportunity of bringing children into the world; they can also play a significant role in bringing to pass their success and happiness here as they prepare them for life eternal.

Footnotes

The economic conditions of today present problems to women and their families that have many implications and far-reaching effects. A woman can find solutions as she recognizes the needs that only she can fill and the part that she must play in the Christlike development of her children. As she lives close to the Spirit, that way will be made clear for her. A wife may be compelled to help with the finances of her family. In this matter we have been given direction. President Kimball has stated: "Some women, because of circumstances beyond their control, must work. We understand that. . . . Do not, however, make the mistake of being drawn off into secondary tasks which will cause the neglect of your eternal assignments such as . . . rearing the spirit children of our Father in Heaven. Pray carefully over all your decisions."

---
Notas:
[^1] The sexually well person would feel gratitude towards her own body for its ability to respond to pleasure. . . . Someone who is grateful for her body will respect and appreciate it. She does not deny it, or ignore it. On the contrary, she pays proper attention to it, and welcomes appropriate opportunities to understand its possibilities and potentialities. Mike Grace and Joyce Grace, A Joyful Meeting: Sexuality in Marriage, Saint Paul: International Marriage Encounter, 1980, pp. 65-78.
[^2] The sexually well person would feel gratitude to her husband. The possibility of loving a well-beloved other should be a tremendous source of happiness, especially since it is mingled with the realization that our own fulfillment has been made possible by that same spouse's desire to give pleasure as well as receive it. Related to this, and I think it is fairly obvious, there is a sense of unique bonding created by that sexual union. We break bread with many people. We even share our hopes and fears with many people, though certainly not to equal degrees. Though the idea is losing popularity in the culture and society around us, one of the characteristics of a healthy marriage is its sexual fidelity—the luxuriant certainty that only the two of you know and understand that part of the relationship, that only the two of you share that activity, that pleasure, that learning and loving. Ibid., p. 74
[^4] Ibid., pp. 74-75.
[^6] Ibid., p. 77.
[^7] Billy Graham, "What the Bible Says about Sex," Reader's Digest, May 1970, p. 118.
[^8] The concept of sexual stewardships has been previously discussed and perhaps introduced by Carlfred B. Broderick. For a discussion on stewardships in marriage see his article "Midlife Report," Ensign, July 1979, pp. 28-30, and his interview on "A Gospel Centered Therapy," Dialogue, summer 1980, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 59-75.
[^9] D. Corydon Hammond and Robert F. Stahmann,"Sex Therapy with LDS Couples," Journal of Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychotherapists, January 1982, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 13-16.
