Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

5

Sexuality

Of all the chapters in this book, this one has created the most interest. After What Wives Expect of Husbands was published, one woman called to ask if I planned to write What Husbands Expect of Wives. I told her I did, and she replied, "Yes, and I'll bet it will have only one chapter!"

This wife may have exaggerated the point, but she did convey a sentiment common to many women that sex is all a man wants in marriage.

My response was that sexual fulfillment is not the only thing a husband wants, but it is one thing, in fact, one very important thing, that almost all husbands desire in marriage.

But in fairness to husbands, I should add that it is not necessarily the most important. In my survey there were four items with precedence over sexuality. But the item "She helps me attain sexual satisfaction in our relationship" was ranked high by most husbands.

Sexual fulfillment for both husband and wife is no guarantee that other aspects of the marriage will go well. But I do know that when there is little or no sexual fulfillment for either or both spouses, it can affect other dimensions of their relationship.

I was somewhat shocked not long ago at a letter Ann Landers received from a middle-aged woman who said we are preoccupied with sexuality in American marriages. She said she and her husband had given up sexual relationships years ago with no apparent adverse effects on their marriage. She challenged Ann to print the letter to see if others had done the same.

Ann printed the letter and to her amazement received more than 260,000 replies, the greatest number of responses she had ever received to any one article. And what did she find? About half, 130,000, agreed with the woman that sex was over-rated and unnecessary for a fulfilling marriage, and they, too, had given it up.

The other 50 percent (with whom I agree) lamented the fact that so many couples had apparently given up on something that could be so rewarding. Whether or not the 130,000 couples who had given up were representative of a large number of Americans is not known. But one does wonder what percentage of married couples no longer nurture the sexual aspect of marriage.

In my own counseling experience I have found married couples who have little or no sexual interaction because of conflict in their marriages. But others give up their sexual life because they have sought satisfaction with little or no results or they believe that sexual interaction is mostly for reproduction and they have finished having children. Some couples withhold sex as a weapon or bargaining tool.

When Sexual Interests Differ

In their book A Joyful Meeting: Sexuality in Marriage, [^1] Drs. Mike and Joyce Grace have an interesting chapter on the differences between men and women in sexual matters. During the later years of marriage, it is often the wife who has the stronger sexual interest. But for the first few years of marriage, it is usually the husband. In fact, during the early years of marriage, a young husband is usually interested in sexual interaction about twice as often as his wife.

While the wife's interest in sex can be as intense as that of her husband, it is usually a little more erratic. The husband's interest, however, is intense and more constant. In fact, Drs. Mike and Joyce Grace suggest that a man's interest in sex reoccurs quite regularly, about every forty-eight hours.

If a wife isn't interested in sex but her husband is, should she participate? Before you say no, consider the following.

Most of us grow up with the myth that in order for a sexual encounter to be a good one, the climax or orgasm must be reached simultaneously. This is a myth! If you can achieve it, fine. But 95 percent of a couple's orgasms are achieved independently. Put another way, only 5 percent of orgasms are simultaneous.

Similarly, the probability of two people being simultaneously aroused is quite low. Often one partner will be interested when the other one is not.

I believe few wives realize the capability of sexuality to help keep their husbands close to them physically, emotionally, and even spiritually. When a husband experiences sexual fulfillment he feels very close to his wife in many ways. Because the sexual urge is so strong and constant in men, a wife should realize the high degree of fulfillment that comes to a husband when she helps him attain sexual satisfaction.

On the other hand, I also believe few wives sense the degree of frustration and alienation husbands feel when a wife refuses or ignores his sexual needs and interests. In reality, it is a compliment to her that he finds her sexually desirable. I believe a wise and loving Heavenly Father has given a wife the gift of sexual intimacy to help her achieve oneness with her husband. (See Genesis 2:24-25.)

What if the marital relationship is strained. Should a wife refuse sexual relationships with her husband? If she wants to prolong and heighten the stress, yes. But if she is sincerely interested in improving her relationship with her husband, the answer is a definite no. Dr. Marian Hilliard, an obstetrician, gynecologist, and a woman, gives this advice to her female patients:

The way to save a strained marriage is to start with the act of love, meaning sexual intercourse. Here are the essentials of marriage in concentrated form. In one act are consideration, warmth, gaiety, charm, hunger and ecstasy. In this small kingdom, a woman can heal the wounds caused by indifference and contempt. She is a fool, if she ignores this tool provided her by nature. If a woman spent half the time cultivating the sexual relationship with her husband that she sometimes spends avoiding it, her marriage would blossom. [^2]

According to Drs. Mike and Joyce Grace, there are at least four ways wives can view sexual intercourse. They are (1) psychological rape, (2) duty or martyrdom, (3) labor of love, and (4) love freely expressed. Let us briefly examine each.

Psychological rape. Some wives may view sex as a form of rape because it is forced on them psychologically rather than physically. In the past, it was considered illegal and sinful for a woman to refuse sex with her husband. And a husband today often may use guilt to force her to participate. He might continually remind her of his unmet sexual needs until she eventually yields to his psychological pressure in order to maintain civility around the house.

But in so doing she usually feels anger and contempt for her husband, and the experience is chalked up as a bad sexual experience. Since she believes she has been sexually violated in marriage, she loses her capacity to enjoy sex. Repeated experiences such as these leave bitter memories that make it extremely difficult for her to have positive feelings about sex, her husband, or herself.

Duty or martyrdom. Sad as it may seem, some wives still believe that sex is a man's prerogative and a woman's duty. The wife who views sexuality as martyrdom usually perceives herself as the good wife who never refuses her husband even though she herself may have little or no interest in sexual endeavors. Both she and the psychologically raped wife see themselves as victims suffering at the hands of another. But the martyr is a heroic victim suffering for a worthwhile cause. For her, sexuality becomes very routine, often perfunctory. There is little fulfillment in sex for her, but she feels rather virtuous about the whole matter.

What martyr wives do not realize is that with her attitude, her husband is not sexually fulfilled either. So both husband and wife end up sexually frustrated. The martyr attitude splits the husband-wife relationship down the middle because it destroys their instinctive feelings of love. Drs. Mike and Joyce Grace note, "Each sexual episode is seen as evidence that the partner doesn't love. This is the exact opposite of what should be taking place. What should be a special way of loving has now become a special curse. Growth is not possible. A cold war is almost inevitable." [^3]

Labor of Love. In this category, the woman starts out as the ideal sexual partner, even if it kills her, and emotionally it often does. She tries to force (or fake) erotic response, and, of course, this cannot be done. Again the Graces observe:

As soon as you start working at sex, erotic feelings go out the window. Working at sex doesn't work. So efforts to force a response, instead of narrowing the gap in sexual interest between her and her husband, make it wider instead. Sex becomes a task, and then, a hopeless task. Instead of being fun for her, it is one big headache—a source of feelings of anxiety, inadequacy, guilt and failure. The whole thing has become a nightmare in which erotic feelings will never arise. She will be tempted to slip back into the martyr or psychological rape situation." [^4] (Italics added.)

A wife in this category often gets caught in the trap of trying to make her husband's sexual experiences her own. But, as noted, male and female sexual response can differ. Couples get so caught up in performance and achievement that they forget freedom, affection, humor, playfulness, fun, and love. To enjoy sex, married couples must set themselves free to enjoy sexual intimacy without worrying about how well they perform.

Not long ago I received a letter from a frustrated wife who wrote that she and her husband had sexual relationships frequently, but that she did not enjoy them at all. The main reason, she stated, was that her husband was pressuring her to get excited, to enjoy sex as much as he did. She did, up until the time he started nagging her. The more she tried to enjoy it, the less she did. She enjoyed the closeness but wanted him to relish the excitement.

Must a wife always experience sex exactly as her husband does? Drs. Mike and Joyce Grace note, "We do not know of any law that says that a woman's pleasure and fulfillment in sexual intercourse has to be measured in orgasms. The fact is that loving and mature women can enjoy sexual intercourse in many different ways." [^5]

Love Freely Expressed. Since a woman has the capacity to enjoy sexual intimacy in a variety of ways, she likely will become frustrated if she is forced to duplicate her husband's sexual needs and interests. For sexual fulfillment to occur, a woman should feel free to express her love, tenderness, and creativity in ways that come natural for her. This may mean a full erotic response with orgasms; a partial erotic response without orgasms; and once in a while a response with little or no erotic feeling but that is still deeply sexual, sensitive, and fulfilling. Drs. Mike and Joyce Grace conclude, "Where a woman has this freedom to be herself in making love, and where there is an other-centered love to express, a difference in sexual appetite isn't an insoluble problem. Sexual intercourse can be enjoyed and lived on many levels. Some women even report that they are most deeply moved when the erotic element is absent. The important thing in functioning at "Love Freely Expressed" is freedom and relaxed play with no worries about performance." [^6]

The chart on the next page shows the four levels of sexual love more clearly.

Christianity and Sexuality

Many of the letters I receive for my Deseret News column pertain to sexuality. One woman wrote:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

My husband and I are deeply committed Christians and have tried to build our marriage and home on Christian ideals.

Our only major problem in marriage is our sexual relationship. For years I have been taught that sex is mostly for reproduction. It has always seemed to be a drudgery to be endured. I don't enjoy it. What is the status of sex in a Christian marriage?

Here is my answer:

I have always been impressed with the Reverend Billy Graham. The evangelist addressed this topic in an article entitled "What the Bible Says about Sex." [^7] He states, "The Bible celebrates sex and its proper use, presenting it as God-created, God-ordained, God-blessed. It makes plain that God himself implanted the physical magnetism between the sexes for two reasons: For the propagation of the human race, and for the expression of that kind of love between man and wife that makes for true oneness. His command to the first man and woman to be 'one flesh' was as important as his command to 'be faithful and multiply."

Graham concludes that "the Bible makes plain that evil, when related to sex, means not the use of something corrupt, but the misuse of something pure and good. It teaches clearly that sex can be a wonderful servant, but a terrible master; that it can be a creative force more powerful than any other in the fostering of love, championship, happiness, or can be the most destructive of all of life's forces.

To the married Christian couples living in Corinth, the apostle Paul admonished:

Because of the temptation to immorality, each man should have his own wife and each woman her own husband.

The husband should give to his wife her conjugal [sexual] rights, and likewise the wife to her husband. For the wife does not rule over her own body, but the husband does; likewise the husband does not rule over his own body, but the wife does.

Do not refuse one another [sexual rights] except perhaps by agreement for a season, that you may devote yourselves to prayer; but then come together again, lest Satan tempt you through lack of self-control. (1 Corinthians 7:2-5, Revised Standard Version.)

This is one of the most positive and mentally healthy statements I have read anywhere regarding sexual relationships. Surely, it has implications for all Christian couples.

While we often view sex as something that makes sinners out of saints, perhaps it could, rightly perceived, help sinners become saints.

The Right to Say No

I received another interesting letter about sexual matters:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

Is a wife supposed to make love with her husband whenever he wants, regardless of how she is feeling about the matter?

Although my husband and I have good sexual experiences together often, this is a constant source of frustration for us. If there are times when I am emotionally not capable of responding sexually, he becomes upset and sulks for days. This, in turn, makes me so upset that I can hardly stand it. Don't I have feelings too? Sometimes I don't even know that I have turned down an invitation until I receive the punishment of silence and sulky behavior.

This was my response:

People should take part in making decisions that affect them as individuals, and this obviously includes the sexual part of marriage. Yes, we do have the right to refuse repeated demands which we deem to be unreasonable.

If you don't feel physically or emotionally capable when the request, or "invitation" as you put it, is made, you could indicate interest but suggest another time you feel might be appropriate.

Perhaps sex is something we share in marriage rather than something we take from or give to each other. And both partners should have an equal opportunity and responsibility in the say-so as to when that should or should not occur. Sex is not a man's prerogative and a woman's duty. That philosophy went out with Model Ts and high button shoes.

After the preceding thoughts were expressed in my column, I again invited written responses. Here is one such letter:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

I like your column but would have given a different answer on the right to say no.

When I was young I was very conscious of my "rights" and of refusing sex if I were not in the mood. But as time went by there were more frustrations, and I found it is hard for both of us to be on a "high" often enough. If a husband is insecure, refusal of sex strikes him as an affront or rejection of him personally. If I were to really extend a firm invitation to my husband and if he were to refuse (which he never does) I might feel hurt. I know how much sex and being loved seem intertwined.

So here is what I do. I know sexual fulfillment makes my husband happy, and I feel good about it too. If I really feel sick or terrible I make sure he knows about it earlier in the day and I make sure he knows it's due to extraneous circumstances. Then he is usually sensitive to me, and I go to bed early. But if he still wants me after all of that, I figure he must need my affection and reassurance, and I do my best to share myself with him. I don't mind in the slightest because I love to please him.

Of course, there are brutish, insensitive husbands, but generally if you put the other person's happiness foremost, you get much of the same back.

Now, I am not always able to do everything in marriage my husband wants. But I am extra sensitive to loving him in sexual ways. And maybe he'll remember me when he is tempted by a younger woman. In other words, I have learned how to be giving and I enjoy it. A wife may make a husband resentful by pushing her "right" to refuse too far. Of course, she has a right. But she must think of what her refusal means to him. And later he may quit asking.

Sexual Stewardship

Rather than viewing sexuality in marriage as something we either give or get, I like to think of it as something a husband and wife can share. It might be called a sexual stewardship. [^8]

In the parable of the talents (Matthew 25:14-30), Jesus taught the concept of stewardship, implying that we should improve on whatever has been entrusted to our care. Stewards are managers. And in marriage we are often given joint stewardships, such as children, fidelity, and the day-to-day maintenance of family members, to name a few.

Implied are at least three elements that characterize successful stewardship: (1) agency, (2) diligence, and (3) accountability. We may accept or reject the opportunity to become a steward, but once we accept the responsibility, we are expected to exert great effort, as indicated in the parable of the talents. We are expected to improve or enhance what we have been given. Ultimately there will be an accounting of one kind or another of our various stewardships.

In my marriage seminars at Brigham Young University, we talk about sexuality as a stewardship, including the three concepts of agency, diligence, and accountability. In so doing we read 1 Corinthians 7:2-5 where Paul beautifully describes the sexual stewardship in marriage. I assign each person to write a few comments on the topic "Do We Have a Sexual Stewardship in Marriage?" Following are four excerpts, two from wives and two from husbands, which are representative of the many I have received.

One young wife wrote:

In too many relationships, satisfying personal desires comes first and the partner's needs are secondary. This is contrary to the teaching of Paul. In sexual relations, the role of each partner is, instead, to satisfy the other. They forget about trying to gratify their own desire; each takes care of the other's wants. Having given love unselfishly, both have sexual needs fulfilled in the most rewarding, tender way.

Sometimes we worry that if we don't look after ourselves, no one will—we might never get what we want unless we take it. This philosophy has no place in the teachings of Christ.

Another wife wrote:

To be a steward means that a person is given the responsibility to nourish, protect, and care for something. Therefore, to have a sexual stewardship would mean that a person has the responsibility of nourishing, protecting, and caring for the sexual part of his or her marriage. This must be a joint stewardship between the husband and wife.

Just as a person doesn't want any harm to come to any of his possessions, he would not want any harm to come to his spouse, because he is her steward. It is suggested that the body of the one is for the pleasure of the other and that this pleasure should not be withheld because it is the right of the other. The steward is responsible to see that this is done with deep concern and love so that both will be able to fulfill their stewardships while sharing their love.

Another aspect of stewardships is that there is always a time of accounting. I believe that this too will be a part of our sexual stewardship. Each of us will be held accountable for how we treated our spouses and whether we were truly unselfish in giving our love.

A husband in my class gave this description of sexual stewardship:

In discussing this part of marriage, my wife and I have both come to strongly believe that a sexual stewardship is vital to our relationship. For us, the most important part of the stewardship is the sharing, or in other words, a joint stewardship. Like all aspects of our marriage, if we are not both trying to satisfy and make the other happy, then not much can come from anything we do.

We have talked about the differences we have in our sexual needs, but we do not think that this means that one has to have more responsibility for stewardship than the other. For example, my wife tends to be more romantic than I am. Therefore, I have a stewardship or responsibility to see that I treat her as affectionately as possible, and make it a priority to spend romantic or intimate time with her. If I do not, I have not fulfilled my share of the stewardship. I tend to be quite a bit more pragmatic than my wife, and she has the stewardship to be sensitive to those feelings and understand when I may not be too romantic.

When we are both considerate of each other's needs, feelings are seldom hurt and we both find satisfaction in the relationship.

Part of stewardship may include doing things for your spouse when you do not feel like it, but in our sexual relationship we view this somewhat differently. We both believe that there must be a mutual interest or desire in order to achieve satisfaction in intimate or sexual relations. It somehow just does not seem right to us if this is not so. We feel that it is as much a part of our stewardship to be patient and understanding as it is to satisfy each other's intimate desires.

Another young husband wrote:

A sexual stewardship is a couple stewardship, not an individual one. Many people have the false notion that the sexual stewardship is the man's responsibility because, after all, "men are the ones interested in sex." Men and women were not created unequal in sexual response or desire. The husband's sex drive isn't any more intense or important than the wife's; it is only more constant.

In our marriage we both recognize that sexual desires are holy and a gift to us from God to use to draw closer together and to people the earth. We are trying to practice the principles found in 1 Corinthians 7:2-5. We never use sex as a punishment by withholding it from each other when we are angry or upset. Another interesting concept we have learned is that our bodies are for the fulfillment of each other. This has brought a "giving" instead of "taking" attitude in our sexual life.

A Marital Myth

During the past few years Latter-day Saint counselors have been giving greater attention to sexuality in marriage. The October 1981 convention of the Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychotherapists (AMCAP), held in Salt Lake City, included many discussions on sexuality.

Two participants at the conference, Dr. Corydon Hammond and Dr. Robert Stahmann, presented a paper on "Sex Therapy with LDS Couples." [^9] They noted:

A widespread myth exists in the LDS culture. The myth is that sexual problems are only a manifestation of marital discord and conflict. Therefore, if the relationship is enhanced, the sexual dysfunction will automatically resolve itself. . . .

It is . . . true that some sexual problems originate from marital discord. Many couples seeking sexual therapy also need marital therapy, which we employ prior to focusing on the sexual dysfunctions. However, in most instances, sexual dysfunctions will not resolve themselves even if the marriage relationship improves.

Drs. Hammond and Stahmann cited several studies that document that happily married couples can have sexual dysfunctions. One such study, reported in the New England Journal of Medicine, indicated that 83 percent of some couples not in therapy reported their marriages "happy" or "very happy." Yet, despite the high degree of marital happiness, 63 percent of the women and 40 percent of the men reported a sexual dysfunction.

The authors suggested that sexual dysfunction does not have to cause disruption of the entire marital relationship. They concluded:

Where there is emotional intimacy and high satisfaction in other areas of the marriage, some couples are successful in tolerating sexual problems with minimal disruption by compartmentalizing and insulating them from the rest of the relationship. However, sexual intimacy and fulfillment are important and valued by most couples, and sexual dysfunction can, over a period of time, frequently cause deep resentment, emotional distance, and deterioration in the marriage.

Latter-day Saint couples ought not, therefore, assume that because a sexual problem exists that something is terribly wrong with their marriage. Many sexual dysfunctions, like other marital problems, can be dealt with adequately by the couple with patience, perseverance, knowledge, skills, and motivation. On occasion, however, couples may need outside professional help.

The Sexually Well Person

At the same AMCAP convention, Dr. Val MacMurray gave an interesting profile of what he believed to be a sexually well person. [^10] (In the profile Dr. MacMurray used the feminine pronouns her and she, but noted that the concepts apply to men as well as women.) He stated:

I think to the extent that the sexually well person accepts and appreciates her sexuality, it would become a force that made her relationship with herself, with her spouse, and with her God better, stronger, and more binding. In other words, sexuality would not be an unacknowledged element in a person's life, something she tried to ignore about herself, something that was present but not talked about in the marriage relationship, or a part of one's life from which God was excluded. It would be prayed over and for. In fact, I am convinced that the dominant attitude of the sexually well person toward her sexuality would be gratitude. . . .

If our chief attitudes toward our sexuality were respect, appreciation, and gratitude instead of fear, guilt, or perhaps anger, what would we teach ourselves, and our children? How would we reteach concepts that may have been badly learned in the first place. And how would we go about healing some of the wounds left by damaging experiences that people have had up to this point?

I suspect that we would want to emphasize the holiness of sexuality and eliminate some of the mysteriousness which makes it frightening and tempting. It would not be something that separates us from God, but something that links us to him.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Good listeners are fully committed to listen. Proverbs 11:9; 12:18; 15:4; 18:8, 21; 26:22. (See also James 3:2-10; 1 Peter 3: 10.) David and Vera Mace, How to Have a Happy Marriage, Nashville: Abingdon, 1977, pp. 71-72.
[^2] Good listeners are physically and mentally ready to listen. Proverbs 4:20-23; 6:12, 14, 18; 16:2, 23. Richard B. Stuart, Helping Couples Change, New York: The Gilford Press, 1980, p. 222.
[^3] Good listeners wait for the other to complete a message before attempting to express their own ideas. Proverbs 15:31; 18:13, 15; 19:20; 21:28. (See also James 1:19.) Ibid., p. 224.
[^4] Good listeners use analytic skills to supplement, not replace, listening. [^3] Proverbs 12:18; 14:29; 15:28; 16:32; 21:23; 26:4; 29:20. Albert Ellis and Robert Harper, A Guide to Successful Marriage, Hollywood, California: Wilshire, 1972, pp. 190-208.
[^5] Proverbs 15:23; 25:11. Ibid., p. 204.
[^6] Proverbs 10:19; 11:12-13; 13:3; 17:27-28; 18:2; 20:19; 21:23. Ibid., p. 205.
[^7] Proverbs 17:9; 21:9. Virginia Satir, Peoplemaking, Palo Alto: Science and Behavior Books, Inc., 1972, p. 77.
[^8] Proverbs 15:1, 4; 16:1; 25:15. Marriage Encounter, August 1982, vol. II, no. 8, p. 24.
[^9] Proverbs 12:16; 19:11. Carlfred B. Broderick, Couples: How to Confront Problems and Maintain Loving Relationships, New York: Simon and Schuster, 1979, p. 84.
[^10] Proverbs 12:17, 22; 16:13; 19:5; 26:18-19, 22; 28:23; 29:5. (See also Ephesians 4:25; Colossians 3:9.) Quoted in Richard Wilke, Tell Me Again, I'm Listening, Nashville: Abingdon, 1973, p. 135.
