Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

6

Communication

The Family Service Association of America once made a careful four-year study of American families to see why marriages fail. The findings included the usual things we blame, such as conflicts over money, children, sex, leisure, relatives, and infidelity. One or more of these occurred in about 35 percent of all the troubled couples studied. Other difficulties, such as housekeeping conflicts and physical abuse, were listed on an average of 16 percent of the time. Difficulties with communication, however, were listed far and above anything else as a major factor in marital disruption. It was reported that 86 percent of those who experienced marital failure indicated they had communication problems. The surveys reported time and time again that husbands and wives had a common complaint: "We can't talk to each other." [^1]

In my own surveys one of the noticeable differences was that wives ranked communication very high in importance, number one in most instances. Husbands, on the other hand, did not rank communication quite as high as did wives. In fact, in my survey they ranked it only sixth. Dr. Joyce Brothers noted in her book What Every Woman Should Know about Men that men, in general, tend to talk about themselves less than women. This suggests that husbands tend to be less personal in their conversations with their wives.

Husbands Comment

Even though communication was not ranked as high by men as by women, husbands did perceive communication to be an important part of marriage. One husband commented:

One of the great problems in marriage today is the lack of communication between husbands and wives. My brother is on the edge of divorce and is married to a wife who will not listen to him or even talk very much. She is unaware that she is quick-tempered and appears to many to be self-centered. When my brother tries to bring these things up, she just walks away from him.

Still another husband believes the ability to communicate is directly related to sexual satisfaction in marriage. He wrote:

I think most people quietly hide behind failure in sexual compatibility because they feel they cannot communicate with their marriage partner or seek assistance from others. Discussing such intimate relationships requires a great deal of confidence in someone else.

There is, however, one key to successful sexual compatibility between married couples. You cannot solve that as a problem when there are other problems in the marriage. For that matter, you cannot really solve it as a problem until you are doing well in the other areas of your relationship. This would include communicating in a nonthreatening way.

I found that our best problem-solving discussions take place when we are communicating well in all the other areas of married life. Then, when we turn to the issues of intimate relations, we are more open and honest about our feelings.

Listening

As was noted in chapter 3, a husband needs a confidante, someone to whom he can confide his deepest feelings. When I have suggested this to wives in my marriage seminars, many are shocked. They state that they have tried for years to get a husband to "open up" with little or no success. But one complaint many husbands have is that wives talk too much and do not listen enough.

While it is generally acknowledged that in communication there must be both a sender and a receiver, we have all too often focused first and sometimes only on the sending aspect. The tragic truth is that many do not care to listen to others. They want to be understood but really do not care to understand.

In his book Helping Couples Change, Dr. Richard Stuart says, 'For golden words to be of value, the sender and receiver are required to be equally proficient in totally different procedures and skills. Without the ability to listen, we would be doomed to a life of monologue rather than dialogue, and we would be locked into a closed information system that would make adaptation to changing living conditions all but impossible. Despite its great significance, most people take listening for granted until it breaks down entirely, much as they take for granted, until times of crisis, their breathing and heartbeat." [^2]

S. I. Hayakawa, the well-known semanticist, once noted that listening, for most people, is "simply maintaining a polite silence while you are rehearsing in your mind the speech you are going to make the next time you can grab a conversational opening." We should not belittle the ability to keep quiet, in thought as well as voice, while another is speaking. I have always maintained that the Holy Ghost tells a person both when to speak up and when to shut up. When trying to communicate, perhaps we need greater inspiration in the latter than we do the former.

But silence in and of itself does not mean, as Hayakawa notes, that a person is actually listening or interested in what another has to say. While we are quiet we may be rejecting the other's words because they appear to be boring, simplistic, or complicated. Or, we may pay more attention to the sender's appearance and mannerisms than we do his words. We can, in addition, place too much emphasis on a single word or sentence. And all along, as Hayakawa suggests, we may be preparing our next speech, regardless of what the other person is saying.

What, then, are characteristics of good listeners? Dr. Richard Stuart suggests there are at least four components:

Commitment to listen (1) involves deciding that the words of a husband or wife are important enough to hear. This needs to be decided long before the actual conversation begins. The willingness to listen may be physically or mentally indicated (2) by relaxing, turning off the television, putting down the newspaper, sitting erect and maintaining appropriate eye contact. Waiting one's turn to speak (3) involves not jumping in to complete the other's sentence, not asking for more information before the other has completed an expression, and providing nonverbal signs of interest in what is being said. Being able to repeat and accurately rephrase the other's message is a good example of number 4, the proper use of analytic communication skills to supplement listening.

By using the above and other appropriate listening skills, wives would be in a better position to be the willing listeners that most husbands want. Wives should also remember that many extramarital affairs begin with a woman who is willing to genuinely listen to another woman's husband. Wives who are poor listeners influence husbands to seek satisfaction of this need elsewhere.

Communication Skills from the Scriptures

Sometimes contemporary marriage counselors think they are the ones who originated the concept that people ought to communicate effectively with each other. And it is true that they have made great progress in this area. But people have had concerns about effective communication for thousands of years.

Solomon was such a person. Solomon, you will remember, had seven hundred wives and likely would have become very knowledgeable about communication.

What suggestions did King Solomon have for wives and others about effective communication? In the book of Proverbs, Solomon gives the following suggestions. The scriptures are listed in ten groups with a central theme for each. Can you decide what the theme is for each of the ten groups?

Measured Openness and Honesty in Communication

Recently one of my students asked in a marriage class if it was best to be totally open and honest in marriage. I asked him and the other class members what they thought, and they all agreed that husbands and wives should be totally open and honest in their marital communication. I told the class I agreed if "being totally open and honest" meant we should not blatantly lie, cheat, or do anything that would be deceitful or cause mistrust.

But, I suggested, there is another dimension that needs consideration. Does being totally open and honest mean I should say everything and anything on my mind? Should I always express exactly how I feel?

A few years ago many, including the experts, would have said, "Yes, let it all hang out." Today, there is some question about this philosophy. Rather than "letting it all hang out," many are advocating measured openness and honesty in marital communication.

I explained to my class that day what measured openness and honesty meant. I asked each of them to think of one of their very best friends of the same sex. I suggested they recall for a moment some of the past experiences they had had with that valued friend. Did they appreciate having such a friend? What did they do to protect and enhance their friendship?

I asked if they expressed every little petty concern that arose between them and their friend. While not suggesting that such concerns always be concealed, I asked when and under what circumstances should a concern or even a criticism be raised? We agreed that we usually disclose such things only when they are necessary to sustain and strengthen the friendship.

We then compared the husband-wife relationship to friendship. What would we say, or not say, to protect the relationship? Would we air every minor concern or would some things just best be left unsaid? Would the tone of voice and the timing be important? Would we make sure we showed "an increase of love" (D&C 121:43) after a confrontation to make sure the relationship was maintained?

Recent research has suggested that vented hostility usually generates more hostility and that repeated gripes do little to reduce the frequency or intensity of undesirable behavior. If, however, we carefully control what we say, the relationship will likely prosper.

The question logically arises as to when to convey a concern or when to just tolerate it. I believe that if a problem continues for a long time and disrupts daily routines such as sleeping, eating and working, it should be discussed and hopefully resolved. This is particularly true if the problem is becoming more and more serious.

On the other hand, many of our concerns can be dealt with by increasing our level of tolerance rather than constantly demanding or expecting a marriage partner to change to meet our expectations. Before discussing such concerns, ask yourself: Will discussing this concern improve our relationship? Will we become better friends by so doing? If the answer is no, the problem is probably better left unmentioned. Morris L. Ernst once noted, "A sound marriage is not based on complete frankness. It is based on a sensible reticence."

Setting the Stage

A few months ago I was invited to be on a television talk show to discuss my book What Wives Expect of Husbands. I arrived a little early and watched the stage crew set the stage for the brief interview that was to follow. The lights were meticulously adjusted and the chairs and microphone precisely placed. Finally we went on the air. I thought to myself afterward that a lot of work went into setting the stage for just a few minutes of conversation. But setting the stage does make a difference in communication whether on television or in our everyday lives.

Many students at Brigham Young University have come to talk to me about marriage. Often they will have something important to say to a spouse and want to discuss with me how to do it. Usually, they want to discuss the content of their message.

But before discussing content, I like to discuss process with my students. For instance, I like to discuss the where and the when of communication as well as the how and the what. In essence, we set the stage for effective communication. And usually we talk about timing and privacy.

Timing. It should be obvious to most couples that certain times are more appropriate than others to discuss important matters. I have found in my own marriage that five minutes before our evening meal is not the most opportune time to discuss my deepest, most sensitive feelings. Susan simply has other things on her mind at that time. And she has found out by now that trying to talk to me about important issues while I am trying to figure out income taxes is somewhat less than futile.

Times of fatigue, hunger, illness, sickness, exams, or other stress are not the best times to discuss important matters. Susan and I have found that some of our best talks have occurred at two or three o'clock in the morning when children are asleep. It is very quiet. And after a few hours of sleep we are rested to the point that we can talk rationally and calmly. Besides, there are no telephone calls, knocks on the door, or any other distractions. It is important to find a time to communicate without interruptions and distractions.

Privacy. On occasion, Susan and I will go to one of our favorite restaurants to discuss an important concern. This is particularly true if we cannot find privacy at home. Not only is the atmosphere of a favorite restaurant conducive to an open exchange of ideas, but a good meal tends to mellow me and, to some degree, Susan as well.

When my students have something important to discuss with a fiancÃ© or spouse, I suggest they drive up the canyon, go to a park, go for a walk, or go anywhere to get away from interruptions and distractions for a few hours. Both timing and privacy seem to be important parts of setting the stage for good communication.

Silence, Consistency, and Respect

In their book A Guide to Successful Marriage, [^4] Albert Ellis and Robert Harper have some suggestions to improve communication between husbands and wives. Here are three of their ideas:

Silence. Someone once noted that "silence is golden," but prolonged silence lasting hours, days, or even weeks tends to be detrimental to marital relationships. Mahatma Gandhi used silence as a means of protest against his enemies, not his loved ones. And I have always maintained that prolonged silence is a high form of communication—it means we can't or won't talk! During times of stress or conflict, a husband and wife should continue to talk about less emotionally charged issues to bridge the emotional gap that comes during the silent treatment. "Please pass the butter" or "Did you pick up the clothes from the cleaners" should not be threatening words. Yet the inability or unwillingness to say even such routine things usually disrupts a marriage.

Consistency. According to Ellis and Harper, communication in marriage often breaks down because husbands and wives believe that everything they and their spouse will do will be logical, consistent, and rational. The fact is, a great deal of what we say, do, and think is often illogical, inconsistent, and irrational.

Why, for instance, will Susan drive our large station wagon several extra miles to a distant grocery store to save three cents on a can of tuna? For the same reason that I will drive the same number of miles to save two cents on a gallon of gas, of course.

Why must the furniture in our house be routinely rearranged or the butter kept on the refrigerator shelf rather than in the cupboard? How can I justify a fishing trip that costs nearly one hundred dollars and come home with a seven-inch trout when trout are on sale at the supermarket?

Harper and Ellis remind us that husbands and wives are not always logical, rational, or consistent, and the degree to which we expect them to be so disrupts communication. They note, "Logic has little, if anything, to do with some of the habits that people develop. Many communication difficulties in marriage can be removed or reduced by helping people to stop looking for logic as the basis for the life-long habits of themselves and their mates." [^5]

Respect as a Person. Most husbands and wives try to communicate with each other in some role he or she is performing. We do not often think of a spouse as a person but as someone who does something—mate, partner, breadwinner, or housekeeper. Harper and Ellis suggest that when spouses are elevated to the status of a respected friend, marital relationships vastly improve. They note, "It is . . . not our words that matter nor the principle of this or that thing, nor what others think of us. . . . The one and paramount thing which really matters is the personality of the mates themselves. Their individual likes and dislikes, preferences and distastes, ideas and attitudes. If each partner in the marriage learns to deal respectfully and lovingly with the you, me, and us of the relationship, meanings will be enjoyable much of the time." [^6]

Patterns of Communication

Dr. Virginia Satir is a well-known marriage counselor and therapist who has written an informative book entitled Peoplemaking. Dr. Satir has conceptualized faulty communication into four distinct patterns: distracting, computing, blaming, and placating.

The distractor often says things that are irrelevant to the conversation and never makes a simple, straightforward response. He or she may ignore what is being said by failing to reply, walking away, changing the subject, or turning to talk to someone else. Distractors often win arguments by simply shifting to a new topic during the exchange or conversation.

The computer is very reasonable, logical, and rational. His or her emotions are completely in control, and the computer's voice is usually a dry monotone lacking animation. Convictions are often expressed in abstract terms with detailed analysis of the situation. Computers usually feel that it is very important to say the right words and to show little or no feelings. He or she often ignores the feelings of the other and does not listen to the meaning behind the words. Discussions are usually reduced to an abstract analysis of words, phrases, or sentences.

The blamer acts like a dictator, boss, or fault-finder. His or her voice is often tight, shrill, or loud. The blamer not only fails to listen but often spends a great deal of time and energy riding roughshod over the other person and his or her feelings. The motto of a blamer is, "The best defense is attack."

The placater is just the opposite of the blamer. He or she tries to please or apologize and never disagrees, no matter how great the provocation. The voice of a placater is often whiny or squeaky. Placaters usually say yes to everything despite their true thoughts and feelings. They seldom achieve anything they want, so there is little possibility of genuine satisfaction through mutual interaction. Failure to achieve such mutual interaction usually lowers the self-esteem of both partners.

Dr. Satir recommends a fifth method of communicating that is open, honest, and direct. It tries to increase, rather than decrease, the self-esteem of those involved. This method is called leveling. Leveling conveys as precisely as possible what a person thinks or feels with no attempt to placate, blame, compute, or distract. A leveler's verbal response is consistent with his or her body language, gestures, and facial expressions. If a leveler says, "I love you," the voice and gesture are warm. If he says, "I am angry with you," both verbal and nonverbal messages are straightforward, unambiguous, and clear.

According to Dr. Satir, leveling is the only kind of communication that makes it possible to live in harmony and mutual self-enhancement in marriage. Leveling heals ruptures, breaks impasses, and builds bridges between the couple. A person who levels allows himself to live as a whole person, in touch with his head, heart, feelings, and body. Dr. Satir notes, "Being a leveler enables you to have integrity, commitment, honesty, intimacy, competence, creativity, and the ability to work with real problems in a real way. The other forms of communication (distracting, computing, blaming, and placating) result in doubtful integrity, . . . dishonesty, loneliness, and shoddy competence." [^7]

When a married couple learns to appropriately level with each other, they are able to function' from a firm base of self-esteem, optimism, and feelings of integrity. This maximizes their chances for contentment, satisfaction, and success in marriage, and for their happiness in other relationships as well.

Feelings and Expectations

Much of what we call communication is actually a simple relaying of information, much like the information given by television newscasters. Usually the information is pertinent, informative, accurate, and necessary. Examples of such information are, "Sally got an A in Algebra"; "Bob got a new job"; "It looks like it is going to storm today"; and "Do you know what is wrong with the vacuum?" We do need to exchange this kind of information. But to deeply understand and be understood, we need eventually to get to feelings and expectations.

Feelings. During the course of each day most of us will ask or be asked more than once, "How are you today?" While this is sometimes a genuine concern of another, we customarily do not give a serious reply. Dr. David Mace, marriage counselor and educator, has noted:

The process of being socialized includes careful training on how to conceal our true inner feelings. Unfortunately, this is poor training for married life. A perceptive psychiatrist once observed that there is little or nothing in our culture that prepares us for the honest accounting that is essential for success in intimate relationships. So, having learned to wear masks all day outside the home, many married couples habitually conceal their real selves from each other, and in consequence never achieve the closeness and trust that are essential for true intimacy. [^8]

So, "How are you feeling?" is a question of paramount importance in marriage. In fact, the quality of the relationship may well be measured by the degree of honesty with which this question is answered. In addition, the degree of caring and compassion with which the response is accepted is also vital.

Dr. Mace suggests a simple exercise to help married couples discuss their feelings. Sit down together with a paper and pencil, and, separately, write down a list of all your present feelings. Most people can easily recognize eight or ten feelings at any given time. Many are surprised at this.

After ten minutes of writing, share with each other the list you have made. Then talk about your lists. What feelings are you reluctant to share with each other? Which are embarrassing to you? Which represent barriers to mutual understanding? This is a good way to more fully understand each other's feelings.

Expectations. All of us come into marriage with a wide array of expectations from a variety of sources. We have expectations of our marriage, our marriage partner, and ourselves. Some of our expectations may be excessive or even unrealistic, but we have them, just the same.

How many times have you caught yourself saying or thinking "I wish my wife or husband would . . . "? Or, have you ever asked yourself during your marriage "I wonder if he or she wants me to . . . ?" Dr. Carlfred Broderick, noted marriage counselor from the University of Southern California, has recently observed, "We can continue for years doing things (or failing to do things) without realizing that they are hurtful to our partners. Often, however, small changes in our behavior—changes that actually cost us very little—can mean a great deal to our marriage partner." [^9]

Dr. Broderick suggests that rather than just wishing and wondering our life away regarding our marital expectations, we can use what he calls "wish lists."

The first step in using a wish list is for both husband and wife to make a short list of wished-for changes in their spouse's behavior. Both partners should write down three or four specific changes that a spouse could accomplish during the next seven days. The expectations must be positive, specific, "small," and done frequently, and they should not be focused on areas of sharp conflict. By learning to meet small expectations, we gain skills and insights to help us meet the larger, more sensitive ones later.

A positive request requires an increase in desired behaviors, not a decrease in unwanted behaviors. "Please ask me how I spent my day" is a positive request that is better understood and received than a negative request such as "Don't ignore me so much." A specific request is one such as "Come home at six o'clock for dinner" rather than the vague "Show more consideration for me and the family." A smaller, more manageable request such as "Help the children keep their bicycles in the proper place in the garage" is much clearer and more easily accomplished than "Do a better job in training the children."

After both wish lists are written and understood, the couple should proceed to the next step, negotiation. In the negotiating phase, a husband and wife simply agree on what they can or will do on each other's list. One partner may be willing to work on just one or two of the other's wishes if he or she will be willing to do just one in return. The negotiating should be done in a playful, competitive, and zestful manner. And the husband and wife may want to do some bargaining. One husband agreed to do everything on his wife's wish list if she would agree to try to accomplish the first item on his. Both were equally happy with the arrangement.

Husbands and wives may also negotiate penalties if either violates their original agreement. Such penalties should be minor and even fun. One wife agreed to bake her husband's favorite pie if she did not follow through. He agreed to buy her a new sweater if he failed to live up to what he said he would do.

After seven days, the wish lists can be continued, renegotiated, or discontinued.

A Concluding Thought

Most husbands and wives do not think of communication as an active, involved process. Most merely think of it as something "we just do." By giving more thought and attention to what they say, or don't say, most couples would likely find their relationship improved. Good communication is based upon attitudes and skills that are consciously learned and practiced over a period of time, much as a couple would construct a bridge. An anonymous poet has left us the following to consider:

Precaution They say a wife and husband, bit by bit Can rear between their lives a mighty wall So thick they cannot speak with ease through it, Nor can they see across, it stands so tall. Its nearness frightens them, but each alone Is powerless to tear its bulk away; And each, heartbroken, wishes he had known For such a wall the magic word to say. So let us build with master art, my dear, A bridge of faith between your life and mine— A bridge of tenderness and very near— A bridge of understanding, strong and fine; Till we have built so many lovely ties, There never will be room for walls to rise. [^10]

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Handle Your Competition Creatively: Competition, like water, left to the uncontrolled floods of [negative] thinking, can drown one's self-esteem. But controlled, . . . competition becomes one of our most dynamic and constructive forces. Focus on yourself, not on others. Compete against yourself and you cannot lose! Repentance. Despair, he noted, often comes because of iniquity (see Moroni 10:22), and wickedness does not result in happiness. (Alma 41:10.) Jesus admonished those laden with despair to come unto him, and he would make their burden light. (Matthew 11:28-30.) Family Weekly, August 1, 1982, p. 18.
[^2] Be Your Own Best Booster: Start being your own best booster by listening seriously to your own bright and big ideas. Give your dreams a boost and you will surprise yourself by making your wonderful, impossible ideas turn a corner and become a possibility. Prayer. Persistent prayer is essential to well-being. "Pray always, that you may come off conqueror." (D&C 10:5.) Improvement Era, July 1968, p. 63.
[^4] Forgive Yourself: Learn to forgive yourself for mistakes you may have made in the past, even if the past is as recent as yesterday. Every day is a new beginning. . . . Instead of being tempted to nurse regrets with the destructive phrase "I wish I had," you will look to the future and say, "Next time I will." Work. Work is a blessing, not our doom. Retirement from work has depressed many a man and hastened his death. We should work at taking care of the spiritual, mental, social, and physical needs of ourselves and those whom we are charged to help. We should not be idle. (See D&C 88:124.) And work, Elder Benson observed, is not just manual labor but includes missionary endeavors, family genealogy, and temple work, as well as magnifying Church assignments. Lloyd Saxton, The Individual, Marriage, and the Family, Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1980, p. 363.
[^5] Accept What Cannot Be Changed: Don't resent the shape of your face or the color of your skin. Don't dislike the sound of your voice or the fact that you are tall or short. Learn to love yourself. Health. We were given the Word of Wisdom (D&C 89) because the condition of the physical body affects the spirit. We should get adequate rest (D&C 88:124) and not work beyond our capabilities (D&C 10:4 Mosiah 4:27). We should be mindful of the kinds and amounts of foods we eat. (D&C 49:18-19; 59:16-20; 89:5-17.) Elder Benson encouraged us to have frequent physical examinations as a safeguard for good health, and to get adequate exercise. (See D&C 89:20.) Wholesome recreation is also part of our religion. (See D&C 136:28.) Ibid.
[^6] Keep on Changing Yourself: Keep improving yourself. Your complex personality is many-faceted and bound to change. And only you have the freedom to choose how it will change. Reading. Reading, and particularly reading the scriptures and words of living and ancient prophets can edify and uplift us. "Reading," Elder Benson noted, ". . . can give direction and comfort in an hour when one is down." Satir, Peoplemaking, pp. 27-29.
[^7] Commit Yourself to a Great Cause: Connect and commit yourself to a cause that, in time, in scope, and in value, transcends your own personal life. Blessings. In many instances it is particularly helpful to seek a blessing under the hands of a priesthood holder. Even the Prophet Joseph Smith once sought and received a blessing of solace from his close friend and counselor, Brigham Young. Fathers should watch for the opportunity to give such blessings to wives and children. In addition, reading one's patriarchal blessing during discouraging times can often provide encouragement and direction. Ibid.
[^8] Believe You Can Succeed: Nothing builds self-esteem faster than success—nothing deflates self-esteem faster than failure. Fasting. Periodic fasting can help clear the mind and strengthen both the body and spirit. And to make fasting more fruitful, Elder Benson suggests that it be coupled with prayer, meditation, minimal physical labor, and reading and pondering the scriptures. Robert H. Schuller, Possibility Thinking, series of audiotapes produced by Nightingale Conant Corp., 3730 West, Devon Avenue, Chicago, Illinois, 60656. Cassette tape number 7, "Self-Esteem."
[^9] Dare to Love Yourself: The truly self-loving person is inwardly secure and so self-assured that he or she is naturally, truly, and sincerely humble. This explains why truly great people are very relaxed and relaxing persons. They put on no airs. They don't need to impress people with their importance. What, after all, is humility? It is not thinking less of oneself; it is thinking more of others. Friends. True friends can be particularly helpful by listening to your concerns, sharing your joys and sorrows, and, when appropriate, giving counsel. Joseph Smith noted, "How sweet the voice of a friend is; one token of friendship from any source whatever awakens and calls into action every sympathetic feeling." [^11] Carlfred Broderick, Marriage and the Family, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1979, p. 80.
[^10] Constantly Strive to Excel: Excellence works wonders in strengthening self-esteem. Failure breeds despair. Music. Inspiring music may fill the soul with heavenly thoughts, move one to righteous actions, or speak peace to the soul. Memorizing or singing the hymns of Zion can crowd out debilitation, evil, or depressive thoughts. Ensign, January 1974, pp. 2-6.
