Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

Self-Esteem

It probably is not surprising to many women that most husbands want a wife who thinks well of herself and exhibits a certain amount of confidence and self-acceptance. We simply might say that husbands want a wife with high self-esteem. And yet, this may be easier stated than achieved. A recent poll indicated that 37 percent of Americans have high self-esteem, 33 percent have average self-esteem, and 30 percent have low self-esteem. Also of interest was the fact that those with feelings of low self-worth reported more symptoms of stress and poor health. [^1]

The importance of self-esteem for both husbands and wives was also illustrated in a letter I recently received. It read:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

Our marriage has not been ideal. Many times commitment was the only thing that kept us together. I really think that our most crippling problem through all the years of our marriage has been lack of self-esteem with both my husband and myself. And we have apparently passed low esteem on to our children.

Lately we began to read about the importance of self-esteem and during the past year took a community education course on the topic.

Realizing that low self-esteem was at the base of most of our problems, the things we learned proved to be very helpful to us. We were both raised in families where duty and performance were more important than being valued as a person. And we now have a difficult time doing things just for pure enjoyment without feeling guilty.

The more I like myself, the more I love my husband and can accept his weaknesses. I just wish I had learned this earlier in our marriage.

When self-esteem is low, not only does the person suffer, as indicated in the letter, but those around him or her usually suffer as well. Elder Neal A. Maxwell probably summed it up best in ten simple words: 'If I am not happy with me, other people suffer." [^2] And when wives and mothers are unhappy with themselves, it usually means that their husbands and children will experience the consequences right along with them.

Because of the mother's monumental influence on the home and family, she is the one who can least afford to suffer from low self-esteem. Her influence on her husband and children has not only mortal but eternal consequences.

If low esteem turns to hostility, things become even worse. Albert Ellis, noted psychologist, has observed, "We get angry with others in direct proportion that we are angry with ourselves." [^3] This statement may give some insight as to why so many husbands and wives get so easily irritated with others so frequently. In reality, they may be angry at themselves, venting and directing the hostility toward other family members.

Self-Esteem and Communication

It is more than just coincidence that this chapter on self-esteem follows the one on communication. In his book The Individual, Marriage, and the Family, Lloyd Saxton notes that effective communication is closely related to self-esteem: "Communication that is disruptive, belittling, or argumentative tends to lower the self-esteem of the other person, whereas communication that is open, honest, clear, and nondefensive tends to enhance the self-esteem of others." [^4]

Enhancing self-esteem, therefore, is a key factor in achieving marital satisfaction and interaction.

Saxton further comments:

A person who has positive feelings of self-esteem is characterized by integrity, responsibility, and the ability to express affection and love. Acting from a firm base of appreciating his or her own worth, such a person is able to appreciate the worth of others. A person characterized by positive feelings of self-esteem attacks problems realistically, thus maximizing the possibility for resolving them. This leads to a relatively great number of success experiences, so that the person with high self-esteem is characteristically optimistic and cheerful, expecting things to go well. When things do not go well, the problems are assumed to be temporary difficulties that will yield to sustained effort. Maintaining a high level of self-esteem is facilitated by receiving recognition and praise from others whose opinions we respect.

In contrast with a person who has high self-esteem, someone who characteristically feels a relatively low level of self-esteem is not surprised by persistent failure and, indeed, may expect it. Each failure confirms this expectation. The person with low self-esteem who anticipates failure rarely puts forth his or her best efforts, but erects protective walls of isolation and distrust that provide protection from expected slights, depreciation, and attacks—withdrawing into apathy and loneliness. [^5]

A Declaration of Self-Esteem

In her book Peoplemaking, Dr. Virginia Satir talks about the importance of self-esteem and notes that if we don't have it, we can get it. The most important message in her book is that one's life can change because he can always learn new things. She states that people can and do change because they are living beings. As we grow older, change may take longer, but it can and does occur, just the same. Satir observes, "Knowing that change is possible, and wanting to do it, are two first big steps. We may be slow learners, but we are all educable." [^6] Dr. Satir then concludes with what she calls "My Declaration of Self-Esteem":

I am me.

In all the world, there is no one else exactly like me. There are persons who have some parts like me, but no one adds up exactly like me. Therefore, everything that comes out of me is authentically mine because I alone chose it.

I own everything about me—my body, including everything it does; my mind, including all its thoughts and ideas; my eyes, including the images of all they behold; my feelings, whatever they may be—anger, joy, frustration, love, disappointment, excitement; my mouth, and all the words that come out of it, polite, sweet, or rough, correct or incorrect; my voice, loud or soft; and all my actions, whether they be to others or to myself.

I own my fantasies, my dreams, my hopes, my fears.

I own all my triumphs and successes, all my failures and mistakes.

Because I own all of me, I can become intimately acquainted with me. By so doing I can love me and be friendly with me in all my parts. I can then make it possible for all of me to work in my best interests.

I know there are aspects about myself that puzzle me, and other aspects that I do not know. But as long as I am friendly and loving to myself, I can courageously and hopefully look for the solutions to the puzzle and for ways to find out more about me.

However I took and sound, whatever I say and do, and whatever I think and feel at a given moment in time is me. This is authentic and represents where I am at that moment in time.

When I review later how I looked and sounded, what I said and did, and how I thought and felt, some parts may turn out to be unfitting. I can discard that which is unfitting, and keep that which proved fitting, and invent something new for that which I discarded.

I can see, hear, feel, think, say, and do. I have the tools to survive, to be close to others, to be productive, and to make sense and order out of the world of people and things outside of me.

I own me, and therefore I can engineer me.

I am me and I am okay. [^7]

Eleven Ways to Build Self-Esteem

Dr. Robert H. Schuller, religious leader and lecturer, has also commented on the importance of high self-esteem. [^8] He notes:

It would be hard for me to overstress the importance of self-esteem. As strong and happy self-esteem grows, our work gets better, our personal relationships improve, we feel more cheerful, healthier—everything takes on a new and friendlier face.

The person with self-esteem develops and expresses a very healthy self-confidence. Lack of self-confidence is one of the major roadblocks to peace of mind, happiness and success in life. Self-confidence is your belief in your own ability to come to grips with problems and solve them; to know that you can and will succeed at worthy casks. Self-confidence equips you emotionally to meet life's challenges with equanimity and self-reliance.

The self-confident person, in turn, dares to be honest and open. He accepts himself as a unique individual. He reflects a basic integrity of character. He becomes genuinely and infectiously enthusiastic.

Here are eleven ways, according to Dr. Schuller, to improve self-esteem:

Having achieved a strong self-esteem, you will find yourself released from an incredible collection of negative tensions. With a stronger and more positive self-esteem, you will be able—better than ever before—to replace inner stress and strain with inner peace, love, power, and creativity.

Building Self-Esteem in Ourselves and Others

There is growing evidence that we are able to love others only when we love ourselves. And in order to improve relationships, one could first develop his or her own self-esteem.

But there is another way to improve relationships and increase self-esteem at the same time, and that is to build self-esteem in ourselves by building the self-esteem in others. Let me illustrate.

Each semester at Brigham Young University I teach a course on preparation for marriage. One of our lessons is on self-esteem. I give the students an assignment called "Building Esteem in Others." [^9] I highly recommend this exercise to husbands and wives.

The students choose a friend, a roommate, fiancÃ©, spouse (if they are married), or family member. For seven days they are to practice building the esteem of that person without the person's knowing about it. My students are encouraged to withhold criticism, complaints, interruptions, corrections, or directions for one week. They are to express genuine appreciation often and also touch the person in nondemanding and unobtrusive ways at least once each time they are together. They are also to choose three or four things the person would probably like done during the week and then do them.

At the conclusion of the seven days my students report on their experiences. Invariably, the students report that when they help and assist others, their own self-esteem increases.

What we have learned is the scriptural concept of finding oneself by losing oneself in the service of others. (See Matthew 16:25; Mark 8:35; Luke 9:24.)

LDS Insights on Self-Esteem

It is impressive to me that our Church leaders have been aware of the importance of self-respect and self-esteem for some time. President Harold B. Lee spoke on self-respect in the October 1973 general conference. [^10] This address is well worth reading. In the October 1974 general conference, President Ezra Taft Benson gave a talk entitled "Do Not Despair." He noted:

We live in an age when, as the Lord foretold, men's hearts are failing them, not only physically but in spirit. (See D&C 45:26.) Many are giving up heart for the battle of life. Suicide ranks as a major cause of the deaths to college students. As the showdown between good and evil approaches with its accompanying trials and tribulations, Satan is increasingly striving to overcome the Saints with despair, discouragement, despondency, and depression.

Yet, of all people, we as Latter-day Saints should be the most optimistic and the least pessimistic. . . . To help us from being overcome by the devil's designs of despair, discouragement, depression, and despondency, the Lord has provided at least a dozen ways which, if followed, will lift our spirits and send us on our way rejoicing.

I would recommend that you read his entire address, which was printed in the November 1974 Ensign on pages 65-67. But in summary, Elder Benson recommended the following:

In conclusion, Elder Benson noted that there is no problem we confront that cannot be withstood with the aid of the Lord. (See I Corinthians 10:13.) We can rise above the enemies of despair, depression, discouragement, and despondency by remembering that God provides righteous alternatives.

Self-Esteem Is Vitally Important

In 1979 1 was one of six on a curriculum writing committee for the Church. We were asked to write something to prepare single Latter-day Saints for marriage in the temple. We eventually wrote Foundations for Temple Marriage, a Sunday School manual with twelve lessons, which is now in use. The first lesson we wrote was on self-esteem, and we included the following quotation by Elder Hartman Rector, Jr.:

Self-esteem is vitally important to successful performance. Self-esteem is different than conceit—conceit is the weirdest disease in the world. It makes everyone sick except the one who has it. It is immensely important that you only feel good about yourself. I am sure that you can only feel good about yourself if you are on the way to reaching your potential. I am positive also that no one can be emotionally or physically healthy unless he is keeping the commandments and rendering unto God the things that are God's. I did not say that this obedience would also make you satisfied with your every performance—I seldom am; I'm sure I can improve my performance in the job. But when I'm on the Lord's side, keeping the basic commandments, I feel good about me, I esteem myself as a worthy child of God, and I find I am very positive. [^13]

A Unique Teaching Experience

While writing this book I had an unusual experience with the concept of self-esteem. I had been asked to teach the Gospel Doctrine class in our ward, and the subject matter was from the Old Testament. I hesitated when accepting the assignment because I didn't then know much about the Old Testament. I accepted and struggled each week to teach the concepts and doctrines in a way that gave relevancy to modern living, something I have committed myself to doing in my role as college professor as well as Sunday School teacher.

One particular Sunday the lesson was on Jeremiah, and I thought all during the previous week (as I usually did) about the lesson. Finally, on Sunday morning at 3:00 A.M. I arose and once more read the assigned reading material. I was particularly impressed with Jeremiah's call to be a prophet. He was to do it without the support of a wife and children. In addition, his immediate family turned against him during his prophetic ministry. He was truly alone.

When he was called, he told the Lord of his unworthiness and supposed inability to accept the call. (Jeremiah 1:6-9.) One might say at that point he had low self-esteem.

To counteract Jeremiah's lack of confidence, the Lord told him something rather remarkable. It was, in essence, "Before thou wast born, I knew thee. " (See Jeremiah 1:5.) Jeremiah had a premortal identity and association with the Lord. And the Lord was simply reminding Jeremiah of this at the time of his call.

At that early Sunday morning hour, it occurred to me that the Lord knew not only Jeremiah before he was born, but each of us who came to mortality. He knew us personally, as he knew Jeremiah, as his own son or daughter. And I decided that would be my message in Sunday School later that morning.

By my side at that early hour was a book by Truman G. Madsen, The Highest in Us. In this book Dr. Madsen relates a fascinating story I later told to my Sunday School class. The story is by James Hilton and was taken from his book Random Harvest.

This story is about a wealthy Englishman, Sir Charles Rainier, who goes to war and is shell-shocked in the midst of a battle. His memory is blotted out—he can't even recall his name. He is returned to England and committed to an asylum, where he and others hope he will eventually remember who he is.

One day Sir Charles walks away from the asylum and meets an English girl in a nearby shop. The beautiful young woman, Paula, recognizes him as a man from the asylum who has forgotten his identity. To make a short story even shorter, they become fond of each other and eventually marry.

Sir Charles returns to Liverpool and is struck by a taxi. The memory of his former identity returns, but he loses his memory from the moment of the shell shock. He no longer remembers Paula or any of the subsequent events. He later returns to the home he had before the war, becomes successful in business, and runs for Parliament.

Paula eventually learns of Sir Charles's circumstances and travels to Liverpool. She is hired to be his secretary. He often wonders where he has seen Paula before and later marries her for the second time. Now Sir Charles has two identities while being married to the same woman, but Paula never reveals his second identity.

A few years later, Sir Charles returns to Melbridge, the same community where he spent time in the asylum after the war. Knowing he is going to be there, Paula secretly arranges to arrive in Melbridge at the same time. Sir Charles walks by the asylum, and memories begin to return. He remembers the gates and the little shop where he met Paula. He eventually walks by the cottage where he and Paula used to live. The surroundings are familiar. He opens the door and looks around. It all starts to return.

By this time Paula has come and is standing behind him. She wants to call to him but doesn't know whether to address him as Charles or as Smithy, the name he had when they were first married. He turns around and looks at Paula. She pauses, takes the risk, and says "Smithy!"

For a moment he is confused, but as she breaks into tears his whole past returns. They rush to embrace, and that's the end of the story. It is also the beginning.

Dr. Madsen comments:

We, too, are wealthy and titled "Englishmen." We once dwelt in the scintillating presence of the Eternal Father. . . . Like Sir Charles Rainier in the story, we were sent into the mortal world clear in the vision of how high were the stakes. There is real evidence that some shrank from that momentous decision. And we, too, have been shell-shocked.

We do not know our own name, rank, and serial number. Even the memory of a perfect language, with its grace and ease and instant communicative power is gone. Here, (mortality) we do indeed stammer and stutter in speech as in conduct, groping our way to self-understanding and feeling at times, even in the midst of helpful people, "strangers and foreigners." We yearn to belong. Only when we are touched by the Spirit do we overcome, for a fleeting time, our memory imprisonment. Then, as Joseph F. Smith puts it, "we are lighted up with the glory of our former home."

My testimony to you is that you have come literally "trailing clouds of glory." No amount of mortal abuse can quench the divine spark. If you only knew who you are and what you did and how you earned the privileges of mortality, and not just mortality but of this time, this place, this dispensation, and the associates that have been meant to cross and intertwine with your lives; if you knew now the vision you had then of what this trial, this probation (what in my bitter moments I call this spook alley) of mortality could produce, would produce; if you knew the latent infinite power that is locked up and hidden for your own good now—if you knew these things you would never again yield to any of the putdowns that are a dime a dozen in our culture today. Everywhere pessimism, everywhere suspicion, everywhere the denial of the worth and dignity of man. [^14]

In my class that morning we reviewed Jeremiah 1:5 and discussed how the Lord knew him, and us, before our mortal birth. I related the story of Sir Charles Rainier. We discussed the fourteenth chapter of John which tells of "another comforter" the Holy Ghost, who will "bring all things to [our] remembrance" (John 14:26), including our premortal, spiritual identity.

I then asked Sister Eva Anderson, who has one of the most clear and impressive singing voices I have ever heard, if she would be willing to sing "O My Father." I told the class that they had all heard or sung the hymn numerous times before, but that I wanted them to hear it again after what we had discussed that morning. I wish I could describe the feeling we had as she sang that beautiful hymn that day. And there were few dry eyes, including my own, when she concluded singing.

We then had a closing prayer and dismissed the class. This was, indeed, a unique learning experience, as much for the teacher as for the class members. For just a few minutes we all had a glimpse of our first estate, of that "more exalted sphere" from which we all have wandered. And who could have low self-esteem with such knowledge!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Homes with young, inexperienced homemakers who consistently compare themselves with older and seemingly better women and mothers. Some young mothers try to live up to the myth of the "perfect mother in Zion," which is how they perceive some other LDS women. Alvin Toffler, Future Shock, New York: Bantam Books, 1971, p. 238.
[^2] Homes with many children and inflexible, autocratic fathers. Christopher Lasch, Haven in a Heartless World: The Family Besieged, New York: Basic Books, p. xiii.
[^3] Homes where husbands always find time for "important" Church meetings but rarely have time to be with their children and wives consistently. James B. Simpson, ed., Contemporary Quotations, New York: Cromwell Co., 1964, p. 238.
[^4] Homes where the homemaker does not know exactly what is expected of her and where communication of family rules is unclear. Salt Lake Tribune, January 31, 1982, p. 10.
[^5] Homes where there is little autonomy for the homemaker and few opportunities for individuality or innovation. Barbara B. Smith, "A Safe Place for Marriage and Families," Ensign, November 1981, p. 84.
[^6] Homes where the homemaker is overly conscientious and has too high an expectation of herself. Deniece Schofield, Confessions of an Organized Housewife, Bountiful, Utah: The Idea Center, 1981, pp. 141-42.
[^7] Homes where the homemaker has not learned to set priorities, let some things go temporarily, or feels guilty when she does set priorities but is unable to attend to all of them equally. Richard L. Evans, "Clean-What a Wonderful Word," Improvement Era, January 1970, p. 32.
[^8] David C. Willis and Harold Fondren, "Burnout in the Home," Journal of the Association of Mormon Counselors and Psychotherapists, April 1982, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 19-20.
[^9] Ibid.
[^10] Ibid.
[^13] This assumes that the wife buys additional clothing and accessories yearly to wear to work beyond what she would purchase if she stayed home.
[^14] This includes the trend for an employed wife to receive a shampoo ($10) three times a month, a cut and style ($20) once a month, and a permanent ($50) four times a year. The wife who is not employed outside the home is assumed to have one shampoo a month, a cut and style four times a year, and a permanent only once a year.
