Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

8

Homemaking

Many husbands who responded to my Deseret News survey indicated that they expected their wives to be adequate mothers. (See chapter 4.) And they also indicated they wanted their wives to be good homemakers. If a mother neglects her home and children, it subsequently affects her marriage. It appears, therefore, that when a woman marries she has three important roles: wife, mother, and homemaker.

Shock Absorber or Shock Producer?

In his book Future Shock, Alvin Toffler comments on the numerous and abrupt changes families may face in the future. In chapter 11, "The Fractured Family," he notes, "The family has been called the 'giant shock absorber' of society-—the place to which the bruised and battered individual returns after doing battle with the world, the one stable point in an increasingly flux-filled environment. As the super-industrial revolution unfolds, this 'shock absorber' will come in for some shocks of its own." [^1]

Toffler then documents what he believes to be some of the major changes in family life in the future. It may be that the family of the future could become a giant shock producer. That is, rather than cushion the harsh reality of life for family members, the family of the future may well produce a major portion of their trauma, physical and emotional. Making or keeping the home a refuge from the world, a giant shock absorber, is what homemaking is all about.

Christopher Lasch, professor of history at the University of Rochester, has noted in his recent book Haven in a Heartless World, "As business, politics, and diplomacy grow more savage and warlike, men seek a haven in private life, in personal relations, above all in the family—the last refuge of love and decency. Domestic life, however, seems increasingly incapable of providing these comforts. Hence the undercurrent of anxiety that runs through the vast growing body of commentary on the state of the family. Does the family still provide a haven in a heartless world? Or do the very storms out of which the need for such a haven arises threaten to engulf the family as well?" [^2]

While both husbands and wives share an equal responsibility in providing this haven for themselves and their children, it seems obvious that the wife and mother has the major responsibility for maintaining stability.

Food Preparation

Perhaps we have not come very far from the days when men hunted and killed the food and women prepared it for consumption. But it is obvious that many women are going to work to help purchase food and other necessities of life. It is also evident that most husbands still expect their wives to prepare and serve the meals. While husbands, on occasion, may warm up some hot dogs or fix a few other simple meals, wives likely will prepare and serve 90 percent of the meals in most homes. And a wife who cannot or will not prepare nutritious meals on a regular basis will harm her family and ultimately her marriage in several ways.

One young man who was about to marry wrote:

Dear Dr. Barlow:

How important is it for a young woman to know how to cook before she gets married? I am engaged and plan to marry in December. Our only major problem is that my fiancÃ© hasn't had much experience cooking but thinks it won't matter. She says we can eat out a lot and buy food that she will just have to warm and serve. Is this realistic for newlyweds?

I responded:

It is important for all married couples to dine out periodically just to be alone and give the wife a rest. And buying precooked foods can be advantageous once in a while. But a steady diet of it can get monotonous. Preprocessed foods also cost much more than food you buy and prepare yourself.

I have always maintained that every couple needs at least three books when they get married: a finance book, a sex book, and a cook book. It seems to me your future bride is desperately in need of the latter.

Married couples must establish many daily routines, including cooking, eating, and cleaning up. Most couples eat over one thousand meals a year together, and I can think of few things that would take the zip out of marriage more than sitting down together to one thousand ill-prepared, unappetizing meals each year.

Sooner or later, I think your wife will have to or want to get involved in food purchasing and preparation. Some would like to ignore the importance of such realities as cooking, but it is impossible to do so.

Home Maintenance

Jerome Chodorov gave this advice to contemporary wives: "I'll tell you the real secret of how to stay married. Keep the cave clean. They [husbands] want the cave clean and spotless. Air-conditioned, if possible. Sharpen his spear, and stick it in his hand when he goes out in the morning to spear the bear. And when the bear chases him, console him when he comes home at night. Tell him what a big brave man he is. And then hide the spear so he doesn't fall over it and stab himself." [^3] Such are the secrets of life.

Psychologists are beginning to understand how structure, order, space, color, and texture affect our lives for better or for worse. This is particularly true of our homes. In fact, Winston Churchill once noted, "We shape our buildings and afterward our buildings shape us."

In his article "Housing Affects Family," Dr. Jay Schvaneveldt, Professor of Family and Human Development at Utah State University noted, "The sociological importance and value of the family may be definitely enhanced or injured by the type of dwelling." Dr. Schvaneveldt then noted the extensive research that affirms that the type of house a family lives in greatly influences the general character and attitudes of the inhabitants.

He continued:

It is well accepted that people design homes to project their feelings and lifestyles, but less common and less understood is that homes design people. Our research shows that if you are really interested in how people live and relate with one another, study them in their homes. It is in the home that people love, fight, and socialize with each other. The home is a sanctuary for reprieve or a prison of hostility. People feel that the real "me" can function in the home. They do not have to be on stage, perform or present a certain self in their home. The house serves as a depository for family themes. History, ritual and the on-going activity of multiple family members. Hobbies and creations most often occur in the home. Historically, the home also served as a center for the critical life events—birth, illness and death.

Light, space, windows and a home in good repair are significantly related to happiness and good family life. Crowding is related to poor mental health, poor child care, poor physical health and personal stress due to a lack of privacy. [^4]

It is always amazing to me what a coat of paint will do not only to a room but to the attitudes of those who live in it. I don't know if it is the smell of fresh paint, the cleanliness of the new walls, or the actual color that gives such good feelings, but a good paint brush and gallon of paint can do a great deal for both rooms and marriages.

Not all wives need to be experts in interior decorating. But perhaps we have not given enough attention to how the physical structure, arrangement of space, lighting, and colors of our homes affect our lives. And perhaps we have not investigated how we could better use these dimensions of our homes to make them more attractive and liveable.

It also became apparent, as I read the many questionnaires that husbands returned to me, that one common expectation was that a wife be able to manage and run an orderly home. This does not necessarily imply that a wife has to do it alone. But the simple truth is that a poorly managed home affects not only husbands, but wives and children as well.

Relief Society president Barbara Smith has noted, "An orderly home is conducive to happiness. But the achievement and maintenance of order, while it is the primary responsibility of the mother, should be the concern of the whole family. And when a mother is required to work outside the home, the cooperation of the family, of the whole household, is often critical." [^5]

Whenever I discuss the importance of an orderly home in my marriage seminars, some of the wives become a little defensive. They remind me that orderly and clean are relative terms and that one could devote his or her entire day to making a house clean and orderly and still not have it acceptable to others. And I know what they mean. Susan works hard at keeping our home orderly, and yet our six children can come home and in minutes make our home look as if it had had little attention. In our home we have learned to distinguish between clutter and dirt. A house can often become cluttered, as anyone with small children knows. But at the same time it can still be clean.

On the other hand, some wives spend too much time on the orderliness of the home and ignore other important needs. One of our friends is very concerned about her kitchen and will not let anyone see any dirty dish on the table or sink. When she has dirtied a dish she cleans it and puts it back on the shelf. (She also will not let anyone see her during the day without her hair immaculately combed.)

On a similar note, one husband conveyed to me his concern about his wife's well-meaning attempts to keep the house orderly and clean. He simply said that having a perfectly clean house did not matter that much to him, and he wished she would spend more time doing things for herself rather than trying to have a spotless home at all times for her family.

When I was attending Florida State University and working on my doctoral degree, I took a course on families in the United States. Each student had to select a particular group or family type and write a research paper on it. I chose the Shakers, a name given to the United Society of Believers in Christ's Second Appearing, also called the Millennial Church. I learned that the Shakers (there are fewer than a dozen members left) are known for many things, one of which is their orderliness. Their motto is, "A place for everything and everything in its place." This motto could well be adopted by Latter-day Saints, and I have been impressed that orderliness and cleanliness are frequently mentioned in Latter-day Saint scripture. In fact, the Book of Mormon notes that a lack of order is one trait of depravity. (Moroni 9:18.) Elsewhere in the Book of Mormon, King Benjamin admonishes, "All things must be done in order." (Mosiah 4:27.) In the Doctrine and Covenants we read, "Organize yourselves; prepare every needful thing; and establish a house, even a house of prayer, a house of fasting, a house of faith, a house of learning, a house of glory, a house of order, a house of God." (D&C 88:119.) The Lord also counseled, "Set in order your houses; keep slothfulness and uncleanness far from you." (D&C 90:18.)

So how do you keep a home in order? Susan has found one book on this topic to be extremely helpful. It is entitled Confessions of an Organized Housewife. The author, Deniece Schofield, observes:

In my role as a homemaker, my main goal is to provide for my family a tidy, comfortable home. I want to make home a place where we all want to be. Confusion and disorder drive people away. Everyone wants to be surrounded by a peaceful atmosphere. . . . Children, as well as adults, feel more secure in a home that is consistent and orderly. They know what to expect and what is expected. How can we teach our children responsibility if we fail to be responsible in our homemaking roles?

The only way to achieve this goal [of peaceful surroundings] is through organization! Yes, there will be times when things are a mess, but when the underlying things are in order, the surface messes are easy to clean up. When everything has a well-defined place, it doesn't take long to put things back where they belong. So, you see, the chaos will never last for long and I can quickly return my family and myself to peaceful surroundings. [^6]

It may also be that the degree of spirituality in a home is directly related to the cleanliness of the surroundings. (See chapter 2.) The Lord has admonished us to "cease to be unclean." (D&C 88:124.) And we are told that the Lord's presence and glory will not come into unclean surroundings. (D&C 94:9; 97:15.) Uncleanliness may include more than sin. It may also have something to do with the surroundings in which we live. This may be one reason our temples are kept so clean, both inside and out, and why those who enter are required to maintain certain dress and grooming standards.

Elder Richard L. Evans has noted:

There is a word that has within it some wonderful possibilities for personal peace, for safety, for self-respect, and the word is called "clean." Clean hands, clean hearts, clean homes; clean water, clean air, clean clothes—clean minds, clean morals—what a wonderful word! The mind so often follows environment—and the cycle reverses itself, as the environment follows the mind. We can have a hopeful outlook in almost anything, if we commit ourselves to cleanliness. . . . That "cleanliness is next to godliness" is not just an old adage but a real fact to face: cleanliness of thought, of person, of dress, of speech. There is not only "the strength of being clean," but peace and safety and self-respect. . . . God help us to commit ourselves to cleanliness. [^7] (Italics added.)

When Mothers Work Too Much

It is my firm contention that the vast majority of Latter-day Saint women are very conscientious about their responsibilities as homemakers and mothers. In many cases they may be too conscientious. In fact, this may be why some women become discouraged and experience what has recently been identified as "homemaker burnout."

There has been much talk recently about burnout in many professions. This phenomenon has been described as a debilitating psychological condition affecting individuals who work in high stress situations for prolonged periods of time. It has only been during the past year or so that we have begun to give much attention to burnout in the home.

David Willis and Harold Fondren, both counselors in the LDS Social Services, have written an article entitled "Burnout in the Home," [^8] in which they note that burnout can often be misdiagnosed as depression and suggest that symptoms of homemaker burnout include irritability, exhaustion, desperate measures to deal with routine problems, impatience, distrust, resignation, withdrawal, apathy, negativism, lack of attentiveness, cynicism, decreased energy and motivation, and an increased emotional distance from husband and children.

According to Willis and Fondren, homemaker burnout has been found to be particularly high in the following kinds of homes:

David Willis and Harold Fondren note:

It is our feeling that examples of low resource allocation for support of the homemaker are found in most homes where burnout has occurred. This may be evidenced by the husband coming home from work, and rather than relieving his wife, saying he needs to rest. So he reads the paper, eats dinner, has a five-minute interview with the kids, goes to his ward basketball game, then attends his leadership meeting. He returns home refreshed and invigorated but returns home to and is confused by an angry wife—a wife who has probably been taught to sublimate her needs to that of her husband and children, and is angry because of these feelings of anger directed towards her husband, especially since he is a "nice" man and faithful in the Church. [^9]

The authors suggest that Latter-day Saints could do more to support homemakers in addition to the traditional flower on Mother's Day. Each stake might do more to encourage women's sports by providing the facilities and also the encouragement to participate. Latter-day Saints might sponsor mother-daughter outings, mother overnight campouts, and women's conferences. We do these things for husbands and fathers, so why not for wives and mothers? More might also be done to help husbands realize that parenthood for Latter-day Saints is a responsibility that should be equally shared rather than implying that mothers have the total or near-total responsibility for rearing the children.

Willis and Fondren state in conclusion:

Our recommendations are based upon this supposition: To meet the needs of her children, a mother's needs must be met, and therefore the mother's needs must be met basically by the husband.

It is our contention that while some women may exhibit characteristics of rebellion or lack of respect to their husband or priesthood leader, most of these are probably reactions to a lack of being listened to, understood, and/or appreciated by the husband or priesthood leader. Most women would follow a husband or priesthood leader who (1) understood and listened to her, (2) understood her needs, (3) showed and expressed consistent appreciation, and (4) allocated more resources to support her in her role as a homemaker. [^10]

Working outside the Home

If a Latter-day Saint homemaker decides to seek outside employment, there are several things she should consider.

In our Church, much, if not all of the deliberations about working mothers has focused on the impact it may have on the children. And this is a crucial concern. In her book The Two-Paycheck Marriage, Caroline Bird has written an in-depth report of how women at work are changing life in America.

She documents in her first chapter, "The Exodus to Work," that about 60 percent of married women now are employed outside the home, either part or full time, and appear to want to stay in the labor force. It is not just a temporary trend. In addition, it is projected that by the year 1990 at least 70 percent of married women will be employed. As was found in the General Mills Study of 1981, most wives go to work for economic reasons, but once there, they stay not only for economic reasons but because of the satisfaction often derived from rewarding labor. Latter-day Saints cannot ignore these trends.

But neither can Latter-day Saints ignore findings of Caroline Bird and others about the adjustments required in a marriage and family for a wife to work outside the home. She documents from her research that work does, in fact, affect wives in several areas that should be considered by LDS couples. Bird notes that working wives usually have (1) greater fatigue, (2) less leisure time, (3) power struggles in decision-making, (4) lower standards of household care and maintenance, (5) sexual adjustments in marriage (which incidentally were noted to improve for wives but become worse for husbands), and (6) an effect on children.

On this latter matter, Bird suggests that one might pick his bias and then quote the appropriate research to support that bias. The facts appear to be that (1) some children are definitely harmed by inattentiveness of absent mothers, particularly those who are employed outside the home; (2) some children are affected little, either negatively or positively, by a mother's work outside the home, and (3) some children are positively affected by mothers who work outside the home. Most research falls somewhere in these three categories with much depending on the age of the child, the presence of the father in the absence of the mother, the quality of supervision provided in the mother's absence, the woman's own skills at being a mother (children with inept mothers are often greatly aided by having interaction with more skilled adults), the degree of satisfaction the wife receives from her work, and the feeling the mother has toward herself, her work, her children, and her husband. What effect working has on specific LDS marriages and families depends on these and several other variables.

One of the most relevant findings of Caroline Bird is the enormous amount of time it takes a wife and mother just to operate and maintain a home. She notes:

It takes a woman more hours a week to run the home than her husband puts in on the average job. This is not an empty boast. Syracuse housewives were averaging 57 hours a week on "purposeful activity performed for providing the goods and services used by the family." The average was 55 hours for a national sample of full-time homemakers who kept time diaries of what they did every 15 minutes in 1966 for the Survey Research Center of the University of Michigan. Updates on these basic studies don't change the surprising conclusion that full-time homemakers spend just as many hours on their homes and families as they did in the 1920's. [^11] (Italics added.)

So, when a wife and mother goes to work full time, she adds a forty-hour work week (minimum) to the fifty-five to fifty-seven-hour one she already has at home. Even by working half time, she works a minimum of seventy-five hours a week rather than the typical fifty-five to fifty-seven hours.

But, one assumes, when wives go to work, husbands jump right in, come to their rescue, and do much if not most of the housework in her absence. Not so, according to research! In my book What Wives Expect of Husbands, I noted that many wives want help. And perhaps this is because so many wives are employed outside the home. But husbands do little to help wives in the home whether wives are employed or not. That is the bad news. The good news, however, is that a quiet social revolution is occurring in the United States. Husbands, particularly young ones, are starting to help more around the home.

When a woman adds twenty to forty hours of work outside the home to the fifty-five to fifty-seven she spends maintaining the home, it is little wonder, as Caroline Bird notes in The Two-Paycheck Marriage, that working women experience a significant increase in fatigue, a significant decrease in her own leisure time, and a lower standard of household care and maintenance. She simply has neither the time nor the energy to keep things as they were. These are all important factors to consider.

Dr. Jerry Mason, family finance expert and member of the Family Sciences Department at Brigham Young University (and my next-door office neighbor) raises another matter for Latter-day Saint wives and mothers to consider before they seek and accept employment outside the home. He notes:

Research indicates that married women seek paid employment outside the home largely because of financial reasons to help support their families. Many families, however, fail to calculate the actual number of net dollars she contributes to the family after subtracting fixed and variable expenses from her salary.

The hypothetical case of an LDS couple listed below illustrates the expenditures a second member of the family could reasonably expect to incur at the present time (1982) if the husband or primary breadwinner is already employed.

Case Study

Suppose an LDS husband earns $20,000 annually and his wife has recently been offered a job for a full-time position that pays $10,000 a year. Two of their three children attend elementary school and the third one would require full-time child care in order for the mother to work. Consider the following:

Salary Offer: $10,000 Expenditures: Federal Income Taxes [^12] $1,400 State Income Taxes 360 Social Security Taxes 670 Tithing 1,000 Child Care (net of tax credit) 2,800 Clothing [^13] 600 Personal Care [^14] 450 Food [^15] 600 Transportation [^16] 500 Total Expenditures: 8,380 Discretionary Income: $1,620

According to Dr. Mason, data for a "typical" family does not perfectly fit most families. [^17] If the husband's salary is significantly above $20,000, the wife's financial contribution will probably be minimal. However, if the husband's salary is smaller than $20,000, the wife's contribution may be larger. The progressive structure of the federal and state income tax rate schedules explains such differences. When a wife earns less than $10,000, the family will receive little financial support from her unless the husband's salary is low.

The largest expense usually incurred is child care. Wives who must pay for child care for more than one child if they return to paid employment may find that the family is financially worse off than if she had stayed home. In fact, this is the situation for many families even when not paying child care because the family believes that it is financially better off now that the wife is earning a paycheck. Dr. Mason notes that such families often get into financial trouble using credit to buy items on time that they could not previously afford because they actually have erroneously assumed that they have $10,000 to spend when they have less than $2,000. [^18] Since, in many cases, the wife's actual contribution to the family income is insignificant, the budget becomes even less flexible as it stretches to cover these additional installment payments.

Every family is unique. Each one needs to examine the financial impact of a change in the employment role responsibilities of any family member. As the above case study indicates, when an LDS mother has to pay for preschool child care and returns to work, she is not likely to make a significant financial contribution to the family unless her income exceeds $10,000 or her husband's income is considerably below $20,000.

Dr. Mason's observations are noteworthy. He also indicates that the same expenditures and "costs" must also be applied to a man's salary in determining the actual number of net dollars he contributes to the family's financial support. He, too, pays taxes, tithing, and spends money on clothing, personal care, food, and transportation for him to do what he does to be employed. And for women, it is difficult to place a dollar value on satisfaction derived from worthwhile work both in and outside the home.

But the point is well-taken. Before an LDS couple decides it would be financially profitable for a wife to be employed outside the home for economic reasons, they should carefully examine Dr. Mason's insights.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] We can do the wrong thing for the wrong reason. Brothers, What Every Woman Should Know about Men, pp. 221-22.
[^2] We can do the right thing for the wrong reason. Ibid.
[^3] We can do the right thing for the right reason. [^18] Elaine Walster and G. William Walster, A New Look at Love, Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company, 1978, p. 149.
[^4] Saxton, The Individual, Marriage, and the Family, p. 249.
[^5] Provo Daily Herald, February 8, 1982.
[^6] Alexandra Penney, How to Make Love to a Man, New York: Dell Publishing Co., 1981, p. 55.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 54-56.
[^8] David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals, Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953, p. 450.
[^9] Spencer W. Kimball, "Marriage is Honorable," Speeches of the Year, 1973, Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1974, pp. 261-62.
[^10] Sterling W. Sill, "To Die Well," Ensign, November 1976, p. 48.
[^11] Deseret News, July 1, 1982.
[^12] Health and Wealth, Salt Lake City: Deseret Mutual Benefit Association, vol. 1, no. 8, spring 1982, p. 4.
[^13] Tim and Beverly LaHaye, The Act of Marriage: A Christian Guide to Sexual Love, New York: Bantam Books, 1978, pp. 129-30.
[^14] Family Weekly, July 25, 1982, p. 13.
[^15] Jean Mayer, Overweight: Causes, Cost, and Control, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1968, p. 203.
[^16] Journal of Discourses 13:154.
[^17] Journal of Discourses 2:269-70.
[^18] Sterling G. Ellsworth and Richard G. Ellsworth, Getting to Know the Real You, Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1980, pp. 86-88.
