Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

9

Attractiveness

From my Deseret News survey, I found that husbands evidently want an attractive wife, as indicated in the Profile of a Loving Wife (appendix B). However, I also found that most wives were attractive to their husbands. Numerous husbands ranked high the item "She is aware that her appearance and physical fitness affect how I feel about her." And notice that the word "affect" is used rather than "cause." But research and opinion aside, simply ask your husband if your appearance and physical fitness are important. His opinion is the only man's that really matters.

A woman from Salt Lake City wrote not long ago and took me to task for saying in my newspaper column that husbands want or appreciate attractiveness in a wife. For my observation, she called me a male chauvinist you-know-what-oinks. The accusation caused me some thought. Was I really the personification of male chauvinism or did I merely comment on a sensitive area in marriage? Is it solely my biased observation or is it a common expectation of many husbands? After more thought, I still believe that attractiveness is important, in fact, very important, to men in marriage. And apparently so do others.

Noted psychologist Dr. Joyce Brothers, in her book What Every Woman Should Know about Men, notes, "A poll of more than a thousand young men revealed that personality was more mportant to them than beauty. Another group of men reported that the most appealing quality in a woman is her ability to show affection. A survey conducted by an advertising agency found that one out of ten men want a woman who first of all will be a good mother. Seven out of ten said that the ideal woman is intelligent, family-oriented, and self-confident. Beauty was way down on their list of desirable qualities." [^1]

But then Dr. Brothers observes, "No matter what men say for the record, good looks are what they want most in a woman. You have to remember that there is quite often a difference between what people say and what they really think. Men may not think it sounds correct or intelligent or sophisticated to say that beauty is what appeals to them most, so they tell the interviewer that affection or a good personality or an independent spirit is what they are seeking." [^2]

On a similar note, Elaine and G. William Walster observe in their book A New Look at Love, "We've all been told countless times from adolescence onward that looks don't count—it's what's inside that matters. But few of us ever bought that idea completely. Looks shouldn't count, of course, but we all know that they usually do. Social psychologists have accumulated file-drawers full of evidence that good-looking men and women have a big advantage in the marriage market. Beauty does count." [^3]

One study indicated that looks are rated very high by some men. At the College of San Mateo in California, 350 randomly selected men and 350 randomly selected women were asked to write down three qualities they valued most in a date and three qualities they valued most in a marriage partner.

The qualities listed by men as the most valuable in a date were, in rank order: (1) looks, (2) personality, (3) sex appeal, (4) intelligence, and (5) fun, good companionship. The qualities listed by women as the most valued in a man for a date were, in rank order: (1) looks, (2) personality, (3) thoughtfulness, consideration, (4) sense of humor, and (5) honesty.

And what qualities did they desire in a marriage partner? Men wanted (again in rank order): (1) looks, (2) love, (3) compatibility, (4) sex appeal, (5) and personality. Qualities a woman wanted in a husband were (1) love, (2) honesty, (3) compatibility, (4) understanding, and (5) loyalty, faithfulness. [^4]

As you will note, looks or attractiveness was the number one quality a man was seeking in both a date and a wife in this particular study. Was this a biased sample, or were the respondents just a little more honest?

The husbands in my survey indicated that attractiveness is desirable in a marriage partner. So perhaps good looks rank somewhere between "highly important" and "somewhat important" to men.

A Second Opinion

Before you come to the conclusion that I, as a man, am giving too much attention to attractiveness in marriage, you might like a second opinion, this time from a woman. Judith Rasband is a colleague at Brigham Young University who also writes a newspaper column. Recently she wrote the following, which I find intriguing:

Ann Landers isn't the only one who receives letters from disillusioned spouses. In a letter signed "Can't bear to look any longer," a disheartened husband complained to me about the appearance of his wife of eleven years.

He wrote that she wore the same wrinkled, ragged dresses and "grungy" slacks day after day. Her clothes were all several sizes too small due to her nonstop weight gain (which he remembers began the moment they walked away from the altar).

He said he was tired of telling her to "tuck in the tag end of her straps," which periodically protruded from her neckline. "She used to shave her legs," he lamented, "but no more, and now they look so ugly under her nylons that she will only wear pants or long dresses when we are out in public."

His complaints certainly seem to have some merit, and his wife needs to be completely "recycled," as one of my students puts it. Somewhere between the altar and the diaper pail this weary wife has lost sight of the attractive woman she used to be, as well as the sparkle in her eye and her looks.

Perhaps the demands on her time, energy, and money have caused her to give in to a sloppy appearance. And maybe the pressure of her house and children, PTA, church, and the March of Dimes have gotten to be so much that she has just given up. Let's face it, the let-down in personal appearance often starts soon after the ceremony. One young man knew the honeymoon was over when his wife of one week quit curling her hair and wearing her usual makeup along with the perfume he had so often appreciated. She figured she'd won her man, so why bother now?

If you're married you "won" your spouse, in part, because of your appearance and what it said about your personality, your values, hopes and dreams. Dress to win even in your home! Don't continually neglect your appearance or the care you give yourself once the ring is on your finger.

If you don't keep up those important appearances, you take the chance that your partner may become disenchanted, and may even look around for more attractive scenery, making him—or her—a prime target for Cupid's misguided arrows.

Even marriages made in heaven have been known to go sour when one or the other partner lets down on his or her appearance.

If any of this sounds remotely close to home, surprise your special someone with some extra attention to your dress and grooming. Then be sure you follow through long after that. I can almost guarantee the lift it will give you and the heartfelt appreciation and respect that your sweetheart will feel as a result. The compliments will come, and you will know that someone cares. [^5]

The importance of trying to took one's best and to be as attractive as possible was also indicated in a letter I received from a wife. She wrote:

The thing that has kept our marriage vital, better than anything else, happened completely unplanned. I have not always been as careful about my appearance as I should have been. But a few years ago, I decided I would start going to the hair dresser once each week to get my hair done. I did this, and since my hair was now looking so nice, I started putting a little makeup on each morning. It wasn't too long after I started doing this that I noticed my husband, too, was taking more pride in his own appearance—a shower each day and many other things. Our sex life improved, and he expressed his love for me much more often. Our whole marriage just became much more meaningful to both of us.

Some Thoughts on Beauty

Almost everyone today seems to be discontent with some aspect of his or her body. We are either too short or too tall, too thin or too fat. We have too much or too little hair that is too straight, too curly, or too gray. Our eyes are either the wrong color or not in the right position. And our nose is somehow out of proportion. In essence, we do not feel we are among the beautiful people of our country.

But we may also have purchased a bill of goods we neither want or need. Exactly who are the beautiful people, anyway? What are we trying to become?

Usually the supposedly beautiful people portrayed on television, in the movies, or on the covers of magazines are young, extremely beautiful, and very slim. Television advertisements for diet drinks are notorious for depicting such people. Problems frequently arise when we try to be like these beautiful people or want our spouses to be exactly like the ones constantly "packaged" by the mass media.

The reality is that less than 10 percent of the population is actually beautiful by Madison Avenue standards or the standards of television advertisers and fashion magazines. And yet the other 90 percent of us are spending great effort and millions, perhaps billions, of dollars each year to try to be beautiful by these standards.

And the price for many who want such beauty is often extremely high. Many try to be young, beautiful, and slim, but in the process end up being preoccupied, miserable, and usually unbearable to live with. If we do equate beauty with youth, as many do, we fight a losing battle, advertising to the contrary. The reality is that everyone ages.

Throughout history, people have had different opinions about beauty and what it is. Socrates called beauty a short-lived tyranny; Plato, a privilege of nature; Theophrastus, a silent cheat; Theocritus, a delightful prejudice; Aristotle, a better recommendation than all the letters in the world; Homer, a glorious gift of nature; and Ovid, a favor bestowed by the gods.

Ninon de Lenclos noted, "That which is striking and beautiful is not always good; but that which is good is always beautiful." And Cervantes warned, "Beauty in a modest woman is like fire at a distance, or a sharp sword beyond reach. The one does not burn, or the other wound those that come not too near them." Similarly, Zimmerman wrote, "Beauty is often worse than wine, intoxicating both the holder and the beholder."

Many have noted that youthful beauty does not last. Shakespeare wrote, "Beauty is but a vain and doubtful good; a shining glass that fadeth suddenly; a flower that dies when it begins to bud, a doubtful good, a gloss, a glass, a flower, lost, faded, broken, dead within an hour."

"Beauty," said T. Adams, "is like an almanac: if it lasts a year, it is well." And Pope mused, "There should be as little merit in loving a woman for her beauty, as a man for his prosperity, both being equally subject to change."

Becoming Attractive

Relatively few people possess the beauty of a Greek god or goddess. And, as noted, not many of us are beautiful by the standards of Madison Avenue. But everyone is or can be attractive in several ways.

One widely read authority on male-female relationships, Alexandra Penney, has commented:

Very, very, very few people have super bodies and/or flawless faces, and it is important to keep this thought in mind. If you do not, you are likely to fall into some very common traps that you can set for yourself about how you look: the "either I took terrific or I look terrible" trap, the 'he's going to notice my blemishes" trap, and the "constant comparison" trap. There will always be a body or a face better than yours, so if you see yourself in these negative terms, you're inevitably going to assume that there is something not right about you, and you'll constantly feel inadequate and unattractive. [^6]

If a wife does feel unattractive and uncomfortable about her body, it can affect not only her self-esteem, but also her sexual relationship with her husband. Alexandra Penney notes:

It is amazing how many of us don't feel attractive or desirable or comfortable with our bodies. . . . Contrary to what the media says, you do not have to be beautiful or to have a perfect body to be truly sexy. Many of our insecurities and our fears are amplified when we watch TV or go to the movies, or leaf through glossy fashion magazines telling us that people with beautiful faces and beautiful bodies are the ones who are sexy. If you feel that you are sexy, men will feel that you are too. And what does it take to feel sexy? Simply this: the more you are comfortable and at ease with yourself and your body, the more sexy and attractive you will feel. You must feel sexy in order to be sexy. [^7]

For a woman to be attractive to her husband, therefore, may mean that she gives as much attention to her attitudes and feelings as she does to her looks. What most husbands want in a wife, apparently, is someone who has confidence in both him and herself.

I was recently interested in some comments by well-known model Cheryl Tiegs. She confided that there were some things about her looks that she really did not like. But she was aware that her eyes were one of her most attractive features. So she had learned how to enhance her eyes with makeup and somewhat played down the other characteristics she deemed less attractive. Cheryl also stated that every woman has some facial qualities that are particularly appealing, and that each woman should learn to enhance those qualities rather than constantly trying to cosmetically hide her other believed flaws.

While I am not the world's greatest authority on what makes people attractive, I have had considerable experience during the past few years with young men and women on several college campuses who want to be attractive to the opposite sex. It has become evident that many who are actually beautiful by today's standards do not date or are not capable of maintaining a sustained relationship. Looks alone won't do it. On the other hand, many young men and women who are average in looks become extremely attractive in one way or another. One of these ways includes learning to smile. A smile is one of the most appealing attributes a person can have. In addition, they learn to make themselves more attractive by the appropriate use of conversation, listening, touch, makeup, and hair and clothing fashion. One of the most effective things a woman can do to become more attractive is simply to update or change her hairstyle and, to some degree, her wardrobe. Both are good investments. Good personal hygiene and the appropriate use of perfumes and lotions have also proven effective.

At least two Church presidents have commented on the importance of beauty and attractiveness in women. As early as 1953 President David O. McKay noted that beauty comes to women from virtuous living. He then stated, "It is not my purpose to discourage efforts to enhance physical beauty. When given by birth, it should be nurtured in childhood, cherished in girlhood, and protected in womanhood. When not inherited, it should be developed and sought after in every legitimate and healthful manner." [^8]

A few years ago, President Kimball spoke at Brigham Young University and advised young coeds to "do all in their power to make themselves physically attractive in dress and grooming, mentally in being knowledgeable on many subjects, spiritually in being responsive, emotionally in being genuine and worthy." [^9]

President Kimball encouraged young women to make themselves attractive in a variety of ways, one of which was becoming spiritual. Many coeds are still confused by the "sweet spirit" versus the "beautiful tabernacle" controversy at BYU. But many men and women may not realize that spirituality has with it a degree of beauty.

Elder Sterling W. Sill has noted:

We all know the things that we do to make this body a pleasant habitation. We bathe it and keep it clean; we dress it in the most appropriate clothing. Sometimes we ornament it with jewelry. If we're very wealthy we buy necklaces and bracelets and diamond rings and other things to make this body sparkle and shine and make it a pleasant place. Sometimes we work on it a little bit with cosmetics and eyebrow tweezers. Sometimes we don't help it very much, but we keep working at it all the time.

Now if you think it would be pleasant to be dressed in expensive clothing, what do you think it would be like sometime to be dressed in an expensive body—one, that shines like the sun, one that is beautiful beyond all comprehension, with quickened senses, amplified powers of perception, and vastly increased capacity for love, understanding, and happiness. And we might just keep in mind that God runs the most effective beauty parlor ever known in the world.

Socrates was a very homely man, and he prayed to the Lord and said, "Make me beautiful within." We have all seen plain people who have been made beautiful by the working of a radiant spirituality. A godly spirit will make the plainest body beautiful. Great mental and spiritual qualities transform our bodies into their likeness. [^10]

Perhaps this is what Jane Porter had in mind when she wrote, "Beauty of form affects the mind, but then it must not be the mere shell we admire, but the thought that this shell is only the beautiful case adjusted to the shape and value of still a more beautiful pearl within. The perfection of outward loveliness is the soul shining through the crystalline covering. [^11]

Weight and Attractiveness

Since deciding to write this book I have debated for some time whether or not to include this section on weight control. So much is said today about weight and diets that seems confusing, contradictory, and sometimes intimidating. Nonetheless, many husbands have indicated that their wives' physical fitness, which includes weight control, did influence how they felt toward them. My challenge, therefore, is how to say that weight really should not and does not matter to many husbands and yet to some it does.

On one occasion, I was just preparing to leave my office when a woman knocked on my door. She told me that her husband had recently told her to lose ten pounds or get out of the house. She had been jogging around the track every day but then stopped one evening and asked herself why. Was she trying to lose weight because her husband demanded it, or was it in her own best interests?

Recently I was talking to a husband and our conversation got around to health and physical fitness. "You know," he said, "I've told my wife if she ever gains too much weight, I will leave her. At that point she can start losing or start looking." He laughed. While my friend may have been a little cavalier in his attitude, I am absolutely convinced that he was, right or wrong, representing the attitude of some husbands.

Another insight on this subject came to me in one of my marriage classes. In a questionnaire I asked, "Does your spouse weigh more now than you would like him or her to weigh?" About 70 percent of my students said no and 30 percent said yes. But the interesting fact was that the wives responded in the same percentage as the husbands.

Most of the couples in these seminars are young, in their middle or late twenties, so we discussed the gradual weight gain that comes to most adults. After graduating from high school, many people gain on an average of one to two pounds a year for the next twenty years. So by the time they are forty years old they are twenty to forty pounds heavier than they were in their early twenties. After some calculating, most of the couples found they were right on schedule for weight gain! We also discussed the fact that after age forty, 30 percent of men and 40 percent of women in the United States are actually obese (20 percent over their ideal weight). [^12]

While weight gain does not appear to be a major problem during the early years of marriage, it can and often does become one later. And the habits of good health and physical fitness, or lack of them, developed during the early years of marriage are contributing factors to weight gain later on.

The simple truth is, when a wife or husband is excessively overweight, it can make a difference in marriage. But I do not believe that it is ever grounds for divorce. I am aware, however, of instances where it has been a major contributing cause. Anything that disrupts a marriage is a concern to marriage counselors and educators. And being overweight can adversely affect many dimensions of a marriage, including the sexual relationship.

Weight and Sexual Interaction in Marriage

In their book The Act of Marriage, a Christian Guide to Sexual Love, Tim and Beverly LaHaye note:

An attractive but grossly overweight president of a Christian women's club engaged me [Tim] in conversation at a luncheon where I was to speak on "How to Get Your Husband to Treat You Like a Queen." After ten years of marriage she still found sex to be repulsive.

Upon further questioning I discovered that she had not always been overweight, but had gained seventy pounds during her last pregnancy and was unable to lose them. Not surprisingly, she had lost interest in sex and found orgasm impossible for the first time in her married life. With the increase in weight she experienced a decreased self-image. For the first time she was embarrassed to undress in front of her husband.

When I convinced her that her love life would improve and her orgasmic capability would return with the loss of weight (not to mention greater energy, health and self-acceptance), she decided to follow my advice and make an appointment with a weight specialist. Within nine months I received a letter telling me that she had seen improvement in four months and that her love life now was back to normal. She had lost sixty pounds of those demotivating pounds. [^13]

I have also had many married couples tell me that their sexual lives improved when either or both lost unnecessary and unwanted weight. And other dimensions of the relationship can also improve. I read not long ago about a study done on weight gain and loss at Utah State University. John E. Gibson indicated that with increasing weight, both men and women reported decreasing self-acceptance, lack of confidence, and loss of self-esteem. He also reported that these people were high in emotionality, more easily upset, and more subject to feelings of depression. [^14]

The Cholesterol Kingdom

Being overweight can also seriously affect physical health. And if being overweight is detrimental to health, what implications does this have for Latter-day Saints? Since the early days of our Church, we have become known for the Word of Wisdom which, in general, encourages good health. We meticulously avoid alcohol, tobacco, tea, and coffee for health reasons. But what about being overweight?

Not long ago, my eleven-year-old son, Brian, came home and asked, "Dad, do you know where overweight Mormons go when they die?" I took the bait and said no. He grinned and said, "The cholesterol kingdom!"

What he said in jest does give cause for thought. Should Latter-day Saints have greater concern about physical fitness and weight control? I was interested not long ago in a statement by Dr. Jean Meyer, one of the noted nutrition experts in the world. He observed that being fifty to one hundred pounds overweight could have the equivalent impact on the body of smoking one pack of cigarettes a day. [^15] While no upstanding Latter-day Saint would ever think of smoking cigarettes, he or she might ignore other health hazards such as excessive weight gain.

Do we have more than our fair share of weight problems in the Church? Some think so. A few months ago I attended a seminar at the Hotel Utah in Salt Lake City on family life, and a noted authority on weight control, who was not LDS, spoke on this very topic. He gave three reasons why he believed many Latter-day Saints are overweight: (1) The thin Mormon pioneers died during the past century trying to get to Utah, creating a hereditary predisposition to weight problems. (He didn't smile as he said this, but I had a chuckle or two.) (2) Mormons are physically less active than others because of the many Church meetings they sit in. He estimated that active Mormons are 11 percent more sedentary because of this. (3) Mormons do not smoke cigarettes, which has been known to keep weight down but is also detrimental to health. I could have added: (4) Mormons have an apparent preoccupation with calorie-laden foods at many of our Church activities.

All of these are food for thought (no pun intended), but I recently heard something else that concerned me even more. On KSL Radio in Salt Lake City is a call-in program called Public Pulse. On July 29, 1982, Dr. James Mason, a public health official in Utah, was the guest. A caller asked him if there is more obesity in Utah than elsewhere. Dr. Mason commented that as far as he can determine, it is not statistically significant. But he added that it is approaching significance! Put another way, we do not at the present time seem to have more of a weight problem in our state than in others, but we are heading in that direction.

The Word of Wisdom Reexamined

If being overweight is a major health concern, why hasn't the Lord revealed something about it? The fact is, he has. In the eighty-ninth section of the Doctrine and Covenants, the Word of Wisdom, he revealed that certain foods were to be used in their season, "all these to be used with prudence." (Verse 11.) He also indicated that meat was to be used "sparingly." (Verse 12.) In August 1831, the Lord revealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith that He had given a variety of foods to mankind to use for a variety of purposes. All dieters ought to read section 59, which says that food was given "to please the eye and to gladden the heart; . . . for taste and for smell, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul." (Verses 18-19.) Nowhere do I read that the Lord intended us to exist only on lettuce and cottage cheese.

But the Lord did indicate we should not eat too much. He stated that food was given to be used "with judgment, not to excess, neither by extortion." (D&C 59:20.) Extortion, in this sense, means not to abuse or misuse the body with food. In essence, we are encouraged not to overeat.

Not all excess weight is gained from overeating. (See "Running Away from It All" by S. Scott Zimmerman, Ensign, February 1981, pages 28-33.) But the truth is that many of us do overeat. On this theme, President Brigham Young said in 1868, "The Americans, as a nation are killing themselves with vices and high living. As much as a man ought to eat in half an hour they swallow in three minutes, gulping down their food like the canine quadruped under the table, which, when a chunk of meat is thrown down to it, swallows it before you can say 'twice.' If you want a reform, carry out the advice I have just given you. Dispense with your multitudinous dishes, and, depend upon it, you will do much towards preserving your families from sickness, disease and death." [^16]

Elsewhere he noted, "Suppose I happen to say 'Come, wife, let us have a good dinner today;' what does she get? Pork and beef boiled, stewed, roasted, and fried, potatoes, onions, cabbage, and turnips, custard, eggs, pies of all kinds, cheese, and sweet-meats. Now grant that I and my wife sit down and overload our stomachs, until we feel the deleterious effects of it from the crowns of our heads to the soles of our feet, the whole system [body] is disturbed in its operations, and is ready to receive and impart disease." [^17]

Some LDS Insights on the Human Body

While Latter-day Saints should strive to have healthy bodies as encouraged by the Word of Wisdom, we should not get caught up in the contemporary clamor that our individual worth is determined by a certain physique or body size. All individuals have worth regardless of body type! (See D&C 18:10.) All physical bodies, regardless of size, shape, appearance, condition, or color, are valued. And gaining one is an essential purpose of coming to mortality. Paul noted that the human body is a temple of God (1 Corinthians 3:16-17), and temples throughout the world are found in assorted sizes and shapes. Yet, all are temples.

Perhaps we have become so preoccupied with dieting, exercising, and losing weight that we sometimes forget the inherent worth of a person regardless of how much he or she weighs or how far he or she can jog. We begin to judge ourselves by our second estate rather than our first estate identity. In many ways, we have accepted the world's standard of who or what is attractive, desirable, or acceptable.

In their excellent book Getting to Know the Real You, Sterling G. and Richard G. Ellsworth discuss the physical versus the spiritual identity of men and women. I highly recommend their book to Latter-day Saints who would like a gospel perspective on self-esteem and the physical body. In their book they note three distinct trends:

With these three ideas in mind, we can make some interesting observations about weight control, exercise, dieting, and attitudes toward the body.

A person might abuse or desecrate his or her body in an extreme way to lose weight, appear thin, or gain respect and attention from others. Such a person might abuse the body by excessive fasting, bulimia (splurge and purge), or extremely stressful or strenuous exercise. He or she might eat inadequately or seldom and then only eat certain "diet foods" that may be lacking in essential nutrients. This is a good example of doing the wrong thing for the wrong reason.

Another person, however, may exercise moderately, cut down on the amount of food eaten, refrain from non-nutritive eating, and, in general, strive to keep the body healthy. But the motive in this case is also for peer acceptance and approval. Such a person may do so to retain youthfulness, believing that a youthful body is of more worth than one that is not. That person may want to be part of the diet-drink generation or to show others sheer will power and self-control. He or she may dress in extreme fashion, often at high cost, and ornament the body so as to be accepted. This is an example of doing the right thing (maintaining a healthy body) for the wrong reason (social and peer approval, which supposedly determines self-worth).

What would be, then, an example of doing the right thing for the right reason? According to Ellsworth and Ellsworth, it would be to maintain a healthy body so the body can serve the needs of the spirit where, according to LDS theology, the real identity is found. One of the authors notes:

I know a young girl who tried to kill herself because she wasn't accepted into a certain sorority. . . . She didn't have the right shape, or the right size, or the right face to suit that society. She was terribly hurt because her healthy clean young body didn't satisfy some others' designs. . . .

How worthless she felt she was! And how confused she really was, and hopeless! She had come to think that her body was her self. If her body was acceptable, then she was acceptable; if it failed, she had failed. But how absolutely wrong she was. Her body was really external to her real [spiritual] self. It was like a car, a house, or a suit of clothing. A body exists to serve the spirit that dwells in it. It is external and of the world; it is a servant to the internal reality of the soul. . . . How vital it is then to have a correct self-concept! How important it is to our mental health to know our real selves, to recognize the proper purposes and places of internal and external values! [^19]

For health reasons, Latter-day Saint husbands and wives should maintain a proper weight and be physically fit. This is consistent with our philosophy of good health contained in the Word of Wisdom. But never should we allow our worth and identity to be determined only by the appearance of the physical body. Among the teachings we have to offer is the inherent worth of each individual. Truly, the worth of each soul is great! (D&C 18:10.)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Those who divorce and later feel it was the correct decision. Richard B. Stuart, Helping Couples Change, New York: The Guilford Press, 1980, p. 8.
[^2] Those who divorce and later feel it was the incorrect decision. Quoted in Louis H. Evans, Your Marriage, Dud or Duet? Westward, New Jersey: F. H. Revell Co., 1962, p. 72.
[^3] Those who remain married and later feel it was the correct decision. Quoted in Dick and Paula McDonald, Loving Free, New York: Ballantine Books, 1976, preface.
[^4] Those who remain married and later feel it was the incorrect decision.
[^5] Provo Daily Herald, February 8, 1982.
[^6] Alexandra Penney, How to Make Love to a Man, New York: Dell Publishing Co., 1981, p. 55.
[^7] Ibid., pp. 54-56.
[^8] David O. McKay, Gospel Ideals, Salt Lake City: Improvement Era, 1953, p. 450.
[^9] Spencer W. Kimball, "Marriage is Honorable," Speeches of the Year, 1973, Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press, 1974, pp. 261-62.
[^10] Sterling W. Sill, "To Die Well," Ensign, November 1976, p. 48.
[^11] Deseret News, July 1, 1982.
[^12] Health and Wealth, Salt Lake City: Deseret Mutual Benefit Association, vol. 1, no. 8, spring 1982, p. 4.
[^13] Tim and Beverly LaHaye, The Act of Marriage: A Christian Guide to Sexual Love, New York: Bantam Books, 1978, pp. 129-30.
[^14] Family Weekly, July 25, 1982, p. 13.
[^15] Jean Mayer, Overweight: Causes, Cost, and Control, Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1968, p. 203.
[^16] Journal of Discourses 13:154.
[^17] Journal of Discourses 2:269-70.
[^19] 19. Ibid., pp. 10-11.
