Brent A. Barlow, What Husbands Expect of Wives ( 1983)

Final Comments

As we conclude this book, allow me to make a few observations on one or two matters.

Highs and Lows in Marriage

If asked to do so, almost every married couple could recall some difficult moments they have had during their years of marriage. And perhaps we do think about these times often. But the difficult times do not necessarily mean we loved each other less. It may simply mean that such times were not as good as others before or since.

One of the interesting dynamics of couples contemplating divorce is that they are usually preoccupied with what is going wrong in the marriage. They not only focus on the lows, but the low of the lows. Each partner can document the times and places where the marriage began to suffer from either internal or external stresses. The internal ones we often bring on ourselves. And the external ones frequently arise outside the marriage. We usually have little control over the latter.

The more a couple is preoccupied with what is wrong with the relationship, the lower they seem to sink. Indeed, many of us gauge our marriages by the low of the lows and constantly remind ourselves how bad things are or have been.

Perhaps we concentrate too much on these difficult times. Almost every marriage will experience less-than-desirable times because relatively few can continue a happily-ever-after, Paul-and-Patti-Perfect relationship. During the times we may be experiencing a few lows, we ought to think of and plan for some highs.

With the hectic pace of contemporary living, most couples will roller-coaster through life experiencing times of exuberance and other times of discouragement. Even during stressful times, most couples can and should recall some pleasant times they have shared together in the past. It is extremely important to remind ourselves and each other of these good experiences. What have been the highlights of marriage thus far? What were the contributing circumstances? Could we create these or similar experiences again?

If we plan and experience some good times along with the difficult ones, we will have something to cushion the lows when they do occur. And by so doing we immensely increase our capacity to survive in marriage. Since we have experienced good times together in the past, we have the same capacity to experience them again, if we both choose to do so.

Socrates once noted, "If all our misfortunes were laid in one common heap whence everyone must take an equal portion, most people would be content to take their own and depart." Perhaps the same is true of marriage.

Decisions about Divorce

One of the most sensitive decisions a couple will ever face is whether or not to terminate their marriage. At the present time, about 40 percent of couples in the United States eventually choose to do so. How many other couples seriously contemplate divorce is not presently known.

There are at least four categories of couples who contemplate divorce:

Whether or not a couple should stay married or divorce is a decision that only they can make, since they are the ones who will experience the consequences of the decision. Advice may be given, both solicited and unsolicited, but ultimately the couple must decide.

Those who are married and are seriously contemplating divorce may be interested in the research of Dr. Richard B. Stuart, who recently wrote an interesting book entitled Helping Couples Change. Dr. Stuart is a professor of Family and Community Medicine at the University of Utah.

In his book, Dr. Stuart notes, "The acid test of the wisdom of divorce can be found only in an assessment of its effects. While it has been shown that divorce and separation have devastating effects on most of those who move apart, many individuals thrive on the new freedom of separate living." [^1]

According to Dr. Stuart, many couples in stressful marriages look only at the apparent advantages of divorce. These may include: (1) freedom from domestic routines; (2) an opportunity to rear children without the opposition of the other parent; (3) freedom from conflict with a troubled spouse; (4) an opportunity to control one's own resources and life space; and (5) opportunities to make personally fulfilling choices without constraint through the need to consider the wishes of another.

But Dr. Stuart warns that divorce is often not a blessing. He reviews many studies that indicate that the physical and mental health of divorced individuals is often less than the health of those whose marriages remain intact. Divorced individuals, he concludes, have higher mortality rates, higher suicide rates, higher rates of victimization through homicide, higher rates of fatal auto accidents, and increased sickness, particularly coronary diseases and cancer of the digestive organs. Divorced people also appear to be at risk for mental disorders. Dr. Stuart points out that the risk rate of the formerly married exceeds those of the married by as much as twenty-fold in certain categories.

Dr. Stuart also reports that few individuals benefit economically from divorce, particularly husbands. The U.S. Bureau of Census has shown that the average annual incomes of married men are significantly greater than those of men who are separated, divorced, widowed, or never married. So great is the economic disruption of divorce that one researcher observed that divorce is a stronger correlate of poverty than is race.

Before a couple decides to divorce, they should carefully examine the consequences on both sides of the ledger. Will the perceived advantages outweigh the potential disadvantages?

It may be found, Dr. Stuart concludes, that the many benefits of trying to improve the marriage may far outweigh the eventual stresses contingent on separation.

Crabgrass and Marriage

I once wrote a column in the Deseret News noting that most married couples become discouraged at times and that some want to terminate the relationship. Because of some of the unpleasant experiences in marriage, we may be tempted to seek divorce and start over, if possible, with someone else. And certainly in some instances divorce is justified. But there may be danger in uprooting something with potential good just to get rid of something that temporarily appears to be bad.

Susan and I learned this not long ago when we planted grass in our backyard. As it started to grow, so did the crabgrass. So many neighbors and friends had told us about the crabgrass in our new lawn that we soon began to believe the crabgrass would prevail. The neighborhood consensus was that the lawn could not survive. The crabgrass was so tall that the little blades of new lawn were barely visible.

One neighbor told us how to spray the yard with a certain chemical that would kill everything. Then we could start over. Another neighbor offered us his Rototiller. We were discouraged, to say the least. It had taken us several months even to get this far with our new lawn. We had had to dig up rocks, bring in topsoil, level the soil, and fertilize and prepare the area for the lawn seed.

While trying to decide what to do, I stopped by a greenhouse one day with a few samples of the crabgrass. I described my plight to an elderly man who looked as though he knew something about plants and grass. "That's nothing but orchard grass," he said. "Just give your new lawn a little more water, fertilizer, and time. As the new lawn grows, it will soon crowd out the crabgrass." We followed his advice and now have a backyard of beautiful, thriving lawn. And the crabgrass is gone.

Marriage, too, has its discouraging moments. And sometimes we may want to give up the good in order to get rid of the bad. But the advice from the old man at the nursery still seems pertinent. Give your marriage a little more attention, make a little more effort, and the good experiences will eventually crowd out the bad ones. Focus your effort and attention on the lawn rather than on the crabgrass.

The importance of effort and focus, of believing and hoping, of bearing and enduring in marriage is emphasized in the poem "Listen World."

You can't leave love to luck. Love first came with leaping ecstasy. But when this passes . . . as it always may . . . Love, too, will go unless you make it stay. For there come times when hearts Are deaf and dumb, when nothing wakens, Nothing yearns or burns . . . These times must come; They are not accident, nor do they prove Your choice of love was wrong. They come with every lover, Every loving bond—mother or father, Sister, brother, mate. Always, at times, Love seems as cold as hate . . . Cut off forever, by malignant fate. But it's not so. Such chilling of the heart's As much a part of life as thirst or hunger . . . It's the natural ebb of our affection's flow. Such times must come for all who love, And when they come you must know why, And how to meet them or your love will die. You can't leave love to luck, You must at times build love. Though lacking all delight, As blind men weave a pattern in the night; Counting each gentle gesture, Spacing word and smile, groping through darkness Of both heart and head, as blind men fumble With their unseen thread. Until at last from out of the dull Gray warp and woof of service, unto God and men, There's the shine of that sweet wonder Which you had thought had passed . . . And, once again, you feel God's beautiful design. [^2]

A Letter

I received a rather lengthy letter from a woman who described several difficult years of marriage. I read her letter often when I need motivation to continue writing about marriage. The woman mentioned some attempts, none of which worked, to improve the relationship. Divorce seemed more and more of a possibility as she and her husband began to drift apart.

She wrote:

One day I was reading an article on marriage in the Deseret News. I usually don't like to read things like that because they always seem so idealistic and unattainable. But this article seemed to have some common sense and was down to earth. The particular article was one in which you compared crabgrass to marriage. . . .

After reading your article . . . I cried and cried. I had cried before, but never do I remember feeling the way I did after reading what you wrote. I realized that deep inside I really did love my husband. And I was relieved to find a workable solution to a very difficult problem.

So I decided to try to "build love," as the poem "Listen World" suggested. I started writing notes of appreciation to my husband. They were just short notes telling him thanks for something or sharing with him a crazy poem. He didn't say or do anything the first day or for several days after that.

Then one night we got into an argument, and I thought, "Here we go again." Later that evening (we weren't talking) he came into the kitchen and put his arms around me. He gave me a big hug that broke the awful tension. It was the beginning of many more hugs, kisses, and talks that we needed.

We have a long way to go in our marriage, but I think maybe we can now make it. It will take a lot of work because learning how to love seems to be incredibly difficult. But it now looks feasible thanks to a poem and newspaper article on crabgrass and marriage.

A Marital Guide

In conclusion, may I share with you some thoughts of Dr. Virginia Satir about marriage. They ought to be read often by husbands and wives.

I want to love you . . . without clutching. I want to appreciate you . . . without judging. I want to invite you . . . without demanding. I want to ask you . . . without pleading. I want to leave you . . . without guilt feelings. I want to join you. . . without invading. I want to criticize you . . . without blaming. I want to help you . . . without insulting. If I can have the same from you, we can meet and truly enrich each other. [^3]

It is my hope that this book in some small way will help married couples want to do these things. And I give my sincere encouragement to husbands and wives to strive to do so. Marriage truly can become an exultant ecstasy if we want it to be and are willing to work for it. May we so commit ourselves, and then do it!

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Those who divorce and later feel it was the correct decision. Richard B. Stuart, Helping Couples Change, New York: The Guilford Press, 1980, p. 8.
[^2] Those who divorce and later feel it was the incorrect decision. Quoted in Louis H. Evans, Your Marriage, Dud or Duet? Westward, New Jersey: F. H. Revell Co., 1962, p. 72.
[^3] Those who remain married and later feel it was the correct decision. Quoted in Dick and Paula McDonald, Loving Free, New York: Ballantine Books, 1976, preface.
