A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

Acknowledgments

In 1987, when I first began to put down on paper the thoughts and experiences that resulted in this book, I had no notion that it would take so long or that it would involve the efforts of so many people.

During those eight years, the realities of mortal life have helped focus my thinking and provided unanticipated testing of the ideas I have tried to organize and express. As difficult and soul-wrenching as some of those tests have been, they have made me even more certain that I was dealing with true principles that were worth sharing with others. I thank my Heavenly Father for that assurance.

As the book evolved, I quickly realized that I could not do it alone. I have been amazed at the way that different people just seemed to come along at the right time to help me clarify my thinking, bring greater unity to the narrative, and, occasionally, to get me back on track.

Jenny Miller Higby, a high school friend of my eldest daughter, Glenna, and a family friend ever since, has sat at the computer across the table from me for hours at a stretch, using her training in literature, English, and grammar to help me put my thoughts into intelligible sentences with words, phrases, and punctuation marks in the right places. Her dedication to the task, even through pregnancy and a move to Idaho, are deeply appreciated.

I would also like to thank Jerry Pulsipher, who drew upon his own roots in and love of Utah's Dixie to add historical and descriptive touches. Jerry was also invaluable in bringing out many of the deeper principles at work in the story, and in making the transitions in the narrative flow more smoothly.

Lavina Fielding Anderson, who read the manuscript in its early stages, demonstrated great patience with a novice author. She showed an uncanny ability in motivating me to reach deep within and clearly identify the underlying structure that made the book hang together as more than a collection of stories. Her encouragement that I was on the right track and her careful editing for style and consistency were most appreciated.

Also, I have appreciated the support and help of Lowell M. Durham Jr. and of the publishing staff at Deseret Book. They sensed intuitively what I was trying to do with the book and have brought it to final fruition with professionalism and understanding.

There are so many others who have contributed—friends and relatives who have pushed me along, been excited about the stories, and encouraged me at times when Ineeded to know that the book could fill an important need. You know who you are. All Ican say is thanks.

Finally, I express gratitude for my family, from whom my greatest strength and support has come. Without them, there would have been no book to write.

Throughout our life together, my husband, Hyrum, has shown an incredible willingness to risk his money and his talent and his time to ensure that his family was loved, cared for, protected, and taught righteous principles. His encouragement to see this book through to completion has been a major source of my own strength. We have truly been equally yoked in the larger effort of trying to bring a family through the mortal stage of eternal life.

And then there are my children—Glenna, Stacie, Sharwan, Joseph, Rebecca, and Jacob. They have each, in turn, received what we were trying to pass on to them, that which is precious and good from those who have gone before them in the eternal family. With joy Ihave watched them begin their own transfer of these things to their children. I cannot thank them enough for making this mother's life easier by being the receptive and stalwart spirits they are.

Last and most important of all, I want to acknowledge the ongoing eternal process that this book attempts to describe—the accumulating heritage that has come to us from our ancestors and that, with the contribution we add, will be passed forward to those who come after. I thank my great-grandparents and grandparents and parents for their teachings, for their dedication, for their commitment to family life. I only hope our generation and our children's generation can do as well in passing on that priceless treasure.
