A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

Prologue: Be a tree

I don't know why I connected with "The Shadowfall" when I first discovered the poem as a seventeen-year-old growing up in rural America during the 1950s. I read it in the Relief Society Magazine, to which my mother subscribed because she loved the faith-promoting stories, historical vignettes, and poetry. The poem was overprinted on a gigantic leafy oak tree, towering protectively over a well-traveled lane that led off into the unseen distance.

I didn't see my first real oak tree until I was twenty-one, serving as a Mormon missionary in England. Those majestic trees were in direct contrast with the oaks I was used to: scrub oak that fought mesquite and juniper, inch by inch, for each pocket of soil on the red hills of southern Utah's Dixie. They were tough, tangled, shrubby things with sharp, resilient twigs that would bend, twist, and contort but wouldn't break. The bark was rough and so were the branches. Scrub oaks could draw blood as fast as the country's bristling Joshua trees.

Despite my lack of personal experience with the stately oak tree described in it, the poem stirred something within me. Recognition. A connection with my heritage. I knew what deep roots meant, and strength, endurance, and the influence that stretches protectively yet commandingly from one generation into the next. I had heard the call, "Be a tree."

I have not been able to find out much about Shirley M. Howard, the author of the poem, or where she grew up that she answered "oak." I would have answered "cottonwood," perhaps because of the country lane, lined with gigantic cottonwood trees, that began just below Grandma Cooper's house and ended a quarter-mile away at the creek bottom. I drove our milk cows to pasture each morning and back each evening to the corrals. That heavily shaded piece of the journey kept this small cowherder cool during the hot summer day—as it had my father years earlier on the same trek.

The call "Be a tree" also reminded me of the ancient ash tree with the trumpet vine clinging and climbing around its rotund trunk until the vine disappeared high up, enveloped inside the leafy branches. Planted with care and often hand watered by Great-Grandmother Averett, the ash was stationed magnificently in front of our house, bespeaking dignity, endurance, and the enormous patience exercised by the shade-starved pioneers. The two mulberry trees behind our house were great, green survivors of an 1870 experiment in pioneer Utah silk production. When autumn filled the air, those two trees hosted flocks of chirping English sparrows, reminding me that migratory creatures—birds as well as people—still have unchanging places of refuge.

Those trees of antiquity seemed to connect me with my Dixie roots—roots that ran deep, supporting enormous, strong trunks and branches sprawling outward and upward. For this reason, the vivid tree imagery portrayed by "The Shadowfall" rang true to my spirit. It connected me with my past, but when I read it I also saw myself as the new acorn with the ability to branch out in any direction.

Thirty-five years later, as I write from our home in St. George, Utah, I see out my window the sharply white Mormon temple and the red sandstone tabernacle—both monuments to the pioneer spirit that tamed this harsh country. From this view I also see myriad trees: cottonwood, ash, mulberry, pecan, willow, fig, and pomegranate—five generations' worth of plantings now, starkly green against the red earth that sustains them. I am currently in the "shadowfall" stage of life. I have come full circle, and while traveling that circle, I have learned that there are many ways of being a tree.

I often think about the cultural changes and differences in family life between my parents' generation, my own, and that of my children. Those three generations span a period that has witnessed some of the greatest cultural change in recorded history—from horsepower and manual labor to laser power and robotic manufacturing. My parents, although living and rearing a family in the post-World War II era, were products of the last stages of rural, nineteenth-century America, with its reliance on hard work, self-sufficiency, community caring, and a strongly knit nuclear and extended family.

When I was growing up, circumstances required my family to be disciplined simply in order to survive. It was natural for us all, from age six to ninety-six, to work hard. We had to rise early just to get the morning fire going and the house warm. Even breakfast was an hour's operation. My mother, with my sisters' help, would make homemade biscuits and gravy or bacon and eggs; even oatmeal required twenty minutes to cook in those days. While they made breakfast and did the household chores, Dad and I would go out to get all the farm chores done before going to work or school.

I was fourteen years old before the first television came to our town. All the kids in the neighborhood crowded in to see the Nisson family's novelty: a huge black box, complete with an elaborate, twenty-foot antenna. When stabilized on their rooftop with guy wires, the monstrous antenna enabled them to get three channels of snowy black-and-white reception.

The first TV program I watched all the way through was during the Thanksgiving holiday at Granny Wilkins's house in Salt Lake City. I still remember lying on my stomach on the floor amid my cousins as we watched a cowboy show—most likely featuring Roy Rogers, my childhood hero—complete with a sheriff's posse chasing the bank robbers, their pistols firing wildly into the air.

At that time, we Dixie folks received news about the "outside world" in one of three ways: by listening to the radio, reading the two-day-old Salt Lake Tribune, or watching the Movietone newsreels before the main feature at the movie house. Communications in general were much slower. My kids can't imagine the antiquated telephone system I describe to them. Those were the days of the black, boxy, no-dialing-mechanism phones. When you wanted to place a call, you lifted the receiver, waited for the operator to ask, "Number, please," and listened to her ring the number you requested. Ten families shared our party line: 790J 1 through 5 and 790R 1 through 5. Though we couldn't hear the rings of the five "R" families, we could hear their conversations if they were speaking when we picked up the phone. Because all the "J" lines rang on our phone, each family had a designated ringing signal: ours was one long, one short. Everybody knew each family's ring; when we heard one long and two short, we knew the phones would be in use for a long time. May, who lived down the street, would be calling her sister-in-law Mina with the latest news.

Though there was a strict code of respect for telephone privacy, once in a while, if I picked up the phone to call a friend, I might accidentally overhear May say to Mina, "Did you hear about Delores?" My natural instinct made me want to listen in, but my conscience and respect for the "code" made me put the receiver back down. Their conversation might delay my phone call for an hour or more, but that was the way of life. There was no real urgency.

For today's children, there is no waiting. To share a party line is unthinkable. Our advanced communications systems include call waiting, voice messaging, portable cellular phones, teleconferencing, fax machines, and satellite broadcasts. We live in an age of instant food, instant communication, instant gratification, work-saving household devices—and disintegrating families.

Modern conveniences have eliminated much of the drudgery of family life and have increased the opportunities for leisure pursuits. But at the same time, they have taken away the natural childhood learning opportunities that taught me the work ethic, creativity, traditional values, and the importance of paying the price to reach a lofty dream or worthy goal. And they have contributed to the negative media influences our society experiences. Viewing today's television and movie offerings, is it any wonder that too many people seem to be overly self-centered, have poor interpersonal communication, or show lack of commitment to almost anything, including the challenges of making marriages or family relationships work?

I'm grateful for the commitment to marriage and family that was modeled by my parents. It has shone as an example in my own married life. My husband, Hyrum, and I met in England when we were both serving there as Mormon missionaries. I still marvel at the manner of our meeting, but that's getting ahead of the story. As to our life together, no image of trees, rooted in place, can describe the whirlwind of events that led us to the point at which we now find ourselves. If Hyrum had been a rancher, I would have bucked hay bales beside him. If he had been a farmer, I would have shouldered a shovel and walked the irrigation ditches with him. But Hyrum's talents lie in teaching and motivating and marketing, often in jobs as a manager or executive. So I've been an executive's wife. It seems we have always been in motion: St. George, Oklahoma, Germany, and Brigham Young University; then on to Hawaii, Oregon, California, back to northern Utah, and finally home to St. George. We averaged four years in each place.

In 1983, what is now the Franklin Quest Company was conceived in the basement of our home, with the creation of H. W. Smith and Associates. At that point I was mother, wife, secretary, accountant, seminar registrar, logistics operator, manual collator of seminar materials (with the children's help), and anything that had to do with setting up and closing down a seminar. Hyrum marketed and taught the seminars. A short time later came the Franklin Day Planner, the time-management tool at the heart of the training seminars, and I opened and operated the first Franklin store. As the company grew, others took over the responsibilities the children and I had helped pioneer, and I resumed my full-time focus on my family.

As a result of the success of the company and Hyrum's skill at teaching and motivating people, we have spent most of our married life in the public eye. However, the secret heart of our life together has always been our marriage and family, and it is there that both Hyrum and I have experienced our deepest inner fulfillment.

This book is about that secret heart, about the challenges as well as the enormous untold joy of healthy family life, in both the good times and the not so good. It is about the quiet, deliberate ways one family sought to create, nurture, and transfer that joy from shadowfall to shadowfall.

Over the last few years, many in America have expressed increasing concern about the state of the family unit. In this reawakening, there is growing alarm about the failure of such substitutes for the traditional family as street gangs, communes, and inadequate day-care centers. Many wring their hands over mounting statistics of divorce, child sexual abuse, and illiteracy, and different programs are put forward to cure or alleviate these ills among parents and children. While I share deeply the concerns about where the American family finds itself today, I believe that our best hope for combatting such problems lies in prevention—the kind of prevention that begins and has the greatest chance of taking root in the childhood years.

Looking back on my own life, I realize that there were many magical moments and hours when I was taught (without knowing that I was being taught) the important lessons of life. Seen in retrospect, those lessons are the greatest legacy bequeathed to me by my parents: treasured values about the things that matter most, like the necessity for and satisfactions of working hard, caring for others, taking responsibility for one's actions, getting an education, and appreciating life's spiritual side. I realize now that my family's daily schedule during my childhood, though we lived that way purely out of necessity, actually provided a natural learning time that no longer exists for most families.

When Hyrum and I were first married, we recognized that the world we had grown up in was vastly different from the world in which we would be raising our children. We knew we would have to consciously create many of the learning experiences that had sprung naturally from the environment in our generation. In these pages I am hoping to share what we have learned in our own family's quest. I am sending a gentle message to young men and young women in the early stages of family formation—or even before marriage—but also to married couples, single parents, teachers, grandparents, and anyone who cares about today's children: "Plant acorns; think roots; shape branches; be a tree."

This book is not a how-to parenting book, although it contains many how-to suggestions. It does not provide tips and programs to help entice teens home from malls and video arcades, although it does describe some of what our own children were doing at that age and why. It's not about household and time management, although our life and family needs have required both.

This book is about family relationships, about discipline and miracles and the deep roots of loving and living by principles and values. It's about the magical years of childhood and the long shadowfall of parental influence.
