A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

1

Once earth called to me

One of our enduring family memories is of Hyrum surveying our six-year-old Glenna approvingly just after she had straightened out a crumpled rug before walking over it—a distinctly Hyrum-like thing to do. Hyrum announced proudly, "Glenna, you have my genes."

"Oh, no, I don't," she retorted. "Your jeans are too big!"

I'm truly fascinated by what scientists are discovering about genetic inheritance and the subtle ways it interacts with environment and nurture in shaping character, defining goals, and confirming talents. It causes me to think about my own inheritance. How much comes from Dixie genes passed down to me from my ancestors, and how much is attributable to Dixie itself?

When I was growing up, Utah's "Dixie" consisted of several small, tight-knit farming communities strung like beads along a small desert river. Set in the midst of wild red rocks and drifting sand dunes later captured by Hollywood (John Wayne starred in movies filmed in the area when I was growing up), these little towns huddled together against the surrounding wilderness, a group of tiny oases in the midst of the desert.

Even in the 1950s, most Dixie people were descendants of the Mormon pioneer families who first came to the southwestern corner of Utah a century earlier. The call to conquer the red desert sands was issued by their prophet, Brigham Young. Many of the families thus called were originally from the South—the Carolinas, Georgia, and Tennessee. Because their purpose was to raise southern crops, such as cotton, pomegranates, and figs, and to establish an outpost to guard the southern boundary of the Mormon territories, this part of Utah came to be known as "Dixie."

Unlike its counterpart in the southern United States, Utah's Dixie was not a hospitable environment for agriculture. The soil was barren and filled with alkali salts that came to the surface when water was applied. Wood was scarce, and homes were built from native rock or adobe fashioned from the abundant clay. The Virgin River, named by early Spanish explorers, was anything but pure. A capricious source of water, it dried up in the summer heat one week and the next ripped out dams and ditches with flash floods. But by working together, the settlers eventually prevailed, building dams that held and irrigation ditches that watered fields, gardens, orchards, and pastures.

Out of the struggle and the isolation came an extraordinary sense of community. Even in the desert, the pattern of settlement followed the plan for the City of Zion established by Joseph Smith and continued by Brigham Young after the exodus to the West. The City of Zion plat called for communities to be laid out in neat blocks, extending outward from a central common block containing the meetinghouse and other community buildings. It was also requisite that the streets be wide enough for a wagon pulled by a full team of horses to be able to turn around. Beyond the town were the agricultural lands farmed by the community's residents, but most people lived in homes in town, four to a block, each lot with its own garden and perhaps a small orchard, a barn and enclosure for the animals, chicken coops, and other outbuildings.

The settlements of Utah's Dixie followed that pattern, adapted to the harsher realities of the desert. Besides being just about as far south as settlements could be and still be in Utah, the Dixie communities were nearly 2,000 feet lower in elevation than the rest of Utah. This made for mild winters, but extremely hot and dry summers.

As was the case elsewhere in the Mormon West, each of Dixie's miniature cities of Zion was a diverse community of families who looked on their efforts to wrest a living from the land as contributing to the day when Christ would reestablish the heavenly City of Zion on earth. Community life centered around the meetinghouse, which often served as a school during the week, a social center on weekends, and a place of worship on Sundays. Although there were inevitable differences and difficulties between individuals and families, the settlers still considered themselves as spiritual brothers and sisters, children of God, capable of coming together as a community divinely ordained and with millennial purpose.

My own roots go back to some of those families who came to help settle Washington, one of the earliest Dixie communities, in the 1850s and 1860s. They were among those who endured the refining fire of the region's touch-and-go beginnings to see their town survive and eventually prosper.

My great-grandfather George Washington Gill Averett was the watermaster, the individual in charge of the dam, canals, and ditches that supplied the community's lifeblood. For nearly twenty years he oversaw the building—and rebuilding—of a series of diversion dams that would periodically be swept away by flash floods. Another ancestor, Woodruff Alexander, with his young and frail Welsh wife, Martha, endured a harrowing experience with Indian marauders at a remote cattle ranch before being rescued by relatives who had assumed that they were dead and were coming to recover their bodies. My great-great-grandfather William Darby Cooper was a carpenter and cooper (barrel maker). He died of pneumonia after working for hours in waist-deep water making emergency repairs on the water wheel of the pioneer cotton mill. Others were farmers, carpenters, schoolteachers, and homemakers, contributing to the growth and increasing stability of the little southern Utah communities. Descending from those pioneer lines, both my parents were products of the strong culture and spirit of Mormon Dixie.

My personal recollection of my ancestors begins with my great-grandmother Margaret Alexander Averett, daughter of the couple who survived the Indian raid. My dad adored her. I was only six years old when she died, but I can still remember her gray hair pulled back in a bun, her wrinkled face, her kind smile, her hugging arms, and her soft voice. She was widowed in her early thirties, when my great-grandfather died from a lung disease contracted in the mines of Nevada. After she raised her family of eight, she stayed on in the old family home in Washington.

As a growing grandson, my dad was given the responsibility to care for Great-grandmother Averett. He took this responsibility seriously, staying with her often, making sure the outside chores were performed, and learning to meet her standards. He continued fulfilling these responsibilities even after he was married. The wood had to be chopped and stacked neatly, the garden planted and irrigated throughout the long, hot summers. Survival required frugality and order. Nature taught in its unforgiving way that winter's meals began with the spring's plowing, the summer's tending, and the autumn's yielding. There was usually enough, but never any to waste. Often when I was tromping hay after my dad had methodically aligned a forkful, or when he nodded at me to arrange the wood he was chopping into an orderly pile, he would tell me stories of Great-grandmother Averett. From listening to those stories and watching my father at work, I knew that the lessons she had taught had become a part of him as well.

Grandmother Florence Averett Cooper, my father's mother, was an important part of my own growing-up years. I was already grown and married when she died in 1969, so I have many wonderful memories of her. It was always a treat to go to her house, where she plied us with delicious homemade bread spread with wrinkled yellow cream (skimmed from the top of the milk pans) and sprinkled with sugar.

The grandchildren's guest bedroom was the coziest place in the world. We would climb the narrow stairs into the attic, go around a kind of storage area, and end up in a bedroom where a fire crackled appealingly in a potbellied stove, keeping Grandma's bedroom and the guest bedroom warm. Snuggling down into the flannel sheets and thick blankets was an experience in total security. It was in this room, enjoying the warmth of the stove, that I did my first "homework." While Grandma was darning socks, she gave me a notebook and pencil and asked me to write all the numbers from 1 to 1,000. I remember working my way through the neatly lined pages: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, . . . until the notebook was completely filled. There, too, Grandma triumphed with me as I sounded out my first word from the first-grade reader: C-L-A-S-S!

On the south side of Grandma Cooper's house stood a huge mulberry tree, so thick with leaves and branches that the sun could not penetrate through it. In the summertime, it was like a cave of cool shadow. Hanging from one of its limbs was Grandma's water jug, wrapped in damp burlap to keep it cool, with a long-handled aluminum dipper beside it. When I was older, and came up from the fields after herding cows or hauling hay, the water jug was a first welcome to her home.

Near the river bottom below Washington is a two-bedroom, red sandstone pioneer house known as the Foster farm, long abandoned but still standing, shaded by gigantic cottonwoods. Grandma Cooper and my grandfather, Erastmus Cooper, were hired to manage the farm in 1912. Two years later, their second child and first son, Evan—my father—was born there. After several years of hard work on the farm, my Grandma and Grandpa Cooper were financially able to purchase their own land and home in lower Washington.

The family that later moved in to replace the Coopers as managers of the Foster farm were, by an amazing coincidence, my future maternal grandparents: Orman and Mildred Wilkins. Their oldest daughter, Glenna, caught my father's eye, and in 1938 he married this seventeen-year-old beauty. They began their life together in St. George, five miles west of Washington.

Even though St. George numbered fewer than 3,000 people in the late 1930s, it was the largest of the Dixie communities, the county seat, and the hub for nearly a dozen smaller towns in the area. St. George had been favored in its early days as Brigham Young's winter home, and it boasted the first Mormon temple to be completed in the West, as well as a magnificent, red-sandstone, white-steepled tabernacle that would have been the envy of any New England town.

In my lifetime St. George has been "discovered" as a recreation and retirement community, and has mushroomed accordingly. But when my parents moved there in 1938, the city was small and still close in spirit and culture to its pioneer beginnings.

I was born into this culture, a fifth-generation Dixie-ite, on a hot June day. I have heard psychologists claim that a child's values are implanted during the first four or five years of life. I lived those crucial years in a small home built on the sandy site of the first pioneer camp at the east edge of St. George. Just as the pioneers had experienced many "firsts" on that spot of land, I encountered many things for the first time there as well.

One memorable "first" was my first wasp sting, which came when I tried to get a drink from an outdoor tap at the same time a wasp was getting one. I learned never to break queue with a wasp in a water line. I learned all about red ants and their possessiveness when I sat on their domain under a big mesquite tree. I got my first shiner from a calf's hoof as it went bucking to its mother. My deep-seated love for horses began there, with pleas to my father to lift me up on Snowball and "hand me the brains, Dad." The childhood diseases—chicken pox, measles, and mumps—all took their turns with me in that St. George home.

The first and probably greatest inspiration of my young life (at least to that point) occurred underneath that home. The cool crawl space below the house provided our collie, Jerry, with a great escape from the desert heat. I loved the dog and could fit into the same space with no trouble, so I often crawled into the coolness to pet Jerry and think deep four-year-old thoughts. I remember the day I contemplated names, and what name I would most like to be called. Suddenly it hit me! I crawled out from under the porch, raced around the house, dashed up the incline to the back stair, and breathlessly hollered to my mother: "Mama! You could call me Tommy Boy Yell!" Surely there couldn't have been a better name—ever.

I laugh now to think what my mother must have thought, but she only smiled and agreed. A short time later, after I had gone back outside to play, I heard her call my new name, "Tommy Boy Yelllll . . . " Joyfully, I ran to see what my mom wanted. All my life, when Mom wanted to get my attention, all she had to do was call the magic words: "Tommy Boy Yell!"

After Great-grandmother Averett's death, my father purchased her old pioneer adobe home in south Washington, a sturdy house built in the 1870s and still shaded by ancient ash and mulberry trees. My first memory of our new home began with a headache.

We were in the process of moving from St. George into Great-grandmother's house. It was a warm spring day and I was riding in the back of our 1940 Dodge truck, "holding down" the Maytag washing machine. As we reached the lane that led to our new home and started up the short, steep incline, the washing machine broke loose. Both of us bounced out of the bed of the truck, landed on the hard-packed road, and rolled down the incline. Miracu-lously, the heavy washing machine bounced over me, but I landed on my head, causing a headache that I remember to this day. I recall my mother jumping out of the truck, gathering me in her arms, and rushing me down the street to Grandma Cooper's house to dry the tears and soothe the pain in a cool bath.

Although my beginnings in this new home were bumpy, it didn't take me long to get acquainted with Washington. The heart of town consisted of four buildings: the meetinghouse, schoolhouse, post office, and general store. The old red-sandstone meetinghouse, built in 1877, was tucked behind the only slightly newer two-story school. The school, a four-room facility with a small gymnasium, was the hub for wedding receptions, community dances, and the school plays that Principal Victor Iverson always had the children put on at Christmas and Easter. Directly across the main street was Abner's General Store, which doubled as the gossip corner where friends met while picking up their groceries and hardware. My first pair of beloved Levi's came from there.

Just behind Abner's store was the post office, located in Widow Stephens's house, where the daily ritual of checking the mail was a big event. Typically, at around 10:30 a.m., Mama would send someone to fetch the mail. Maybe there would be a letter from Granny Wilkins or Great-grandmother Murray.

If you walked five blocks from the center of Washington in any direction, you were out of town. To the south lay the irrigated fields, darkly green in the summer sun beyond the silver ribbon of the now-tamed river. To the east and west, the highway extended away across black, lava-capped ridges to Salt Lake City or Los Angeles and the larger world. To the north, beyond the life-giving springs that made Washington possible, a series of salmon-and-white sandstone cliffs and lava terraces rose toward the sheer wall of Pine Valley Mountain, forming a majestic backdrop ten thousand feet high for our little community.

Although I was only nine, I remember well the process of remodeling that came four years after our move. With the arrival of a new baby sister, we had clearly outgrown Great-grandmother Averett's two-bedroom home. Besides, it had no indoor plumbing. In fact, I learned to roller-skate on the hard-packed path that led to the outhouse.

Dad first built a temporary one-room shelter with a wood-burning stove at one end for cooking and heating and a bed at the other. Ever after, we respectfully called it the "Dog House." Mama, Dad, and baby Kallie stayed there during the year the remodeling project lasted. In the summer months, we three older sisters slept outside on a bed between the pomegranate tree and the rosebush. But during the winter, I slept at Granny Wilkins's house, seven blocks away, while my sisters Margarette and Christine went to Grandma Cooper's, a block down the street, until the job was finished.

All the family's available time was spent on the project, during which we extensively remodeled and modernized the original pioneer structure. We plastered the soft adobe walls, rebuilt the entire roof, added new windows, and constructed a new kitchen and three bedrooms.

This was not an easy feat. Consider that Dad's "help" consisted of Mama and three girls under the age of twelve. Together we carried the cinder block for the new walls of the addition. Together we put up the roof. Together we hauled the red sand from the river bottom for the cement foundation. Dad would hitch up our team of horses to the wagon—a truck would have gotten stuck in the sand. We all brought our shovels, jumped on the flatbed wagon, and drove to the river bottom. Then we shoveled sand onto the wagon bed until Dad pronounced the load big enough but not too heavy for the team to pull. We would climb on top of the sand for the ride back home.

On one particular trip to the river bottom, Christine kept scratching at her knee. My mother, her suspicions aroused by some nameless instinct, pulled up Christine's pant leg to expose a scorpion—common to the desert sands. Dad's big hands quickly brushed it off before it could sting her.

Nearly a year later, we proudly moved into our new home knowing that it really was ours—we had each contributed to the work and we each felt a strong sense of personal ownership. That home would be the setting for many important and lasting childhood memories.

Some of those enduring memories have to do with gunnysacks. This humble bag, made from coarse burlap fabric woven from fibers of jute or hemp, has been a basic storage and shipping container for centuries. A gunnysack has its own unique odor, and I can't pick up one today without its scent bringing back wonderful memories of my childhood years. Gunnysacks were the storage containers for the delicious pine nuts we gathered and roasted in the fall. They held grain for our farm animals and, wrapped around a water jug and moistened, kept our water cool when we worked in the field. We tamped them into the dirt banks of our little diversion dams in the irrigation ditch to keep them stable; we hung wet bags over the screened hutch that sat in the shade of the mulberry trees, turning it into a "refrigerator" for our milk and cheese.

In my parents' generation, many wonderful things came in gunnysacks. Even in his later years, Dad carried a vivid memory of his delightful surprise at finding a single orange in a stocking on Christmas morning. How carefully it was peeled and distributed among all waiting hands, with small fingers wiggling to be noticed first! The orange had come from Uncle Harry, who by horse and wagon had returned home for Christmas from faraway California, bringing in a gunnysack a few precious oranges to disperse carefully among several families.

This story, when Dad told it to his grandchildren, brought expressions of wonderment to their faces. The idea that one gunny-sack of oranges lovingly brought by horse and wagon could become the highlight of a family's Christmas celebration seemed incomprehensible to children who passed loaded counters of oranges at the local supermarket every day.

I can see now that in their lives, my mother and father crossed over a long suspension bridge of time, packing over their shoulders a gunnysack brimming with many things. Some of the items in the sack were the old methods, the old ways of accomplishing daily tasks. Struggling along the way, continually meeting the challenges of change, my parents traded those old ways for new conveniences.

But as they discarded and replaced many of the methods and tools they had originally carried in it, Mama and Dad still clung to the old burlap gunnysack. It was the real treasure: the values and traditions of grandparents and great-grandparents to be passed along to the next generation.

In the years since the gunnysack passed to my generation, I too have found that many of my childhood ways of doing things no longer work in the culture that has evolved. The methods and the means may have changed, but the real treasure of my family's values and traditions stays the same. And my children and their children need them even more now than I did when I learned them under the tutelage of Mama and Dad.

So I keep the burlap gunnysack, a reminder that my generation too must pass its treasured values and traditions to those who come after.
