A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

2

Acorn

I came from Utah's Dixie and now, after moving all over the globe and making homes in many other places, here I am, back in Dixie. How can a place and a culture have such a hold on a person? As strange as it appears to some, my attraction to my roots does not seem unusual to those born and raised with the red sand of Dixie between their toes. Coming home to this special place elicits a feeling that can't be compared to anything else. A friend describes the inborn Dixie spirit: "It's just something in my soul that longs and lingers."

I see in the current hunger for community a sense of the connectedness that I felt growing up in Washington, Utah, a place of kith, kin, and kindness, where a whole community felt invested in its children. I know that such communities can be rebuilt with intelligent investing of time, talent, and love.

Notice that money is not on the list. As important as it may be, money is useful only for such things as contracts and commodities. Communities are about caring. During my childhood, we never had more than a marginal economic existence, but the home created by Evan and Glenna Cooper was a solid foundation for our lives, a place where love was expressed and happy memories were born. Without necessarily understanding what they were doing, my parents—through their example and the things they expected from us—passed on the core values of our family and our community.

The Lessons of Wash Day

Because of the lack of modern conveniences in our small rural community, simple daily tasks often took a long time, sometimes even full days, to complete. Since laundry was done only once a week, "wash day" was exactly that—a whole day. After chores and breakfast, we would sort out seven or eight batches of clothes on the kitchen floor to begin the process. At the time, we felt blessed to have the latest technology in washers: the Double Dexter Washing Machine. It provided the convenience of an electric, double-tub wringer, right on our very own porch. Instead of having to slave over a washboard and tub, we had a Double Dexter.

After Mama had heated a large pail of water on the stove and dumped it into the washer, she filled the remainder of the washtub and the entire rinse tub with cold water from the outside garden hose. She always tied two or three bluing balls in an old rag to float around in the rinse water and dissolve while she filled the tub. I never did quite understand how the bluing somehow acted as a whitener, but it kept Mama's whites looking clean and new, despite the yellowing characteristics of the homemade lye soap we used. White clothes would always go into the washer's first batch, then towels and dish towels, colored items, and finally Levi's, overalls, and Dad's greasy cooking clothes.

Though Mama used the same water for several batches, just filling the tubs and draining the water out onto the lawn once or twice was time-consuming—not to mention the tedious process of putting each individual article through the wringer to squeeze out the sudsy water before the item dropped into the rinse tub. The wringer came into play again as the clothes passed from the rinse tub to the laundry basket. Mama then artfully hung the clothes on the line with clothespins while waiting for the next two loads to cycle through the washer.

I recognize now that each wash day an unstated homemakers' washline competition went on in my hometown. This was no doubt one of the reasons that Mama took great pride in how her clothes were hung on the line. Her fun-loving, even artistic, side came out in how she hung up our laundry. All the full skirts hung upside down by the hem in a row. All the blouses were lined up, also upside down, to billow in the drying desert wind, the clothespins staking down the seams that ran from sleeve to hem. The towels took two lines and were hung square, corner to corner. The finished product was almost like a visual representation of a full-blown orchestra, with distinct sections for brass, woodwinds, and strings, all performing harmoniously.

When we children were small, our task was to fill and drain the tubs and to hang the socks over the barbed-wire fence, each sock between two barbs. As we grew tall enough to reach the clothesline, we were promoted to hanging the towels and dish towels. However, Mama always insisted on meticulously hanging the colorful blouses, skirts, and dresses herself. Her artistic, joy-filled attention to that weekly labor was a great lesson in the satisfaction to be had from work done well.

The Electrolux

Recently, Hyrum and I visited an oriental shop so that Hyrum could buy his year's stash of li hing mui, a sour-salty dried plum. As I waited for him to make his purchase, I scanned the contents of the many square glass containers. One, filled with pine nuts, brought a rush of memories of gathering pine nuts from the scrubby pinyon pines of my home country.

Oddly enough, connected with those nuts was a love story—my parents'. Those pine nuts had a lot to do with romance, consistent work, shared goals, and caregiving. In the friendly, effective, and above all loyal relationship of my parents, I didn't see many flickers of dime-novel or Errol-Flynn-type romance. But I saw something better. It was an Electrolux vacuum cleaner. And, fittingly enough, it began with the exhausting labor of harvesting pine nuts.

Almost every October, my parents packed up the family, our camping gear, and some tarps and turpentine, and we would head for the mountains of Panaca, Nevada, a hundred miles away. We always took Uncle Frank Prince, the last of the Dixie old-timers, and he invariably made the trip lively.

Usually we left after school on a Friday and traveled to the upland hills where the pine trees were thick and heavily loaded with pine cones. We set up camp by clearing the fallen cones away to make room for our bedrolls on the soft blanket of pine needles. Uncle Frank cooked a Dutch-oven dinner of biscuits and beans. Then, to the smell of the smoke from the campfire, we snuggled down in the thick bedrolls that kept us warm in the chilly fall air. High in the black night sky, brilliant stars cast their spell; eyelids closed and dreams began.

I remember waking up to the sun kissing my face. From my cozy bedroll, I watched Dad rekindle the fire and Mama place thick pieces of bacon in the frying pan. Moments later, the smell of sizzling bacon caused growling hunger pains, inspiring my sisters and me to leave our warm beds for the crisp morning air to devour our breakfast of biscuits, bacon, fried eggs, and hot chocolate.

Even before breakfast, Uncle Frank had scouted out the best trees and placed the tarps in position for the day's work. We all put on our gloves and old work clothes. Using rakes or long sticks, Dad and Uncle Frank shook the pine branches to knock the pine cones onto the tarp. My job was to assist in this effort by shinnying up the tree to shake the higher branches. In that initial fall, many pine nuts would be jarred free from the cones.

After we had gathered a large pile of cones on the tarp, everyone would surround the canvas and lift an edge, causing the cones to roll to the center. Then we poured the pine cones out into a custom-built wooden box with a wire screen bottom. The holes in the screen were large enough to allow the pine nuts but not the cones to drop through to a tarp below. Two people, one on each end, picked up the box and shook it, bouncing the pine cones one more time to loosen the last remaining seeds. We emptied the pine cones from the box and picked up the tarp again to funnel the nuts into the waiting burlap gunnysacks. Then we moved to another tree and started the process again.

By the end of the day, we had pine gum all over our hands and gloves, faces and clothes. Dirt and dust stuck to the gum, leaving sticky streaks and spots everywhere. But it did no good to clean up until the gummy job was done. When we had a couple of hundred pounds of nuts in our gunnysacks, we loaded them in the truck. Then, and only then, we shed our gloves and sticky clothes and began the arduous task of rubbing the pine gum off our hands and faces with turpentine-soaked rags. Weary but happy, we packed up our camp and headed for home. I was happy because I knew that the next time I saw those pine nuts, I would be sitting on the sandstone hearth near the blazing fire with a bowl of freshly roasted nuts on my lap. I would crack the shells with my front teeth, throw the shells into the flames, and toss the nutmeats into my mouth. Nothing could be more sumptuous and succulent.

On one such occasion, in early December, my sensuous feast was disturbed by a knock on the door. Mama answered, and before she could inquire about the nature of the visitor's business, a stranger briskly stepped inside, hefting a large cardboard box with a handle. This boldness caused my father to rise up out of his chair and demand, "What do we have here?"

The stranger proudly announced, "I'm a vacuum cleaner salesman and I understand you have need for a vacuum. I have in this box a vacuum that will take care of all your cleaning needs."

We all exchanged curious glances as the salesman opened his box and lifted out an elongated, rounded canister on wheels, which he set on the floor. He reached in again, pulled out a long, thickly woven cloth hose, and poked it in a hole in the end of the canister, which bore the letters E-L-E-C-T-R-O-L-U-X.

He turned to his box again to remove two shiny silver tubes. He locked the two together into one long tube and then attached it to the end of the hose. Again reaching in the box, he took out four different-shaped metallic gadgets, explaining, "Now, this is your upholstery attachment. It will clean your couches, chairs, and draperies. This round one with soft bristles will dust walls, furniture, windows, lamp shades, and bookshelves—virtually anything that collects dust. You can throw away your oily dust rag. This needle-shaped attachment gets in all those hard-to-reach places: behind your fridge, under the stove, in corners. It can even suck dead flies out of windowsills." (I was particularly impressed with that feature.) "And last, but certainly not least, is this floor attachment, which can handle virtually any mess." With that, he pulled out a small sack and dumped dirt on our floor.

Mama gasped in disbelief.

"Oh, don't worry, ma'am," the salesman continued. "This Electrolux will have your floor clean as a whistle in no time." With that he unwound the electric cord and, with a nod to Margarette, said, "Hey, little girl, will you plug this into the electrical outlet?"

Excitedly, she did so. In seconds the unfamiliar whirring began, and the man began going over the asphalt-tiled front-room floor in neat swaths, just as my dad did with his tractor in the hay field. Sure enough, that vacuum did what the salesman said it would do. Then he launched into his final pitch: "Now, wouldn't this make a great addition to your house? Why, you could have this place slicked up in no time. This is my last model; seeing as it's a demonstration vacuum, I'll give it to you tonight for twenty dollars off."

"Mama, can we?" all three of us girls begged in unison.

I looked at my mother for her reaction. I really wanted it, and I could tell by the way she looked at Dad that she did too, but she discreetly shook her head no. To the salesman she politely said, "We really can't afford it at this time of year, as badly as we would all like it."

My dad agreed, "Yeah, you better box it up and take it away. I'll help you on out." Dad walked outside with the deflated salesman.

The next morning, after Mama had gone to work, I was surprised to see the salesman coming up the walk. Dad invited him in and asked him to wait. The next thing I knew, Dad came in with a gunnysack three-quarters full of our precious pine nuts. I overheard the salesman say, "Well, sir, here's your receipt, 'One Deluxe Electrolux; Paid in Pine Nuts (100 lbs.).'"

I don't know where Dad hid the box. All I know is that it showed up under the tree on Christmas morning, beautifully wrapped and bearing a tag, "To Glenna." Attached to the top with a red ribbon was a single pine cone.

Mama and the Sparklers

My parents passed through life with a quick eye for the comical, greeting the ludicrous with gales of laughter in which there was no sting of mockery. The gifts of laughter and a keen sense of humor were sparks that drew them together, lighting many a weary hour.

For my dad, steadily and steadfastly turning his hand to each new job as it came up and doing his uncomplaining best, duty comprised very nearly all there was to life. Mama and Dad farmed. They worked in a local restaurant, Dad cooking while Mama waited tables. They ran a rest home for years, providing cleanliness, care, and good cheer to people slipping toward death. Every day was hard work, and they never complained. Mama settled to the same rhythm as Dad, pulling cheerfully in double harness and leaving no chore undone, yet she bubbled with gaiety and fun, purely enjoying the seasons and the sunsets. Glenna Fern Wilkins grew up as one of six children in a hard-working farming family and was only seventeen years old when she married. Even with the rigors she knew most of her life, she always maintained a youthful, fun-loving, adventurous spirit. In the cracks between the required chores, she could always find fun.

It was the third of July. In the late afternoon, when Mama pulled up in the black Dodge truck and got out carrying a grocery bag, I paid attention. Normally I wouldn't have noticed the contents of the brown paper sack (usually basic commodities such as flour, sugar, and eggs), but as she approached, something different—maybe frivolous—poking out of the top caught my eye. I followed the bag to the kitchen table. I was right. Nothing could have prevented me from carefully taking out one of the long, narrow boxes to scrutinize every detail. It was a bright red box with patterns of white starbursts and streaming tails. The full cellophane window on the front exposed the thin, gray sparklers that always reminded me of the cattails in the marshes on the river bottom.

My mother, noticing my keen interest, reminded me that the next day was the Fourth of July. "Gail," she said, "tomorrow night I'm going to put on the grandest sparkler show you've ever seen."

Mama's words sent shivers of excitement through my nine- year-old body. I couldn't wait for it to get dark, so I could go out to my summer bed between the pomegranate tree and the rosebush. The anticipation made it difficult for me to fall asleep, but I must have, because the next thing I knew I was aroused by the traditional cannon shots and musical strains of "The Stars and Stripes Forever." The Granny Band (one granny being my own, who played the harmonica) woke up the town every Fourth of July by parad-ing up and down the streets rendering rousing, patriotic music. Quentin Nisson (who was lovingly called "Abner" and ran the General Store) would set up his old upright piano on a flatbed truck and arrange folding chairs for the band members, who donned long dresses, bonnets, and other pioneer garb for the event. About once every block they would fire the cannon, which trailed behind the truck.

This day, Mama didn't have to work very hard to hustle us through our chores and housecleaning duties; we knew that as soon as we were finished we could go over to the park for the annual Fourth of July games and races. There were foot races, three-legged races, wheelbarrow races, egg tosses, balloon tosses, and needle-threading contests for the men. Each contest was divided into various age or gender categories, so everyone had a chance to win a prize. There was also plenty of lemonade and watermelon for all.

The full day's activities ended with the setting of the sun. As dark set upon us, our family (except Dad, who had gone to work) anxiously raced home to prepare for Mama's promised sparkler show. Mama, with flashlight in hand, let me and my sisters bring out the sparkler boxes and stack them on the top step of the cement stairs leading to the road. She followed us with the box of matches. "Now," she said, "all of you sit here on the steps." We did, and she began the sparkler show.

She lit one sparkler, then another, and then another. Sometimes she handed us each a sparkler and let us hold it to wave back and forth in the air. Sometimes she connected two sparklers together by bending the ends into hooks, then lit both ends and sent the two gyrating high into the air. They flew upward, lighting up the sky, then spiraled down and landed in the road to burn themselves out. One time, in her excitement and effort to give us a really good show, she threw a half dozen sparklers, all hooked together, a little farther than she had anticipated. They landed across the street in our neighbor's wheat field.

Immediately the field lit up with flames. Panicking, Mama hollered for us to get the garden hose. We grabbed it, turned the tap on, and raced across the street, spraying water on all the tiny fire patches. At about the same time, our neighbor saw what was happening and quickly grabbed his hose as well. Any empty hands filled buckets of water from the ditch that ran by or soaked gunny-sacks to throw on the scattered flames. It was plenty exciting for a few minutes, but it didn't stop Mama's sparkler show the next year—or for years to come.

Mama had creative ways of expressing her wonderful sense of humor. Halloween was one outlet for such expression. Each Halloween, with great secrecy, she would plan and plot with us over how we would disguise ourselves to go about the town trick-or-treating.

It was a small town, so it was not difficult or time-consuming to cover the entire community, knocking on every door with a "Trick-or-Treat!" Some of the people would make us do a trick, such as reciting a poem or singing a song, to earn our treat.

The year I was ten, I went trick-or-treating with Uncle Kendyl, who, despite his exalted title, was my own age and also my good friend. We dressed up as farmers and managed to come up with the money to buy simple masks at Abner's Store. That night, since we were in the middle of remodeling Great-grandmother Averett's house, I was to stay at my Granny Wilkins's house with Kendyl.

We returned after an hour of trick-or-treating, our bags bulging with treats, which we dumped out on the living-room floor. We were busy comparing candy, swapping items, and critiquing the contributions of the donors when we heard a knock on the door. I ran to get it as quickly as I could, knowing that it was probably more trick-or-treaters.

I was right, but the visitors weren't children. There in the doorway stood two huge ghosts. Aunt Nola Wilkins invited them in. As I stepped quickly aside, the two big ghosts floated in and sat down together on the piano bench, just in front of our piles of candy. I immediately went back to guard my candy and look up at those enormous ghosts. They had to be adults. Granny came in from the kitchen, wiping her wet hands on her apron.

"Who are you?" asked Aunt Nola.

The ghosts gave no answer.

"Do you live in this town?"

They nodded.

"Do we know you?"

Again a nod.

"Do you live close by?"

The ghosts shrugged.

Kendyl and I, intrigued, joined in the questioning, but the ghosts' identity remained a mystery. Then the ghost nearest me looked down and, behind the hole cut for its mouth, grimaced at me. I could see the teeth and part of the lips. My mind began to race. I had seen that grimace and those teeth before. But where? I searched my memory. Where, where?

Suddenly it came to me. I burst out, "I know you! I've seen those teeth before." The ghost chuckled and then I was absolutely sure. It was my mother. The other ghost was my Aunt Nola Cooper.

I think often of what it meant that my mother was willing to ruin two perfectly good sheets to step out of her workaday identity as Glenna Cooper for a few hours to mystify and delight us children. I hope I show the same imagination with my own children.

The Swimming Hole

One of the lasting lessons of my childhood was that fun was paid for with work. Dad's tone of voice was serious when he reminded us, "Work before play." But Mama, more adventurous and light-hearted, taught us, "Work pays for fun." She contrived and schemed so that we had fun while working and our work had a pay-off of fun.

It was July in Dixie. This particular week seemed to have passed slowly, but at last it was Saturday morning. I was excited because Mama had promised my sisters and me—and any friends we wanted to have along—that if we would get the Saturday's work done (chores, housework, cleaning the yard, and mowing the lawn), she would take us swimming in the old swimming hole. There could not be a greater reward on a hot summer day.

I rose early, eager to get my work done. I called my friends down the street to see if they would come help with the chores so they could enjoy the swimming adventure as well. Being really good at delegating, I quickly assigned my sisters and two or three of my neighborhood friends to do this and that chore. David would mow the lawn, Christine would clean the kitchen, Margarette would vacuum the house, Kathy would clean the bathroom, and I would dust the furniture and sweep and mop the floors. Each sister had to clean her own room. Periodically Mama would call for our help, and we would hurry outside to hang a batch of laundry.

After a morning of hard work, we all reunited in the living room, excited to report that at last our jobs were done. Mama easily talked us into some baloney or egg sandwiches for lunch, with cool milk to wash them down, as final preparation for our long, hot trip to the swimming hole. Finally she gave us the go-ahead: "Let's run and get our swimming suits on." And away we all went, hiking the mile and a half to our destination.

This hike, in retrospect, was a journey in itself, but nearing the swimming hole brought one last challenge—the climb up the steep, rocky Warm Springs Hill. After struggling to the top, we could look down and actually see the water hole, nestled among green trees and reeds, a hundred yards away. That glistening pool was an oasis in the red sands.

As with any swimming hole, the likelihood of catching some boys "skinny dipping" was pretty high; thus, over time, some unwritten courtesies had evolved. This day was no different. Seeing boys in the water, we signaled, "Yoohoo! Girls coming!" then turned our backs and rested a moment while the boys scrambled into the bushes for their clothes. We then raced down the hill, flinging off our shirts, and jumped into the cool, clear water. It was a well-earned reward.

My mother jumped right in the pool with us and led us in the water games that we all loved to play: Blind Man's Bluff, Marco Polo, and Water Tag. When she felt that our bodies needed it, she made us get out to rest for a few minutes on the grassy banks in the warm sunshine. By the time our suits were dry, we were pleading with Mama to let us get back in, and we started the swimming and splashing all over again. Too soon, Mama ordered us out of the pool to dry off one last time and begin our downhill trek home.

Thinking back on that glorious Saturday afternoon and many others like it, I can't help getting a lump in my throat as I now realize the time commitment, physical effort, and loving protection my mother quietly offered. Gently, effectively, she taught us the value of work before play, cooperation, fun, and friendship.

I don't know what it meant to my mother to spend the whole afternoon going for a swim. I don't know if she savored and honored her instinct for play. But I do know that it meant something important to me that my mother would play with us.

Yes, she fed, clothed, and bossed her children around, just like other mothers. There was never any mention of the "rules" she broke to enter into our world of play and imagination. But those crossings-over showed that she was literally on our side. She was no censorious judge of our play, nor did she seem to be consciously indulging childishness in a way that communicated her expectation that we would someday abandon it. Her heart was with us in sympathy. I felt her liking and her love through that play in a way that I could not articulate until years later.

The adult world was my father's world—he always said that he never had a childhood. As the eldest boy in his family, he was put to work as soon as he was physically able. Dad was creative and artistic, and a natural musician—probably an inherited gift from his great-grandfather William Darby Cooper, who handcrafted his own violin and dulcimer and was a renowned musician in the Dixie region. He loved to tease, but, of necessity, order and productivity governed his life. My mother usually stood squarely in that world beside him. But in moments like those July afternoons, without ever saying it, she taught us clearly with her actions, "You've earned fun. You've paid for it with your work. And so have I." She modeled the difference between being a hard worker and being a workaholic. For Glenna Cooper, there was work, but there was also glorious fun.

As a result, I always thought of my own future children as people I wanted to be with, work with, play with, and enjoy.

The Magic of the Mulberry Tree

Another important lesson of my childhood came not from the example or influence or teaching of my parents, but from self-discovery. This experience seemed to mark an important turning point, one of those times when a person's worldview changes.

One of my favorite childhood play areas was in back of my house, between two large (to my eyes, mammoth) mulberry trees standing about ten feet apart. Along the base of those two giant trees ran a wide, shallow, sandy-bottomed ditch that continued past the trees and on down into the garden below. The purpose of the ditch became apparent every Friday at exactly 1:15 p.m., when irrigation water came down it into the garden.

My sister, my friends, and I would play in the sandy-bottomed ditch and at the base of the north mulberry tree, pretending that we were farmers or ranchers. That game kept us occupied for hours on any day except on Fridays at 1:15, when the water came down the ditch; or on Saturdays, because the area was too muddy; or on Sundays, because we were expected to observe the Sabbath day.

By Monday our farm or ranch land, whichever we decided it would be that day, was dry and ready for play again. We lived in pretend houses on top of the ditch bank between the big roots of the north mulberry tree. We built roads down the ditch bank, then drove our toy trucks and tractors or rode our little horses from our houses down the steep grade to the sandy bottom of the ditch.

Then we began the project of building our corrals and fencing our lands. In order to do this, we built roads into the "forest" of nearby shrubs. There we gathered twigs and cut or broke them into four-inch fence posts. We hauled our fence posts in our trucks out of the forest and back to our sandy farmland, where we poked them into the ground about two inches apart and strung kite string between them to make the fence. We always made two string-wire fences; we wanted to make sure that the cows and horses would not go astray.

We spent many enjoyable hours building fancy ranches and farms down in the ditch. Our hands, faces, clothes, seams, creases, and pockets were always caked with red sand by the time we finished playing. Occasionally we suffered a bite from one of the many big red ants that seemed to think this was their play area. However, our biggest tragedy occurred every Friday at 1:15 p.m., when our farms and ranches would be flooded, our fences and fence posts washed downstream. Often we forgot to take in our animals, trucks, trailers, and tractors before the Friday flood hit, and we would have to retrieve them from the garden below on the following Monday.

One Monday when I was about eleven, I was sitting on the ditch surveying the damage to my farm. I realized that the project of rebuilding, which used to be play for me, now seemed like a lot of work. As I flicked a big red ant off my shoe, it occurred to me, "Gail, playing in a ditch is dirty play. What's more, you're not accomplishing anything; no matter how big and nice and neat you build your farms and roads, you are building on a sandy foundation. When the Friday flood comes, all is lost. You can't enjoy your good work or continue to build on it." I then thought, "Instead of looking down into the ditch and building all those neat corrals, fences, roads, and houses on such a sandy foundation, why don't you look up and find something worthwhile to invest your efforts in?"

As my eyes followed my train of thought, the first thing I noticed was the mammoth mulberry tree to the south. As I stood up in the ditch, I wondered what the world would look like from the top of a mulberry tree. My quest became to find out.

My first challenge was figuring out how to get up in the tree. The trunk of this huge mulberry was as big around as a semitrailer tire and extended as high as a basketball standard before any of its branches began to spread out. It was impossible to wrap my legs around the tree to climb, nor were there any branches low enough for me to grasp to pull myself up.

I first attempted to throw my father's lasso rope over the lowest branch and hoist myself up, but my efforts were thwarted by the thick leaves and branches. My second plan required a lot of work and some trial and error. Obtaining my father's permission to use some old lumber he had stacked in a bin, I sawed some boards into two-foot lengths. I then rounded up some big nails and a hammer and proceeded to make my stair ladder up the trunk. I attached the first two boards easily by hammering a big nail through the center of each into the trunk. I should have known it was too easy, for when I put my weight on the stair, the board turned on the nail and I was again standing on the ground. I learned that I must nail both ends of the board to the tree.

My next attempts (and errors) came with my trying to engineer height so I could hammer in the nails to hold the last two stairs in place. Unhelped by a chair, then by a box on top of the chair, then another box on top of the first box, I finally scrapped that plan after some very anxious and unstable moments.

My last effort—and success—came with the toil of dragging an old, unused rabbit pen from the corral up to the tree. This was approximately the distance of a baseball diamond from home plate all the way around the bases. It was a long haul, but when I reached my destination, the height and stability of the rabbit pen enabled me to finish the ladder, each step nailed securely to the trunk of the tree.

My finished ladder endured the final test when I climbed the five stairs, grasped a branch, and swung myself into the main fork in the huge branches of the mulberry tree. What an exhilarating feeling of joy filled my soul! My heart beat like the wings of a dragonfly; excitement erased the aching muscles and the dripping sweat. I had achieved my quest.

Standing in the fork of that giant mulberry tree, I could see forever. To the south lay the lazily winding Virgin River, glistening in the sun. Below the river I could see rectangular fields, each wearing a proud, unique shade of green. Above me was only vast blueness, broken by occasional wisps of white cotton. To the east was the red-orange, mountainous strength of Zion National Park, the highest peaks capped with snowy whiteness. The north view took in the massive bulk of Pine Valley Mountain with the red hills of Dixie snuggled against its base.

From my height in the mulberry tree, a new world with endless horizons opened before me. The excitement was still building in my heart when, at that moment, I looked down. The ditch below, in which I had been sitting all morning, was cold, dark, and gloomy. The red ants were trailing in, out, and over the roots of the north mulberry tree and down into the ditch.

I shuddered as I realized all the wonderful things I had been missing by playing in the ditch at the roots of the tree. My view was blocked by my very position. My dreams were washed down the stream every Friday at 1:15 p.m. After viewing all that I had seen from this magnificent mulberry tree, I would never again be satisfied with the play or the view from the ditch.

Quickly, I refocused my eyes and my thoughts back to my tree. To my pleasant surprise, and seemingly as a bonus for all my hard efforts, I discovered a natural tree house within the tree's limbs and branches. The big limbs had grown out and up like the ribs of a giant, upside-down umbrella, and branches had filled in the spaces between, forming natural walls.

Ideas coursed through my brain as to how I would make one terrific tree house. I immediately obtained equipment and tools and began delegating tasks to my friends and sisters.

By Friday, the terrific tree house was completed. The floor was carpeted, the walls were paneled, and two curtains (contributed and hung by my mother, who for some reason was very excited about this tree house) adorned the natural windows. We were having the time of our lives. We soon discovered that our play was not limited to building temporary roads and fences. Instead we built permanent corrals to house our animals, or, if we were in the mood, we made houses for our dolls. We even consumed our peanut butter sandwiches, cookies, and milk within the walls of our terrific tree house—thanks to Mama's delivery service.

One day, as I was enjoying the last cookie, listening to the birds singing from higher in the tree, and relishing the warmth of sunshine on my back, I heard the familiar sound of rushing water. At first, fear seized my body as I realized it was the 1:15 p.m. Friday flood. I was trying to remember if I had removed all the animals, tractors, and trucks from the ditch.

Then I remembered, and my fears were washed away. Now my hopes, my dreams, my animals, my trucks, and my house were centered on a strong foundation. When the winds, rains, and floods came, this terrific tree house would stand firm. From my mulberry-tree height, I looked down and watched the Friday flood wash my past into the garden.
