A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

3

A leaf, a stem, and a brief root shooting down

Values—many of them old-fashioned, all of them desperately needed and clearly teachable—were among the most important things Hyrum and I learned when we were children. My own childhood forged indelible lessons in honesty, prayer, and many other vital principles that I have since tried to share with my children.

Honesty and the Candy Bars

"Gail," called my dad, "take a dozen eggs to Abner's and trade them for a pound of oleomargarine, please."

I had run this three-block errand before, proving myself a dependable seven-year-old capable of being suitably careful with the fragile cargo. Mama packed the eggs in a paper bag and sent me on my way.

I walked through the big store door and put the sack on the counter. Abner carefully opened it and glanced at the contents. "Put 'em in the egg basket, Gail," he said. "And pick up the oleo." When I returned to the counter, he handed me fifteen cents. "There's the change," he said.

I closed my hand around the dime and nickel. Then my eyes fell on a row of Baby Ruth candy bars. It was late in the afternoon, but still two hours before supper. I was ravenous, and we were always starved for sweets. Chewy carmeled nuts. Creamy milk chocolate. I put a dime on the counter and heard myself saying, "Two Baby Ruth candy bars, please." Pocketing my dad's remaining nickel, I stepped off the porch, peeling back the wrapper on the first bar. Every bite was heavenly. I savored each morsel slowly, then opened the second. It was gone before I turned the corner to our house. I shoved the wrappers out of sight under some bushes.

Suddenly I wondered—would my dad know about the change? I bounced up the front steps, waving the oleo. My mother took it and disappeared into the kitchen. I went back outside to resume my play, but Dad materialized from nowhere. "Gail, where's my change?"

I quickly pulled the nickel out of my pocket and handed it to him.

"Where's the rest?" he asked.

My heart began to race. My palms got sweaty, but I said calmly, "There wasn't any more."

Dad placed his big hand on my shoulder, walked me through the front gate, and steered me down the path to the running board of our old Dodge truck. He sat beside me, his arm around my shoulders.

"You can fight and quarrel, Gail," he said. "You can swear, you can smoke, you can drink, and you can still be a good person. But if you're dishonest, you stop being good. You can't tell the truth sometimes and lie sometimes. Nothing is more important than your integrity, Gail. If you lie to me about a dime, you'll end up lying about more important things."

Tears were running down my cheeks. "I'm sorry, Dad!" I wailed. I knew that what he was saying was true. I had never felt so ashamed, so awful. I clung to his dark blue denim work shirt and sobbed, "I'll never do it again."

His arm closed around me fiercely. I felt his cheek on the top of my head for a moment. Silence was relief—I had learned my lesson, and my dad knew it.

Evan Erastmus Cooper was an honorable man. I never doubted it, even before I knew what honor was. My people had never had a great deal of money. The red soil of the Washington farm yielded its onions, radishes, sugar beets, and alfalfa only reluctantly. Mama worked as a waitress at Dick's Cafe when the family coffers were low. But truth counted for something among the Coopers and the Wilkinses.

Prayer and the Softball

It was summertime. I must have been about seven years old. After the beds were made, the dishes done, and the house straightened up, I would ask my mother the familiar question, "May I go play at Richard's house?" Given her permission, I took the shortcut through the sage and began the one-mile hike from my house to his.

Our favorite game was Bat and Roll. Richard would bat the ball out to me, then lay the bat on the ground pointing in my direction. My job was to field the ball, then roll it back to try to hit the bat. If the ball touched the bat, I became the batter and Richard would go to the field.

One morning when I appeared at his house to continue our game, we could not find the softball. We looked everywhere: behind bushes, under shrubs, around trees, and in tall grass and ditches. The ball was nowhere to be found. I asked Richard to think back and retrace his steps from the last time he had played with the ball. This led us into his house, where we looked under tables, in closets, under chairs and couches. All to no avail.

Finally, he wondered if his mother had put it in the toy box in his bedroom. We dug through the box, looked on his shelves, under the pillows, under the bed—anywhere we thought the softball might be. We were both disappointed that we would be unable to play.

As we stood there, downhearted, suddenly a lesson taught by our teacher in Primary clicked in my mind. I reminded Richard that the teacher had said if ever we were lost, or couldn't find something important, or needed anything, all we needed to do was pray to our Heavenly Father, and he would help us.

Richard replied, "That's right! I remember that."

Without hesitation we knelt at his bedside and simply said, "Heavenly Father, Sister Hall told us that if we ever needed your help, we could kneel down and ask you for it. We want to play softball today and we can't find our ball. Would you help us find it?"

While I still had my head bowed and eyes closed, a vivid picture of where the softball lay came into my mind. Confidently, I leaned down, pulled up the corner of the bedspread, and picked up the ball.

"Okay, Richard," I said matter-of-factly. "Heavenly Father answered our prayer. Let's go play."

From that moment, I knew that God indeed answers prayers. It was the first of several experiences that taught me the reality of that truth. Another such moment came a few years later, when I was a teenager and old enough to drive. My need was much greater than the simple desire to find a softball, but my earlier experience with God helped me to exercise childlike faith in finding something far more precious that was lost.

At the time, I was working as a waitress at the Liberty Cafe in St. George to earn money to attend college. I had dropped my adored dog, Mopsy, off at the veterinarian's office on my way to work. He had recommended she be spayed to minimize the effects of a calcium deficiency she suffered. Because of the bond of loyalty between me and Mopsy, it was hard for me on that Friday morning to leave her at the vet's for the procedure. I knew she would hate it, and I would miss her, too.

Some three hours into my shift, I received a phone call from the vet. Mopsy had escaped. "We cannot find her," he said. "We have looked everywhere, up and down the road, and we just cannot find her."

Frustrated that I couldn't leave work, I anxiously waited for my shift to end at 2:00 p.m., then hurriedly drove to the veterinarian's. Although he was apologetic and tried to explain how the dog had gotten out, all I cared about was that somewhere out there in those vast fields of alfalfa was my little dog, alone, in foreign surroundings, five miles away from home. Some dogs have incredible homing instincts, but Mopsy was a sheltered house dog, with little outdoor experience.

I began my search. I drove up and down the road, hunted through the alfalfa fields near the vet's office, and walked down to the river bottom, whistling and shouting her name. I tried to think like Mopsy. Which way would she go? What route would she take? I looked for her all afternoon, pursuing every possible avenue she might have tried, but to no avail. Finally darkness forced me in.

The next day after work, again I searched and searched. I was frantic, thinking of all the things that could have happened. She had no food or water. What about predators? Could someone have taken her? I extended the radius of my quest past the alfalfa fields, up on the Black Ridge west of St. George, through the city streets, back down to the river. I asked everyone I met if they had seen my dog. Again, no success.

On Sunday, I decided I would fast and pray about finding Mopsy. After church, a strong impression came to me about where to look for her. Improbable as it seemed, I knew I was going to find my dog. I asked my mother if she would drive while I looked. To her disbelief, we drove away from Mopsy's most probable route home toward the other side of Black Ridge, ten miles away. My mom followed my instructions, but the expression on her face told me what she was thinking.

Another impression came: turn left and go toward the Santa Clara fields. As we drove along a dirt road, we stopped often to get out and call for Mopsy. We searched for a long time. My hopes gradually dimmed as we continued driving through the green alfalfa fields, eventually circling back toward St. George. Finally I had to admit defeat. I looked over toward my mother and opened my mouth to say, "Let's go home." Then, through her open car window, I noticed a wave of movement in the alfalfa field beyond the road.

It could have been anything, but I knew.

"Mama, stop the car!" I yelled. I jumped out and ran to the barbed-wire fence, calling "Mopsy? Mopsy?" Just above the top of the alfalfa, her little head popped up in recognition. She bounded toward me as fast as she could, while I crawled through the fence to run and meet her.

I picked her up and hugged her. She simultaneously yapped, licked me, and wriggled hysterically. My mother, tears in her eyes, shook her head in disbelief. Joyfully yet solemnly we drove home, pulling burrs and foxtails out of Mopsy's matted fur. Once again, I had learned that God does hear and answers prayers with a generosity that does not scorn some requests as insignificant. His eye is on the sparrow—and the softball, and a little lost dog.

Working toward a Goal: The Softball Glove

I was taught early that faith and works go hand in hand. In my family we learned faith, we learned work, and we learned faith in work. My softball glove was a wonderful test of my faith in work.

I was not very old before I discovered that my gifts lay in the athletic realm. For a female growing up in Dixie in the fifties, the only organized outlet for athletic expression was the Church-sponsored Young Women's softball program. When I graduated from Primary at age twelve and was eligible to play on that team, I could hardly wait until the season began. I was so excited—until I dug out my old softball glove. The horsehair padding was coming out of the worn holes in the leather; the leather thongs that had once held the fingers together were missing. It was flat worn-out. It seemed okay in the sandy backyards and behind the schoolhouse, but now that I was in the big leagues, I had to have a new glove.

I knew it would be futile to go to Mama and Dad with this request. I knew I needed a new glove, but I didn't think they would feel that I did. Besides, the family finances would never stretch far enough to afford one. So I formulated a plan to obtain a new glove myself—and to have it by the time softball season began.

In the farming community of Washington, early spring brought the back-breaking work of harvesting onions and radishes. It took a courageous and motivated person to enter an onion patch and look down long rows and rows of onions, but I was incredibly motivated. The process of bunching onions or radishes was arduous. I chose onions because they were easier to handle; radishes had rough leaves and had to be bound in bigger bunches than my twelve-year-old hands could manage. After school I would change clothes, walk to the onion field, pick up a bundle of 120 precut lengths of string, and tuck the bundle through the right belt loop of my jeans. The field boss would assign me to a row. It didn't take long to work out a system: I would straddle the row of onions, stoop down and pick a precise bunch, and slap the bunch against my leg with my left hand to knock off the dirt while with my right hand I grabbed one string from my belt loop and wrapped it twice around the bundle. Then it was simply a matter of tying a quick knot and dropping the bunch between the furrows. I had to repeat this process 120 times to earn fifty cents. Depending on how focused I was, I could earn between fifty and seventy-five cents an hour.

I was focused. Every morning, the five-mile school-bus ride took me past Nelson's Sporting Goods Store in St. George, with its display window full of softball gloves, bats, and balls. I always sat on the left side of the bus so I could look at those gloves as we passed the store. With that reminder each day, I was motivated to hurry to the onion patch every afternoon to bunch.

One morning, as the bus passed by the window, I decided to spend my lunch hour inspecting the gloves. As soon as the lunch bell rang, I raced the three blocks to Nelson's. Standing before the display, viewing the myriad gloves and inhaling their strong leather aroma, I felt an excitement in my soul that I still remember today. At about eye level I spied one particular glove: a Wilson, with Billy Martin's signature on it. I envisioned myself with that glove on, catching a long fly ball out in left field. The price tag read $38.43. Too shy to try it on, I just eyed it—knowing with all my heart that this fielder's glove was the one for me. I returned to school, praying that I would be able to earn enough money.

After five solid weeks of bunching onions, working for two or three hours each day after school and all day on Saturdays, I finally had enough to buy the softball glove. I'll never forget the day I asked my mother if she would please drive me the five miles to the sporting goods store to purchase the coveted prize. I was holding the crumpled money in my onion-stained hand. She knew what I had done to earn it. Without hesitation, she smiled, "Yes, let's go."

As we walked in, my whole soul was aglow. I picked up my glove and put it on. It fit perfectly. Eye-level with the counter, I proudly counted out the $38.43, plus tax, in dollars and pennies. My mother wore a wonderful smile as I put the glove on my hand and floated out of the store.

As my mother drove me home, I scrutinized every inch of that glove: the light brown leather with Billy Martin's personalized autograph stamped in black, the bold "Wilson" brand across the wrist strap, and the words "Genuine Raw-Hide Leather" and "Snap Action" right in the pocket.

As perfect as the mitt seemed to me at that moment, I soon realized that the weeks of work that had gone into my purchase were just the beginning. Now the real training—of myself and my glove—commenced. To train the glove, I put my softball in it, tied some string around it, and began to form it. I slept with it, loved it, and kissed it. For my own training, I committed to daily practice of an hour or more. I had my sights set on being a pitcher, so to the side of the now-vacant "Dog House" I nailed a square piece of plywood that represented the strike zone. I stepped off my twenty-seven paces to the pitcher's mound, faced the target, and began my career.

The coach's phone call, announcing the start of spring practices, finally came. As we got into the season, I recognized immediately that I had a challenge ahead of me. The older girls, who had more experience and practice, were nearly always on the first string. Undaunted, I resolved that I was going to be a starter my first year, even though I was the youngest player on the team.

The night of the first game came. We gathered in the Dixie Sunbowl, the rodeo arena where all the Church softball games were played. As the first-string players were sent out onto the field, I was left sitting on the bench—praying with all my heart that somehow I would get the opportunity to go out and prove myself.

At the beginning of the eighth inning, I noticed a group of young men come into the arena. I also noticed that one young man kept looking at the left fielder. He would periodically wave at her to come toward him. She would just wave back and say, "I can't. I can't."

Finally, as the team ran off the field between innings, I saw him come over and talk to her over the railing. It appeared that he was trying to persuade her to leave with him. Under my breath, I was saying, "Go! Go!" If she went, maybe I would get to take her place. Sure enough, when the ump signaled our third out and our team was taking the field, I watched intently as the girl approached the coach to excuse herself. The coach turned, looked up and down the bench, and finally signaled for me to take left field. Fitting my new Wilson on my hand, I nodded to the coach and nonchalantly trotted out to left field—straining to keep my insides from exploding. I was sure that the bright arena lights were all celebrating with me.

It was the ninth inning; the score was 3-2 in our favor. The first batter hit a double over second base. Batter number two struck out. The third batter grounded out at first base, but the second-base runner advanced to third. Batter number four, their heavy hitter, confidently stepped up to the plate. The first pitch was a strike. The pressure got to our pitcher, because she followed with two wild pitches. The batter swung hard at the next pitch, but fouled it off. From left field, the next pitch looked like a strike, but the umpire's call was "Ball three!" and we were on the brink of crisis—two outs, a runner on third, and a count of three and two.

As I looked at the stance of the batter, I instinctively dropped back and shifted to the right two or three feet. My sixth sense told me she was going for the left-field fence. I saw our pitcher wind up, then release; the batter swung, and the ball, sure enough, sailed high in the air, right past third base, deep into left field. Adrenaline took over. I raced for the baseline and, with a spectacular backhanded reach, caught the ball—right on the Genuine Raw-Hide Leather stamp. Though out of breath, I could still hear the roar from the crowd and the shout of victory from my teammates as they ran toward me. I met them with a big grin. "Hey, nothing to it!" My benchwarming career was over.

The years have come and gone, and my tired and worn Wilson glove, with the faint Billy Martin signature, has been retired to a shelf by my bedside. However, the glorious memory of desiring, working for, obtaining, training, and maintaining my glove lives on.

Caring and the Curling Iron

It was the day of Woodward Junior High's eighth-grade class assembly. I was in a crowd scene in the opening skit. We had been practicing for weeks; our goal was to win the award for the Best Class Assembly.

Before I left for school, my mother had painstakingly curled my hair. Her job was difficult for two reasons: first, my hair was absolutely curl-resistant; second, the method of curling hair was a laborious, one-curl-at-a-time technique that was quite tricky. The curling iron looked somewhat like modern ones, except that it had two wooden handles joined together to form a U shape. Squeezing the handles together opened the hair-clip piece, allowing my mother to roll the hair into a curl. Another minor difference: it wasn't electric. The U-shaped handles, just larger than the mouth of our coal-oil lamp's glass chimney, held the iron in place as it dangled above the flame.

My mother would use a comb to part my hair into small sections, then take the thin curling iron out of the lamp chimney to curl each lock. As she finished one curl, she would place the iron back in the lamp to reheat, prepare the next bit of hair, and repeat the process until my whole head was in ringlets.

Just before I left the house, I looked in the mirror to see my beautifully curled hair. As I walked the three blocks to the school-bus stop through the unseasonably damp February morning air, my friends commented admiringly on my hairdo. I loathed standing still as long as it took, so I let Mama curl my hair like this only for church or special occasions. But I glowed under the compliments.

Twenty minutes later, as I got off the bus, I half expected similar comments from other schoolmates but was greeted by quizzical looks instead. Puzzled, I went straight to the rest room. As I looked in the mirror, I gasped, "Oh, no!" The ringlets had wilted. Looking back at me was a sad face surrounded by a mass of straight, stringy hair. It didn't even look combed. I was totally embarrassed, realizing that the assembly was only two hours away. Tears welled up in my eyes.

I waited in the bathroom until the school bell rang, indicating that everyone would be in class, then sneaked up the long flight of stairs to the principal's office and asked to use the phone. With a shaky voice, I explained my story to my mother. She asked to speak to the principal. After only a moment, Mr. Frei hung up the phone with a chuckle and sympathetically instructed me go meet my mother at the Texaco station next to Dick's Cafe, where she worked. Then he put his arm around my shoulders and escorted me to the door. By the time I walked the three blocks to Texaco, my mother had already driven the five miles from Washington, lighted the coal-oil lamp, and had the curling iron heating on the countertop.

She gave me a comforting hug. "It's not as bad as you think, Gail," she said. "Hop up here on the counter." I sighed in relief; my mother was there. Everything would be all right. Once again she transformed my hair into beautiful ringlets, then drove me back to the school. With my confidence back and my mother in the audience, my performance was supreme.

When I became a mother myself, I remembered the lesson of Mama's curling iron and how important it was that my mother cared about me enough to come when I needed her.

Patience and Persistence: A Lesson from a Cow

My family lived on a small farm. After the harvest, as winter approached, my father would have to seek work in the closest big city, Las Vegas, which was 135 miles away. Although I had other sisters, somehow I was the only one who knew how to milk a cow, so the outdoor chores fell to me. I didn't mind; milking a cow was a lot better than having to scrub out the oatmeal kettle.

It was a fabulous Friday afternoon, made glorious by the thought of no school the next day. On the five-mile bus ride home, my friends and I excitedly made plans to go to the latest picture show in town; the gang would meet at Abner's General Store at 6:00 p.m. Since I didn't get home from school until after 4:00 every day, this didn't give me much time to get all my chores done, get ready, and be back at the store at the appointed time.

I had to slop the pigs, feed and water the horses and chickens, gather the eggs, collect the wood chips to start the morning fire, and milk the cow. I hurried through the chores as quickly as I could, saving the milking for last. Finally, milk bucket in one hand and hobbles in the other, I walked into the corral. M.J.B., the cow, was lying in the far corner. She had earned her name by straining for the last morsel of oats and getting her nose caught in the M.J.B. coffee can my dad used for graining the cows.

I hurried toward her, anxious to get her up on her feet and moving toward the manger. She slowly levered up her back legs, then her tail, and awkwardly put her front feet under her. We then began the arduous journey toward the manger. It seemed that all my, "Yip, Yip," and "Hurry along!" encouragement did nothing but slow her down. She knew I was in a hurry.

Finally she reached the manger. I set my milk bucket down and quickly secured the hobbles by reaching in front of her back legs, placing the hobble on her left hock, bringing the chain across the front of her legs, and fastening it on her right hock. Being in such a rush, I didn't take the time to follow my usual practice of securing the tail inside the hobble. I pulled up the milking stool and sat down. Again, feeling time pressing, I didn't clean her udder and teats thoroughly, only briefly brushing away the hay and dried manure.

Placing my head in her flank, I glanced at my watch, only to be reminded of how little time I had left. Of course, as I began milking, M.J.B. refused to let her milk down. Her uncooperative attitude brought loud, impatient words from my mouth, and she answered with a stinging slap of the tail on the side of my head. I responded by pushing my head deeper into her flank and squeezing harder on the teats. She persisted in her stubbornness, shuffling forward, almost upsetting the milk bucket and knocking more debris off her udder into the pail.

I ran out of patience and shouted, "Okay, M.J.B., I've had it!" Grabbing the bucket in my right hand, I stood and swung it at her head. At that moment, she turned her head and caught the flying bucket with her horn, making a huge dent and a little hole three-quarters of the way up. M.J.B. had won the battle and left me facing an even greater crisis.

Now it wasn't just the time I had to worry about. If I quit at this point, I had to go back inside the house, face my mother with an empty milk bucket, and spend my evening at home. That prospect, along with the loss of the needed milk, was an unhappy one—not to mention the confrontation I would have with my dad, trying to explain the dented bucket to him when he returned home. I knew exactly how much sympathy I would get when I explained that I was in a hurry because I wanted to go to a movie.

I knew what I needed to do. Taking a deep breath to calm myself, I spoke softly to M.J.B., rubbed her neck, and began again. When I settled down, the cow settled down, and I filled the bucket—to the hole. That day M.J.B. taught me a great lesson in patience. By the way, the picture show was great.

A leaf, a stem, and a brief root shooting down. I was learning at a very young age values and principles that would stay with me all my life. Honesty matters. God answers prayers. Working hard to achieve a goal brings success and satisfaction. Caring parents provide a stability greatly needed by their children. And patience and persistence can help a person concentrate on the process of work and find fulfillment in it. Focusing on only the desired product creates a rushed, impatient feeling and eliminates a great deal of the satisfaction that can come from work. I may not have known it then, but someday it would be important to me to be able to pass that heritage on.
