A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

4

A young trunk bending in the wind

In the 1970s, we were living in Portland, Oregon, and one of our children's favorite places to visit was OMSI, the Oregon Museum of Science and Industry. This marvelous facility provided numerous hands-on learning experiences for children and adults alike, such as an enormous model of a human heart with chambers large enough to walk through and "functioning" valves that visitors could touch, or a busy cross-section (behind glass) of a live, active beehive.

One display my children particularly enjoyed was called the "Love Machine." It supposedly measured the amount of love within the hearts of those who stepped up to the machine and placed their hands on the copper plates. Across the top of the display was a row of ten indicator lights, all of which would light up if the person was filled with love.

The first time we discovered this display, of course, my children were anxious to test their levels of love. One by one they took their turns standing up on the little step and placing their tiny hands on the plates. Each was pleased as he or she was able to turn on all ten lights, indicating an abundance of love.

After the initial interest had worn off and they moved on to other displays nearby, curiosity got the best of me and I decided to measure my capacity for love. Thinking that I was a naturally loving person, I confidently placed my hands on the copper plates. To my shock and chagrin, only five lights came on. Was the machine broken? I exerted more pressure on the plates, glancing around to be sure that none of my children were watching these bleak results. The harder I pushed, the more the fifth light flickered.

Somewhat put out, I removed my hands, wiped them on my pant legs, then tried again. Five lights. I was not only irritated, I was baffled as to why my children could produce ten lights and I couldn't. Words from the Bible, "and a little child shall lead them," rang in my ears. Considerably humbled, I trailed in their wake, realizing anew that children truly do lead—in love, in purity, in simplicity, in faith—and that sometimes the best thing an adult can do is follow their lead.

I later learned that what the "Love Machine" really measured was the moisture in hands. The more "loving" hands were those busy, sweaty little hands, not my cool, dry ones. However, that knowledge did not lessen the impact of the truth that had hit me so forcefully that day: children really do know an unconditional, all-encompassing love.

Children possess this natural love and an abiding faith in their parents, even when the parents forget about that unconditional trust. That's why they believe the terrible messages we sometimes send them in our tiredness or frustration: "You're careless. You're lazy."

That truth came home to me a few months ago when our twenty-two-month-old granddaughter, Shilo, was making a particular mess of herself in her high chair at the Sunday dinner table. Observing her food-caked face and hands, Hyrum, quite without thinking about it or meaning to do harm, said, "Look at you, Shilo! You're ugly!"

Shilo's sky-blue eyes welled with tears. Stacie, her mother, immediately came to her defense: "Grampy, you've hurt Shilo's feelings. She's not ugly; she's just messy."

Hyrum, realizing the message he had sent, quickly repented. Wiping her face and hands with a napkin, he said, "Shilo, you're beautiful. There's beauty under this messy face." Shilo beamed back at him.

If little Shilo, less than two years old, knew the difference between "ugly" and "messy," it seems obvious that a child's self-esteem begins to form at a very young age. A few unflattering words—even when spoken by someone who had provided lots of other previous evidence of love for Shilo—would have taken their toll if they hadn't been noticed and corrected.

But even for the most nurturing and loving parents, their children's teen years are generally a trial. Adolescent self-esteem is a roller coaster, and parents are not usually welcome on the ride. In the search for identity, most teenagers lose themselves for a while. They become clothes conscious, peer conscious, looks conscious, and self-conscious. Teenagers do need structure and parental direction, but they often resent being directly "taught." It takes all the proficiency, creativity, and ingenuity a parent can muster to quietly provide support, resources, and encouragement for good decisions.

The simple fact is that for most people adolescence is an emotional, ingenuous, and agonizing time when the parent and teenager alike endure "growing pains." My own teenage years were no exception.

Tomboy

As I struggled to learn how I fit in with the rest of the world, I grew to appreciate the counsel of David O. McKay, President of the Church during my growing-up years: "Be yourself, but be that perfectly." It was an often-uphill battle for me to realize that I was who I was, and that it was okay to be me. True self-esteem could come only by my recognizing that truth and working with it.

Due to my practice chasing cows among the tamaracks on the river bottom, I could speed down a 75-yard track in 9.2 seconds. I could balance a spinning basketball on the tip of my index finger, Harlem Globetrotters' style, besides handling the ball effortlessly and shooting with near-perfect accuracy. I could throw a softball from the right-field fence to get a base runner out at home plate. Riding a horse—bareback or saddled—was heaven to me. God had gifted me with uncanny athletic talents.

As early as I can remember, I was labeled a tomboy. (Was my self-inspired nickname of "Tommy Boy Yell" a subconscious recognition of those qualities even at the age of four?) The tomboy label had no effect on me, however, during my grade-school years. My immediate classmates—one other girl and five boys—accepted me in either world. I could play rough-and-tumble with the boys at such games as cowboys and Indians, football, Annie-I-Over, and rubber guns. Or, when necessary (on cold, rainy days), I could be soft and gentle with the girls at such things as playing house, cutting out paper dolls, or painting pictures. My choice, however, was to be with the boys. It was a win-win situation because they needed me to make the teams even. Besides, I was a better player than any of them. I soon became their organizer, quarterback, pitcher, and floor general. The label "tomboy" was a small price to pay for six years of grade school glory.

The painful years came when the long yellow school bus hauled me to Woodward Junior High. Overnight, my beloved blue jeans and sweatshirts were relegated to home-only status by the new rules of the game: "Girls have to wear frilly dresses, black patent-leather shoes, and bows in their hair to school." The vision of my jeans left hanging on my bedroom doorknob—so I could jump right into them after school—helped me cope with the changes.

No longer could I be the athletic ace I had been in my grade school years. No longer could we all go out and play a game of football together at recess. It was a painful loss of identity for me to drop from reigning supreme to being unseen. The boys and girls were now separated. Boys went to wood shop; girls took home economics. The boys had their physical education classes and the girls had theirs. These were the 1950s; we were never to play together again.

My biggest frustration came when it was time to select the school's basketball, baseball, or track and field teams. Girls' athletics hadn't even been born yet. It was difficult to sit on the sidelines and watch my male peers begin the journey of realizing athletic hopes and dreams that I too ached to fulfill. I felt the way my mom's homemade bread looked when she forgot to put in the yeast.

My physical education class became the highlight of my day. I couldn't understand why the majority of girls dreaded this class. It was my hour to shine, to get out of a dress, to breathe and be free. My gym class was a glimmer of fulfillment of my athletic abilities—that is, until Miss Marker entered my life in the ninth grade. I still wonder why she was hired as a physical education teacher. She did not fit my mental picture of a gym teacher, nor could she compare to the fun-loving and personable Miss Armstrong of the previous year, who would dress and join us in the sports we played each day.

Miss Marker was of medium build, with stiff, bleached-blonde hair that always looked professionally done. She wore thick, red lipstick, heavy eye makeup, and gaudy jewelry to match her expensive, fashionable clothing: colorful Jantzen sweaters and tight, knee-length skirts with coordinating four-inch heels. Seeing her walk down the hall was like watching a model on the catwalk at a fashion show. As she spoke in her low, indefinite voice, she would gesture with her hands to show off her long, painted fingernails, invariably colored to match her bright lipstick.

Miss Marker's mission was to instill in us poise and social graces. We did not change out of the dreaded dresses we wore each day to school. Rather, we met in the auditorium, where Miss Marker would lecture to us about the importance of walking, sitting, and carrying ourselves properly. She would then use the stage to demonstrate graceful mannerisms: how to ascend or descend stairs, how to get into or out of a car, how to walk and sit with correct posture, how to be seated at a table, how to stand and turn when modeling clothing. At that point in time, I could see no relevance in such things, though other girls were very enthusiastic about them.

The requirement for a satisfactory grade this particular term was to gracefully perform a modeling routine in front of the entire class. Each girl, individually, in a dress and high heels, had to walk up the stairs to center stage, face the audience, pose, make a full turn, pose again, and then walk over to a chair and properly seat herself. At this point, it was critical to hold the legs together, properly clasp the hands in the lap, and sit erect on the front portion of the chair. The final step was to stand, go around the chair, descend the stairs on the other side of the stage, and return to the audience. This performance horrified me.

As I think about it now, there were many factors increasing my tension. First of all, my clothes were all hand-me-downs. I was fearful of being compared to my better-dressed peers. Second, I had never worn a pair of heels in my life. I knew that I would look silly. Third, I felt uncomfortable about parading myself in front of others. Finally, I was terrified to stand alone and face those million eyes. My self-esteem could not cope with this demand.

The day came that I knew would bring my turn to take the stage. I entered the auditorium and sat on the back row of folding chairs, clutching my coat tightly about me, thinking that somehow it would go away, denying the reality that I would need to perform. Something would happen: maybe she would forget to call my name; maybe I could turn invisible; maybe, being on the back row, hiding behind the class, I would just be overlooked.

The number of girls who had not yet modeled became fewer and fewer, yet the slow-moving minute hand of the clock told me there were still twenty minutes left in class. Reality was closing in. As my inevitable turn drew closer and closer, a burning sensation shot through my body and I started to break out in a cold sweat. I couldn't handle it. I would not walk across that stage. Tears filled my eyes; I stood up, still bundled in my coat, and slumped out the side door. I would rather suffer the consequences.

I don't actually remember what those consequences were. Miss Marker may have lowered my grade from an "A" to a "B." It may have been the reason I did not receive the award some time later for "Girl Athlete of the Year." The really important consequences, however, went deeper. For example, in class, I would know the answer to a teacher's question, but the fear inside was so great I could not—and would not—respond. I couldn't stand before a class and give an oral report. As time went by, my inability to communicate and express myself deepened to a near-phobia.

Then senior high school began. Although the flavor of junior high frustrations lingered, high school introduced an intricate and intriguing challenge called the dating game. I soon discovered that maintaining a feminine image and disguising my athletic prowess among men took all the genius I could engineer. A "movie date" was safe, but being asked to play tennis forced an interesting decision. Should I play "like a girl" and lose, or really play as well as I could and take the chance of beating my date? I had to ask myself, "Do I want another date with this guy?" If so, I let him win. If not, I started looking around for another ride home. It was a painful time of juggling my desire to be me with my desire to be popular.

Prom Night

The junior prom was three weeks away. Among the girls, the exciting game of getting a date for the occasion had begun. That excitement was catching even me. Of course, the fact that my two best friends already had dates only elevated my motivation. Secretly, I had to admit that a certain brown-eyed, dark-haired boy who rode on my school bus already put a tickle in my stomach every time we passed.

I laid out my battle plan. First, I knew that I had to get his attention. I would have to wear the "right" clothes (frilly dresses and patent-leather shoes) and look perfect every day. I also needed to be discreet and nonchalant. I would have to research his interests. Did he like sports? What were his favorite teams? I hoped he was a Celtics fan. Conversations about football, baseball, or basketball would be easy for me. I knew the stats of Mickey Mantle, and that Johnny Unitas was quarterback for the Baltimore Colts.

I would also have to play the detective to find out his routes, patterns, and daily schedule. Who were his friends? Where was his locker? Where and when were his classes? Where did he eat lunch and what was his daily path? I envisioned him descending the stairs just as I turned the corner and delicately placed my hand on the banister to begin my ascent. Mysteriously, at that very moment, my lace handkerchief would float to the floor at his feet. Of course, he would gallantly pick up the handkerchief and bow as he gently placed it back in my hand. "Your handkerchief, Mademoiselle." Timing was everything.

Of course, he would never notice that I was playing this game. I would be completely innocent and naive, though observant and complimentary. Discreet flattery wouldn't hurt either: "Nice shirt," or "What cologne are you wearing?" or "Good job on Mr. Frei's last test."

Monday morning, I launched my prom plan. I spent the first two days observing his every move. By Wednesday, I was able to position myself by his locker just as he happened to be exchanging his books between classes. "Oh, hi. How was your class?" I said as I casually breezed by, my palms sweaty. The play of the day happened as I rounded the corner by the stairs to begin my ascent just as he was reaching the landing coming down. He couldn't help but notice me. Perfect timing. I nonchalantly greeted him. "Oh, hello. Are you having a good day?" He stopped, and we spoke long enough for me to throw in a compliment about a new shirt he was wearing. The stair incident was crucial. He actually spoke to me. My plan was progressing nicely.

I continued my tactics daily, and the next victory occurred a few days later. I managed to brush by him in the bus line while talking to some of my friends nearby. At the same moment, a girlfriend of mine standing behind him called me over to talk about a homework assignment. Perfect setup. As we finished our discussion, the brown eyes turned around and the three of us began talking about last night's high school basketball game. He seemed pleasantly surprised that I was able to speak his language. We talked about the team's quick fast break, and that last-second baseline shot that won the game. The school bus came and the line dissolved too quickly, but during our conversation he had looked at me with different eyes. I knew I had made an impression.

The long-anticipated phone call finally came on a Friday night that I will never forget. I was in the living room, relaxing by the fire. My only thought was that school was out for the weekend. Mom was bustling around in the kitchen. When I heard the phone ring—one long, one short—I had a feeling it might be for me. That thought was confirmed when my mother announced, with her hand over the receiver, that I was wanted—by a baritone voice.

My heart began pounding in my throat as I struggled to get to the phone. I moved in slow motion; my legs seemed immobile, as in a dream I'd had when someone was chasing me. "Mustn't panic. Calm down, Gail!" This was the fruition of my plan, the phone call—the one I had been hoping for, working for, and praying for.

My acting career began. Without a tremble in my voice, I managed, "Hello?"

"Hi. This is Ron." (As if I didn't know.) "Gee, how are you doing?"

"Oh, I'm fine." (I was grateful he couldn't see through the phone.)

"What are you doing?"

"Oh, nuthin'."

"How's the weather down in Washington?" (We were only ten miles away.)

"Oh, fine. How's it out there in Leeds?"

"Fine. How did you do in Mr. Hafen's algebra class?"

"Oh, okay, I guess. It was a hard test." (I had flunked it, but I'd never tell.) "I bet you aced it, as usual."

"Yeah. I did okay."

Finally he asked the big question I had been waiting for: "Gail, would you go to the prom with me?"

My calm answer should have earned me an Oscar nomination. I said, "Well, let me check and make sure that I'm not doing anything that night."

I put my hand over the receiver and silently jumped up and down for a minute, then came back and reported nonchalantly, "That night is free. I'd love to go to the prom with you."

I don't remember hanging up the phone. I only recall running through the house, wildly announcing, "He asked me! He asked me! I have a date to the prom!"

Immediate preparation for prom night began. I had two weeks. For most, that was probably sufficient time, but for me, a tomboy unfamiliar with the process of shedding my comfortable Levi's for a formal gown, it would take every minute. The very thought of the transformation I had to undertake was frightening, but the decision had been made; there was no turning back.

My mother was the Queen Shopper. Her idea of shopping was to go to every store, try on every article of clothing, then return to the first store and purchase the first item she had tried on. In contrast, my mode of shopping, when the need arose, was to go to the store, find as quickly as possible what I needed—usually a pair of Levi's or a sweatshirt—and buy it. Thankfully, because St. George was then a small town, Mama's shopping maneuvers were limited. There were only two stores in which formals were sold: Snow's Dress Shop and Mendy's, across the street. We entered Snow's first.

We were greeted immediately by a saleswoman. When my mother explained our need, the saleswoman was happy to suggest several styles I might like. As I entered the stuffy dressing room with my first choice, I recall feeling uncomfortable exchanging my Levi's and sweatshirt for the strapless gown. When I stepped out to show my mom and the saleswoman, I kept wanting to wrap my arms around my neck to cover my bare shoulders. Despite their complimentary comments, I felt strange and was certain I looked funny too.

My style and size were not to be found at Snow's. The fresh air felt so good as we began our trek across the street to Mendy's. Once inside, we were again met by a helpful saleswoman, who pointed out a variety of dresses. As she was expounding the virtues of this or that gown, a sky-blue dress of tulle and taffeta almost jumped out at me from an obscure rack in the back corner. For the first time, I spoke up: "May I look at that one?" As she pulled the dress off the rack and held it up, lights flashed and cymbals crashed: This was the one. I excitedly took it to the dressing room to try it on. Blue was my favorite color—it matched my eyes. Though the dress was strapless, the tulle was arranged on the shoulders to give the modest look that I needed. My only concern at that moment was that it felt a little big in the chest. As this was my first experience with a strapless dress, I asked myself, "What keeps this thing up?" The saleswoman seemed to read my mind. "No problem," she said. "A few alterations, and this dress will fit perfectly." My mother agreed wholeheartedly. "Gail, you will be the princess of the prom. Now all you need are the accessories." The saleswoman, of course, was happy to direct us to the strapless bras, garter belts, and nylons, and suggested that we drop down the street to Center Clothing for the shoes to complete my ensemble. As we prepared to leave, without hesitation my mother pulled from her purse the cash she had earned waiting tables at Dick's Cafe. This was an extravagant price to pay for a one-time affair. Only years later did I realize the extent of her sacrifice.

The day of the big prom finally arrived. It took me all afternoon to prepare. Of course, the first priority was to wash my hair so Mama could roll it in curlers and then wrap it in a dish towel to set while I soaked in a long, hot bath with perfumed oil. The next step was to manicure my nails, then douse my body with all the appropriate lotions, powders, creams, and perfumes. By this time my hair was dry, and I sat on a stool while Mama coiffed it and supervised my last-minute touches.

At last, it was time to put on my formal. The saleswoman was right: it fit perfectly. As I stood and looked in the hallway mirror, my mother came from behind and placed her treasured rhinestone necklace about my neck. The tomboy disappeared (at least for tonight); there in the mirror I beheld the princess of the prom.

The magic moment was broken by the timely knock on the door. My mother answered and announced that Ron had arrived. As I entered the room, my handsome date, dressed in a sharp-looking black suit and tie, took a step toward me and handed me a plastic bag with a beautiful, white-carnation corsage. I graciously thanked him and gingerly pulled it out of the bag. My mother stepped in to help; as she began to pin it on my dress, one of the small carnations fell to the floor. Mama carefully picked it up and reassured us that it would take only a moment to make it look as good as new. She walked to the sewing machine, positioned in front of the living-room window, and retrieved a straight pin, then skillfully arranged and fastened the fallen flower. It was impossible to tell which one she had replaced. The corsage looked perfect as she pinned it to my tulle and taffeta formal. Ron put my coat around my shoulders and we were off to the dance.

An hour of ecstasy passed. We waltzed to such love songs as "The Tennessee Waltz," "Love Is a Many-Splendored Thing," and "The Rock and Roll Waltz," intermingled with the more upbeat "Mr. Sandman" and "Don't Be Cruel." We swung and turned, waltzed and jitterbugged. I was totally in love. My game plan had worked, and this moment was worth all the ingenious tactics I had employed to be with Ron tonight.

As we whirled around and around, my eyes were at the same level as all the men's lapels. It began to dawn on me that each lapel bore a small flower. My body instantly and uncontrollably stiffened in Ron's arms, and my palms broke into a cold sweat. Ron sensed my emotion and must have perceived what I was thinking. "It's all right, Gail. It doesn't matter." Too late. The spell was broken. His words couldn't change the awful realization that gripped my heart: the flower that my mother had so painstakingly fastened to my corsage was . . . his boutonniere.

Moving On

The tragic ending to my prom date with Ron did not mar me for life. I dated him for a while, but the summer passed, and so did he.

In the fall, a new family moved into town. In Washington, where very little ever changed, this event became the talk of the town. My own interest was piqued because this family had a boy, Ira, who was just my age. We rode the same school bus every day. One Friday afternoon, on the bus ride home, we sat together. Amid all the excitement and chattering that accompanies the out-of-school-for-the-weekend atmosphere, Ira casually asked if I could go with him to the movies that night. He said that he would have to ask his mother if she could drive us and another couple of friends; then he would telephone me.

It was the first time I had ever been approached like that, so I walked home wondering if this was a date or just a friendly get-together. When I asked my parents if I could go, I told them that he had asked me out. Just to be safe, though, I broke into my piggy bank for enough nickels, dimes, pennies to cover the seventy-five-cent admission fee. My Levi's pocket was cumbersome with the change, but I wanted to be prepared.

About 6:00 or 6:30, the phone rang. Ira was calling to verify that he and his mother would be there to pick me up at 7:00. His other friends wouldn't be able to go. When they pulled up, Ira came to the door to get me, then led me to the rear door of the car. We got in the backseat, and his mother chauffeured us.

Upon arriving at the old Gaiety Theatre on Tabernacle Street in St. George, I remember getting out of the car and holding back somewhat as we approached the ticket booth. I breathed a sigh of relief as Ira held up two fingers and said through the glass window, "Two, please." It was a bona fide date, all right. As we walked into the movie house, I had to keep my hand on my pocket to silence the coins I had robbed from my piggy bank.

The following spring, Ira's family moved back to Farmington, New Mexico, but every summer Ira would come to stay with his sister and her family in Washington. A group of eight or nine of us would get together on those summer evenings to go to the movies, play games in the park, "borrow" watermelons from Mel Adams's patch, or attend the church youth dances and functions. Over the next two summers Ira and I would hold hands, or he would put his arm around my shoulder; during the school year we wrote letters and talked to each other on the phone. We had a good relationship, and I remember praying to know if he was the one I should marry. But the last summer he returned, it was with another girl. My heart wept—for a couple of days. Then my mother reminded me that he would probably never be a Wyoming rancher. My prayers had been answered again.

You see, ever since I had read the great classic cowboy novel The Virginian as a young girl, I had fantasized that I would marry a Wyoming rancher. I daydreamed about stepping out onto the porch of our ranch house and surveying the surrounding mountains and our expansive ranch, with the corrals full of beautiful horses. I could see myself on horseback, gathering the cattle or galloping over the range toward the setting sun.

I don't recall when I first started to wonder about whom I would marry. Would he be tall? Would he have blue eyes or brown? I do remember that often, in my prayers, I would ask Heavenly Father to help me recognize my dream cowboy when I met him.

During my college years, first at Dixie Junior College and later at Brigham Young University, relationships came and went. Each association, being on a more mature and serious level than my earlier relationships, required more fervent prayer when it came down to the decision-making time. In each case, circumstances and feelings told me this was not the one.

In the meantime, I was majoring in physical education and helping pioneer women's athletics. I thoroughly enjoyed the challenge of self-discipline, the ecstasy of athletic expression, and the thrill of victory that had returned to my life.

The crowning event of my Dixie College career occurred my first year there, when we were invited to participate in the first-ever Intermountain Collegiate Athletic Conference women's basketball tournament held at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah. During the two-day tournament, we played against teams from the University of Utah, Utah State University, Westminster College, Brigham Young University, and Snow College. We played well in the tournament and found ourselves in the championship game with Westminster College.

With three seconds left in the game, the score was tied. The guard defending me fouled me as I was bringing the ball down the court. I remember looking up at the score board as I stepped up to the foul line: 17 to 17. I looked at my team and realized the championship was in my hands. I remember my heart beating a thousand miles an hour as I released the ball. It dropped through the hoop! We held out for the remaining three seconds and came back waving the victory flag.

This experience influenced my decision to go on to Brigham Young University with the same major. There I played on the women's basketball, softball, and volleyball teams. I set a university broad-jump record that held for eight years. Because of my speed, I was designated pacesetter for a world-champion runner training at the university for the next Olympics.

I had come through adolescence intact. During my university years, I finally became comfortable with who I was and what I could do with my life and my talents. Under those wonderful circumstances, graduation came all too quickly. That evening, as my name was presented, "A. Gail Cooper," a champion walked across the stage in front of thousands of eyes to receive the diploma: baccalaureate in the field of physical education. Beneath my traditional black graduation gown, I was wearing my beloved blue jeans.
