A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

5

A new limb strong

I have been in many schoolrooms, but a patch of arrow weeds in the river bottoms near my home was the place in which I received an education for eternity.

It was my first winter quarter at Dixie Junior College. I was dating a young man, Richard, from Cedar City, who was also attending Dixie. We would often double-date with Richard's first cousin, Wells Harrison. We had many good times together and came to know each other well. One Saturday night we had been at a dance together and thoroughly enjoyed ourselves. The next day, a friend called to tell me that Richard and Wells had been in an automobile accident. Richard was not seriously injured, but Wells had been killed.

I was stunned. What a fine line there was between life and death! I began to ask myself some sobering questions. Where was Wells now? Why did this have to happen? Why to Wells? Why now?

At Wells's funeral, a sermon given by Brother Tobe Hunt directly addressed the question of the meaning of life and death, as captured in the explanations of Alma. Though I don't remember the details of the talk, I do remember the feeling that penetrated my heart. I knew Brother Hunt had spoken the truth. I was comforted and left with a desire to read the Book of Mormon and find out more.

I had been given this book as a gift when I was a child. Many times teachers and friends had told me to read it, but I had never found it important until now. I went home and dusted off my unused copy. As I read, I became deeply involved in the account that unfolded from the pages. One particular king, instead of living off the labors of his subjects, worked with his own people and gave service to them. A charismatic military leader rallied his people to defend their freedoms in the face of a powerful enemy force. In another military battle, 2,000 young warriors showed great faith and were preserved from death. A prophet demonstrated great courage in testifying of a king's need to repent, even though it drove the king to burn him at the stake. Other parts of the story taught me the value of prayer, the actuality of Christ's resurrection, and the reality of my relationship with him. Most important, I learned that it was possible for my own weaknesses to become strengths through my faith in Jesus Christ.

I longed for the book not to end. I did not want to lose the new feelings inside me. Although I had grown up in a deeply religious culture, I was only now beginning to understand why great-great-grandparents had sacrificed family, friends, hometowns, and countries, faced incredible hardships, and endured the Dixie red sand and blazing sun to plant cottonwoods and mulberries for shade and shadowfall. I wanted to know for myself the truths my ancestors held precious.

I closed the book and walked down the road to the creek bottom about a mile below my house. There, in a childhood hideout screened by arrow weeds and willows, I knelt and prayed. The feeling that came over me could best be described as the warmth of the sun on a cool April day; it gently touched my neck and back and flowed down over and penetrated through me. When I left the willows, I knew for myself that there was a God, that he cared about me individually, and that he would help me overcome my fears and weaknesses.

After my experience in the arrow weeds by the creek, I had a strong desire to become closer to God through attending my church meetings and serving others. That experience and the feelings it generated created a spiritual foundation for my life that would stay with me ever after. I set goals to finish my education and then to go on a mission for The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—decisions that literally changed my life.

A Mission to England

My arrival in England as a new Mormon missionary was one of the great culture shocks of my young life. For a young woman from the vast expanses of the western desert, the closed-in environment of mists, rain, and clouds was oppressive. In the country around my hometown, cactus and sagebrush outnumbered people. Here I felt smothered by the press of people who spoke a different version of my native tongue than the one I knew. In contrast to the slow, leisurely life of a small town, everything in England seemed to be in a state of bustle, on the move.

There were six new missionaries in my group traveling to England that September day. We arrived at London's Heathrow Airport reeling from jet lag. As we deplaned amid the din of British dialects and multitudes of people hustling in every direction, it was a relief to spot two young men dressed in the familiar missionary attire. Elders Driggs and Bennett, assistants to the mission president, were there to welcome us, gather our bags, and give us a whirlwind tour through foreign, crowded streets as we made our way to the mission home, riding in the navy blue Thames van.

After a day of shifting my biological clock eight hours forward and being oriented to missionary duties and responsibilities, I was assigned to serve in the city of Harrow Weald in the northwest suburbs of London. In these new quarters, my biggest adjustment was dealing with the lack of open space. I had come from miles of wide-open grazing and farming land to kilometers of tightly connected, two-story housing rows; I felt claustrophobic. My only links to home were in looking up at the spacious, blue sky on an intermittently clear day, and in hearing the drone of airplane engines overhead, a reminder of how I arrived in England and how I would one day return home. Gradually, the homesickness faded as I began to serve the English people and to understand their language and culture. My first companion, Sister Belcher, was a great trainer, so it didn't take long to build my confidence in my ability to do missionary work.

Together Sister Belcher and I spent most of our waking hours trying to share our beliefs with the English people. Rain or shine, heat or cold, we were expected to be up at 6:00 a.m. and out on the street by 9:00 a.m., knocking on doors, talking with people on the streets, and generally being about the business of finding those who were ready to hear our message. Even though days could be long and discouraging, there were the wonderful times when someone would actually invite us in, listen to the message, feel the Spirit, and go on to become converted.

After serving in Harrow Weald for two months, I received a phone call from the mission president, Preston Robinson, saying that I was to be transferred to another city, Harlow New Town. Firsts always leave lasting memories. I was saddened to leave my first companion, my first (now familiar) area, and my first English friends. I would be starting all over again.

On November 21, transfer day, the blue Thames van pulled up to collect me and my belongings. Homesick already, I took a last look at my familiar surroundings and said good-bye to my companion and landlady. I was then taken to the mission home in the heart of London, some forty-five minutes away, along with all the other missionaries being transferred that day. Here, the missionaries and their baggage would be loaded into different vans and sent out to their new areas.

It was a foggy, cold, dark evening, about 6:00 p.m. Coming from sunny St. George, I was not yet acclimated to the misty, biting, English air. As I walked out of the mission home, I was bundled up in three sweaters, a heavy coat, a scarf, a hat, gloves, and near-thermal nylons. I looked like a refrigerator box as I awkwardly boarded the outgoing van.

Before I took my seat, I quickly scanned the other missionaries to see who was being transferred to my new area. Straining to see through the darkness, I did a double take at the occupant of the left rear seat. In a flash, my childhood fantasy appeared before me: a handsome cowboy in a white, ten-gallon hat, a colorful western shirt, buckskin cowboy boots, and chap-covered Levi's. His belt bore a huge, silver buckle, displaying a fierce golden eagle in flight. He stood proudly, with his thumbs hooked in his front pockets. There was a shiny, silver-barreled, ivory-handled six-shooter in the holster on his right hip, and a lasso in his deerskin-gloved hand. The Virginian! The man of my dreams.

I blinked and looked again. This time I saw a tall, dark-haired missionary in regulation suit and tie. He was thrillingly handsome, however, and my earlier impression stayed with me. Oh no, I thought. Not here; not now. I made the commitment to be here as a missionary. I shouldn't even be having these thoughts. I desperately brushed all feelings aside as I settled back in my seat for the drive.

While we were traveling to our new area, I found out that the left rear seat was occupied by Elder Hyrum Smith. Elder Smith was going to Cambridge, an hour's drive beyond my destination of Harlow. When our zone leader dropped us off, he informed Sister Booth, my new companion, and me that a week later the entire mission would be meeting in the town of Crawley to celebrate an American Thanksgiving. He would pick us up at 6:00 a.m.

A week later we climbed in the van and started the lengthy process of picking up the other pairs of sisters and elders in our district. As we approached Cambridge to pick up Elder Smith and his companion, I could not deny feeling excited to see him again. When he got in the van, I felt a flutter for this young man—a feeling that I quickly suppressed.

During the four-hour drive to Crawley, the eight of us (two sisters and six elders) had a great time exchanging stories about the missionary work in our areas and about the experiences we were having in a foreign land. As usual, our minds drifted toward home and we talked about the different Thanksgiving traditions we were missing. In the course of the conversation, I learned that Elder Smith would finish his mission in March, that he was from Hawaii (downtown Honolulu), that his parents were schoolteachers (not ranchers), and that he had ridden a horse only once in his whole life. Somehow, this news did not alter my feelings for him; with an eye of faith, I saw in him the kind, open, and charismatic traits of my Virginian. I didn't know how, but I knew that somewhere, sometime, the cowboy of my dreams would emerge in Elder Hyrum Wayne Smith.

Despite the strength of those feelings, I managed to keep my focus on missionary work. As the new year began, Sister Booth and I were approached by our landlord. He wondered, "You two spend all day talking to people on the streets and knocking on doors throughout Harlow New Town. How come you've never knocked on our door to share your message with us? What are you telling these people?" Amazed at his questions, Sister Booth and I exchanged dumbfounded glances. Needless to say, he didn't have to ask twice. We immediately set up an appointment and began sharing our message with the Woolridge family.

A week later, Sister Booth received that unexpected telephone call from President Robinson; she was being transferred. Sister Dutson, one of the missionaries who had traveled to England with me, would be taking her place. Sister Dutson and I continued working with the Woolridges, and shortly thereafter the entire family accepted our message and were baptized members of the Church.

It was mid-February when we received yet another surprising call from President Robinson. He explained that we were being called as "traveling sisters." He and Sister Robinson had just completed a missionwide tour and felt that there was a need for experienced leadership in various Relief Society programs. Our purpose was to travel to designated branches and strengthen the Relief Societies by teaching leadership skills. It took us two or three days to close our affairs in Harlow New Town, notify our landlord, and pack our belongings for our new headquarters, the mission home in London.

Upon arriving, we were given a day of instruction by Sister Robinson, who had been asked by President Robinson to head this work with the various branch Relief Society programs. We were told that our first assignment would be in Norwich, one of the northernmost cities within the mission boundaries. That evening, as we went downstairs to get into our assigned car—a sporty Triumph sedan, the envy of all the missionaries—the president's assistants came running out. "Sister Cooper! Sister Dutson! We have had a change of plans. Instead of going to Norwich, President and Sister Robinson feel impressed that you are needed in the Southend Branch."

We went back inside to get acquainted with the new plans. We would be working with the Southend district leader to boost branch morale and assist in building leadership. The assistants explained to us that they had already notified the district leader in Southend of this change. By the time we arrived, he would have arranged a place for us to stay. With new maps in hand, we sped off in our Triumph to our new assignment.

When we arrived, we were met by the district leaders, none other than Elder Hyrum Smith and his companion, Elder Jensen. Elder Smith explained that he had originally made arrangements for us to stay with the family of the branch president, but he had just received a distressed phone call saying that their young children had come down with the chicken pox. On such short notice, the only other place he could find for us was in a flat next door to the legendary Sister Kinch, the landlady of the apartments where two sets of Southend elders lived. Under these circumstances, our meals would be provided by Sister Kinch, and we would eat with the elders in her flat.

We were soon to discover what an honor it was to be one of Sister Kinch's missionaries. A convert to the Church, she had housed missionaries for more than ten years and had a picture of each missionary who had stayed there on her Missionary Hall of Fame picture board.

The next morning, according to Sister Kinch's house rules, we sat down to breakfast at 7:30 sharp. Elder Smith was sitting directly across the table from me. I couldn't believe this coincidence—or was it perchance more than a coincidence? Here I was, sitting across the breakfast table from my dream. I tried to make interesting conversation about our missionary work and ask for suggestions about what we could do to help strengthen the branch, but I struggled with every word that came out of my mouth.

When we had finished eating, Elder Smith propped his elbows on the table and lightly clasped his hands together in front of his chin. My eyes were drawn to his handsome hands. They were strong yet refined, with long, slender fingers. On his right pinky finger he wore a gold ring bearing his initials. These were not the hands of a rancher, yet I found myself falling in love with them. I struggled to mask the emotions that involuntarily surfaced, thinking, This can't be happening now. Not to me. I have a year left on my mission and he's going home in three weeks. My faith weakened. Would we ever meet again? My thoughts were interrupted by Sister Kinch's stern but loving command: "It's time to get to work, lads and lassies." I was glad to breathe the cold, fresh air.

By the end of the week, hiding my feelings became more and more difficult. I felt an urgent need to avoid any nonmissionary encounter with Elder Smith. This meant eating dinner somewhere other than Sister Kinch's flat. I convinced Sister Dutson of my sudden, overwhelming craving for English fish and chips, and we conveniently ate out every night.

Yet because the two companionships were partners in the common cause of strengthening the branch, Sister Dutson and I had to work very closely with Elders Smith and Jensen. I found myself struggling increasingly to disguise my feelings. Therefore, I looked forward to the weekly reprieve from this situation provided by our returning to the mission home for preparation day.

We used these rest days (Mondays) to refill our physical and spiritual buckets after a long, regimented work week and a particularly taxing Sabbath. Sundays were always intense physical and spiritual experiences, from early morning until late night. Missionaries were expected to attend presidency meetings, preparation meetings, and all the auxiliary meetings as well as the regular church services. We were also always on call in case a teacher was ill or out of town; we often had to teach lessons or speak at the last minute. Of course, we brought our investigators to church and did our best to make them feel welcome in their new surroundings. We wanted to introduce them to members and be available to answer any questions they might have.

On Sunday evenings, we could count on at least one fireside or devotional for the youth, new members, or general membership. We often had to travel great distances by bicycle, train, or bus to get to these meeting places, and it was not uncommon for a missionary to be the main speaker. Indeed, in the eyes of the people, a missionary was invincible, the solution to the problem, the answer to the question, and the epitome of perfection. Attempting to fulfill such expectations required hours of preparation and incredible energy. Thus, Mondays were a welcome opportunity to rejuvenate ourselves and catch up on such things as doing laundry, writing letters home, or gathering with other missionaries to visit historical sites or take in London's cultural events. Sister Dutson and I also used Mondays to report our week's efforts to Sister Robinson.

Such a reprieve was my first Monday away from Southend. It gave me the chance to evaluate what was happening in my head and heart concerning Elder Smith. In these silent moments of thought I asked myself: Hadn't he been more attentive to me than the others in some of our conversations? Hadn't he waited for me at the meetinghouse door to open it for me and my companion and make sure, in his words, that we got home safely? Wasn't he always standing within sight of me in social gatherings—or was I standing within sight of him? Were these feelings one-sided? Honolulu, Hawaii, was thousands of miles away. A year yet to serve was 8,760 hours of time. St. George, Utah? He probably had never heard of the town. The whole idea was an impossible dream. I turned my questions toward heaven. At that moment, a voice spoke inside my head: Gail, Elder Smith is the man you are going to marry. I couldn't disbelieve, but I was stunned.

On Tuesday, Sister Dutson and I returned to Southend to begin our missionary efforts anew. More cautious than ever in my associations with Elder Smith, I accomplished more that week than I had my entire mission, it seemed. Working hard caused Sunday night to come quickly. As we were about to leave for the mission home, Elder Smith came by with a message that we (Smith, Jensen, Cooper, and Dutson) had been asked to spend our preparation day helping an elderly missionary couple move from their "digs" in Cambridge to the mission home in London. To say no was unthinkable.

Though this excursion was duty bound, I felt that heaven had intervened to bring it about. Besides, I was legally allowed to throw on my sweatshirt and jeans, a happiness I had not enjoyed in many months. By 8:00 a.m. we had loaded the van with boxes, brooms, rags, and cleaning supplies and begun our journey to Cambridge, with Elder Jensen driving. Through the bright morning sunshine, itself a rarity, we wended our way over the English countryside. Crocuses bloomed in the patchwork of greening fields.

In this relaxed atmosphere, we talked, laughed, and philosophized. As we visited, I learned about the passing of Elder Smith's father the previous August and about the difficult decision he had made to remain in the mission field, rather than go home to attend the funeral. He then told me about his mother, who had strongly supported his decision, and I felt the great love and admiration he had for her. I learned that he had played center on his high school basketball team. "I was the tallest, of course, being the only haole among the Hawaiians," he laughed. He spoke of his plans for after he returned home from his mission. He would go back to Hawaii to spend some time with his mother, then enroll at the University of Utah for summer quarter.

I told him about the farm I grew up on in Washington, Utah, that I was one of five girls, and that I enjoyed riding, shooting, and even milking. My family had recently moved to nearby St. George and my parents were currently owners and operators of a nursing home, "Cooper's Rest Haven." I also mentioned that I enjoyed playing ball, but cautiously kept details of my athletic ability to myself.

At the Cambridge apartment, the elders packed and loaded the elderly couple's belongings while Sister Dutson and I cleaned the house. We completed our assignment and were back at the mission home by 2:00 p.m. Elders Smith and Jensen unloaded the van, then went about their business while we returned to our third-floor home base to begin our preparation-day activities. We started our laundry, then wrote letters home. I was on my way to the post office, just a block away, when Elder Smith, driving the van, pulled up beside me. He told me he was getting ready to return to Southend and reminded me that he would be going home next week. Then, out of the blue, he asked me if I would write to him. My answer was inspired. I lightly replied, "Hey, if I get a letter from you, I'll write back." He came back with, "It sounds like a plan," then drove off down the street. There was hope!

Elder Smith's final day in Southend arrived. Sunday he said farewell to the branch members and Sister Kinch; then Sister Dutson and I, along with Elder Jensen, gave him his last ride to the mission home in our Triumph. The mask I wore this day gave no indication of the turmoil that was raging within my head as well as in my heart.

This Monday was not only preparation day, it was also a transfer day. The mission home was bustling with missionaries who were there to be transferred or to pick up new companions. Transfer days were especially enjoyable because we were able to reunite with missionaries we had labored with in other districts. They would share the most recent news about friends from our old areas, people we hadn't seen for weeks or months.

By midafternoon, all the missionaries who were scheduled for changes had arrived. We stood about in small circles of friends and former companions, talking and laughing together in the large reception area of the mission home. From the corner of my eye, I could see Elder Smith chatting with Elder Dyson, his companion for the day, in another circle of missionaries. At one point I thought I saw them simultaneously glance at me. Seconds later, Elder Dyson encouragingly patted Elder Smith's shoulder and nodded in my direction. Elder Smith stepped away from his group and purposefully walked toward me, breaking through my circle of missionaries as he approached. Facing me squarely, he said, "Sister Cooper, when all the missionaries have returned to their areas, Elder Dyson and I would like to visit with you and Sister Dutson in the Blue Room." At that instant, my heart could have used a pacemaker, but I managed to reply calmly that we would be there.

My mind conjured up a thousand thoughts. Why would Elder Smith want to talk to me? I knew he had worked in Southend for a total of thirteen months and had developed some close ties. I knew he had been sent there this second time to help the branch with some of the same challenges for which I had been called to help. Maybe he wanted to discuss developments in the Southend branch and tell me what I needed to do—or shouldn't do. Surely there were a dozen ordinary reasons why Elder Smith would want to talk to me.

A short time later, a group of missionaries decided to catch the red, double-decker bus and go out to dinner at Piccadilly Circus. Elder Smith was in that group, and he made a point of asking me specifically if I were going. Of course I didn't let on to him, but if I hadn't planned on going before, believe me, I was planning to now.

After an enjoyable but uneventful dinner, Sister Dutson and I returned to the mission home in time to see the departing missionaries board the Thames vans. We anxiously waited for the dust to settle in the reception area, just adjacent to the formal sitting room we called the Blue Room. On several occasions, just as it got quiet, a missionary would frantically burst back through the mission home doors to retrieve a forgotten umbrella or set of scriptures or raincoat. Finally the mission home was still, and Sister Dutson and I walked to the elegant Blue Room to await Elder Dyson and Elder Smith.

As we heard footsteps approaching, I knew that the answer to my question was just around the corner. We stood to greet the two elders with the usual handshake as they walked into the room. I reached across to shake Elder Dyson's hand first, then extended my hand to Elder Smith, who by that time was standing directly in front of me. Elder Smith took my hand and held it firmly, looked me straight in the eye, and said these very words, "Sister Cooper, I think I am falling in love with you. I'm going to Paris for three days to visit my Uncle Gene. I would like you to fast and pray about this, as I will be doing, and upon my return I would like to meet with you to see if you are feeling the same way I am."

Elder Dyson had apparently been prepared for this conversation, but not so my companion. Sister Dutson, a very poised and proper person, completely lost her composure. Her mouth gaped and she staggered back into the chair she had been sitting on. For me, although his words came as a total shock, they confirmed all my feelings for this man. He was the man I would marry.

For what seemed a long time, I was speechless, but I finally managed enough voice to reply that I would fast and pray about this surprising turn of events and that I looked forward to meeting him in the Blue Room in three days. I don't remember when our handshake ended, or how Elders Smith and Dyson left the room, but I do recall pulling Sister Dutson up from the chair and dragging her to the "lift" to ascend to our quarters in silence. I began my fast immediately.

I woke earlier than usual the next morning, trying to process the events of the previous day. I felt very warm inside as I recreated the conversation in my mind. Miracles really do happen. God really does answer prayers. I still couldn't believe the whole situation, but in retrospect I recognized that, from the first time I had seen him as my "Virginian" and through all our encounters, Elder Smith had been having the same emotions about me as I had been having about him. As the day proceeded, I found it difficult to concentrate on the work. Sister Dutson would have to pull me through today—but she wasn't much better than I. She was still recovering from the way Elder Smith had boldly presented himself the night before.

By the end of the third day, I knew that Elder Smith would indeed become a part of my life. When he returned from France, again we met in the Blue Room—accompanied, of course, by Sister Dutson and Elder Dyson. Interestingly, they didn't stand within hearing distance this time. Elder Smith shared with me his experience while in France visiting his uncle. More specifically, he told me of the three-mile walk he took along the Seine River from the Louvre to the Eiffel Tower, contemplating his feelings about us. Then he presented me with a beautiful blue-and-white silk scarf he had purchased from a roadside vendor at the end of his walk. He told me he knew of a surety that I was the one for him.

I related to him that I too had felt a peaceful assurance about our relationship. Sharing these emotions alleviated the heavy burden I had carried from stifling my feelings for so long. I was happy to tell Elder Smith that I knew he was my heavenly find. He told me he would write and send me his address as soon as he arrived home. Thus ended our Blue Room conversation.

That afternoon, through cleverly controlled circumstances, Sister Dutson and I included ourselves in the entourage that took Elder Smith and the other departing missionaries to the airport. I have to admit that I couldn't stifle the wistful twinge I felt watching his plane fly off for the Hawaiian horizon.

Despite my efforts to remain busy with the missionary work, the days passed slowly as I anxiously awaited my first letter from Hyrum. By the end of three weeks, with still no word from him, I was beginning to wonder. Sister Dutson didn't help. Teasing, she would say, "Well, he probably waited for you at least a week. By now, a beautiful Hawaiian girl has a plumeria lei around his neck."

Finally, in the wee hours of the morning, the telephone rang on our floor and I was summoned to take the call. "I haven't heard from you. Is everything okay? How come you haven't written me?" His concerned voice sounded wonderful to my sleepy ears.

I responded, "Because you haven't written to me. I'm waiting for an address."

He said, "You mean you haven't received any mail from me?" He told me he had written as soon as he had returned home and was worried sick because he hadn't heard from me.

He was still waiting for me! I began to breathe a bit easier.

That afternoon the mission secretary handed me a battered, crinkled envelope with H. W. Smith on the return address. The four-cent stamp told the story: This letter had come by boat instead of airmail. The next morning I scraped together two pounds, sixteen shillings, and headed to the telegram office. "RECEIVED YOUR LETTER STOP WILL WRITE TODAY STOP WITH LOVE STOP SISTER COOPER."

After this scare, I thought, There's got to be some way to ensure that my Elder Smith will be kept safe until I return home. After some days of thought and prayer, I asked Heavenly Father to preserve him until I got home, and promised myself that in return, I would be the best missionary England ever saw. I began to keep my commitment. A few weeks later, I opened a letter from Hyrum (he was no longer "Elder Smith") in which he told me that just as he was about to leave Hawaii to attend the University of Utah, he had received a letter from Uncle Sam drafting him into the United States Army. I didn't dare tell him that it was the answer to my prayers.

Lassoed

A short time later, I addressed an envelope with my best penmanship to Mr. and Mrs. Evan Erastmus Cooper. I carefully licked the Queen Elizabeth sixpence stamp and placed it on the appropriate corner. As I began to seal the flap, my anxieties about the news this letter bore told me I'd better read it just one more time. Carefully unfolding the lined notebook paper, I began:

Dear Mom and Dad:

You'd better sit down to read this letter. I just sent off to Honolulu, Hawaii, the man I'm going to marry. His name is Hyrum Smith (of course, I know him as "Elder"; don't worry, Dad). I'm excited for you to meet him. He will be driving through St. George in the near future and will contact you before he gets into town. I'm sure that he can tell you the full story much better than I could in this letter.

The work is still progressing well. I'll send a more detailed letter later.

Love,

Your daughter of the Misty Isles,

Gail

As I refolded the letter, stuck it in the envelope, and licked the flap to seal it, I couldn't help but chuckle about how Mom and Dad would react when they read the news. They would wonder what had happened to their "Misty Isle" missionary (as Mom liked to refer to me in her letters). A few weeks later I received this response:

Dear Gail,

Your Elder Smith paid us the promised visit. I let him sleep in your room. I overheard your dad saying to him, "If you are going to marry my daughter, then you better know something about her." Your dad then proceeded to take him upstairs and show him your guns and the gun case you made to house them, all the time telling story after story of your shooting expertise. After that, Dad drove him to Washington to show your Elder Smith your horses. He explained to him how you had broke them to ride. Elder Smith did not know what it meant to break a horse to ride. Although your dad was amazed at Elder Smith's lack of horse sense, he gave a detailed description of the meaning. Dad ended the afternoon with a historical tour of Washington, St. George, and the red hills of the surrounding area.

While they were on this expedition, I fixed a pot of beans and a batch of homemade bread so it would be ready when they got home. He seems like a fine fellow.

I miss you and love you,

Mama

P.S. Your dad noticed, when we were at the supper table, that he had no calluses on his hands.

As I read her letter, a little knot formed in my stomach. My dad, in an effort to brag about his tomboy, could be rough on a guy. I wondered how my Honolulu cowboy had handled my farm folks and our country lifestyle. I worried that my dad's behavior would cause Hyrum to have second thoughts about me. But time would tell. I had a mission to fulfill.
