A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

6

I answered

March arrived, and I said good-bye to England. The sky, which had always been my link to the wide-open spaces of home, was all around me. For some seven hours on the flight home I reminisced about the magnificent experience I had lived the past eighteen months. I had kept my promise to God, and God had kept his promise to me. Elder Smith was waiting for me.

Finally the captain announced, "Fasten your seat belts. We will be landing at O'Hare Airport in Chicago in fifteen minutes." As the plane descended and touched down on the runway, I looked out the window to see an enormous American flag waving in the March breeze. Tears welled in my eyes and a lump swelled in my throat. I was home.

A few hours later, I was in the arms of my family. My little sisters had grown; my dog, Mopsy, had died; the horses were waiting for me to ride; the garden needed to be planted; and my room was just as I left it. "Did you bring me anything from England?" "Can we help you unpack your bags?" The house was filled with excited chatter.

Suddenly the phone began ringing. It was Hyrum! How did he know that I had just walked through the door of my St. George home? The magic hadn't stopped. "I'm so glad that you're home," he said. "How was your trip? I'm looking forward to seeing you. When will your homecoming be?" I explained that the home-coming report was scheduled for Sunday, two days away. He told me that he was hoping to get leave from his base in Fort Ord, California, so that he could come see me the next weekend. As I listened to his voice, that tingling, warm feeling began again, washing over my whole body. I was still in love.

Later that night, as we were all preparing for bed, the phone rang again. My mother answered it, then quietly retreated to her bedroom to talk on the extension. A couple of minutes later she returned to hang up the kitchen phone and nonchalantly finished closing down the house for the night. I thought it a little odd, but being travel weary, retired to my room without thinking much about it.

My body, adjusting to its new time schedule, demanded that I sleep late on Saturday morning. When at last I began the day, I noticed strips of notebook paper attached to doorways, walls, bathroom mirrors, beds, and the kitchen sink. Each message, written in my mother's handwriting, said, "To be forewarned is to be forearmed."

"Mom, what is going on?" I demanded.

She laughed nervously and answered emphatically, "Don't ask any questions. Just don't ask any questions. Read the notes." My mother was like an iron bar when it came to breaking confidences. I knew she was trying to warn me, but of what, I knew not.

Sunday was my missionary homecoming. The house was filled to capacity with friends and old companions from out of town. It was still early. In a general state of disarray, all the girls were gradually moving through the various stages of getting dressed. We all jabbered excitedly from room to room as we caught up on months of missed news. Friends were bursting with questions about my mission, and I had a lot of catching up to do about their lives, but always the conversations turned to inquiries about my Elder Smith. "Who is he? How in the world did you meet him?" I just quietly smiled. Where could I begin? It was impossible to tell the story.

For a missionary, the homecoming is the grand finale. I was nervous about talking to all these people, yet excited to share my mission experiences. As I was mulling over what I would say, my thoughts were interrupted by the telephone. It was Hyrum, and I could tell this was not a long-distance call. I said, "Hyrum, you sound very close."

He replied, "I am close. I'm calling from the Twin Oaks Motel. I'll see you in a minute."

The Twin Oaks Motel was about a block away. As I hung up the phone, pandemonium broke out. My mother, the iron bar, just shook her head and repeated, "To be forewarned is to be forearmed." Apprehension seized me. I hadn't seen Hyrum since the mission field. I had been home only forty-eight hours, so I was still in the missionary frame of mind. How should I greet him? With a handshake? With a hug? Should I run out to meet him, or be waiting inside for his knock on the door? The assembled family and friends were free with their counsel, but before I could decide, he drove up.

As he got out of the car, I saw that he was in full Class A military uniform. Placing his hat on his head, he proceeded confidently up the front walk. The decision was made for me; someone opened the door and I walked out into the waiting arms of Hyrum Wayne Smith.

Somehow Hyrum had managed to obtain an extended weekend pass to come see me and attend the homecoming. As I walked in with "the" Elder Smith proudly in tow, the house that moments ago had been full and noisy was now silent and empty. A magician couldn't have performed a better disappearing act. Where were my loyal friends when I really needed them?

The homecoming was a treasured experience. After sacrament meeting, we assembled at home to enjoy Mom's superb roast beef with potatoes and gravy. All afternoon, friends, relatives, and assorted well-wishers dropped in to welcome me home. Finally, after the repast and repose of the weary, we were alone. Hyrum suggested that we take a drive so I could show him some of my favorite night highlights of St. George. I asked him if he wanted to see them all at once or one at a time. His answer, "All at once!"

Many towns have an elevated lookout point from which the surrounding area can be seen. In Tucson, Arizona, "A" Mountain provides the well-lit desert view; in Honolulu, Hawaii, the city lights from Tantalus enthrall night lovers. St. George, however, has two heights from which to view the area: the black ridge (near the airport) on the west, or the red-sandstone ridge on the north. My favorite lookout is the latter, Red Hill, topped by a large sandstone monolith, the Sugar Loaf. During the day, this red ridge offers a mile of different points along the rim from which to see the panorama of tall red mountains stretching to touch blue sky or the sunburned Virgin River winding through the green quilt of fields. Then, when day succumbs to night, the scene lights up and shows another picture. The strands of street lights, strung north and south or east and west, outline perfect glimmering squares. The tabernacle, chiseled from blocks of red sandstone, is the foundation of the steeple clock, which shows its face and hands in every direction. The white temple, brilliantly lit against the night sky, keeps darkness at bay with its ethereal glow.

The stars added their sparkling beauty as we stood holding hands, feasting upon this night scene. I could tell Hyrum was awed and impressed by this magic Dixie expanse.

"My feelings haven't changed, Gail."

"Nor have mine," I whispered, as he pulled me close for our first tender kiss.

We had just one more day to share two full lifetimes of experience. Monday morning I found my beloved Levi's in the same drawer I had left them in some nineteen months earlier. My dad walked us to the truck, describing where I could find all the saddles, bridles, ropes, currycombs, and brushes. He cautioned me that it was spring and that the horses had been ridden little during the winter. "They'll be a bit spunky, especially Chubby," he said. "You'd better not put Hyrum on Chubby."

"Thanks, Dad," I said, and we drove off to the pasture where the three horses were grazing.

Of course, the horses were in the farthest corner of the field. Taking the bridle and a rope, I told Hyrum to wait by the barn, then walked through the gate toward the horses. I think my own horse, Blaze, remembered me; at least he let me walk up to him. Not so with the others. They galloped to the other end of the pasture. I slipped the rope around Blaze's neck, put the bridle on, then grabbed a fistful of mane and swung up on his bare back. It was as if I had never been gone.

At a gallop, I headed toward the other two horses, rounding them up into the corrals. Dismounting and tying Blaze, I tossed Hyrum a currycomb and asked him to brush down my horse while I bridled Chubby. This was all so natural to me, I completely forgot that Hyrum had had almost no experience with horses.

I wanted Hyrum to have a positive ride, so I picked out our best saddle for him to put onto what I considered to be our best horse: Chubby. I showed him how to saddle Chubby by first looping and tightening the front cinch, then buckling the back cinch. Then I watched as he put on Blaze's saddle.

After I gave Hyrum a basic lesson with the reins, with particular emphasis on stopping the horse, we began our ride. As we headed for the river bottom, although Chubby was fresh, he seemed to be behaving himself. I relaxed and began to wonder why Dad had seemed so concerned. We rode along, enjoying each other's company. Suddenly, a gust of spring wind blew a tumbleweed right under Chubby's belly. He didn't buck, but crow-hopped and whirled around to get away from the weed. Hyrum managed to hang on like a professional while settling Chubby down at the same time. My Virginian couldn't have done better. I was relieved when the horses were back in their pasture, but I had seen another glimpse of my cowboy.

On the way home, Hyrum told me about his military training on M-14 guns and his "expert" marksmanship pin. Knowing of my gun collection, he suggested that we get a rifle and go shooting. Stopping at the house long enough to get my bolt-action .22, we drove to the old dump on the north side of St. George. While Hyrum loaded the gun, I found a couple of empty whiskey bottles and placed them on the hood of a rusted car, some 100 feet away.

When I returned, he handed me the gun and said, "You shoot first."

"Which part of the bottle would you like me to hit?"

Thinking I was joking, he laughed, "Aw, why don't you start at the top?"

As I carefully aimed, the picture of his marksmanship pin came into my mind. I'd better shoot straight, I thought, then fired three shots: taking first the cap, then the neck, and then the base of the bottle. He surprised me with his compliment. "Gail, that's wonderful! I wish I could shoot like that." (I didn't know at the time that he had earned his pin by shooting 100 rounds of ammunition from an M-60 machine gun into a large target on the hillside.) After we had emptied a box of .22 bullets, he asked, "How about a game of tennis?"

A flashback of earlier tennis dates automatically kicked in the old familiar mental process: Should I let him win? Then I realized I was with Hyrum. There was no need. I laughed and asked, "If I win, will you still give me a ride home?" I did, and he did.

After such a long, active day, we had earned our supper. Later that night, Hyrum asked me to come with him to the St. George Temple. Because of the late hour the gates to the grounds were closed, so we had to step over the three-foot, wrought-iron fence to get in. As we strolled along the walk, arm in arm, admiring the brilliantly lit temple and smelling the fresh spring air, Hyrum asked me if I had ever been to Washington, D.C., and visited our nation's capitol. My answer was no.

He then asked, "How is your imagination?" Before I could answer, he told me that when he found the right spot, he was going to tell me a story that would require an imagination.

We approached the front of the temple with its two massive staircases leading up to the enormous front doors. At the sides of the staircases the gardeners had readied the ground for the spring planting of flowers. Hyrum took me by the hand and led me to the right staircase. Beaming, he declared, "This is the right spot."

Kneeling down on the freshly cultivated soil, he smoothed out a section of dirt with his hand and began drawing a map with his index finger. I was leaning over his shoulder, trying to imagine what he was about to show me. Finally, after completing his drawings, he began to explain: "Imagine you are in Washington, D.C." Marking each place, he showed me where the Lincoln Memorial was in relationship to the Jefferson Memorial, the Potomac River, the Washington Monument, and the Capitol. Hyrum then asked me to step up on the staircase to about the fourth stair. He remained at the base of the stairs looking up at me.

"Now imagine that you are standing on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial looking toward the Washington Monument," he said. "Looking over your shoulder is Abraham Lincoln sitting in his enormous chair. He is looking at the same picture. In front of you is a beautiful rectangular reflection pool that extends almost to the Washington Monument. The reflection of the monument in the pool comes back and almost touches you. Beyond the Washington Monument on the hill is America's beautifully lit Capitol. Can you imagine the picture, Gail?"

"I not only see it, I can feel it!" I answered.

He continued, "Three years ago, a dear friend of mine, Arty Gaines, and I stood on those very stairs and basked in that scene. We were touched by the spirit of the great patriots. We made a pact between us that when each of us met the girl he would marry, he would ask for her hand in marriage on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. Since it is physically impossible for us to be there, you will have to imagine it. Gail, will you marry me?"

The Hitching Post

Some situations have to be handled delicately and artfully. I didn't worry about my mother, but I did hesitate to tell Dad about our wedding plans, for several reasons. I knew my dad had looked forward to the return of his gardening and cowboy sidekick. Traditions run deep, and I knew he looked on Hyrum as a foreigner to our folksy, small-town culture. Hyrum possessed little of the farmer brawn and background; therefore, he was likely to whisk me away from my Dixie roots to a faraway city in order to make a living. My dad had always resisted change, and deciding to get married after three days of formal courting was instant change. Dad needed time. Hyrum planned to return in two weeks. Meanwhile, I could prepare the soil for the big seed.

When Hyrum returned from Fort Ord to officially ask my father for my hand, we decided to get what was on our minds off our minds right away. I asked my parents to come into the living room and sit on the piano bench, then timidly shifted responsibility to Hyrum: "Hyrum needs to talk to you." After a few minutes of nervous small talk, Hyrum asked the big question. "I'm in love with your daughter. May I have her hand in marriage?"

The reaction every young girl anticipates and wants from her parents came instantly and intuitively from my mother, who exclaimed, "Oh, this is wonderful!" The response most dreaded came from my father; even I wasn't prepared for his stern and stiff reaction. He coldly asked Hyrum how he planned to support me and where we planned to live. Hyrum didn't have a good answer for either question. Without a word, Dad stood up and walked out of the room.

That was when Hyrum decided to apply for Officer's Candidate School. He knew that a private's pay couldn't meet Dad's expectations—or our needs. Besides, with the military buildup occurring at the time in Vietnam, he decided he would rather serve his time as an officer than as an enlisted man. The OCS training would also buy six more months on American soil.

Over the next few months, while we waited for Hyrum's acceptance into OCS, we did our courting on weekend passes or extended leaves from Fort Ord. On one such weekend, we had decided to meet at Mother Ruth's temporary home in Provo. (At age sixty-three, she was working on her master's degree at Brigham Young University.) Hyrum had driven all night for this rendezvous, so Hyrum's mother, his sister Pauline, and I were relieved to see his car pull safely into the driveway. We rushed outside to meet him. As Hyrum approached his welcoming committee, I held back out of respect for Mother Ruth, assuming that he would want to greet her first. To my surprise and pleasure, he boldly strode past his mother and sister to gather me into his arms and kiss me. "I drove all night to see you," he whispered in my ear. That simple expression was pivotal; it reinforced that I was number one in his life.

In June, his orders arrived: Hyrum was to report to Fort Sill, Oklahoma, on July 1. Before his transfer, we were able to spend ten days together, in which time we did six months' worth of planning. First on Hyrum's agenda was to surprise me with a beautiful silver and diamond engagement ring. He also felt it important that we begin paying on a car so that we would have our own when we married. He had saved about $600 for the down payment; with his mother as a cosigner, we financed a new $2,500 1966 Rambler Classic. My mother later named our new acquisition "the surrey with the red fringe on top," because it was white with a red top. Next on the agenda was to make our wedding plans. We decided that we would be married in the St. George Temple on December twenty-first, right after his graduation on the seventeenth. As a parting gift, Hyrum presented me with a bandolier filled with twenty-four spent machine-gun cartridges, instructing me that each Sunday night, after his telephone call, I was to pull out one shell to represent the passing of another week.

It was a wonderful Dixieland summer. Early each morning, before the sun could speak its heated language, I found myself beside Dad landscaping the backyard of the rest home. It didn't take long for my England-blanched face and arms to tan and my hands to regain their calluses. It was a summer of nostalgia: I was working alongside my dad as in times of yore. When the blazing sun cast no shadow, we sought the grumble of the swamp cooler churning to cool the house. Evenings would find Mom, Dad, and me on the river bottom in Washington, riding horses and doing the chores. Sometimes we would finish the chores early, pack a watermelon, and drive to Pine Valley to cool off and fish. I savored each moment because I knew that such a summer as this one with my parents would not come again. From now on I would be with Hyrum; we had at least two more years to spend in the army, a university degree to obtain, employment to find, and settling into a home to do. The spent cartridges in the machine-gun bandolier emptied faster than I could have imagined.

I remember the last Sunday of November, when Hyrum called to announce that he would be the honor graduate of his OCS class and to tell me that, as his fiancÃ©e, I would be expected to pin on the gold bars indicating his rank as second lieutenant. I would have a personal escort for the proceedings and Hyrum and I would be expected to lead off the dancing at the grand military ball. This phone call caused me great anxiety. Never in my wildest dreams had I ever imagined that this small-town girl would be involved in such elaborate proceedings. I was completely unfamiliar with military protocol and even unsure about what I should wear. I felt like Eliza Doolittle of My Fair Lady fame; however, I was not so sure that I could bring off the necessary transformation.

A month earlier, Hyrum's brother, Denis, who had recently returned from serving in Vietnam, had brought me some beautiful Vietnamese material—deep aqua silk, brocaded with fine gold thread—with the idea that I might use it to make a formal gown. I persuaded my friend Delores, a talented seamstress, to transform this material into a dress befitting a military ball. Then, once again, Mom and I searched madly all over St. George for the perfect shoes to match my dress. Mother Ruth gave me some long, white, pearl- buttoned gloves to wear with the gown. Throughout all these preparations, my dad kept teasing me with statements like, "Nose in the air and walk with poise, Mademoiselle," or "May I seat you, Your Highness?" His joking didn't make me any more comfortable with the image I had of the glamorous ball in which I was expected to be the leading lady.

The day of the big event finally arrived. The promised escort, Lieutenant Retzlaff, met our plane in Oklahoma and immediately whisked us off to the Pass in Review parade. The grandstands bulged with proud supporters of the graduating officers and thousands of future candidates. It was easy to get caught up in the charismatic, powerful atmosphere: flags waving, bands playing patriotic music, and 3,600 sharply dressed American soldiers marching in formation. I didn't need binoculars to focus on my handsome honor graduate as he led his battalion past.

After the march music halted, the grandstand crowd swept into the auditorium for the graduation and awards ceremonies. Lieutenant Retzlaff escorted me to the front row with the wives of the high-ranking military officers. After a rousing military Pledge of Allegiance, the school commandant called Hyrum to the stand and boasted that of all the OCS graduates who had passed through this school, Hyrum's composite scores ranked the highest. The colonel then signaled Lieutenant Retzlaff to escort me to the stand to fasten Hyrum's second-lieutenant bars on his left shoulder while he pinned the bars on Hyrum's right shoulder.

Shaking with stage fright, I took the gold bars from their small box and stretched up on my toes to better see the shoulder flap. Struggling to appear dainty as I tried to force the gold posts through the thick material, I placed my thumb under the flap to avoid sticking the posts into Hyrum's shoulder. With a burst of adrenaline, I forced the pin straight through the material and deep into my thumb. A bright red stream of blood shot from the puncture wound. Silently wincing in pain, I carefully pushed the other post through the material and snapped the two fasteners into place, praying that no one in the audience would notice the stains on the gold bar. Despite the bloody throbbing in my thumb, pain did not dampen my pride as I heard the words: "Hyrum Wayne Smith, I commission you a second lieutenant in the United States Army."

The excitement of the parade and graduation melted in my anticipation for the grand ball. I gazed into the mirror that reflected my transformation, feeling foreign and far from home in the aqua gown and long gloves. My simple, rural upbringing had not readied me for such an occasion, yet I sensed that this new image in the mirror reflected a glimpse of my future. The knock on the door reminded me of the time. I took a last wistful glance, then opened the door to my second lieutenant in his Class A uniform. Hyrum's gold bars, now shiny, glistened in the light.

The enormous ballroom, romantically lit, was magnificent. A sparkling mirrored ball hung from the ceiling, casting millions of brilliant reflections off the glittering jewelry, elegant formal dresses, and bright gold officers' bars. As the orchestra played the enchanting strains of our love song, "More," it was our cue to begin the dance. Hyrum held me close and softly sang the lyrics, "Longer than always is a long, long time; but far beyond forever you'll be mine." The words of the song and the feeling of his strong arms securely around me brought eternity into perspective. The fading shadows of my past connected comfortably with the not-so-frightening unknowns of the future. Five days later, on December 21, 1966, Hyrum and I began our eternal journey together.
