A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

8

A thousand songs

I believe that a house is the shelter you wrap around a home. Not all houses are homes. Not all homes are made in houses. It is the bond among family members that creates a home. Still, I believe strongly in the power of place to shape our responses and to give us a safe yet stimulating environment for learning. When place and people come together, special things can happen.

I think the term homemaker is a thrilling one, packed with power and promise. Although our society applies it usually to women and often uses it as a synonym for housewife, homemaker is a title that applies to everyone—husband, wife, children, grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins, even the family dog—who cares about and works for the quality of life within the home.

Part of the reason Hyrum and I teach our children to do housework in the way that we do is because we don't have a farm or a workshop, as many families had in past times. Our home is the arena where we teach the principles of work. But there's another reason. We want them to be not only housekeepers, but also homemakers—sons and daughters alike.

As our children grew and began school, their individual talents began to emerge. We felt an increasing need to coordinate the many personal, business, school, and church activities we were all involved with. As our needs evolved, our system gradually took on a fuller shape. Then, in the fall of 1977, we received an enormous opportunity—a calling to preside over the California Ventura Mission for three years.

The years that we served in the mission field further contributed to the development of our family training ideas. Missionary rules had not changed since Hyrum and I had served in England. The only difference was that now, as leaders, we set the pace. Just as the missionaries were expected to arise at 6:00 a.m., pray, read the scriptures, and prepare for the day, so did the Smiths—all of them. The children were on this mission just as much as we were, and they prided themselves on their obedience to the mission rules.

While we were in California, the children became very involved in the community athletics programs. And we were fortunate to find a wonderful, dedicated piano teacher, Connie Tice, who was firm but loving, had high expectations for her students, and gave them many opportunities to perform. She laid a solid foundation for the budding musical careers of my children. The mission calling itself provided many other opportunities, such as fulfilling speaking assignments or singing together at conferences and church functions.

After our mission, we relocated to Centerville, Utah, a pleasant, semirural community thirteen miles north of Salt Lake City. When we moved into our Centerville home, it was easy to transfer the mission routine into our "normal" life. Glenna was fourteen and going into ninth grade, with the other children stair-stepping down in age to six-year-old Jacob, just entering first grade. In the mission field, we had kept our schedules in simple pocket calendars. Now, as we maintained and integrated our mission-inspired morning schedule into the daily routine of our household in Centerville, we were very grateful for the more advanced day planner and time management system that Hyrum was now teaching in seminars.

As the children grew older, their schedules became more complex (as did mine and Hyrum's). If Hyrum's work hadn't introduced day planners into our lives, I would have had to invent one just to keep straight the after-school schedule of carpooling to practices, games, and lessons. Besides the boiling activity brought on by community, school, and church events, I still had a household to maintain—thus, the compelling need for the full incorporation of the Magic Three Hours.

The Magic Three Hours

Fourteen years earlier, during the ride home from the Stuttgart airport with our three-week-old baby, Hyrum and I had defined our desires for our children. As we thought back to that important time of commitment to our baby and our other future children, we were desirous to fully implement that commitment. We wanted our children to be confident, competent, and compassionate—anywhere in the world. They had to possess real skills. They had to be self-sufficient and have self-esteem. The compassion needed to come from three sources: deep religious roots that connected them in a personal way with a loving Heavenly Father; the example in our family life of recognizing, honoring, and meeting each other's needs; and the practice of serving others cheerfully, willingly, and spontaneously. We had committed ourselves to those values then, and had already done much to implement that commitment. But now, the seeds that had been planted fourteen years earlier were about to begin their full flowering.

"The Magic Three Hours" was the name we gave the plan that systematized and expanded on the methods we were already using to teach our children. It gave us a way of building important events into the schedule, instead of hoping somehow we could make time for them. It didn't take us long to figure out when to hold our magic hours—they obviously had to be during a time when no one else wanted us or our children. Afternoons were always crowded with friends, homework, athletics, music lessons, telephone calls, the unexpected events that regularly surface—and fatigue. The magic, uninterrupted hours would have to occur in the early morning.

Each morning, Hyrum and I would wake up fifteen minutes before the kick-off moment, pray, dress for exercising, and then move systematically through the house, waking each child individually, helping him or her make the bed, then kneeling together for the child's individual prayers. This was always the sweetest experience of the day for me, as I listened to my children express through prayer their gratitude, their concerns, their simple needs, and their inner desires. Their pure, unpretentious communication with God continually reminded me of my children's unquestioning faith and of my eternal responsibility to them as their mother.

The hour for beginning the Magic Three Hours has varied from year to year, defined by the time our children had to leave for school and the various jobs they had to accomplish within our magic hours. In the beginning, when all the children were in elementary school, which started at 9:00 a.m., rising at 6:30 a.m. worked fine. But high school started at 7:30 a.m., so as a family we discussed what we should do. The children decided to move the getting-up hour to 5:00 a.m. It was exciting for Hyrum and me to see the children make this choice, because we realized that they had internalized the power of the Magic Three Hours. They recognized for themselves that this was the most effective way to accomplish our personal and family goals.

When everyone was up (notice I don't use the word awake), we all gathered in the study at the "round table," a circular table that seated all eight of us. First we planned our day and reviewed our schedules so that when the chauffeur's hat went on my head I would know where and when to pick up each of the children. Next we would read and discuss a chapter from the book of scripture we had chosen to study that year. Then we knelt as a family and Hyrum would call on one of us to offer the family prayer.

From here we would break off into our various morning assignments. The children practiced the piano (by 1983 we had two pianos to accommodate six practice sessions in a three-hour period), started the laundry, emptied the dishwasher, made breakfast, fixed school lunches, set the table, tidied up the bathrooms, and finalized school preparations. Hyrum and I supervised, exercised, made dinner preparations, or otherwise got ready for the day. The breakfast call came at 7:00 a.m. After breakfast, some children had clean-up duty, some finished with piano practice, and some had to leave for school.

By the time the last child left for school, the house was in order: the beds were made, the bathrooms were cleaned, the laundry was done, dishes were washed, and dinner was ready to put in the oven at the appropriate time. Rather than facing a day of endless housework, I could meet my own busy schedule, have some time for myself, and be fully available to the children and to Hyrum after school and in the evenings.

Afternoons brought household chores, athletic games and practices, music lessons, homework, dinner, an hour for bedtime preparations, and an early bedtime—8:00 p.m. Eating dinner together was an important priority for us. Though I didn't really learn to cook until after I was married (with the Betty Crocker step-by-step Cooking for Two as my guide) and have never claimed to be an expert chef, I can put together the basic food groups tastefully and make a mean pot of chili. Our meals were tasty, nutritious, and simple. More important than a fancy meal was the time we spent together at the table. I believe that eating together is a strengthening time, a bonding time, a healing time. Hyrum and the kids came in from the daily "battle" at school or work to the safety and reassurance of family. The mealtime was the time to reflect upon the day's events; for us as parents, it was always a listening time and sometimes a teaching time. It was a time for prayer and thanksgiving. A hot, delicious meal was soothing and pleasurable, a daily reward we all looked forward to. There were obviously instances when eating together was impossible, but we made it a high priority and achieved it a surprising number of times.

A sample of one day's schedule from 1986 tells the story in a nutshell. Glenna was a senior in high school, Stacie a junior, Sharwan a sophomore; Joe was an eighth grader, Becca a seventh grader, and Jacob a fifth grader. This was how a typical day went:

5:00 a.m. Arise, make beds, dress

5:10 a.m. Read scriptures

5:30 a.m. Glenna and Stacie—piano

Sharwan—laundry/school preparations

Joseph, Rebecca, Jacob—pre-breakfast (empty

dishwasher, set table, cook breakfast, make

school lunches)

6:00 a.m. Sharwan—piano

Stacie—tidy bathrooms/school preparations

6:45 a.m. Breakfast—family

Final school preparation

7:15 a.m. High schoolers leave

Joseph and Rebecca—piano

Jacob—dishes (with Mom's help)

7:45 a.m. Jacob—piano

8:00 a.m. Junior high schoolers leave

8:15 a.m. Elementary schoolers leave

8:30 a.m. I leave for work (in the Franklin Day Planner

bookstore)

2:00 p.m. I come home from work

2:45 p.m. Kids are home from school

3:00 p.m. Joseph, Rebecca, and Jacob fold clothes from the

morning's laundry and put them away

3:30 p.m. School preparations (homework, tomorrow's attire,

music lessons, athletic practices)

5:00 p.m. Dinner and dishes (dishes done by the kids on a

daily rotating basis)

6:00 p.m. School preparations and free time

7:30 p.m. Showers and preparations for bed, including a final

pick-up of the house by everyone

8:00 p.m. Bedtime

I read this schedule now, and I have to admit that I am amazed at what was accomplished. I now understand why motherhood is an occupation for the young. Following such a schedule took a constant infusion of energy and concentration. There were times, even with our daily planning, and everyone's schedule written down in my day planner, when preoccupation with dinner or visitors would cause me to forget a pick-up, a practice, or a music lesson. Despite the inevitable glitches, I try to think of accomplishing what we did without planning and scheduling. It could never have been done.

Building in Flexibility

We have had people tell us that the whole idea of the Magic Three Hours is unrealistic or that they find it intimidating. As our practice has become more widely known, people have admitted that they have actually driven by our home at 5:30 a.m. just to see if the lights were on.

I can only report that this approach has worked for our family. I recognize that it may or may not fit in with the dynamics and relationships of other families. The important thing is to determine what kind of program will work for you and your family, one that will help teach children the value of work and other important values that we can no longer be sure they will absorb from society, school, or modern-day family experiences. Who among us, upon seeing a child about to dash into the street or fall into a pool of water, will not immediately respond to rescue the child from danger? Today's dangers are not so apparent, but they are no less real. If a structured program like the Smith family's Magic Three Hours can help your family avoid some of those dangers, use it. If something else is needed in order to accomplish the same thing in your family, by all means, use that.

I don't imagine for a minute that one plan will ever work for every family. But the principles of planning, setting goals, and building a schedule that facilitates reaching those goals are broad enough that almost any family should be able to adapt to them. The important thing is to not leave the necessary teaching and transfer of important values to others or to chance.

Another clarification I should make is that although we were systematic, we were not inflexible. For example, my journal records one winter in Portland when, for six and a half solid months, someone was ill every single week. There were mornings when we were so tired after a late night that we would get up, say our prayers together, and just climb back into bed for another much-needed hour of sleep. That was just a simple matter of being perceptive about our own feelings and physical needs as well as those of the children. The important thing was to keep alive the spirit of what we were trying to do. Through the difficult times, being flexible allowed us to do that.

People have asked if our children didn't rebel at this schedule. They didn't, really, although there were times when one or another of them was less than enthusiastic about the program. This was especially true after they were old enough to realize that their friends were not necessarily doing the same thing in their families. In those scattered instances of questioning, I trusted the children and tried to help them see the right vision from within themselves.

For instance, when Glenna was a tenth grader, her best friend, a team member in basketball and volleyball, was stunned at Glenna's schedule. I remember the day Glenna announced to me, "I don't want to get up in the morning and study scriptures and practice the piano. Jenny doesn't. Why should I?"

I simply said, "Glenna, it's your decision. Why don't you check out of the Magic Three Hours for a while and see what you think."

In three days, she came to me and said, "I can see for myself that I'm losing out. I want to do it again." She loved her music, she loved sports, and she loved to do her best. The structure of our family life helped her do that. And because of her experience, she was a great fan of the system. If any of the other children thought about checking out, I never knew about it. I think Glenna just took care of them.

Many motivations are intrinsically built into a planned system like the Magic Three Hours. I believe that if the atmosphere is provided, the children will see the vision within themselves and become self-motivated.

Weekly Planning

We tried to simplify our busy schedules by taking time each Sunday to review our progress. The first Sunday of the month we would talk about our entire month, and each subsequent Sunday we would go over schedules and plan for the upcoming week. During these weekly planning meetings, we wore comfortable, casual clothing and created a relaxing family atmosphere. This meant we had no visitors, took no phone calls, and encouraged a leisurely conversation that involved all the children.

We began each planning meeting with prayer and scripture reading. After that, the agenda was very loose. This was a time for the children to vent any frustrations with school, schedules, or each other, and to express their disappointments and successes. We discussed school projects, specific challenges and needs, family problems, and ideas for the future. This forum gave us as parents the opportunity to share principles and experiences with our children. One rule did wonders toward keeping the atmosphere pleasant: No one could pass judgment on another, but everyone could offer suggestions that might help correct a problem. We tried to keep each meeting a positive, growing experience. Sometimes we struggled, but most of the time we succeeded.

After our open discussion, we all opened our day planners and reviewed everyone's schedule for the next week or month, highlighting the activities that we could all attend to support one another. We finished our meeting off with the traditional Sunday taco dinner, which everyone helped prepare. Our kitchen never seemed quite large enough, but we all crowded in happily, one grating the cheese, another slicing tomatoes and lettuce, others warming up the refried beans, cooking tortillas, setting the table, and making the drink. This was everyone's favorite meal of the week because it involved so much pleasant interaction and did not, like most other evening meals, have a scheduled deadline with other tasks. The kids and I also loved it because Hyrum always did the dishes, scouring the pots and pans and leaving the kitchen sparkling to begin the new week.

People have been astonished that we were willing to spend such a huge chunk of time every week on planning. Granted, planning was the agenda and the stated purpose, but our real goal was to spend time working together, learning to set goals and to see each other as resources. Yes, we made sacrifices; Sunday afternoons weren't a time for going off with friends, joyriding, skylarking, or goofing off. That didn't mean our Sundays were grim, though. A by-product of our spending a lot of pleasant time together was that we liked to spend time together.

Another valuable thing that came out of our Sunday meetings was that each child felt important because he or she was obviously and conspicuously a contributing member of our family organization. No family decisions were made without consulting the children in this type of setting—and that means all kinds of decisions: going into a new business, accepting a new Church calling, considering what kind of a new car to buy. Allowing the children to report on their week kept us in touch with their interests, successes, and frustrations. When one child was harboring bitter feelings about not getting a part in a school play, for instance, we could listen supportively and take advantage of a teaching moment to help her move toward understanding.

During these meetings we also communicated to each child, simply by discussing his or her plans and goals, that the activities each was involved with were important and valuable to all of us. Finally, coordinating our schedules and discussing the family's needs on a regular basis created an atmosphere of cooperation and flexibility. Being aware of what was going on enabled us to be more supportive of one another's needs.

August's Mega-Planning

Organizing our year was a major event that became something of a ritual. We incorporated an annual planning session, keyed to the school year, on the first Sunday in August. By then I had collected the school schedules and knew which days school would be out over the next year. The children were also expected to bring to this meeting their own school schedules, including athletic seasons and sessions, dates and times for music lessons and church events, a prospective budget, and any other important dates or items of which we needed to be aware.

We used a notebook or calendar to record our plans before the Franklin Day Planners became part of our lives. After their creation, however, we made sure that each of the children had a full day planner, complete with addresses, key information, finance planning, and pockets for pictures and identification.

For this mega-planning meeting, we would gather around the round table in the library, with snacks and juice on hand. We began with a prayer and then started into our session, which would often last a full morning (sometimes longer, if we got involved in gab sessions, storytelling, or serious decision making).

First, we would set our yearly goals, both personal and family, in five categories—spiritual, physical, cultural, financial, and educational goals. Each year we chose a book of scripture for daily reading: the Old Testament, New Testament, Book of Mormon, or Doctrine and Covenants. We also chose a literary classic that we would read as a family during the next summer. Glenna, the designated reader by choice of the other children, kept us enthralled with her dramatic renditions of Mark Twain's Tom Sawyer, Owen Wister's The Virginian (my own teenage favorite), John Fitzgerald's Papa Married a Mormon, and everyone's favorite, F. Hopkinson Smith's Peter, A Novel of Which He Is Not the Hero.

Then we branched out into a new skill. Often it was a new sport, such as tennis or archery. One year we all took violin lessons. (Some liked that well enough to continue even past the year.) Often it was a new household skill, such as sewing (everybody sewed at least one item of clothing) or cooking. Joseph locked in to cooking, developing his own specialties: biscuits and gravy, chicken Dijon, and barbecued ribs. One year we learned to crochet, with private lessons offered by an expert, Mother Ruth. When Becca was twelve years old, she began to crochet an afghan for me. Twice a year, while we are watching LDS general conference on television, she brings it out and works diligently on it. After eight years, she's very close to having it finished. I keep teasing Becca that I will probably be dead before I get my afghan, but she keeps plugging away at it.

One year our family skill was bread making. I had learned to bake bread years earlier at a Relief Society homemaking night and had continued to do it regularly. This year, however, the whole family wanted to learn the skill, so we built the job into our Saturday routine. We had a mill that ground our whole wheat into flour and aided us materially in the mixing of the dough. We would bake the bread in batches of eighteen loaves at a time, using a collection of assorted thirty-two-ounce juice cans standing upright in the oven. This was enough to feed our family for two to three weeks, with a few extra loaves for the neighbors. We often saved out some dough for scones or pizza crust. Each one had his or her specific job: measuring the ingredients, mixing them, greasing the pans, and, of course, laying out the butter, honey, and jam with which we would eat the results. This was a tradition that found a permanent place in our family lifestyle. As the older children left home, the younger ones took on new jobs in the family assembly line. As a result, all my children, boys and girls alike, can make a mean loaf of bread. That project was good, both for the body and for the soul.

We also selected several service projects that we would work on together. As an example, we took over seventy-five-year-old Mother Ruth's yard work during the summers we lived nearby in Centerville. This was quite a project, especially considering the turbo-speed growth of the thick lawn on her half-acre plot, and the fact that our job had to pass her exacting inspection. We would cut the grass, trim the edges, rake, sweep the walks and driveways, weed the garden, and start the water. It was a good two-hour project with all of us working, no matter how we divided it up. When Mother Ruth asked, we would also help her do the big cleaning inside the house: washing windows, moving furniture, vacuuming under the beds, or cleaning in the places that were too high or too low for her to reach.

Another service project we did as a family was to pick up the trash at the local elementary schools. It seemed that every school had its particular weak area in which trash built up. At Poinsettia Elementary in Ventura, California, it was the ramp leading onto the school grounds from the dead-end street. Children deposited their candy and gum wrappers and unwanted school papers there before entering or leaving the school grounds. At Reading Elementary in Centerville, Utah, trash piled up against the chain-link fence north of the playgrounds—always in hidden spots just out of reach of the teachers' eyes or the busy janitors' cleaning schedules.

One of the highlights of our mega-meeting was planning an annual summer vacation and how we would earn money to finance it. We established some ways in which the children could earn money for personal spending or for the vacation. For example, there was office work to be done for Hyrum (answering the telephone, filing, collating seminar manuals, typing, or entering data on the computer), as well as the more traditional neighborhood baby-sitting and yard work.

Next, we would go over with all the children some of the things that would be expected of them, based on their ages. We discussed what sports they might pursue, and what musical options or special interest classes would be available. We helped the children set goals for their grades and let them decide what chores they wanted to be responsible for that year, taking into consideration individual schedules and time demands. All the children played soccer, basketball, volleyball, and baseball, keeping them active in sports year round. We estimated practice times and lengths, and found the best slots for homework. After we discussed all the activities each child would be involved with and the daily chores that needed to be done, they collectively decided what time they needed to get up that particular year to accomplish their daily goals.

We planned our family budget and helped the children establish their own budgets. We asked each child to forecast expenditures throughout the year for such things as school fees, lunches, clothes, athletics, music lessons, and birthday and Christmas gifts for family and friends. Beyond this budget allotment, each child received an allowance—based on age and circumstances—for consistent completion of household chores. Of this amount, the children paid 10 percent for their tithing and an additional 10 percent to their savings accounts. The rest of their allowance was theirs to spend or save at their own discretion; they were responsible to handle both their budget allotments and their allowances appropriately. A milestone that made seventh grade special was getting their own checkbooks and assuming the responsibility of accounting for their expenditures to Hyrum at a month-end checkbook balancing.

An important assignment, and one that required a lot of discussion, was apportioning out the household chores to be performed each morning. There were bathrooms to clean, breakfasts and lunches to make, dishes to clear, and vacuuming to do. We laid out the list of chores to be done and, as much as possible, let each child choose his or her preferences. This technique was a good corrective if someone wanted to complain later about being the most overworked person in the family. It went without saying that each person was responsible for keeping his or her own room tidy, keeping personal items out of the family areas, and keeping items he or she used in the family areas (such as sheet music) neatly arranged. Each person had a dish-duty night, depending on practice schedules or other demands on their time. Mondays through Fridays were dish nights for the kids (Jacob was usually assigned to help one of the older children), and Hyrum and I took the weekends. The children kept their assignments for the whole year, taking pride in developing quality and quickness. Joe became such an outstanding breakfast cook that he volunteered for the assignment two years in a row.

We also chose one day each week, usually Fridays, for "Super Housecleaning Day." On that day we dusted and vacuumed the whole house; swept, mopped, and waxed floors; periodically washed walls and windows; and tackled other deep-cleaning proj-ects. To make our Fridays more enjoyable for everyone, we always did something fun as a family in the evening. Whether it was going to a movie, going out to dinner, renting a video, or getting ice-cream cones, we all had something to look forward to after our big cleanup efforts.

Saturday was the children's day. This was the one day they could spend entirely as they wanted: sleeping in, playing ball, shopping, going out with friends, or whatever. Most of the time, Saturday was filled with various soccer or basketball games, but such involvement was always by choice. Saturday was also a well-deserved "date night" for Hyrum and me.

Sundays always consisted of church, our planning meeting, and the traditional taco dinner. The children were learning communications and planning skills, but more importantly, these Sunday sessions were a time to mobilize everyone's energies and commitment to maintaining our family lifestyle. The Magic Three Hours wouldn't have been so "magic" without this weekly meeting.

Mondays were always family home evenings. We scheduled no meetings, practices, or lessons for that night. After supper, our home evenings provided a leisurely and fun time for all of us to be together, with everyone participating in some way, conducting, singing, reciting, giving a lesson, or praying.

Another aspect of our mega-planning meeting was a run-through of the holidays and school vacations for the upcoming year. We planned what we could do together as a family on those days: spring cleaning, baking bread, updating photo albums, visiting grandparents, or going on a hike or camp-out. Every child was responsible for something on our outings: games, snacks, books and stories, audio tapes, songbooks, or coloring books and crayons. The children were never at loose ends when a school holiday came, and we didn't have problems with bored youngsters or idle teens drifting into trouble.

During the summer months, each child had an assigned day of the week on which he or she was responsible for all three meals, from the menu planning to the shopping to the cooking to the cleanup. Usually I took the assigned weekly shoppers with me grocery shopping, and the other kids gave them shopping lists to cover their menus. This shopping spree was an enjoyable time for us. I would play a game with my little designated shoppers, giving each child a verbal list of three or four items to pick up. They had to remember the assigned items and carefully compare prices to get the best value. The children enjoyed finding "bargains" and learned some math skills at the same time.

Washing the cars and mowing the lawn were summertime additions to the usual chores. Summer was also a good time for more time-consuming projects, such as sorting, indexing, and cataloging all the music in the house, or sifting through closets and drawers for outgrown clothes to be handed down or given away. Other projects included filing family photos, planting and weeding in the garden, and cleaning and organizing our growing library. Summer was a time for large-scale activities, and all the time we were having fun.

The process of reaching goals and accomplishing the tasks we had outlined for ourselves was indeed a process, not an event. Events like our planning meetings and our Magic Three Hours were a lot of work, but they were worth it. We knew that the better we planned and the more organized we were, the more we could get accomplished. The mega-planning meeting gave us the bigger perspective into which to fit our weekly planning and our daily implementation. This system has proven invaluable in extending the shadowfall of our beliefs and values into the hearts of our children.
