A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

9

Weave through my branches

People often ask us how our children felt about the Magic Three Hours and our structured household programs. It seemed only fair to invite the children to respond personally. So in 1990, when I began writing this book, I asked my children to reflect on their years of participating in the Magic Three Hours. I specifically asked them to express honestly their frustrations, successes, negatives, positives, failures, and accomplishments. All the children's responses had some elements in common: the early hour of rising, the individual prayers with us, scripture reading, household jobs, athletics, and music practicing. But they all had individual perspectives as well. These accounts are important because they make the process real, going into the details of the Magic Three Hours as experienced by the participants. I have presented them here in the children's own words so that you might better understand and feel the personality of each child.

Glenna

As far back as I can remember, my mother has awakened us early. Although the magic three hours wasn't named such until after I was in high school, it has always existed. When I was very small, the hour of beginning was 6:30 a.m. As we grew older and more involved, the time was pushed back a half hour every year. By the time I was fourteen, 5:00 a.m. was the time to arise.

My mother had various methods of waking us up. I can remember being jolted out of bed by the soundtrack to Star Wars played at 80 decibels or more. A more frequently used ploy was singing the BYU Cougar Fight Song as she came into each of our rooms. When I entered high school, I acquired my own room (for which I was eternally grateful), but it was in the basement, two floors below anyone else. So my mother invested in an intercom that had the most obnoxious, high, piercing "beep" ever heard. Every morning at 5:00, she would beep that thing to wake me up. I got so that I woke up at ten minutes to five every day and just lay there in dread, waiting for that beep to shatter the silence. My father was just as effective with his bugle, or with his irritating habit of ripping off the covers—all of them.

Of course, bedtime was at 8:00 p.m., which was the cause of wonderment, awe, and even ridicule by my friends, but believe me, by the time 8:00 rolled around, I was ready to go to bed.

And just what did we do when we were up? Well. The schedule varied from year to year. Reading the scriptures as a family has always been a given, as was practicing the piano. There were also various household chores to be performed. Every year our house "jobs" were rotated. One of us would have the laundry, which had to be done three times a week; one of us had the vacuuming. It seems we've always had a house with a lot of square footage carpeted. Nevertheless, that was the job I preferred, since it only had to be done once a week. My mother was kind enough to give me that job my senior year since I had already proven to be too busy with school and extracurricular activities to do a very good job at anything that required consistency.

When I was in high school, the job of making breakfast was delegated to my brother Joseph. Of course, it followed that the morning dishes belonged to either my sister or brother just younger than Joe. Joseph became an excellent cook. He cooks better than I do, which actually doesn't say much. My grandpa gave him a real chef's hat once, which he was proud to wear. Hence, the job of making breakfast became a job of honor—and one to be sought after by my younger brother and sister. Finally, the "mantle" of the breakfast maker was passed on to my sister Rebecca. Breakfast time became a grim experience for a while, but she eventually mastered the art. She and Joseph now team cook on many occasions. But, it must be kept in mind that they were only nine or ten when this began. Now the honored position rests upon my youngest brother, Jacob, who is twelve. He has not yet mastered the art, but I'm sure that with practice, he'll catch on.

The most despised job was cleaning the bathrooms. Every year we had to draw straws to see who would be the lucky one. Everyone was assigned a room in the house, besides their own, to maintain, and everyone had one night a week for dish duty. Sunday was always Dad's day since it was pretty well guaranteed that he would be home. It is still the case. Sunday is also the day we have the biggest meal. During the summer, the day we have dish duty is also the day we are responsible for the meals. Needless to say, we don't eat very much during the summer.

Obviously, all of these jobs can't be done within the literal magic three hours (which are between 5:00 and 8:00 in the morning), but the concept of the three magic hours carries through all hours of the day: discipline in doing what has to be done to keep the wheels turning, so to speak, and to achieve whatever goals have been set. Of course, growing up, I didn't realize that this was what was happening. Since it started when I was very young, it never occurred to me that there was any other way until my friends informed me that there really was an alternative route. A few of them thought that my parents were running an army and were secretly planning to break off from the United States to create an independent state.

In high school, my bedtime was moved to 9:00 p.m., due to the fact that I was so involved in everything. I think I tried everything at least once. There were volleyball and basketball practices on top of play practices, madrigal rehearsals, track, tennis, soccer, jazz band practice (I was the pianist there for only a short time), and . . . homework. By the time I was a senior, it finally occurred to me that I couldn't do everything and expect to stay healthy, so I cut back considerably on the number of things I was involved in, but it was still enough to make the head spin just a little at times.

Another important part of the week was our "Sunday raps." This was a grueling two hours or so where we would gather with our day planners in hand to plan and coordinate our week. It was designed so everyone would know what everyone else was doing and when. At the time, the only productive thing about it for me was finding out who could trade on my dish night if I knew I wouldn't be able to do it. Otherwise it was tedious and time-consuming. I always had something else I felt I needed to do, or a friend that I wanted to visit, so of course I felt that we could have accomplished what we did in half the time it normally took us. But we were always hindered by sidetrack conversations, or everyone talking at once.

Nevertheless, scheduling was very important and often very tight. All six of us took piano lessons and we all had to practice in the morning before we went to school. There was no time to do it after school because of the extracurricular activities that everyone was involved in. That meant that at least two of us had to practice at the same time. So my parents took me down to the church house at 6:00, and while they played basketball with some men from the neighborhood, I practiced the piano in the chapel. That worked fine until I was kicked out by the janitor. Apparently, he felt it necessary to clean the church, and particularly the chapel, at that time in the morning. It ultimately worked out for the best because we found a white grand piano for an amazingly low price to take some of the burden off our faithful old upright that's about seventy years old. We put one piano upstairs and one down, and they were used simultaneously.

I am in college now—a music college, even—so the practice has paid off. But as I look back and think about what the magic three hours has achieved for me, my siblings, and my entire family, I think the most important thing is not the self-discipline it developed, nor the ability to organize, but the unity it created among the members of my family. The memories I have of my family planning together in the mornings, even when it wasn't pleasant, of working together toward a common goal, of reading, playing, and just being together mean more to me than anything. I appreciate the fact that my parents place a high value on my family being together in everything because, ultimately, my family is who, when life gets rough, will be there to stand up and admit they know me. I value the knowledge that, no matter what, I have a solid support system. My family knows what I want and what I am trying to achieve, as I know what they are striving for—and we support each other.

I would give anything to be able to go to bed at 9:00.

Stacie

What do I think about the magic three hours? What do I really think? I think it's pretty crazy. But I believe in it. Like most things in life, it's harder when you're in a situation to see what's really happening, what you should do, etc. And then when it's passed, and you look back, you can see exactly how things should have been. The answers are there now that the experience is past. But then, isn't that what gaining experience is all about? Boy. I'm an awesome philosopher.

Really, though, somehow this is kind of how I feel about the magic three hours. It was harder when I was going through growing up with the magic three hours to see the value of it. Luckily, I was sensible enough to trust in the wisdom of my parents. For me, that experience is invaluable.

Honestly, wouldn't you feel blessed to be born into a family that catapults you from sleep at 5:00 a.m. to study, discuss, practice, and collaborate? We're talking every school day of the week, without fail. What a blessing. (Futile attempt at humor.) I remember waking up at 4:50 a.m. thinking, "What if, just what if Mom let us sleep in today?" I would pray with all my heart, "Oh please, oh please, let today be the day." But it never was. Mother would faithfully make her rounds. She would come in all cheery and happy. Don't you just love cheery, happy people at 5:00 a.m.?

She would get us up and pray with us. We needed prayers. Then we would all meet in the study room. We all looked like we'd been fifteen rounds. We would read and plan, then practice our musical instruments so that we might be talented people. At that time, I didn't see the real purpose to this grueling schedule except that it was a great source of attention with my friends.

Now I do. I remember when I went to college thinking, I can arrange my schedule so I can do what I want, including sleep.

But the first little while at college was so mediocre. I kept thinking, "What's wrong? I never have time to get ready or do this blah, blah, blah." I would call home and Mom would tell me to stick to the basics and to start doing what I had been doing before. So I began to do it on my own. Yes, me. And I felt so good. There's nothing that feels better than when you feel you have accomplished something—even simple things. It does wonders for self-image. I would arise at 6:00 a.m., study, prepare for the day, occasionally exercise, and then the rest of the day was mine for fun stuff. It gave me a great incentive to get to bed at a decent hour as well.

Looking back at it, it is these times with my family growing up that I remember. It has made such a difference in my life. I know I can do anything and become anything because of what I learned in those three hours each day. They are precious times. Family is what it's all about, and I've been able to spend as much time with my family as the average person might in three lifetimes. These magic three hours have provided me with great lessons of life: priceless values and good communication skills. I thank God every day for parents—and especially a wonderful mother—with vision and love enough for me to make this system a priority. So truly I am blessed. Perhaps it is crazy, but it's so worth it.

Sharwan

"The Magic Three Hours"? Hah! I have to admit that sometimes I looked at it as the dreaded three hours. Of course, the dreaded three hours, for me, consisted of arising at 5:00 a.m., scripture study and "planning and solitude" from 5:00 to 5:30, piano practice from 5:30 to 6:00, followed by breakfast, doing household chores, and getting ready for school from 6:30 to 7:20, at which time I would either catch the bus, snag a ride, or, when old enough, drive myself to school, which began at 7:30. I was almost always tardy.

I called it the "dreaded three hours" because of the time at which it began. I used to wake up early and anticipate my mother turning on the hall light and then either my dad or mom coming down the hall to wake me up. I remember thinking that I was literally going to die from being so tired in the morning—and I would tell my parents that, too! But, I swear, they never believed me. I remember at times being so tired that I used to dream on purpose that my mom let us sleep in until 6:00. Then, at 5:00, when she really did wake us up, I would feel more refreshed. Sometimes at night, if I got to bed really late, I used to think, "Why bother going to sleep? Mom is just going to wake me up in five hours anyway." Isn't that crazy?

The funny thing is that on the days we didn't get up at 5:00 and we were lucky enough to sleep in, my mother would come in at 6:00 and say, "Okay, you guys, I let you sleep in, now we all need to pitch in to get everything done." That usually cracked me up because, normally, since I was expecting my mother at 5:00 anyway, I was already awake and couldn't fall back to sleep for that extra hour. Some sleep-in! What really cracks me up, however, is that we, as growing teenagers, looked at 6:00 a.m. as sleeping in. But I must say that on those days we did sleep in, nothing seemed to go right. We would miss our scripture reading and family bonding time and then I would have to find some time after school and basketball practice to practice my piano—which usually never happened. The whole day would go differently when we had one of our rare sleep-ins.

I look back now at that so-called three dreaded hours, and can definitely see why Mom called them the "magic three hours." What we accomplished in those three hours is enough to leave anyone in complete awe. A clean house, clothes washed, eight fed stomachs, six children all ready for school—four of whom had already practiced the piano for half an hour, spiritual growth and scripture study, and—of course—the day completely planned out as to who was going where and doing what, written down in every one of our Franklin Day Planners—all this before 8:00 a.m.

The lessons I have learned from this have already begun to pay off. There were times, I admit, that I wanted to quit piano and never take another lesson. There were also times that I wished I could be a normal kid and roll out of bed five minutes before class and still make it on time. And there were the times that I would look at my mom and dad at 5:00 in the morning and think, "They must be from hell!" But then they would kneel in prayer with me and my exhaustion would disappear, along with my orneriness at being awakened.

I am now a senior in college, attending Southern Utah University, majoring in communications. I have a minor in music and piano. Believe it or not, when I got to college I continued taking private lessons on my own, even though I swore up and down that I wouldn't. All those hours on the piano so early in the morning had paid off. I actually have some talent and received an award my junior year for my ability.

The scripture study has paid off as well. I have now read the Book of Mormon many times and have a strong testimony of its truthfulness. This testimony has seen me through many a hard day. I still read the scriptures daily because I have learned the value of reading them and the need for the words of the Lord to be taken into our hearts daily.

The family bonding time in the morning and the sense of achievement from getting things done instilled in all of us a sense of confidence and high self-esteem. Each one of us has the confidence to dream and to go after our dreams.

My sister Glenna, who is a returned missionary from Italy, wants to be a concert pianist. In striving for this goal she applied to the Westminster Choir College in Princeton, New Jersey, and went there for two years. She is now at BYU majoring in music and doing very well.

My sister Stacie will be the first of the children to graduate from college this upcoming year. She is majoring in the social sciences. Stacie served a mission in England and married a total stud and is very happy.

My younger brother Joe was the star basketball player in his high school and is so good-looking he doesn't know what to do with himself. What is neat about Joe is that he tries to be humble and involve everybody. He just auditioned for his first play and landed the lead. Joe leaves on his mission in six months.

Rebecca, my younger sister, was the lead in her high school play and is involved with student government. She is also a star basketball and volleyball player. I get tired just watching Rebecca.

Jacob, my youngest brother, is "Mr. Read-a-new-book-every hour." He loves to read and is just starting to get involved in his high school.

And as for myself, I became the "Days of '47" Queen and the student body administrative vice president while attending SUU. I am currently preparing to leave for Bahia Blanca, Argentina, where I have been called to serve a mission. I now have the opportunity to go tell others of the "Magic Three Hours," and the importance of scripture study, family bonding, and personal improvement.

My parents have instilled in me values, for which I will be forever grateful. My family is awesome and it is because two people who believed in correct principles took the time and effort to make sure their children learned and came to believe in correct principles as well. I have a testimony of the "Magic Three Hours."

P.S. I hear that in the Missionary Training Center you don't have to get up until 6:00 a.m. I can't wait to get there!

Joseph

I never woke up at 5:00 a.m. to start the Magic Three Hours. My morning always started at 4:59 a.m. My eyes would watch the digital alarm clock by the door as one minute of pure agony and pain would begin to "tick" down. I would think to myself, "Maybe today will be different . . . " But sure enough, before I could finish the thought the clock would change to the hour of 5:00 a.m. and the hall light would begin to flood through under my door. I could always hear my dad's footsteps coming down the hall. (I swear to this day he wore combat boots with the extra-thick sole so we could hear him coming.) He would get to the door, pause for only a moment, and then with great ceremony he would flip on the light. I think my room was the only one equipped with a floodlight. "Let the games begin!" I thought.

This is how every morning started for me. My memories include those of personal prayer with my father, family scripture study and planning, long piano practices, chores, getting ready for school, and playing tricks on my sisters while they were getting ready for school. On rare occasions I got to go and watch my parents play early morning basketball between 6:00 and 7:00 if I got my chores done early. However, the thing I remember the most was making breakfast. I don't know why, but year after year it was my job to make breakfast with my trusted assistant and lifelong pal, Rebecca. I loved it. Do you have any idea what it is like to make breakfast for eight people every morning, Monday through Friday? The menu had to be filling yet tasty, with plenty to go around. So we often had oatmeal and toast, eggs on toast, rice cereal, pancakes, French toast, hash browns (from potatoes left over from dinner), scrambled eggs, or cold cereal. Every once in a while we'd make our SpecialitÃ© de la Maison—biscuits and gravy from scratch. Nobody makes better biscuits than me, and nobody makes better gravy than Becca. Nobody!

In conclusion, the Magic Three Hours taught me a lot of things. It taught me self-discipline, organization, in all honesty how to read, and the value of being prepared. Most of all, it taught me how important being close as a family really is. This space of time in the morning was sometimes the only moment my family was ever able to share time together. It was often the only time I got to see my father. That is why it was important to me—to get to know and be with my family. It is getting more and more rare to see a family that is really close, where everyone loves each other. A big reason for this, in my opinion, is because families today don't spend any time with each other. They don't read the scriptures together, they don't pray together, they don't eat together, they don't even spend time talking to one another. If nothing else, the Magic Three Hours strengthens the bonds of love in relationships between family members. I'm reminded often by a plaque above our table which reads, "A family that prays together, stays together." This is what the Magic Three Hours taught me.

Rebecca

What do the magic three hours mean to me?

If this question were to have been asked five years ago, I would probably have been very negative in my answer. Getting up so early wasn't really a cool thing to do, nor was having to be in bed early a great thing, either. It very much limited what I wanted when it came to my night life and trying to be the most popular girl in school. I felt like a big nerd. All of my other friends would tell countless stories of how they just got out of bed five minutes before the school bell would ring and they still had enough time to look perfect. Hair, makeup, and all! I felt so deprived. Why did I have three hours to make sure I looked perfect, and why was it that I had pretty much accomplished a day's worth of obligations all by the time I had gotten to school? How unfair not to be typical.

Now, the thought may be running through your head, do you know how many people would kill to have all of their chores and obligations for the day done by 8:00 in the morning? You see, it isn't until now that I recognize what an amazing trick my parents were teaching us. To someone in high school, fitting in means a lot, and getting up and going to bed so early wasn't the pinnacle of how to be accepted. But to someone who is venturing out into the world for her first time going to college, trying to get a degree, holding a job, or trying to make something of herself, the picture becomes all too clear. Because of those dreaded three hours every morning, I now know what it takes to remember who I am. My greatest teaching moments happened in those three hours. I learned discipline. I learned structure. I learned how to stand on my own two feet. I learned to appreciate my sleep. I even learned a little about cooking. (You see, miracles do happen.) Most of all, I gained an amazing appreciation for my family. Those three hours took all of us. We all had separate chores and duties, and at five in the morning, we came together to make it happen. If one of us was out of sync, we all felt it. We were like a machine, and to turn the machine and to let it function takes all the parts. I have never met a family that works together, plays together, and is so close as mine. I attribute my family's closeness to those three little hours we spent together every morning.

Sure, high school is a place to have friends and to fit in, but those friends come and go. The one constant that I know will always be a part of my life is my best friends, my family.

Jacob

I'm sitting here in my flat in Gloucester, England, and my mind goes back to all the mornings that you got us out of bed early. You taught us to read the scriptures, to plan our day, to pray, and to work.

All those mornings you or Dad would come in at 5:00 and turn on the lights, and I would groggily roll out of bed—those are the things I'm grateful for now. Every morning I get up, bathe, plan my day, read the scriptures. I guess the strangest thing now is that I love it. We (my companion and I) pray more now than I thought anyone ever did, and it truly helps us feel peace and happiness in our lives as young missionaries 6,000 miles from home.

The knowledge of the scriptures that I gained through the Magic Three Hours is my greatest ally. Every day, something that I studied in the past is a help, a strength. The scriptures give me something strong to stand on.

Thank you so much for all those mornings, for making me get up, pray, and study the scriptures. Thank you for giving me the strengths that I need the most now.

Our system isn't for everybody. Personality, circumstances, or different views of the universe will shade everyone's approach to the world of child rearing. But maybe you can see how parts of it would work for you, or how you can reach the same goal using different means. I think the key question is: What do you want for your children?

The world begins at home. Within the walls of our home, thanks to the threatened miscarriage that kept me in bed and taught us that children rise to great expectations, we learned that even little ones can demonstrate amazing competence. We structured a family life to teach them competencies in many areas, but also to teach life skills that were universally useful: goal setting, planning, reviewing, evaluating, negotiating with others, maintaining commitment, cooperating, and rewarding themselves and being rewarded for achievement.

From competence springs confidence in trying new things. And from ease with oneself and one's abilities comes the feeling of abundance that can overflow readily into compassion for others. Thus confidence, competence, and compassion, the qualities that we had hoped to help our children develop, were a natural outgrowth of the Magic Three Hours.
