A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

10

A thousand leaves

As Glenna so aptly explained in her evaluation of our parenting strategies, "the concept of the Magic Three Hours carries through all hours of the day." The habits of growth, discipline, and togetherness had roots in that morning time with our family, but many other settings and methods figured in our efforts to nurture those values.

Quality Time, Quantity Time

In the current parenting debate between quality time and quantity time, Hyrum and I come down firmly on both sides. We've sacrificed a great deal to put our children and each other first, but the reward is that we enjoy being with each other most of anyone in the world.

It's one thing to say we want to spend time together, and another thing to actually do it. We carefully chose activities we could do as a family and consciously made the time for them. Some fell naturally into our routine, like reading the scriptures together daily, discussing the characters and the stories, and then looking for opportunities to apply them in our lives. The children took their turns reading aloud; as a result, their reading skills were far advanced for their years. Helping the children with the dishes gave me other great opportunities for one-on-one time with them.

We planned for togetherness and worked hard to achieve it. Because of Hyrum's schedule, time with him was particularly precious. I always tried to arrange things so that I could take him to the airport and pick him up. If they weren't in school, the children accompanied us on these airport trips. Because Hyrum nearly always returned at night, it was easy for us to go as a family to pick him up, even if it was so late that the children had to go in their pajamas.

Getting a treat at the airport was part of that family tradition. The ultimate treat was to go to the Portland airport restaurant and have an Eskimo pie, which was a square of chocolate cake with hot fudge on it, and then ice cream with more hot fudge and another piece of cake on top. It was probably a dietitian's nightmare, but it was part of our family togetherness. We've tried Eskimo pies all over the world in an unsuccessful attempt to duplicate the ones we used to get at the Portland airport. Another fun treat was to park the car at the end of the parking lot and take the shuttle bus in, then go to Hyrum's gate and greet him as he got off the plane. It wasn't always practical, but we did that whenever we could.

On one 2:00 a.m. airport excursion as we waited in the car at the curb nearest the baggage claim, we saw a huge rat waddling obesely along the curb toward our van. It looked like Templeton from Charlotte's Web after his midnight foraging through the fairgrounds. We were relieved when the rat finally lumbered past the van; after that experience, we were especially glad to see Dad!

During the three years Hyrum was mission president in California, he had a heavy schedule of speaking on weekends throughout the region at firesides, retreats, stake conferences, special events, and priesthood meetings. Hyrum had the title, the authority, and the responsibility, but both of us considered it a joint effort. I accompanied him to many of his assignments and also spoke, if only a few words, at most of them. To keep our commitment to make weekends family time, we would piggyback activities on his schedule. Frequently Glenna, Stacie, and Sharwan—ages ten, nine, and eight—would sing trios or play the piano. People were charmed with their talents, and the children felt good about "helping Dad." Even Joseph and Becca, at age five or six, would sing short songs or speak for a minute or so. It was a way of keeping the whole family involved. If the nature of Hyrum's meetings precluded our direct involvement, we would research what there was to do nearby and enjoy that activity while he was involved with the group.

We made the drives to and from our assignments pleasant with car games, songs, stories, and treats. The children thought staying in a motel—especially one with a swimming pool—was the height of pleasure. And eating out, even if it was only hamburgers, made them feel special. If Hyrum and I were hosted at a dinner, they went with us, carefully using their best table manners.

Besides all the meetings and speaking engagements, we had the opportunity while in the mission field to visit such places as the J. Paul Getty Museum, Hearst Castle, several early California Spanish missions, the Queen Mary, Hollywood Boulevard, and even the Rose Parade. Our children always accompanied us to public events whenever possible. We took the time to spell out in careful detail ahead of time what we expected of them: what constituted acceptable behavior, what reward they would get if they met our expectations, and what sanctions there would be if they exceeded the limits. So they knew from the time they were little that it was okay to jump up and scream at a game, but not in a movie or at a museum. We didn't want to be anxious about their behavior, and we didn't want them to be anxious. Clear expectations made for an enjoyable experience all around.

Church meetings required some special thought; they present a big challenge in any young family's life. On the one hand, we felt that families should be together in church; on the other hand, we couldn't allow our children to disrupt the experience for others. Church is a place to be reverent, but it's difficult to convey that expectation to a tiny child. I thought through this situation carefully and decided that I would not let church spoil Sundays for my children. I came prepared with snacks that could be eaten with no mess, toys that would make no noise, and quiet books. That way the children could be with us, but we were not requiring them to pay attention to a meeting that was not designed to communicate with children.

It didn't always work, of course. All of my children have been warned during church that the foyer is not a place for running around, and that if I have to take them out of the chapel for misbehavior, they will be spanked. Every single one of them has tested that statement, been spanked, and learned that the foyer was not a play room. I know that some who sat near us shared the suffering and probably wished I had a different rule. But I took the risk to teach the lesson.

Hyrum was nearly always on the stand because of his callings, so we sat on the front row. Thus, even though Hyrum couldn't sit with us, he could see the children; occasionally a thunderous scowl from him would nip prospective misbehavior in the bud. And certainly, the great example that the older children set for the younger ones was invaluable.

A far-from-small side benefit of spending a lot of time together was the incredible loyalty the children developed for each other. We planned together, worked together, attended each other's games and performances as a matter of course, and included each other in our world to an extent that I think is rare in today's families. This loyalty shows up in little ways. Joseph, for example, has never been afflicted by the bashfulness most teenage boys exhibit at giving anyone in the family a hug or a kiss in public. During his Eagle Scout award presentation, the boys were expected to give their mothers a thank-you kiss. Kissing moms in public seemed to embarrass the socks off the other boys. Not Joseph.

Even more touching, Joseph insisted that Becca get an award that night too, because she had worked so hard and helped him so much with his Eagle project. Joe chose a gold medallion for her and had her named an "honorary Eagle Scout."

Spending quality and quantity time with children can be a demanding habit. One night at 1:15 a.m. our phone rang, waking us out of a sound sleep. It was Stacie, calling from her student apartment. My first thought was, "Is anything wrong? Is someone hurt?" Stacie was so excited that her words were tripping over themselves. Larry, the apple of her eye and the one for whom she had serious hopes for romance, had finally kissed her. He had come over with a friend, and they had just stayed and stayed and stayed. The friend at length had announced that he was tired and would wait in the car, but Larry had lingered at the screen door until finally . . . She couldn't call us before now, but she just had to tell us.

For Hyrum, who had answered the phone, the first reaction was: "Stacie, that's great, but do you know what time—"

I practically shoved him out of bed with my foot. "Hyrum," I hissed, "if she's willing to tell us about it, we'd better be willing to listen!"

So we heard the whole thrilling account of Stacie's first kiss from her future husband. No, the timing wasn't terrific, but the experience was.

Managing Money

Hyrum and I have always had a strict budget and have tried to manage our money with the utmost economy. For most of our married life, being careful with our money has been an absolute necessity. This has not always come easily. Although we agreed early in our marriage that we would never go in debt for anything other than an automobile and a house, Hyrum and I started out with some fundamental differences in how we approached finances. In the early years, I was the one who established the budget and tracked the money in the checking account, and I had a hard time spending money on anything that wasn't absolutely essential. Hyrum, on the other hand, has always been generous by nature and was always making unplanned purchases when he became aware of a need or was impressed by a sales presentation. At the end of the month, I was frustrated at finding checks in the bank statement for purchases that I had not been aware of. As a result, I automatically cut corners and skimped in other areas to make ends meet. After some long discussions, we decided that Hyrum would take on the responsibility for budgeting and tracking our finances. After a month or so, he understood that we had only so much money at a given time.

Conversely, I have learned to appreciate Hyrum's foresight in making purchases that had a long-term benefit—such as a new sewing machine or a family entertainment system. I often questioned such purchases at the time they were consummated, but they made lasting and important contributions to our family. Not long after we moved to Portland, for instance, Hyrum came home one night with an expensive stereo system. Although I was initially frustrated by Hyrum's purchase, I soon came to appreciate his long-range wisdom. Not only did that purchase expose our children to good music, but the kids quickly learned that they could turn into performers by plugging in the microphone and singing along with the music. I suspect that the stereo system had more than a little to do with their discovery of their singing talents. Hyrum helped me realize that some purchases were important investments in our family's future.

During our student years, the G.I. Bill paid 250 dollars a month. From that amount we squeezed out rent, gasoline, and books. Both of us were resolved that I would be a full-time mom for Glenna, so my finding a job was not the option it was for many student couples. As Stacie and then Sharwan were born, also during those student years, no job on earth could have tempted me away from the three.

Somehow, in those lean times, we made ends meet—often thanks to my parents, bless their hearts, who kept us supplied with beef for the freezer, eggs, butter, and bottled fruit. When we visited St. George they would always load us up. We laughed about how, as students, we were too poor to buy chicken, so we ate steak instead. But there were plenty of weeks when our budget was no joke. Just after Stacie was born in 1969, we had hot dogs for Thanksgiving dinner. That was what we could afford.

We have tried to teach our children that money is never a possession, always an instrument. It's worth working for, not because possessing it is intrinsically important, but because with it many good things can be done. We taught them that society pays its respects in money, and that they should honestly earn what they receive, always remembering that money is their servant, not their master.

We had two methods for teaching our children to respect money without letting it dominate them. First, we taught them to pay their tithing, one-tenth of what they received. Another tenth was to serve as an investment in their own future in the form of a long-term savings account. It's hard to feel totally possessive about money when you have already mentally distributed part of anything you will receive.

The second strategy is to turn money rapidly into rewards, so that money itself does not become attaching. One example of working toward a financial goal that involved the whole family was our first super vacation, something the children still mention as a combination of sustained work and glorious fulfillment.

When we were living in Centerville in 1983, we decided during our August meeting to go explore Hyrum's roots. What would the children think about a super vacation—thirty days in Hawaii? They were wildly enthusiastic. St. George was like a second home to them, but Glenna, Stacie, and Sharwan had been toddlers when we had spent our one part-year in Honolulu. They all wanted to go see where Dad had lived and gone to school, and to meet his friends and associates.

We spelled out the conditions. Hyrum had accumulated enough frequent flyer miles to pay for four of the airfares, but we would all need to help come up with the money to purchase the other two tickets. So each child had to earn enough to pay for his or her share of the airfare, plus some for spending money, which we estimated at about a hundred dollars each. They were enthusiastic about that too.

We began seeking work opportunities. Mother Ruth introduced us to a friend of hers, Brother Bosic, who had a knife- and scissors-sharpening shop. He accepted a business deal we offered him: We would gather scissors from people in our ward and neighborhood, label them with little name tags, take them to Brother Bosic for sharpening, and then return them to the owners. He kept one dollar and we kept two. He also made wooden lawn ornaments, which the children sold throughout the neighborhood, again earning a commission.

The children searched high and low for odd jobs. They baby-sat, mowed lawns, raked leaves, cleaned garages, and put their housecleaning skills to good use for hire. Our day planner business was just beginning, and the children were our first assembly crew, collating the thirty-seven pages in the first simple manual and popping them into three-ring binders for ten cents a book. Stacie, age thirteen, took over processing the orders for a motivational book Hyrum had written, Where Eagles Rest, which we sold from our basement. Stacie took the orders and packaged up the books for mailing. We trained all the children to answer the telephone in a professional manner, since at that time it was also the business phone. We had rehearsals and drilled them in what to say, how to check Hyrum's schedule, and how to take messages. To prove we were serious, we rewarded them if we later got a compliment or positive comment about them. And if we scheduled a seminar as a result of following up on a call they had taken, we gave them fifty dollars.

An unbelievable invitation next came. The family who had purchased the home in which Hyrum had grown up was coming to visit family members in a town just five miles away from Centerville. Would we be interested in house-sitting for them in Hawaii? We would. Would they be interested in using our car while they were in Utah? They would. We were both delighted with our exchange.

The big day finally came, and we were off. We had planned to learn about Hawaii in particular and Polynesia in general while we were there. Each morning we followed our Magic Three Hours routine, then hopped in the station wagon and headed out. Each day included a visit to a monument, a library, a marine show, a museum, or an exhibition of a native craft. We learned to hula and to make leis. We inspected sea mammals and fish. Many of Grandma Smith's friends invited us to dinner or to family home evenings. We barbecued in the park, explored the beaches for seashells, and swam every day. Everyone learned to surf.

It was interesting to see how the children budgeted and spent their own money. Glenna methodically allowed herself only two dollars per day. On some days she would not spend anything, allowing her under her tightly formulated system to spend the money she had thus "saved" for an occasional larger purchase. Stacie spent as she saw and was out of money early. Sharwan spent her money on treats. Joseph, Becca, and Jacob were younger and deferred to Mom and Dad for most of their spending decisions. Everyone purchased school clothes at a Salvation Army store that offered great buys on goods donated by wealthy Honolulu residents.

It was a perfect thirty days. We came back with every child a believer in planning, working, saving, and savoring the pleasures of achieving a goal.

Rewards and Discipline

Our summer super vacations have been a great way for us to reward the children for accomplishing their tasks during the school year. Over the years, we've taken trips to Disneyland, gone boating among the red-sandstone canyons of Lake Powell, attended company outings, traveled to visit grandparents, and enjoyed a number of other summer family activities together, some as simple as camping in our backyard and sleeping on the trampoline.

But summer is often a long way away, so we used weekly rewards as well. As was discussed in greater detail earlier, Friday was our major housecleaning day and Saturday was reward day. If the children stuck to the schedule throughout the week and accomplished all their tasks, then Saturday was free time. They could watch television or go to a movie with friends or have friends over.

We tried to use natural consequences in providing motivation. Children who didn't do their jobs during the week had to do them on Saturday—no playing, no television, no movies. If the child was playing on a soccer team, he missed his game, letting down the team and depriving himself of an activity he loved. If we had a family activity planned, it would be cancelled for everyone. That may seem harsh, but Hyrum and I adhered to the idea that just as an automobile can't be driven with a flat tire, a family doesn't really function well without all of the family members participating—and that applies to family fun and rewards as well as to family responsibilities.

Of course, we had specific family rules with specific punishments attached. It may surprise some people that, for the most part, those punishments were determined by the children themselves. Once, for example, our children came up with the idea of "solitary confinement" for a particularly blatant violation of family rules. That meant being banished to an especially gloomy basement bathroom to spend a specified number of minutes thinking, with no books, no radio, just solitary silence. The kids even put a poster on the door featuring jail cell bars and a title: The Jailhouse. This turned out to be quite effective in providing a "time-out" situation, although we would never use it for extended periods.

An infraction of the rules might also result in "parole," which was similar to what some families would call grounding. Being on parole meant no playing with friends, no phone calls, no TV, and no outside activities. We seldom needed other measures.

And we didn't need even those sanctions very often. Positive results did most of the disciplining for us. Besides, one of our basic philosophies is that spending time together is in itself rewarding, because you're surrounded by people who know you, love you, demand the best from you, and support you.

Planting the Seeds of Work

I always knew where I stood with Pat Brewer, a dear friend in Portland, Oregon, who used to come to my house to give my children piano lessons. If I ever called her to ask a favor, when she could help me she would, but when she couldn't, she'd simply say, "Nope." No excuses or explanations. She was one of the first who rallied when my pregnancy with Rebecca kept me in bed. Pat was in her midthirties and married, but didn't have any children at the time. She later moved to Denver, where she had three small children of her own. We kept in touch, and during one of our phone conversations, Pat commented, "Gail, now I understand why your children's beds were always lumpy."

I said, "What do you mean, Pat?"

"Well," she explained, "when I used to come to your house, I couldn't understand why your kids' beds were always wrinkled or lumpy, even though they were made. I just couldn't understand it, and I judged you as not being a very good housekeeper. Now that my children are four and five years old, I understand why your beds were lumpy. You let your children make their own beds!"

I laughed at her tone of triumphant discovery and confirmed, "That's right."

She continued, "It's really hard for me to do that, because I want them made neatly and up to my expectations."

All mothers probably have that attitude at one point or another. It's easier just to do the work ourselves: the job gets done better and faster. Of course, Pat already knew the reason for squashing such an attitude of impatient expectations. The mother gets the work done but has to do it forever because, as she is doing the task, the children are learning that they are inadequate and incompetent. Furthermore, she has just handicapped herself in the other great battle we parents face in teaching our children how to work: getting the child to perform the work in the first place. We need to understand that it is through the process of allowing (and requiring) the children to work at their own level, to the best of their ability, that we teach them responsibility, self-satisfaction, and independence. They learn what it means to feel success.

In working with my children, I always spend some time thinking first—thinking about the child, thinking about the job, and thinking about my goal. I can't, for instance, have a goal related to an individual job that would conflict with our greater goal of shaping competent children.

I also think through the child's individual capabilities—age, skill, and confidence level. High expectations only work if the child can actually perform the job, and setting a child up for failure is a ter-rible experience for both the parent and the child. A mother well knows that each child in a family is different in temperament and abilities. For example, I could instruct one of my children to take a stack of folded towels upstairs and put them away, return two books to the shelves in the study, and hang up a coat that was over a chair—and that child would go and accomplish the needed tasks. On the other hand, another child, if given the same set of directions, would probably get sidetracked by a toy or a butterfly on an upstairs window sill. Still another would say she would do it, but I would have to follow up to see if she actually performed. Goals for each child must take such variables into consideration.

When I have those principles clear in my mind, I set up my expectations of what constitutes a "good" job and how I expect the child to do the job. For a child's first time tackling a new task, I work with him or her individually. I explain what we want the end result to look like. I give the child the "job description" as we work through it, making sure that the instructions are simple, well defined, and in a logical sequence. It is important that he or she have a clear understanding of the whole picture. Sometimes I make simple charts showing each step of the process. And I make sure that there are three incentives accompanying the job: the child's recognition of performing up to standard, my praise of his or her accomplishment, and a privilege or reward.

For example, when I taught six-year-old Jacob to clean the bathroom, we both went into the room and I announced enthusiastically, "When we're finished in here, the fixtures and mirrors will shine, the towels will hang straight, there will be no puddles or litter on any of the surfaces, and the wastebasket will be empty." This is the overview. It sets up six criteria, even if they aren't phrased quite like a list.

We grabbed the portable tote with all the necessary cleaning supplies in it, and together Jacob and I cleaned and polished the mirrors. Then we scrubbed and rinsed the sinks and bathtub. To clean the toilet (a skill Hyrum always demonstrated to the children), we used a different brush, cleanser, and technique. Jacob thought that was pretty neat. Then we wiped off the counters and polished them dry. The floor needed to be either vacuumed or mopped, depending on which bathroom it was. Next came the trash, and he already knew how to dump it in the garbage can. Then I showed him how to straighten the towels and refold any items in the linen closet that may have gotten rumpled or out of place during the week.

We repeated this process until Jacob could give me exact instructions about what steps needed to be done, in what order, and to what specifications. After a couple of times working with him, I announced, "Jacob, this is now your job. You're the boss of the bathroom. You're responsible for tidying it up every morning before breakfast, and giving it a good cleaning on Fridays. And I'm counting on you to do it." He nodded.

During the Magic Three Hours, I try to walk the fine line between observing and policing. If someone needs a hand, I'm there. When a job is finished, I try to show up promptly, put my arm around the child, and pour out a little praise. It makes both of us feel good.

We have a simple, four-point philosophy of discipline: (1) the best disciplinary agent is reality, (2) encourage choices but present choices between positives as much as possible, (3) share all the information you have, good or bad, and (4) evaluate the consequences, both for the short term and over time. As a result, the children learn to deal with the natural consequences of their stewardships. If Jacob does the job on time and well, he's a happy boy, I'm a happy mom, and the bathroom sparkles. If he doesn't, then we start with the expectations. Does he know the expected standard? If I've done a good job of teaching, he does. Usually, just looking at the room with him and asking him to tell me the six things that make a good job in the bathroom will solve the problem. In the rare instances when there is a problem with getting a job done, I've learned that it generally has nothing to do with the job itself. That's a time to sit down with the child, to talk, to explore feelings and try to understand the deeper problem the child is trying to deal with.

Another crucial point to remember—because it's such an ever-present temptation—is not to add on more jobs once a task has been finished according to the stated expectations. This is why I always think through what constitutes a good job ahead of time.

Perhaps it should go without saying, but I'm going to say it anyway: parents should teach children to work by setting an ex-ample. Our children were never asked to do anything that they had not seen us do many times. No child in our family has had the privilege of ordering a younger sibling to take on a job that she or he didn't want to touch. All of them worked beside me in the garden and the house, seeing order emerge, surfaces sparkle, and savory meals appear.

Spending quality time together, managing finances well, disciplining effectively, and teaching our children to work were all important values to us. Perhaps the greatest reward in all that we did to try to share those values was in the results that came from setting and achieving goals. By the time they were in fifth or sixth grade, the children were fully aware of how much they were accomplishing. They loved the sweet success that comes from achievement. They thrilled at their own skills and at their self-sufficiency. They were experiencing some of the rewards that make adults happy too—taking care of themselves and helping the people they loved. They had adult skills, like cooking, shopping, and earning and managing money. Success breeds success. No wonder they loved it!
