A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

11

Stirred in a thousand winds

The Magic Three Hours provide a wonderful opportunity for the consistent practice or development of talents and aptitudes. However, faithfully using this special time for such personal development does not provide any guarantee of success and fulfillment. When she was fifteen, Glenna learned this lesson in a most wrenching and unforgettable way for all of us.

Glenna had started picking out tunes on the piano when she was four, and a piano teacher in Portland appraised her aptitude and willingly took her on as a student at age five. For ten years, Glenna practiced the piano every day. She did it out of love; I never had to remind her. Our piano at home, a spinet, was scheduled every available minute by the younger children. So Hyrum and I would go to our local meetinghouse and play basketball in the gym with friends while Glenna practiced on the grand piano in the chapel.

For months Glenna had been practicing for a statewide piano competition. The story of that experience is best told in her own words:

The Piano Competition

I fumbled in the dark trying to find the lock on the chapel door of the church. I finally found it and went inside. I turned on one set of lights and looked at the clock. It read 6:05 a.m. I sighed as I walked up the aisle and on to the stand where the piano was. It didn't seem to get any easier. I could already hear my parents involved in a game of basketball through the wall in the gym.

I turned on the little piano light and turned off the big lights. This way I couldn't possibly waste electricity, as the janitor accused me of doing. He always gave me the same speech every day when I came to practice about how I shouldn't be here. "It's against church policy and it wastes electricity. We can't let everyone come here just to use the piano, and if we let one, we have to let all. Don't you have a piano of your own? I had five kids and put 'em all through piano lessons on one piano."

I had never heard of any such church policy. As far as electricity went, I used only a small piano light. Besides, what was the tithing and ward budget my parents paid used for? Didn't that pay for the light? And who else would want to come and practice on church pianos at six in the morning? I didn't believe him, but his obvious lack of welcome always took the edge of pleasure off my practice. I felt he just flat didn't want me there.

I had just finished my warm-ups and was starting on my real music when the door was thrown open and a vacuum was shoved in. Terrific. Mr. Janitor does it again. He always had to do the chapel first, out of all the rooms he could have started with. He had to come here first and spend nearly twenty minutes of my practice time vacuuming.

I played louder, not that it did any good. He always wore a Walkman radio and earphones in his ears. He was a big, tall, fat man with a gruff voice and baggy eyes. He'd been a janitor for twenty-five years. I kept playing Rachmaninoff as loud as I could while he brought the stupid vacuum up to the piano and literally vacuumed under my feet.

When he finally left, I was able to concentrate again on my music. I had two songs I was perfecting. Actually, it was too late to do any perfecting; this was my last practice before the statewide competition tomorrow. I was ready. I'd been working on this for the last two months. I had both my Rachmaninoff Prelude and my Bach memorized and had performed them for my teacher and various people several times.

I was aware of the doors being opened again. It was my mother. "Glenna, it's time to go." I looked at the clock. 7:07. I had to catch the bus to school by 7:25. I gathered my books together, put them in my bag, and walked out of the chapel.

The next morning, I woke early. Too early. I hadn't slept very well anyway, but it would have been nice if I could at least have dozed until I absolutely had to get out of bed. But here I was, as wide awake as anyone could be. I stayed in bed anyway until my mother came to get me up.

"What dress should I wear?" I asked, already knowing perfectly well what I wanted to wear. I would wear my purple dress, mainly because it wasn't black and I hated the fact that people traditionally wore black when performing in concert. Black was boring. Of course, this wasn't a concert, but close enough. Therefore, no black.

"Why don't you wear your white lace dress?" answered my mother. I hadn't thought of that.

"What about my purple one?" I countered. "It fits looser so it's not as hot."

"Wear your white one so people can look down and see a black grand piano and this person in white playing it."

My mother had struck the romantic part of me. I pictured a huge auditorium and a lone nine-foot black grand piano out in the center of the stage with a girl in white playing this gorgeous piece that everyone loved—and of course she won the competition. I wore the white dress.

I was scheduled to play at 11:20 and it would take two hours to get there through canyons and along one-lane highways. So the whole family—all eight of us, including Grandma Smith—piled into the green van at 8:30. It was the longest drive in history.

I wished that I had an earlier time. I hated waiting. It gave me too much time to think. This was my first competition since we had moved to Utah from California two years earlier. I played with my coat zipper. Up and down, up and down. It was about time I got a new coat. Nerves. Already I could feel the butterflies begin to arrive in my stomach. Why should I be so scared about the whole thing? I'd been in hundreds of competitions—well, quite a few, anyway. Was it just because I hadn't been in one for a while? No, I'd been in one or two recitals since—in my teacher's basement in front of her other students. But what if I drew a blank in the middle of one of the pieces? In the rush to leave, I hadn't brought my music. No, I willed, that wouldn't happen. I considered this as kind of a test or trial to prove to myself that I could still perform without major problems, or even minor ones.

"We're here," said my father.

Inside the building hung an air of tense excitement. Participants milled all over the place waiting for their turns to practice or perform in various rooms. Some were already finished and still had the rest of the day to wait for the results, telling them whether they had made the finals. Most were just waiting.

According to my schedule, the fourteen- and fifteen-year-olds were in Room 4. I first found where it was, then found an empty practice room.

Practice rooms weren't totally soundproof. You could still hear the person next door, and it wasn't exactly reassuring. I started right in on my Rachmaninoff Prelude in C-sharp. That was my favorite out of the two pieces I was doing. Besides, Rachmaninoff helped get rid of nervous energy. My other piece was by Bach. I liked Bach too, but the problem with Bach was that if you didn't have it learned backwards and frontwards, one finger played out of place threw everything off and you forgot where you were.

It was finally time. I sat outside the door marked 4 and waited until the person inside was finished. My whole family was with me. My teacher was there too, dressed in pants. Other people were waiting to perform with me. They all had their music with them.

"Myrtle," I asked my teacher, "was I supposed to bring my music?"

"I think so," my teacher said, alarmingly unconcerned.

"I didn't bring my music." I felt panic well up inside me.

"That's okay. If the judge asks you about it, just tell her you didn't bring it. She'll probably recognize what you're playing anyway."

Terrific. I was supposed to bring my music. Thanks, Myrtle. Maybe I wasn't as prepared as I thought. What if I drew a blank in the middle of a piece, despite how hard I'd practiced? No. I wouldn't do that. At least I wouldn't think about doing it.

The door opened, and everyone stood up to go inside. The butterflies had now all arrived in my stomach and were living it up while they had the chance. I was the last one in and the door closed behind me.

It was no auditorium. There was a black grand piano, but it was crowded against the wall of the long, narrow room, next to a brown piano. Five rows of chairs were lined up behind the piano so that the performers had their backs to the audience while performing. There was only one judge, an older woman who was running behind and wanted to get this group over with so she could go have lunch.

The girl before me went to her place at the piano. She had forgotten her music too. I felt a little better. The girl was playing the Grieg concerto, the same piece I had just started to learn. She played it flawlessly, a tough act to follow.

"Glenna Smith," called out the judge.

I stood up and made my way to the judge's seat.

"I don't have my music," I almost whispered.

"Well, what are you playing?"

"Prelude in C-sharp Minor by Rachmaninoff and Prelude in C by Bach."

"All right, I think I know those. Which one are you playing first?"

"Bach is first." I would do that one first so I could get it over with and relax with Rachmaninoff. I walked to the grand piano, wishing I'd worn the purple dress. I felt so stiff in the white one.

I started in on the Bach. I could hear every little whisper made by the audience, but I couldn't hear what they were saying. My mind began to wander. I wasn't doing so well in geometry anymore. They were starting to use algebra, which I knew practically nothing about. My cousin wanted me to try out for the high school madrigals as the accompanist. Maybe I would. I was only in ninth grade, though. Suddenly, I realized how little I was concentrating. I panicked. I was in a performance! I tried to bring my mind back to what my fingers were doing, but my fingers had been carefully playing along while my mind had been off in never-never land. Now I had no idea where I was in the song.

I stopped. My mind was totally blank. I started over, scared to death that I would forget again in the same place. Sure enough, when I got there, I went blank again. I tried again. No use. I couldn't remember anything past the first page.

"Why don't you go to your Rachmaninoff and then come back to this?" said the judge. Her voice was sympathetic, almost pitying.

I nodded and sat up straighter. I couldn't stand pity. I started Rachmaninoff. It was a deep, heavy piece with a lot of chords that used all ten fingers. It was a story about a man buried alive. The soft and dreary chords at the beginning told of the funeral procession making its way to the grave. The middle part was very fast, almost panicked, telling of the man in the coffin coming to the realization that he is about to be buried, so he starts beating on the inside of the coffin. No one hears him so he panics and beats harder and harder until the last part of the song is reached, which is chords again except loud and an octave apart. They gradually get softer and softer as the man becomes weaker and weaker. The song ends on a very soft minor chord as the man dies.

I barely heard the applause of the small audience. I had made it through without stopping. I waited until the judge was ready and then started Bach again. I made it through without forgetting anything.

"That's the way," said the judge. It sounded condescending to me. "It helps to play Bach after Rachmaninoff. You might try that next time."

My face grew red with anger and embarrassment. I got up from the piano with no expression on my face and made a deep, dignified bow as if I'd just been in a huge auditorium and had sat center stage at a long black grand piano, totally visible to all watching, in my very white dress. Then I walked out of the long, very narrow room that had two grand pianos crowded together as the first tears began to fall.

Hyrum, the children, Grandma Ruth, and I had sat frozen with apprehension during Glenna's performance. We were all hurting for her, but nothing like how my Glenna was hurting. She had wanted perfection in her performance so badly. Never in all her previous piano competitions had anything like this happened. Always she had come out a winner or with high marks. We did our best to cheer her up during the long ride home and she responded, on the surface at least, with a half-hearted smile.

In the days after the competition, my empathy button was ringing every bell in my body. I began at once to try to help her regain her confidence.

"Glenna, when a gymnast falls from the balance beam, she immediately gets back on the beam and begins again," I ventured. "Or when you miss a basketball shot, you don't quit shooting. Get back on the piano and play those two pieces." I pled, persuaded, begged, and bribed. Try as I might, I could not get Glenna to run through those two pieces. She continued her piano lessons and learned different pieces, but she avoided any retriggering of the horrible memory.

However, fate can sometimes turn even a searing failure into a success. Two years later, Glenna's English teacher asked her to enter a short-story writing contest sponsored by Brigham Young University. In her story, "The Piano Competition," she told of her agonizing experience two years before. The story (from which her words on the previous pages are excerpted) won the competition, and she received a fifty-dollar prize at the awards banquet. From Glenna's moment of failure had arisen a new talent—writing.

The next morning, as I was preparing for the day, I heard notes from the piano room. First, without hesitation, came the strains of Bach's Prelude in C, followed by the heavy Prelude in C-sharp Minor by Rachmaninoff. "Oh, thank you, thank you!" I said audibly, almost as if in prayer. "Rachmaninoff is still alive!"

Our children have had their share of elective success, winning various class and student-body offices in school. Those have been important opportunities to serve, to grow, and to increase in leader-ship skills. But the lessons from their defeats have been equally important.

When Joseph was in sixth grade, he ran for student-body president. He prepared thoroughly, organized a committee, campaigned hard, and put on a skit. He won easily in the primaries and looked like a shoo-in in the finals. But the day before the final vote, his opponent's mother died very suddenly from a heart attack or a stroke. Everyone felt so sorry for the girl that they voted her in. Joseph felt terrible that her mother had died and was filled with compassion because of her loss, but the defeat was a real blow to him. This mixture of emotions would be complicated for an adult to deal with, let alone a twelve-year-old.

It was a major topic at our weekly family planning meeting. We were able to acknowledge his conflicting feelings and discuss his situation. Just being able to articulate those feelings helped, especially since all of us had experienced losses and defeats of one sort or another. It was very helpful for him to realize that although he had not achieved something he desired, neither had he actually lost anything. In fact, he had gained. By organizing a committee and preparing his campaign and speeches, he had developed leadership and speaking skills that he could use on other occasions. With his feelings about himself in perspective, we could talk more generally about defeat and victory, life and death, and the death of a parent. All of us contributed. All of us learned. All of us grew.

Joseph needed that experience. He tried out for the school basketball team when he was in ninth grade and confidently expected to make the team, just as all three of his older sisters had. He was stunned when he didn't. It was a tough year for him, even though he got involved in the city league and was very successful. The next year, when he made the team as a sophomore, he was a very appreciative young man.

No recounting of our family's defeats and victories would be complete without the story of Sharwan, who became a rising star in her twenties after a challenging childhood and a cataclysmic adolescence.

Sharwan was different—in physical features, in temperament, in personality, and in intensity. Her will to follow her sisters and do everything they did was ferocious, but her little body simply lacked the skills sometimes. She was frequently frustrated and irritable. Glenna and Stacie were both anxious to please. Sharwan tested out exceptionally bright for her age but was headstrong, overreacting dramatically to stimuli. For instance, when she was six or seven, she was eating a boiled egg for breakfast one morning when she suddenly began screaming uncontrollably. She had bitten into her egg and a loose tooth had chosen that moment to come out. She completely panicked.

In school, Sharwan was always positive, aggressive, and competitive—and wildly popular—yet she needed constant reassurance and was always asking for approval. Glenna was always ready for a new experience. Stacie needed to be escorted to the door of her new classroom in the fall, but once there, a final kiss and a pat and she was over the threshold without a backward glance. Sharwan was always excited to go, but she would ask two or three times, "Mom, do I look okay? Is this blouse the right color? Is my hair all right?"

Always tall, during adolescence she outgrew her sisters as well as all the boys in her class. People—including us—sometimes expected seventeen-year-old behavior from a fourteen-year-old. She was compulsively tidy, organized, determined, and focused on her goals. These were good traits, but their down side was that she was also, during those naturally me-centered years, sometimes inflexible in her persistence. If she wanted something or needed to be taken somewhere, she hammered away relentlessly. She was a hard, fast, smart worker, but waiting for instructions was torture for her. Hyrum is an intense person too, and Sharwan's intensity clashed with his own.

In grade school, Sharwan discovered a lucrative racket. After a classmate had bought a nickel carton of milk with a dime or quarter, Sharwan would flash her million-watt smile and say, "How about lending me a dime?" or "I could use a nickel." She had squirreled away thirteen dollars before her sisters blew the whistle. Without overreacting, we sat her down, explained that what she had done was dishonest, and asked who had given her money. She has a great memory and was able to reconstruct the whole list. We had her earn the money honestly, then go back to each friend and return the money she had "borrowed."

Glenna and Stacie scampered to do Hyrum's bidding; Sharwan frequently wanted to argue, to know why. Unfortunately, she seemed to pick times when Hyrum was tired, when we were in a hurry to go somewhere, or when a series of unrelated events made her stubbornness the last straw. I sometimes went to bed exhausted from my peacekeeping efforts.

Talented and hopeful, Sharwan was devastated—as were we all—when she was not selected for madrigals her senior year after what seemed a successful audition. Another crushing experience came when, despite her height of six feet and her athletic ability, Sharwan had a bruising year with an unsupportive basketball coach.

"I was the black sheep in the family," Sharwan remembered later. "Nineteen years old and my role in the family had been basically, as Dad puts it, 'a home-wrecker.' I had the self-esteem of a flea. I looked down on myself. I did not think of myself as a beautiful person inside or out." It breaks my heart to think of my wonderful daughter ever feeling this way about herself.

The turning point came over, of all things, a beauty contest. After high school graduation, Sharwan had a great freshman year at the College of Southern Utah in Cedar City. As a sophomore, she was president of Lambda Delta Sigma, the Mormon service unit on campus, and got a letter asking her to announce to her unit information about the pageant for the Days of '47 Queen. The glittering Days of '47 parade, held annually on July twenty-fourth to commemorate the arrival of the Mormon pioneers in Salt Lake Valley, is a legendary event in Utah. Its queen contest, sponsored by the Daughters of Utah Pioneers, requires that candidates be descendants of someone who crossed the plains before the completion of the transcontinental railroad in 1869. Sharwan announced the contest, but mostly to make fun of it. Still, the connection with pioneer heritage stuck in her mind. Mary Fielding Smith, her third great-grandmother, was a strong woman who brought a family of nine across the plains as a widow. She was five feet eleven inches tall, with dark hair, brown eyes, and a lovely singing voice. Sharwan realized that Mary sounded a lot like her.

She brought the application home. "Mom, what do you think?" Her voice sounded tentative and wistful.

"Great!" I all but shouted. "Definitely you should do this!"

She filled out her application. I looked it over before she sent it off and said, "Wannie, this is no time to be modest! Put down all of your achievements, all of your talents."

Reluctantly, she added more and mailed it off. I saw unbelieving delight on her face when the answer came back that she was qualified. Then she and I faced the gigantic problem: What next? My experience with modeling consisted of total trauma in Miss Marker's class. I could and did dress like a CEO's wife, but I had never bothered to study the fine points of elegance. My preferred outfit was sweats and gym shoes. I was out of my depth, big-time, in advising a daughter on charm, makeup, and wardrobe accessories.

Then an angel entered our lives. Eddie Ward and her husband, both dear friends, were with us as houseguests when Sharwan's letter came. Eddie had been in the same pageant as a high-school girl, and her sister had won the Miss Utah title in her own time. At that very time, Eddie's daughter was preparing for the Miss Salt Lake City pageant. Eddie was full of knowledge about what needed to be done and volunteered her unlimited services. Sharwan and I could only express our undying gratitude.

Right on the spot Eddie set up an appointment to go with Sharwan to purchase try-out clothes. Sharwan needed a formal gown to model for the talent show and a "Sunday best" outfit for the interviews. Eddie spent a weekend blitzing Salt Lake City stores with Sharwan, finding the perfect outfits and personally overseeing any needed alterations. The contest committee supplied information on the questions likely to be asked in the interview. Eddie drilled her, not only on the answers, but on how to speak. I had coached Sharwan in how to pivot, dribble, and shoot a basketball. Now Eddie coached her in how to sit, stand, and walk like a beauty queen. Sharwan also worked hard on physical conditioning, not only losing a few pounds, but toning herself into radiant and luscious health.

The day of the event came. Eddie had arranged an appointment with her own hairdresser, who piled Sharwan's hair in an elegant arrangement of curls and put on her makeup. When he turned her around to look at herself in the mirror, Sharwan's face stiffened. She quickly smiled and graciously thanked him, but as we walked toward the car, I said, "Wannie Bear, you seem disappointed."

She almost broke down. "Mom," she whispered, "this is just ugly. It's not me. It's a facade."

I took a deep breath. This was no time for panic. "Sharwan," I said as earnestly as I could, "this is you. And you are beautiful. This beauty business is something that you and I don't know anything about. It's time to trust the professionals. This man is a professional. He's assisted many queens. I saw how carefully he looked at you, how thoughtfully he made decisions, and how hard he worked. He wasn't just applying something from a book. He looked at your color, your face, and your hair. What he's done is professional. Let's just exercise faith."

Sharwan slumped in the car seat and nodded. Eddie had a set of last-minute instructions, did some last-minute coaching on the interview questions, and had Sharwan try on her day wear, making last-minute decisions on a couple of items. Sharwan felt better. After a special prayer, I drove her to the pageant site, registered her, and received the hostess's firm instructions that the interviewing was private and so was the first round of modeling in Sunday best. Families would be welcome in the auditorium for the final rounds and the evening wear modeling. I could pick up Sharwan for lunch at twelve, as long as I had her back by two.

At lunchtime, Sharwan was bubbly and excited. When I asked her how she was doing, she exclaimed, "Arghh! I don't know. I think it's out of my league. Did you know I didn't even bring a comb? Not even a lipstick!" Then she brightened and added, "But I'm having a lot of fun with the other girls."

After the afternoon round and dinner, the names of the final twenty were chosen and their families were allowed to be present. We clustered together anxiously, hoping for the best, fearing the worst. The girls were introduced by number only, lest a well-known family name subtly influence the judges or audience. I looked around the auditorium. Who were the parents of number 8, that gorgeous, petite blonde? I couldn't tell. Everyone looked proud. Everyone looked anxious. Sharwan's number, 27, always seemed to be the last one called as the girls modeled, answered a question, and waited for the announcement of the top ten.

I barely heard the questions that the judges asked in the final round of interviewing. I was dazzled by Sharwan's graciousness, her spontaneity and eloquence. She had never seemed so beautiful, her height adding a dimension of queenliness. The night before, Hyrum had asked her, "Why do you want to be queen? What could you give the people?" Sharwan told him, "The queen gets to speak a lot. It would be an incredible opportunity to share my testimony."

This was Sharwan's final interview question: "If you had to leave all you possessed to come west with the pioneers, would you do it, and why?"

As Sharwan recalled that moment later: "With all my heart, I said, 'I would. And I would do it to have the opportunity to share my testimony with others and build the kingdom.' It was the question that, without knowing it, my father had prepared me for. I think I felt the spirit of Mary Fielding Smith as I walked down the runway. I know I could not help smiling from the joy inside me. It was an incredible moment. Whatever happened in the contest, I knew I had already had my reward."

That's the part I remember: my Sharwan walking down the runway into the audience. She looked dramatic, her black hair glistening, her coloring enhanced by her white formal gown, her smile radiant. The anxiety I had been breathing past all evening simply and suddenly dissolved. I knew absolutely that Sharwan would be named queen.

That knowledge didn't stop my heart from racing as the final candidates sat, each exhibiting perfect poise under the scrutiny of hundreds of eyes. The judges announced their decisions: first alternate, second alternate, second attendant, first attendant . . . I saw some of the children exchanging anxious glances. Sharwan's name had not been called. Did this mean she didn't even place?

Then the judge announced, "And as Queen of the Days of '47, number 27, Sharwan Smith!" The whole house exploded. It was as if everyone knew, everyone approved. The cheers and clapping were tumultuous. Sharwan's smile was brighter than the camera lights. As we swarmed around her on the stage, she threw her arms around me and bent to kiss me. "Oh, thank you, Mom," she whispered. "Thank you so much."

Tears welled up in my eyes, but when Sharwan turned to her father, and I saw the look on both faces as they embraced, I didn't try to keep the tears from spilling down my cheeks. I don't think they said anything. How could they have put into words what they were feeling? How often do you get to see a miracle right in front of your eyes?

I think the miracle came because Sharwan, for the first time, felt totally beautiful, inside and out. She felt right. She felt complete. She was not anyone's sister or anyone's daughter. She was herself and, just for a moment, she was perfect. She saw that perfection reflected in her father's eyes, and everything has been different between them from that time on.

When we got home that night, I looked at the biography of Mary Fielding Smith that Sharwan had been reading for a couple of months and caught my breath. "Sharwan," I called to her, "look at this." The portrait on the cover showed Mary Fielding Smith with her hair caught up in curls, exactly like Sharwan's. "Sharwan," I said, through my tears, "I know she was there, and I know there was a reason for all of this." Sharwan had felt the same way.

Now, one lesson from this experience, of course, is that it's important to find ways in which children can excel, so that each one can experience the thrill of succeeding in public and having others recognize that achievement. Behind an individual's growth is a parent's faith that makes the space for that growth. But perhaps equally important is the reminder that parents need to be humble. Even loving a child does not mean liking her, accepting her, or understanding her. Good relationships with two children do not guarantee an automatic good relationship with a third. Growth comes to parents too, line upon line.
