A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

13

My roots lie deep

Traditions are a wonderful way for families to "hand down" treasured values. They are like heirlooms received from past generations, polished by the present generation, and passed on to the next generation. They create family closeness and joyful, enduring memories.

In organizing our year, we have consciously included traditions, associating times of the year with important family goals. Because traditions are often connected with holidays, they are special times that provide sparkle in our hard-working routines. I have been grateful that traditions were important to my parents, especially my mother. The love of family traditions was a vital part of her personal bequest to me. When I was growing up, every holiday had its own traditional events.

It was late September, too early for the cold weather to spread its crisp aroma around Dixie, but preparations for that wintry season began well in advance. One Saturday morning Dad harnessed up Old Nel and Tops, ready to pull the flatbed, rubber-tired wagon. Mama had lunch stored in the picnic box. The familiar gallon water jug, which my dad had meticulously fitted with a damp burlap gunnysack to keep the water cool, was fastened by leather thongs to the right front corner of the wagon. When my sisters and I were safely seated next to Mama and Dad on the wagon, my father clucked at the horses and gave a flip of the reins. Thus we began our journey to the river bottom to gather wood to keep our cookstove and fireplace aglow with snapping, lapping orange flames through the winter.

As we bounced along the road to the river bottom, between Dad's talking "Gees" and "Haws" to Old Nel and Tops, he told about this year's spring floods, and how much driftwood they had left in the bottoms. He reminded us that he and Mama would pick up the long log poles and heavier tree stumps, and that our job was to gather chunks of wood just the right length for the stove or fireplace. As usual, he ended his instructions with: "Oh, don't forget to be on the lookout for this year's Christmas yule log. It has to be big, fit in the fireplace perfectly, and be pitchie-pine. We want Santa Claus to come to a warm house. Whoever locates the precise one gets to hold the reins and help me drive the wagon back home." During the remainder of the trip the conversation dwelt on the subject of Santa Claus and Christmas.

By the time we reached our destination, I don't know if it was the competitive spirit (I would die for the reward of driving the team of horses back home with my dad) or the Christmas spirit tickling our stomachs that motivated us to work like the big Dixie red ants hauling their winter stores to their nests. I do know that between my sisters and me, we had our dad "come look" a jillion times to see if this or that log was the precise one that would win the prize. Just before the wagon was fully loaded with wood and we were ready to head back home, Mama, as always, discovered the perfect Christmas log. Even though Mama was the finder, Dad always made us feel good about our day's efforts by letting each of us take a turn at holding the reins and driving the team. Once we got home and unloaded the wagon, the chosen Christmas log was set in its sanctuary until the anointed eve.

As the autumn leaves began to fall from the mulberry trees near the woodpile, the need for a fire in the fireplace would arise. My job of gathering the kindling each night took me past the Christmas log's waiting place. Some evenings, in moments of procrastinating my job, I would walk over to the log, place one foot on it, look down on its thick, gnarly, still shape, and think about events to come.

On Christmas Eve, my father would take the yule log from its shelter and carefully place it on a bed of kindling already prepared on the fireplace grate. I used to imagine what Christmas Eve would be like from the log's perspective. I imagined the log looking around at its new surroundings in our fireplace, greeting a forest friend—a tree dressed in her festive attire, with brightly wrapped gifts and surprises tucked under and about her lowest boughs.

In my mind's eye, I could already see the Christmas log aglow in the fireplace, casting light and warmth upon the family in the living room. There was Dad, sitting in his favorite chair, cracking and eating roasted pine nuts and staring back at the flame. I could see Mama soaking up the heat and wondering if she had remembered everything she was planning to do to make this Christmas perfect. I wondered if the Christmas log could see the anticipation on the children's faces. Could it see me, or its own blazing reflection in the gold and silver Christmas tree ornaments? Did it notice each carefully hung silver icicle, casting shimmering reflections of the flames back at the fireplace? I imagined the log watching the Christmas room through the Silent Night, lowering its flame just enough to let Santa slip by to leave the hoped-for gifts and surprises. And then when excitement chased away sleep in the household, the log would continue to burn brightly while Christmas packages were opened and Christmas wishes were granted. My reverie ended when Mama called and reality set in. Darkness was always the intruder, and I would go on about my unfinished chores.

Easter was another unforgettable time for family traditions. Easter Sunday was generally reserved for contemplating the reality and significance of Christ's resurrection. But the Saturday before was the part of the Easter celebration most anticipated by a child. On that day, my four sisters and I couldn't tumble outside fast enough to search the yard, the farm, and the outbuildings for our individualized Easter baskets. The baskets were never in obvious places, even when we were little. Through the years I found my Easter basket hanging on a branch in the almond tree, in the bottom of the irrigation ditch hidden under the thick ditchside grasses, in the haystack, and even in the thick growth of a rosebush. We sisters would help each other until the baskets were all found. In them would be boiled eggs that we had colored and marked with our names the night before, candies, jelly beans, and a little windup mechanical toy.

After we found our Easter baskets, Mama would send us on a treasure hunt. One particular year, I remember that the hunt started in a three-drawer dresser sitting at the side of the house. "Open the top drawer," Mama said. "There you'll find your first clue." There were strict ground rules about not reading a clue until everyone had arrived at the spot.

That first note sent us to the telephone pole down by the Jolleys' house. There we found a note that sent us another block away. This was no slouch of a treasure hunt! We went around blocks and up and down streets. We found clues on telephone poles, in mailboxes, in the crevices of house steps, in tree branches, and even in gopher holes. After a half hour, the last note sent us again to the chest of drawers where we had begun. There in the bottom drawer was a folded plastic shape that, when inflated, turned into a huge beach ball.

Later that afternoon, bringing the beach ball with us, we joined our extended family for an Easter picnic. Granny Wilkins brought the fried chicken. Aunts, uncles, and cousins all chipped in with food, balls and bats, picnic quilts, games, and more food. Mama brought her famous baked beans, another Easter tradition.

In addition to the extended family Easter picnic, other traditions came from my mother's side of the family. One unique tradition was the New Year's Jack. "Jack" was not a person, but a small gift—perhaps something that had been hidden away so well at Christmastime that Santa Claus had forgotten to deliver it. Or it might be something that had been wished for but that somehow had not shown up in the Christmas stocking. New Year's Jack was usually accompanied by candy, nuts, or fruit.

On Valentine's Day, we secretly placed carefully selected valentines on the doorsteps of neighbors and friends. We would knock on the door and then run and hide in nearby shrubs to watch until someone answered. We would remain hidden and quiet until the valentines had been discovered, discussed, and taken into the house. When the door was closed and darkness settled again, then and only then would we come out of hiding and move on to the next door to repeat the process. The evening of sharing love with others was filled with secrets, fun, and excitement.

With our own family, Hyrum and I have striven to continue, cultivate, and combine as many of these inherited family traditions as possible. Some have survived the generational transfer more or less intact; others have required adaptation to changed circumstances and living environments. While the specifics of some traditions have evolved as our children have grown, at the center of each a special core has remained. Excerpts from my journal detail two of our family's Easter adventures in 1979 and 1995.

April 14, 1979, Ventura, California

"Today we had our Easter fun. Hyrum got up with me at 5:00 a.m. We hid the Easter baskets in the front yard. The eggs we hid in the backyard, and the treasure hunt in the front yard. The children were ready to go at 6:45 a.m. We reminded them of the ground rules: keeping quiet when an egg was found that belonged to somebody else, and everyone staying together until the new treasure hunt clue had been read. They then hunted for their baskets, which were straw hats with jellybeans and candy eggs or rabbits in them. Then we moved to the back to hunt and found all the hard-boiled colored Easter eggs that we had prepared the night before. Then back to the front yard for the treasure hunt, with the first clue found in the rain drainpipe by the front of the garage, and the last clue ending the hunt in the garage with Becca and Joe so surprised, as were all the children, when they saw two baby Easter rabbits sitting in a rabbit house especially built for them. They were immediately named Nephi and Moroni. So all day we have played and loved Easter rabbits in the backyard."

April 15

"Sad day. One of the rabbits died. Stacie and Rebecca were really sad. We took the time to have funeral services for Moroni. We had a lesson on death and eternal life and read some scriptures on the subject. Hyrum dug a grave and we buried him in a Nike shoe box underneath the lemon tree. The kids made a headstone which said, 'MORONI our rabbit. Died April 15, 1979.'"

Here's a parallel Easter celebration, sixteen years later to the day:

April 15, 1995, Gunlock, Utah

"This year, in spite of the many directions my children have scattered, we were all together for Easter. Last night we had an electric time sitting around the kitchen table reminiscing and coloring Easter eggs. Their artwork and design has improved with age. Glenna and Ed [Glenna's husband] asked if they could set up the treasure hunt, in which I willingly acquiesced. All of the clues were in the form of nursery rhymes. For example: 'Little boy blue, come blow your ________.' We found the next clue in the mouthpiece of a small bugle hanging from the mantel above the fireplace. Another said: 'Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet, eating her ______ and _______.' That clue was found on a block of cheese in the refrigerator. We went from house to barn to haystack. One clue was even attached to the dog collar of our collie, Mac. The treasure was a huge Easter basket filled with fruit, carrots, and flowers, instead of the usual candy and chocolate eggs (it's interesting how even our eating habits have changed over the years). There was also an aqua plastic ball to take with us on our Easter picnic.

"Weather prevented our picnicking outside, so we decided to make a big collage out of construction paper, showing things that reminded us of Easter. Each of us did one item of our own choosing. It was agreed that we couldn't use scissors, but would have to tear the paper to create the different shapes we wanted. We could not use anything other than construction paper and glue.

"I made an Easter bonnet, with little cats glued around the headband. Jacob made a shepherd and Sharwan created an Easter egg. Each member of the family, including little Shilo, made something to contribute to the collage. Then Ed glued them all onto a big sheet of poster paper and hung the finished product in front of the fireplace for everyone to look at and admire for the rest of the day."

The experience in making the collage was a first, the beginning of a new family tradition. (Hyrum says that events become traditions when they are done for two years in a row.)

Another tradition that evolved in our family took place each year on the first day of school. On that day, during our scripture study time, Hyrum gave each of the children a father's blessing. Then, after our morning routine was completed (on the first day of school things always went without a hitch because everyone was so excited about school starting), I would arrange the children according to age and take a group portrait as well as an individual picture of each child.

Then Hyrum would take over. He lined the children up on the sidewalk in military fashion (he must have missed his Officer Candidate School days). He would then shout: "ATTEN-SHUN! Chins tucked in, shoulders straight, knees together!" He would check their school apparel, making sure that "gig lines" of buttons were straight, shirts tucked in, and shoes clean.

Hyrum then gave them marching commands: "Left face! Right face! About face!" He would start giving the commands slowly and then increase the speed until the kids got all mixed up and burst out laughing. The "general" would straighten them out again and put them into a column, giving the "forward march!" command. "Left, right, left, right"—and off to school they would march. As they grew older, they became conscientious objectors, so the military maneuvers were dropped. But we always started the school year with the blessings, the photographs, and lots of hugs and kisses good-bye.

Although the yule log tradition I knew as a child is still part of our Christmas, we have embellished, invented, and added traditions until Christmastime is the king of our year. For the Smiths, Thanksgiving and the Christmas season are the culmination of the entire year, and the year-end traditions begin on Thanksgiving Day. While delicious smells are emanating from the kitchen, the family, extended family, and friends always play in the annual family "turkey bowl" football game—an event guaranteed to work up an appetite.

When at last all are seated around the table for Thanksgiving dinner, a kernel of corn is placed on every plate, a tradition Hyrum brought from his family. Each person in turn picks up his or her kernel of corn and expresses gratitude for the most important blessing received over the past year. It is a time of reflecting, sharing, and giving thanks, followed by the family prayer and the Thanksgiving meal.

The day after Thanksgiving officially begins the Christmas season, as we purchase and put up the Christmas tree. Each of us makes a special contribution to decorating the tree and house (inside and out). Hyrum puts the lights on the tree, Joseph puts up the creches, and Glenna builds a castle out of cardboard boxes and empty paper-towel and toilet-paper rolls, all wrapped in Christmas paper. Stacie arranges a Christmas scene on the piano, and Becca and Sharwan place the ornaments on the tree. Sharwan, being the tallest, does the top part of the tree and Becca the bottom. I put on the tinsel, a throwback to my own childhood. Jacob hangs up the Christmas calendar and places other Christmas essentials about the house. When all is completed, we turn off the lights and have a ceremonial lighting of the tree.

After the Christmas-tree lighting, Hyrum and I distribute to each child, according to age and needs, a precalculated amount of money. This money is to be used to buy clothes. The rules for clothes buying are:

We then have each member of the family make a prioritized "wish list" of items they'd like to receive for Christmas. Since the items have to be prioritized, the children are constantly making choices and balancing one against the other. For Christmas, Santa usually gets them their top one or two items, but he might also get them something totally unexpected—something they mentioned or wanted weeks earlier.

I remember Rebecca once eyeing and totally falling in love with a shiny, red, patent-leather telephone shaped like a high-heeled shoe. She oohed and ahhed and pledged slavery for one year if we would purchase the phone for her. At the time we said, "No way," and moved to the next store. Some months later I spotted the telephone in a catalog and ordered it for her for Christmas. I will never forget the excitement and exuberant burst of energy when Becca unwrapped that package.

Next, and most important in terms of the true spirit of Christmas, we send the family on a "research mission" to find an individual or family who needs special help. The following week, in our planning meeting, we decide together as a family whom we will help and how we might be of service to them. We hope that anything we do can be done in secret, anonymously. We have had some sweet experiences with this annual service project that brings the spirit of Christmas into each of our hearts.

Other traditions that we look forward to during the Christmas season include going caroling to our neighbors, friends, and extended family. We take a gift of home-baked bread, candy, or even souvenirs from places we have visited during the year. Another favorite tradition is to draw names the day after Thanksgiving so that each of us can become a secret "pixie" for another member of the family. Between then and Christmas we try to do good things and be of service to the person whose name we drew. On Christmas Day everyone guesses who his or her pixie was, even though most have figured it out already.

When the Christmas vacation officially begins and the family starts to gather home from school and work and travels, I set out a jigsaw puzzle on a card table where we can work on it piecemeal for several days. Everyone takes a hand putting it together when there's not something more urgent to do. The puzzle must be done by New Year's Day, when Hyrum glues it on a piece of cardboard to be saved.

Most of our activities reach their culmination on Christmas Day. On that most looked-forward-to of all mornings we get up around 7:00 a.m.—which amounts to sleeping in for the Smiths—and have a special activity before opening our gifts. One year, I found an empty barn and a manger on a country road, with no animals around anywhere. On Christmas morning we took the children to that barn and, standing in a cold and empty spot on the leftover straw, we read the Christmas story together. Away from the glamour of Christmas lights and pretty packages, the children gained a new perspective. At other times, we've climbed the hill above our town for our own Christmas service, reflecting on the true meaning of this sacred holiday.

Once we held our Christmas morning rendezvous at my dad's corrals on the river bottoms below Washington. He had always maintained them in the careful way a farmer must, but since his death in 1990 they had been neglected. Tumbleweeds had moved in to fill the empty spaces. The children, now in their teens or early adult years, easily saw the consequences of misuse and neglect, contrasted with our many pleasant memories of the area as a working part of the farm when Gramp and Granny were alive. Back at the house, we have a solid breakfast—after these early-morning expeditions, the appetite is never lacking. Then we get in our Christmas "line-up," from shortest to tallest, and take pictures. (It is interesting to review those pictures now and see how the children have changed places over the years.) In the living room we rekindle the Christmas yule log fire, sit down in our appointed places, and then open the gifts one at a time so that everyone can enjoy gifts of giving and gifts of receiving. Just as the yule log takes the night to burn, opening gifts takes the day, providing precious family bonding time.

It's popular these days for people to express concern about the materialism that has invaded much of the modern Christmas celebration, and I will be the first to agree that Christmas must always focus upon the Babe of Bethlehem and the gifts of life that he alone brought to each of us here on the earth. Our own experience is that Christmas, with Christ at the center of our thoughts, is a celebration of abundance—an abundance of love, an abundance of gratitude, and an abundance of gifts. In that order.

Hyrum has always said that learning is spaced repetition. Truly, the roots of traditions lie deep, but their branches must bear many leaves for the shadowfall to extend into the future. I know we're succeeding when a child says, "What will we do for our Christmas morning adventure this year?" or, "I have a perfect holiday puzzle for us to build," or, most important, "I have an idea for something we can do to help this family." Traditions truly are teachers of timeless values.
