A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

15

Now I have heard

Weeks of preparation had gone into the evening's events. The round tables were set, each with a forest-green tablecloth and a burgundy, green, and navy blue floral arrangement, potted in brass. The wooden pillars supporting the large, roughly hewn crossbeams were wreathed with green ivy and strands of delicate white lights. The old prairie wagon, built by the Studebaker Company in the mid-1800s, stood against the wall, midway between the entrance and the reception line. The wagon, spiffied up to display Glenna's and Ed's wedding gifts tonight, was also ivy-covered, with a handmade green and burgundy patchwork quilt draped over the driver's seat. Romantic, low lighting highlighted the rustic interior of Dixie's old Cotton Mill.

Glenna had chosen this site for her reception: the Rio Virgin Cotton Mill, located on Mill Creek in Washington, Utah, not far from the willows and arrow weeds I had played in as a child, where I first learned about God and faith. The mill had been built in the 1860s by my ancestors—the same ancestors who had planted the cottonwood and mulberry trees that shaded the special places of my childhood and youth. The old rock structure had been abandoned in my youth, and had provided us many hours of exploration and adventure. But tonight it glowed in its recently restored authentic grandeur.

My family, formally attired in dark burgundy or forest-green velvet, bartered for position in the reception line. Suddenly I was struck by the irony of it all. Tonight I had begged Hyrum, without succeeding, not to wear the black cowboy hat and silver hatband he had so carefully selected. I accused him of wanting to cover his balding head, but what I really meant was that the hat was inappropriate for the occasion. It just didn't go with his tuxedo.

Members of the old-timers band were setting up their equipment on the stage at the opposite end of the room, and the wedding guests were just beginning to trickle in. The band, also chosen by Glenna, was as historic—and rustic—as the building; it consisted of Quentin Nisson (of Abner's General Store) and his three sons. This seventy-six-year-old piano player had led the band that played at my own wedding reception, just three blocks east of where we now were. I couldn't help but reflect back on that night twenty-nine years ago.

One of the surprises of Hyrum's life had been our wedding reception. To Hyrum, a wedding reception meant standing in a line in formal dress, with candlelight glowing and soft music playing, while guests came through to pay their respects and to consume punch and cake before leaving. Hyrum had never been to a wedding reception in Washington, Utah.

To make sure everyone was invited, my parents and I had gone through the local telephone book. I could count on everyone in Washington being there; after all, a wedding was a major social event. After exchanging our wedding vows in a private ceremony in the nearby St. George Temple, Hyrum and I went that evening to the gymnasium of the old red-sandstone schoolhouse on Washington's town square for our reception.

There was a receiving line, to be sure, but that was just the beginning. In Hyrum's own words: "Everyone in the whole town came, left a gift, went through the line, sat down to eat, and then they stayed, and they stayed, and they stayed. There was a program and speeches, and Gail and I had to speak, and then they danced dances I'd never heard of"—schottische, Varsovienne, Spanish waltz, Virginia reel, rye waltz—"and then they danced some more. Gail and I were the first to leave our own reception."

As Hyrum stood by my side and greeted the proud townsfolk of Washington, many asked him how soon he and I would be moving back to Dixie. In each case, my city boy immediately responded, "I will bring Gail back to visit, but I will never, ever move to Dixie."

For the first twenty years of our marriage, Hyrum's work took him all over the country and required that we live in major urban centers where the action was. Coming back to Dixie was simply not an option. However, in the early 1980s, when my dad decided to sell several acres of the hay field I had tromped in as a youth, Hyrum and I purchased it. That decision was made more out of my sentiment than anything, but the seed was planted.

During the early years of Franklin Quest, we were both so involved in the company, and the children were so involved in school activities, that a move was not a realistic choice. Still, my ties to my Dixie roots were strong deep inside, and occasionally my old Virginian prayer would surface as a sigh, "Perhaps someday . . . "

By 1988, Glenna, Stacie, and Sharwan had all graduated from high school and had gone on to college in Cedar City, just fifty miles north of St. George. As Franklin had grown, I had moved out of active involvement in the company and was focusing again on the home front. Others were assisting in the day-to-day management of the company, relieving Hyrum of those former responsibilities, but he still maintained a heavy travel schedule, often traveling and teaching seminars from Tuesday through Friday. That was when I realized that it didn't matter where we lived as long as it was near an airport. This was enticing. Once again, a home among the sunny, sheltering red cliffs and lava-topped mesas of Dixie appeared to be possible.

As Hyrum likes to tell it, embellished for effect, I approached him with this proposition: "If I'm going to have to live alone anyway, let me live where I want to live." I reviewed my rationale: he could fly out of St. George almost as easily as Salt Lake City, and the children did not need to be tied to Centerville for school and activities as much as before. Hyrum agreed, and I started to plan for the move.

Once the decision was made, unexpected opportunities presented themselves. In the spring of 1988, our family went to visit my dad in St. George. On the day we were scheduled to return home, I went on my usual morning walk up into the red hills of Dixie, just north of my dad's house. On the way, I noticed a "For Sale" sign on a house; a sudden urge to walk down the long driveway to see the backyard overtook me. As I did so, I realized that this felt like the experience of meeting Elder Smith in the Thames van in London all over again. Sure enough—there was my garden space, fruit trees, a greenhouse, a basketball standard, a detached indoor sports court, a woodshed, even a swimming pool! I ran to Dad's house shouting at Hyrum with the exuberance of a four-year-old, "Come see, come see!"

We saw. Hyrum loved the house—but it lacked an office. I loved the yard and told him I would make his office. To my delight, we discovered that the original builders had planned to have an observatory room on the top floor and had built the staircase leading to it, but had later abandoned the project; the stairway led to nothing. It was the perfect spot for Hyrum's office. Before leaving St. George, we placed a deposit of earnest money on the home.

We sold our Centerville home and purchased an apartment in Salt Lake City so that Hyrum would have a home for the weeks when he wasn't traveling but had to attend meetings at Franklin's headquarters. The apartment would make it possible for us to spend part of our time with him on those occasions. In June 1989, after Joseph, Becca, and Jacob completed school for the year, we moved to St. George.

The move came at a good time for the three children still living at home. They quickly made new friends and found that there were even some advantages to being the new kids on the block. Joseph made the high school basketball team, as did Rebecca, who also found herself involved in the drama club, the volleyball team, and student government. Jacob found his niche in drama. These opportunities likely would never have happened in Centerville. Even though St. George had grown to be a respectable city of more than 30,000 people, it still retained a small-town feeling, and we soon were in the thick of community activities and events. I had returned to my roots, to the places that had shaped my spirit.

The Return of the Virginian

During the years that we lived away, Mama and Dad always kept three or four horses in the river bottom pastures for us to ride "when Hyrum brought Gail back to visit." And when we came to visit, we always seized the opportunity for a good horse ride. To my sorrow, less than one year after we moved to St. George, my beloved dad died of a heart attack and the horses were sold.

I finally suggested to Hyrum that it might be nice to have a horse or two of our own. I was delighted when he was very receptive to the idea, and occasionally on weekends we would take leisurely drives through the rural Dixie communities looking for horses or land that would be suitable for keeping them.

One day, as we were driving through LaVerkin, a small community about twenty miles up the river from St. George, we spied a sign advertising a pasture, barn, and corral for sale. We turned in to inquire. Hyrum stepped out of the car and was immediately drawn to a beautiful young stallion in the adjacent corral. He walked over to the fence, seemingly mesmerized. Later Hyrum described his experience: "That stallion was the most magnificent animal I had ever seen. Reddish-roan, huge, powerfully built. He held his head majestically, and stormed around the pen like he owned the place . . . my kind of person."

Hyrum finally whirled around to me and exclaimed, "Gail, I've got to have this horse!"

I couldn't have been more surprised, and I found myself telling him that he didn't know what he was getting himself into. We had no place to keep horses. He didn't know the first thing about owning a stallion.

About that time, the owner of the horse sauntered out to see what these awed intruders were doing at his corral. Hyrum's enthusiasm didn't wane even when the owner informed us that the stallion was only green-broke. Hyrum didn't seem to hear, or maybe he didn't understand. "Is this horse for sale?" he demanded. I crossed my fingers, hoping that it wasn't.

It was for sale, and Hyrum insisted on buying it.

I couldn't believe it. The Virginian was emerging! I immediately felt an urgent need to ensure that he had a good experience with his first cowboy acquisition. Knowing that when people start a new venture at the top without learning the bottom, they can easily become frustrated and discouraged, I casually (but desperately) asked the owner if he knew of anyone who could help us with the breaking and training of our new animal. I didn't realize it then, but Providence had entered the picture again. A glimmer of my Virginian had appeared, and this time it would not be extinguished.

The next morning I called the recommended horse trainer, John Day, who owned the Rockin' D Ranch south of St. George. I told John of my great desire that Hyrum have a good experience with this horse. He agreed to pick up the stallion from the man in LaVerkin and size the animal up.

Later, after he had checked out the stallion, he told Hyrum, "I had to put a special kind of halter on your horse just to calm him down. I put him in my trailer and he nearly kicked it apart as I drove over to my corral. After three days, I didn't think I was going to have any corrals standing." Then, with great earnestness, he said, "You've got to get rid of this horse. It's going to kill somebody. Let me help you find a horse more suitable for pleasure riding and family ownership." Despite Hyrum's reluctance, he listened to the counsel and we took John up on his offer. A few days later, John notified us that he had exchanged the stallion for two horses.

Then John began teaching Hyrum how to ride. What I witnessed for the next six months can only be told in Hyrum's words:

"John started me out by putting me on the ground on my knees and hands, putting a saddle on my back. Then he got in the saddle and sat in it. He is a big man. He weighs 250 pounds.

"And he said, 'How does that feel?'

"I said, 'Well, that hurts.'

"He said, 'Well, that hurts the horse too.'

"Then John leaned over on my right shoulder, put all of his weight above my right hand on the ground, and said, 'Now lift your right hand.'

"I said, 'I can't lift my right hand when all your weight is on my right hand.'

"He said, 'Same problem with the horse. Everybody leans on the leg they want the horse to pick up. It makes it hard for the horse to do that. You need to lean on the other side and let the horse pick up the foot you want him to pick up.'

"Then he put the horse's bridle in my mouth, pulled back on it, and asked, 'How does that feel?'

"I said, 'That hurts a lot.'

"He said, 'Hurts the horse too. You don't ever have to jerk your horse's mouth around or it will get a hard mouth. If you treat your horse well, the horse will treat you well.'

"John drew the distinction: 'There is a difference between a cowboy and a horseman. A cowboy treats his horse like a hammer or a tool. A horseman treats his horse with respect.' It totally changed how I related to a horse. John Day taught me how to be confident on a horse."

We now had two horses, and Hyrum surprised me for my June birthday with a beautiful palomino mare named "B." We pastured our horses on my uncle Denny Cooper's property in Washington. Our son Joseph and Stacie's husband, Larry, spent the summer erecting a large prefabricated hay and horse shelter that we promptly dubbed the Taj Mahal.

Benjamin Franklin once wrote wisely about the true cost of a major purchase: "When you have bought one 'fine thing,' you must buy ten more, that your appearance may be all of a piece." We learned for ourselves the truth of what Franklin had written. The horses were indeed "fine things," and we soon found that to own and use them we had to buy saddles, bridles, blankets, brushes, a watering trough, horse trailer, and feed. But I began to see a new side of Hyrum revealed through the love he obviously felt for our new animals.

The ultimate "fine thing" arising out of the purchase of our new horses manifested itself a few months later. Hyrum and I were visiting with Mark Walters, the real estate agent with whom we had worked to purchase our St. George home. On his desk, along with some papers, was a photograph of a beautiful ranch, with green fields, a river running through it, an attractive ranch house, and other outbuildings, all nestled in a scenic valley. I pointed to the photo and said, "Mark, if you ever find a ranch like that for sale, we'd be interested." To our surprise, he told us that the owner of that particular ranch had come into his office that very morning and asked Mark to sell his ranch for him. Before the day was over, we had driven to the Turtle Mountain Ranch, located near the scenic little village of Gunlock, about twenty-five miles northwest of St. George. Within months, we had purchased the ranch—a "fine thing" to house the horses.

Hyrum and I are very different people. Hyrum's a sprinter. I'm a long-distance runner. His enthusiasm is like a rocket, throwing off sparks even on the launch pad. I ask questions, collect information, and make plans; he marches off and does a thing immediately. We've learned to trust these different styles in each other; as a result, we're a better team and make better decisions than we would otherwise.

If I had to characterize myself, I would use the symbol of a clock. I've always had a love affair with old clocks. Great-grandmother Averett's clock, given to my dad, sat on the mantel above the fireplace and tick-tocked faithfully all the years of my childhood. During our first year of marriage, while we were stationed in Germany in the military, I entered an old furniture shop to look for a piano and fell in love with a wall clock, dust covered and plain faced in a black box. It was leaning against the wall, upside down, as if it hadn't been touched for years.

For five dollars it was mine. I pulled it out of its hiding place, took it home, cleaned it, and hung it on the wall. It always reminds me of the beginning of our marriage. After we got it back to the United States, I put the ceramic bride and groom from the top of our wedding cake on the floor of the clock's pendulum case, with the gold pendulum swinging behind. I love the steady swing, the steady tick-tock, the steady movement through time. To me, the old clock ticks consistency into all our lives.

Hyrum, on the other hand, has always loved eagles. Displayed around our home are various paintings and photos of eagles. A large bronze statue of an eagle swooping to land on a gnarled branch is the first thing that greets visitors as they enter our front hallway. A painting of a eagle adorns Hyrum's office at Franklin Quest, and several of the prized mementos and awards displayed on his office walls have eagles as motifs. To Hyrum the eagle symbolizes keen vision, powerful wings, strength, high goals, speed, endurance—the attributes of leadership and achievement.

Thus when we finally purchased the Turtle Mountain Ranch, we promptly renamed it the Eagle Mountain Ranch. It's an appropriate name, not only because of Hyrum's love of eagles, but also because several golden eagles nest in the rugged cliffs just below the ranch house. It is indeed a beautiful place, situated along the cottonwood-lined Santa Clara River and surrounded by hills covered with juniper and pinyon pine. At an elevation nearly a thousand feet higher than St. George, the ranch is significantly cooler than town, especially during the hot Dixie summers.

The ranch has turned out to be one of Hyrum's great joys, one that he fully shares with the entire family and numerous dear friends. It is a place of refuge from hectic travel schedules and the pressures of being a chairman of the board and chief executive officer. Many a weekend we spend in the rustic ranch house, with its two-story stone fireplace and displays of historic firearms, eagles, clocks, and western art on the log walls. The windows of our ranch bedroom open out on the horse pastures, and I'm still a little surprised when I look out and see Hyrum—the city boy who would earlier have shunned such a life—talking with the nuzzling horses.

Equally amazing to me is the transformation in dress. Hyrum, who before would never have considered being seen in public in anything but a suit, spends much of his time at home and on the ranch in cowboy boots, a western shirt, Levi's with a big belt buckle, and, for outdoors, a Stetson.

The first of several hundred guests approached the reception line, bringing me back to Glenna's wedding evening. Hyrum had succumbed to my pressure and had placed his hat on the windowsill behind him. "Well, you're back in Dixie, Hyrum. I knew you'd bring Gail home," said a local old-timer, with a countrified handshake and pat on the back. Our next few guests said basically the same thing. Poor Hyrum, I thought, you're in for a long night. Then the comments seemed to cease. I looked up at Hyrum. He had put his black cowboy hat with the silver band back on. The hat was doing the speaking: "I'm back! Yes, I've brought your Dixie girl home. I've got the red sand between my toes, and I too seek the shade of the cottonwood tree." Behold the Virginian.

In silent moments since that night I have wondered when the change really began in Hyrum—until last Christmas. Hyrum's younger sister Pauline gave him a photo she had found in an album of their mother's. Enclosed in an antique oval frame was a picture of Hyrum when he was about eight years old. He is decked out in a black cowboy hat, shirt, vest, big-buckled belt, white scarf, and gun and holster—but no boots. He's even wearing a pair of cowboy chaps, each leg emblazoned with the names "Roy Rogers and Trigger" (my childhood heros!) and a depiction of Roy on a rearing Trigger. It was my Virginian in embryo, speaking to me down through the decades: "Shucks, ma'am, it only took me forty years to find my boots."
