A. Gail Smith, Shadowfall: Reflections on Nurturing Family Values ( 1996)

Epilogue: Long upon an afternoon

When Hyrum first gave me the gift, I did not particularly care for it. Although the print was elegantly framed, the scene was depressing to me. I was young, I had small children, circumstances were happy, and I did not want to be reminded that there was a sad side to life. It was a thoughtful gift, and I hung it on the hallway wall of our house in Centerville. In time, though, I quietly removed it from the wall and stored it in the closet until another day.

That day came some nine years later. Hyrum and I were furnishing and decorating our newly purchased ranch house in Gunlock, Utah, using all the household keepsakes that could never be thrown away and had therefore been stored for "another day." Coming upon the nearly forgotten print, Hyrum pounded a nail in one of the logs of the wall, took the picture out of the box, and hung it on the wall. My reaction to the scene was different this time. My earthly journey had produced scars that taught me the meaning of the message depicted by the artist.

The painting depicts the experience of the Martin handcart company. Some of the Mormon pioneers were so poor that they carried their few belongings across the plains in wooden, two-wheeled handcarts. During the summer and fall of 1856, five handcart companies pushed and pulled their frail vehicles from the Missouri River all the way to Salt Lake City. Three of the companies reached the valley without major difficulties, but two had been delayed in their departure and were overtaken by an early winter as they struggled along the Sweetwater River valley in the highlands of what is now central Wyoming. The Martin handcart company, the last to depart from the East, suffered most severely when trapped by the early snows.

The painting shows a pioneer mother huddled with an older daughter, both wrapped in shawls and tattered blankets, carrying a bundled-up infant. Buffeted by wind-driven snow, a little group watches as two men lay the frozen body of the women's spouse and father to rest in a shallow grave scraped from the icy earth. In the near distance, a cold and still loved one from another wagon is being carried in a blanket to be buried in the same grave. As the wind whips the snow around the onlookers, wagons can be seen in the background ready to move on as soon as the brief ceremony is over. There is no time for grief. Survival dictates that the pioneers move on.

My pioneer ancestors could not have endured all that they did merely on some vague hope that there was a better world beyond the harsh and dangerous and unforgiving one in which they lived. As I have read of their experiences, especially those accounts that have come down in their own words, I have seen that they did not merely hope. They knew. In my youthful experience among the arrow weeds of the creek bottom below Washington, I too came to know something of what they knew, and I felt that knowledge grow within me over the intervening years as I experienced the loss of my grandparents, my mother, my father, and my youngest sister, Nola.

I am thankful that such events are unforeseen, for, as it turns out, those earlier experiences were stepping-stones to the tragedy that wrenched our family in May 1995. This time I was the woman in the painting. I stood with my husband and many others in the little pioneer cemetery at Gunlock, not far from our ranch. We all huddled together to observe the burial of our daughter Sharwan and our granddaughter, little Shilo Sharwan. The rains fell in mourning, but umbrellas kept us dry. In the background the scene revealed automobiles that were prepared to move on as soon as the ceremony was concluded. Unlike the handcart pioneers, we were not forced to move on in order to survive physically; our comfortable homes were only a short distance away. Yet the same knowledge and inner understanding of eternal principles possessed by my ancestors demanded that I move on emotionally and spiritually.

I do not want to leave the impression that moving on is easy. It is desperately difficult. My mind keeps going back to the day of the accident. Thoughts run through my head over and over, repeating all the "what-if" scenarios in a vain attempt to change the day. My heart aches with the thought of their earthly absence from our family. But in reality I have to ask myself, what changes could have been made?

I had been in Salt Lake City taking care of Shilo while the Smith 4 were taking care of some preparations for their scheduled performances at the governor's ball and the Utah Summer Games. That morning I had adhered to my normal Magic Three Hours routine of arising early, reading the scriptures (John, chapter 15), and exercising for an hour. Sharwan had accompanied me to the swimming pool of our apartment complex.

The Smith 4's morning schedule required last-minute fittings and alterations for their costumes. Before they left for their appointments, we all knelt in family prayer. When we finished, there was a special closeness among us. We gave each other hugs, and the girls departed. During the hour my daughters were gone, I enjoyed taking care of Shilo. Being her granny was a role I cherished.

It was about 10:30 a.m. when the girls returned from their errands. Excitement filled the room as they chattered about the costumes and upcoming events. In the same store where the alterations on the dresses were being made, Sharwan had found a bridal veil that she loved, so she had purchased it on the spot. She placed it on her head and asked me how I liked it.

"Pretty great," I said.

Typically, Sharwan retorted, "Oh, Mom, what do you really think?"

I hesitantly reassured her of its beauty. The hesitance came because, as I saw her standing there in the veil, I felt the twinge of her leaving the nest, and June 24 was not that far away. I'm sure that every mother feels such a tug at the heart prior to her daughter's marriage.

Soon the focus changed to preparing Sharwan, Stacie, and Shilo for the drive back to St. George. They needed to be in Gun-lock by 5:30 p.m., so that Sharwan could judge a rodeo queen contest and Stacie could accompany one of the contestants on the piano.

Sharwan disappeared with Shilo, then reappeared a few minutes later with a bathed bundle wrapped in a bath towel. "I want to be an angel girl," Shilo said.

With that plea, Sharwan stood her on the large bay-window ledge, put the towel around Shilo's back so she could grasp the corners of the towel, extend both arms out, and spread the towel like the wings of an angel. This had become an after-bath ritual for Shilo. Then she pulled the towel down around her and snuggled in its fluff.

The twelve o'clock departure time came too soon. Sharwan was holding the elevator door open. I was taking my last-minute hugs and kisses from Shilo and giving last-minute travel counsel to seven-month-pregnant Stacie, when Shilo spotted Sharwan waiting for her in the elevator. She ran to the waiting arms of her aunt, shouting, "Let's go, Wannie!" Everyone else hurried onto the elevator and the doors closed.

Around 3:30 p.m. I looked at my watch and calculated about where they would be on the interstate highway running from Salt Lake City to St. George. I figured that they would be approaching Parowan, with about an hour remaining before they reached St. George. They would also be within the range of cellular phone service at Cedar City, so I called Wannie on the car phone. Yes, she replied, they were near Parowan. They had stopped a few minutes earlier at McDonald's in Beaver. Sharwan told me she had called the bridal dress shop and made all the arrangements to pick up her wedding dress. I could hear Shilo's laughter and chatter in the background. The sounds made me say to Sharwan, "Take good care of my babies."

Wannie answered back, "Oh, Mom, you know I'll take the best care of them."

Fifteen minutes later Stacie's husband, Larry, called me on his cellular phone. "Gail, there has been an accident with Stacie and Sharwan."

My first question was, "Has anyone been hurt?"

Larry replied, "I don't know. 1 was talking to Stacie on the cellular phone when I heard her say, 'Sharwan! Sharwan!' and the phone went dead. I tried to get her back on the phone but there was no answer. So I called 911 to report what I thought might be an accident. Someone had already reported it, and they told me the car was registered to Hyrum and Gail Smith. They would not give me any information other than come to the Cedar City hospital emergency room as soon as possible."

Glenna, Becca, and I fell on our knees and prayed to God for the courage and strength to be able to handle whatever had happened. I called Hyrum, who was on his way to the office, on his car phone to alert him of the accident. He immediately returned to the apartment.

Imagination controls the mind at times like this. The feeling of somehow knowing, yet not knowing, that something is seriously wrong. The hope of a miracle that somehow all will be right. It was long upon an afternoon before the details came of the unexplained one-car rollover, the passing of Sharwan and Shilo, and the miracle of Stacie and her unborn baby, both of whom survived.

I have never tried to live without faith in God. I have never wanted to. I believe that faith is a real thing, as real as what we see and touch and hear and taste. The things of the physical world can be understood by the evidence of the physical senses and the more precise methodologies developed by scientists. But I believe, in an age when too many look to the physical world for the only explanations of our existence, that a surprising number of us sense deep within that there is also a spiritual dimension to life. I believe that this spiritual dimension can be understood only by the spiritual senses, senses that each human being is born with, but that too many of us rationalize away or overlook as we get older.

Only those who have experienced what I have in these past weeks will understand the depth of my own sorrow and how much I miss my daughter and granddaughter. But through it all has come an underlying feeling of peace, which I sense is the "peace that passeth all understanding" of which Jesus spoke. That peace is the spiritual assurance that this life really is but a way station in a longer journey that reaches far back before our birth and extends forward into eternity.

In the words of a favorite Mormon children's hymn, "Families can be together forever, through Heavenly Father's plan." Seen in this perspective, Sharwan and Shilo, while plucked away from our family, have only passed to the next stage of eternal existence. Although we cannot see or associate with them now, I rest in the assurance that they are once again with their loving Father and with Mama and Dad, Papa and Mother Ruth, and others who have gone before. And, most important, I know that Hyrum and I, along with Glenna, Larry and Stacie, Joseph, Becca, and Jacob, will all be together face-to-face with Sharwan and Shilo at some future day when we have ourselves passed through death's doorway. When that happens, we will realize that our separation was for but a brief moment.

As I have pondered the events of May 18, 1995, and the events following the accident, I have been and continue to be overwhelmed at the outpouring of love and support from family and friends numbering in the thousands. I understand more than I ever have about the nature of faith, about miracles and eternal matters, and about sensing their reality deep within and trusting in them.

I understand now more than ever the power of parenting. Although Shilo's stay in this world was brief, she had the vision of eternities because everything she saw was good.

As for Sharwan——for several weeks I had been struggling, trying to achieve some feeling of closure so that I could emotionally and spiritually begin to move on. On a quiet Sunday morning, in a moment of grieving, I climbed the stairs of our St. George home to our Eagle Room, with its large windows looking over Dixie. As I sat down, pondering and pining about the loss, through my tears I saw Sharwan's day planner lying on top of the desk. Intuitively I unzipped it and began paging through it.

Every page was neat and orderly. Her journal was caught up to the day she died, her checkbook current and accurate. There were neatly typed pages of uplifting quotes, poems, and stories, as well as photos of family and friends she held dear.

Tears brimmed anew as I found an encouraging letter I had written to her six years earlier. "Keep those brown eyes sparkling," it read in part. "Remember that when the road gets rough, we put our trust in God and figure out an inspired solution. What you are supposed to be in earth life—leave that in God's hands. He'll use you where you are needed most, and when it comes along, the Spirit will confirm." She had carried that letter with her constantly from the day she received it, and Ihad never known.

But the healing comfort for which I yearned came as I turned to a beautiful photograph of the six spires of the Salt Lake Temple silhouetted against a backdrop of planets, stars, and galaxies. It was a glimpse of the eternities, the realms of order, beauty, and peace. Again tears welled up in my eyes, and I rose from my chair and walked to the window. Through watery eyes, I saw the morning sun glistening on the tender spring leaves of the century-old ash, mulberry, and cottonwood trees. Their sturdy trunks faithfully supported the profusion of branches, limbs, stems, and leaves all reaching out and up to touch the blueness of the sky. The morning shadowfall from these magnificent trees was cast westerly, with shaded limbs and leaves awaiting their turn in the sun.

Peace touched my heart like a presence. My daughter knew who she was and what she was about. The values and treasures transplanted into her life had struck their own roots and sprung up high and strong. She was casting her own giant shadowfall beyond the veil. To this parent, that was the most magical feeling of all.

Standing at the window, I marveled at the land marked by shadowfall, brightening westward into a perfect day.
