Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Acknowledgments

Without the assistance and cooperation of many individuals and institutions, this work would not have been possible. We acknowledge the help of several individuals, including Donald Albro, Harold Allen, Ronald Barney, Rick Boomgarden, Greg Christofferson, Gary Cottle, Michaela Voss Cottle, Larry Draper, Tyler Edmundsen, David Ettinger, Chad Flake, Jeni Broberg Holzapfel, D. J. Isom, Edith Menna, Melissa Ostler, Lee Pement, Ronald Read, Margaret Rich, Ronald Romig, Dana Roper, Roseline Seaver, Elbert Sheppard, R. Q. Shupe, William Slaughter, Steven Sorensen, Eldred G. Smith, Ted D. Stoddard, Richard Turley, and Alan Wood. We express gratitude also to our publisher, Bookcraft, Inc., who considered our proposal a valuable project-in particular, we thank Jana Erickson and Cinda Morgan for their extra efforts in the design and layout of the book.

ixSeveral institutions and the Eldred G. Smith family have graciously provided copies of photographs, access to artifacts within their collections, and permission to reproduce them. We thank the Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; Archives-Library, Missouri Historical Society, St. Louis, Missouri; British Museum, London, England; Cincinnati Public Library, Cincinnati, Ohio; Detroit Institute of the Arts, Detroit, Michigan; George Eastman House, International Museum of Photography, Rochester, New York; Illinois State Historical Library, Springfield, Illinois; Library-Archives and Museum, Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints, Independence, Missouri; Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.; Manuscript Department, Special Collections, and Photoarchives, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah; Mariners Museum, Newport News, Virginia; Missouri State Historical Society, Columbia, Missouri; Museum of Church History and Art, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; National Maritime Museum, Greenwich, England; National Society Daughters of Utah Pioneers Memorial Museum, Salt Lake City, Utah; Nauvoo Historical Society, Nauvoo, Illinois; Restoration Trails Foundation, Independence, Missouri; Special Collections, J. Willard Marriott Library, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah; Smithsonian Institute, Washington, D.C.; Visual Resources Library, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; Western Reserve Historical Society, Cleveland, Ohio; and the staffs at the Joseph Smith Historic Center, the LDS Visitors' Center, and Nauvoo Restoration, Inc., in Nauvoo, Illinois.
