Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Far West Temple

A revelation given through Joseph Smith on 26 April 1838 announced that the city of Far West was to be a "holy and consecrated land" to the Lord (D&C 115:7). The Lord also enjoined the Saints to build up Far West as quickly as possible for the gathering of the Saints. He continued, "I command you to build a house unto me, for the gathering together of my saints, that they may worship me" (D&C 115:8). In July 1838, the Lord said of the Twelve Apostles: "Next spring let them depart to go over the great waters, and there promulgate my gospel, the fulness thereof, and bear record of my name." The revelation continued, "Let them take leave of my saints in the city of Far West, on the twenty-sixth day of April next, on the building-spot of my house, saith the Lord." (D&C 118:4-5.) Persecution and ultimately the Missouri governor's expulsion order prevented the Saints from erecting this temple.

61838 Far West Plat Map. The 1838 Far West plat was drawn on sheepskin. The map shows the temple at the center of the city-illustrating the "City of Zion" concept that has been prominent in the Church since its days in Independence.

7Far West Temple Cornerstone. In D&C 115:7-8, the Lord commanded the Saints to build a temple at Far West. The cornerstones were finally laid at midnight on 26 April 1839. Many of the Twelve Apostles were present on that occasion.

Wilford Woodruff's Journal, 26 April 1839. In April 1839, Wilford Woodruff accompanied several Church leaders to Far West from the safety of Illinois. In an effort to avoid anti-Mormons in the area, the meeting on 26 April 1839, in which Wilford was ordained an Apostle, was held before daylight. Wilford was ordained while sitting on one of the temple cornerstones. The Apostles then began their missionary journey to the British Isles, thus fulfilling the revelation given a year earlier (see D&C 115).
