Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Kirtland Temple

In a revelation to the Church, the Lord said: "And again, verily I say unto you, my friends, a commandment I give unto you, that ye shall commence a work of laying out and preparing a beginning and foundation of the city of the stake of Zion, here in the land of Kirtland, beginning at my house. And behold, it must be done according to the pattern which I have given unto you." (D&C 94:1-2.) Later, the Lord chastised the Saints for their slow progress on erecting the temple. "Ye must needs be chastened and stand rebuked before my face; for ye have sinned against me a very grievous sin, in that ye have not considered the great commandment in all things, that I have given unto you concerning the building of mine house" (D&C 95:2-3).

8The Lord promised the "first elders" of the Church an "endowment from on high in my house, which I have commanded to be built unto my name in the land of Kirtland" (D&C 105:33). Eventually, a solemn cornerstone-laying ceremony on 23 July 1833 marked the commencement of the construction of the first completed Latter-day Saint temple. When the temple was finished in 1836, Joseph Smith offered a prayer of dedication (D&C 109) and a few days later he and Oliver Cowdery received in the temple a glorious vision of Jesus Christ, Moses, Elias, and Elijah (see D&C 110). The Spirit-filled days of this Pentecostal period began several weeks earlier when Joseph Smith and several brethren met on 21 January 1836 in the attic offices of the nearly completed temple. During this evening meeting Joseph Smith received a great vision of the celestial kingdom (see D&C 137).

8Kirtland Temple. The Kirtland Temple measures 59 by 79 feet and is two and a half stories high. It is the first major structure erected by the Church-a monument of the devoted labor and sacrifice of the first thousand Church members.

8Emer Harris's Square. The builders of the Kirtland Temple were skilled craftsmen. The temple was originally to have been built of brick but was finally built of stone from a nearby quarry. The exterior is made of solid stone covered with stucco plaster, and the interior includes beautiful woodworking exemplified by moldings, carvings, and the windows.

9Kirtland Temple Window. The Kirtland Temple shows a mixture of styles. The main doorway, for example, exemplified the Federal style, while this is a Gothic window. The temple tower is a combination of Gothic and Greek architectural elements.

9Temple Curtain Pulleys. The pulleys allowed the rollers at the auditorium's ceiling to lower curtains that subdivided the auditorium into several rooms.

9West Pulpit of the Lower Assembly Room. The west pulpit of the lower assembly room is where the Lord Jesus Christ appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery to accept the temple. Moses, Elias, and Elijah also appeared during a series of visions. (See D&C 110.)

9Kirtland Temple Step Stone. The temple foundation was made of smoothly cut stone, and the ends of the steps were finished with a vertical texture. The main walls, made of rough stone, were originally covered with white plaster, mixed with ground-up glass and china to make the plaster sparkle.
