Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Section Two

Social Settings in Early Church History

An abundance of physical artifacts remains from the nineteenth century-homes and buildings (including foundations and architectural plans), furniture, tools, utensils, clothing, and the like. From the Latter-day Saints and their communities, a surprising number of artifacts have survived the rigors of pioneer life and travel, early persecution, and natural loss. The items included in this section represent a small portion of the material culture still available today. They help us visualize the world of the early Saints-a world that is increasingly lost to us in a modern technological setting.

13Mangle Board (Used for Smoothing Out Damp Linen or Cloth).

Windsor-Style Chair Used in Newel K. Whitney's Store in Kirtland, Ohio and Early Trunk.

13Candle Snuffer.

13School Bell Used by Joseph Smith, Sr. (Also Used as a Family Dinner Bell by Lucy Mack Smith).

Establishing a Home

Many of the Saints established more than one home in a ten-year period (1830-1840). The Saints from New England and New York gathered to Ohio pursuant to Doctrine and Covenants sections 37 and 38, and then to Missouri according to D&C 57, 58, and 59. Persecution next forced the Saints to relocate in northern Missouri and finally in Illinois and Iowa (see D&C 124 and 125).

14The first Joseph Smith, Sr., home in New York was a log cabin near what would come to be known as the Sacred Grove, where in the spring of 1820 the Father and the Son appeared to young Joseph in response to his prayer. Following the First Vision, the Smith family continued to reside in the log cabin, where the angel Moroni appeared to Joseph in 1823. The home was a one-and-one-half-story structure with a twenty-four-foot by thirty-foot foundation. The space in the home was used completely. The ground floor was divided into two rooms, and the attic was also sectioned into two separate areas.

14The Smith's stay in the Manchester area depicts the typical four stage development of an early nineteenth-century farm. First, enough timber was cleared to erect a log cabin. Second, fences, crops, and a kitchen garden were established. Third, a barn, other outbuildings, an expanded house, and an orchard were added. Fourth, a new plank or brick house was erected. From this early home until Joseph Smith, Jr., moved into the Mansion House in Nauvoo, the range and variety of buildings in Mormon communities were extremely vast.

14Joseph Smith's Axe Head. Joseph Smith's axe head is forged from a single piece of metal. An axe was an essential tool of the early Saints. It served to clear the land, provide logs and cut notches in building log cabins, and cut wood for the cabin fireplace and for fences. Fences were necessary for keeping some animals in and other animals out. Rail fences were the most popular. Good neighbors built stiles, or steps, into their fences so people could easily get over the fences. Settlers often walked across each other's property because doing so was the shortest distance to the village or mill.

14Howard and Martha Knowlton Coray's Log Cabin. The log cabin of Howard and Martha Knowlton Coray was typical of cabins at the time. Logs were usually felled and cut to a uniform length. Notches were made in both ends, and the logs were laid into position. Moss, mud, leaves, or plaster were used to fill in the space between the logs. The roof of the cabin was made of smaller logs and pieces of bark and later was usually replaced with shingles.

15Fireplace Swing Crane. A fireplace swing crane was attached to the back of the fireplace and was made to swing out from the hearth so that the pots could be more easily stirred. Immediately after the cabin was under way, the fireplace was started. The foundation was built up with stones, and the chimney was erected. The hearth was then made. Because the fireplace provided light, warmth, and heat for cooking, the family's indoor activities revolved around the fireplace. The fire was usually kept burning night and day because of the difficulty of lighting a fire.

15Water-Bucket Carrier. A water-bucket carrier was used by people to help provide water to Nauvoo residences and temple workers. Very few roads had been built in the early days. Even though settlers built most early towns along rivers, traveling to the nearest town or mill often meant walking long distances. Living near water provided the Saints with plenty of water for drinking, cooking, bathing, and laundry. Even if settlers lived near a water source, they often built a well and lined its inside with stones.

15The Noble-Lucy Mack Smith Home Latrine. After building a log cabin or house, the settlers next began constructing outbuildings. An outhouse and barn were usually the first buildings to be added. These latrines also served for trash disposal. Hotels often had double latrines for use by both males and females. Chamber pots were kept near the bed for late-night emergencies.

15Nauvoo Pitcher. The settlers used a pitcher and basin daily to wash their faces and hands. A pitcher usually stood waiting for use. Small wooden tubs were often used to bathe children.

16A Stool Used in the Smith Family Cabin. The stool from the Smith family cabin was probably kept in the "best room," or parlor. The parlor was a special room in the home where guests were entertained. The best furniture was placed in this room. Here also the needlework was done, courting took place, and on Sundays the family gathered to read the Bible together.

Wood and Rope Bed. The early settlers slept in beds of wood and rope. The frame and legs were carved from wood. Holes were then bored in the four sides of the frames. Rope was pulled through the holes to make a net. A mattress of straw, corn husks, hay, boughs, or goose feathers was placed on top of this rope net. (Some mattresses contained straw on one side, which was cool in the summer, and goose feathers on the other side, which was warm in the winter.) The weight of the persons sleeping in the bed eventually caused the net to sag, and it had to be tightened from time to time. Several types of beds were used, some of which were particularly beneficial in saving space. Trundle beds, which were low beds on wheels, could be pushed under higher beds. Turn-up beds, which were built into the walls and could be raised during the day, were also used.
