Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Printing and Publishing

As communites such as Palmyra grew, the need for information became important. A printer published newspapers, religious pamphlets, almanacs, schoolbooks, and government papers. All of the letters used in a word were handmade out of metal. These letters were called matrixes. Matrixes were stored in a wooden frame called a composition. The composition housed trays of letters of various type sizes and styles for use in the printer's work. The process from composing the words and lines to the finished product was long and tedious. Newspapers were easier to make than books. When the pages of a book were finished, a bookbinder bound them together by hand.

17Following the publication of the Book of Mormon, the Lord commanded Martin Harris to "pay the debt thou hast contracted with the printer" (D&C 19:35). Eventually, William W. Phelps was called to be the first Church printer (see D&C 57:11). The Literary Firm, organized in November 1831, was commissioned to print all the official literature of the Church (see D&C 70). Included in the plans of the firm was the printing of Joseph Smith's translation of the Bible, Church hymnals, Church almanacs, children's literature, and Church newspapers. Printing and publishing thus played a significant role in spreading the message of the Restoration.

17Martin Harris's 1830 Copy of the Book of Mormon . Harris ensured Grandin of the printing costs of the Book of Mormon by putting up a mortgage on the Harris farm.

17Inkwell. Quill and ink were used by Joseph's scribes in producing the Book of Mormon manuscript.

17The Grandin Print Shop. E. B. Grandin bought his Palmyra printing business and bookstore in 1827 from John H. Gilbert. The Book of Mormon was printed on the third floor, the book bindery was on the second floor, and a bookstore occupied the first floor.

18Grandin's "Smith Patented Improved Press." The printing press Grandin used became available in 1824 and was used in the Grandin printing establishment to print the first edition of the Book of Mormon. The work of hand setting the type began in August 1829; by 26 March 1830, the book had been printed and bound.

18Original Manuscript of the Book of Mormon . The section shown contains Lehi's vision of the tree of life located in 1 Ne. 8. This was the manuscript the scribes wrote as Joseph Smith dictated the record contained on the gold plates. Many of the early revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants (see D&C 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 11, 12, and 13) concern issues raised while Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery translated the Book of Mormon.

18Printer's Copy of the Manuscript of the Book of Mormon. Because of hostility in Palmyra and Martin Harris's loss of the first one hundred sixteen pages of the translation, Joseph Smith requested that Oliver Cowdery recopy the entire manuscript for the printer. Neither manuscript was punctuated. After Oliver completed recopying the manuscript in August 1829, he delivered the first twenty-four pages to Grandin's print shop.

18Type from the Grandin Printing Shop. Early printing required the type for each sheet to be inked separately. Leather ink balls served this function. Approximately three hundred pieces of type were recovered from the Grandin printing shop. The typeface known as Duodecimo was used for the Book of Mormon. Printing the Book of Mormon was a difficult process. Each individual type character had to be picked out of the type case (the capital letters were in the upper type drawer, or case, and regular type in the lower type case; hence, our designations of upper and lower case). A normal print order in the 1830s was five hundred to one thousand copies, so the Book of Mormon was a very lengthy project, as it consisted of three thousand copies. The job required extremely long hours of labor from numerous printers and helpers.

19Printer Page Proof Sheet. Pictured is the first printer's page proof sheet from the Book of Mormon. When the title page proof sheet was printed at Grandin's, Joseph Smith, Jr., Joseph Smith, Sr., Hyrum Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and Martin Harris were present. They all examined and passed the proof sheet from hand to hand and "pronounced it good."

19Signature of the Book of Mormon. A book is printed in "signatures," or groups of from eight to thirty-two pages printed front and back. The signatures are then folded to produce a book.

Reflector, 2 January 1830. On 2 September 1829, Abner Cole began publishing a weekly newspaper in Palmyra called the Reflector. Cole used the pseudonym "O. Dogberry" in publishing the weekly from the Grandin printing establishment. Cole started to print sections of the Book of Mormon in the Reflector without permission, beginning with the 2 January 1830 issue. After a confrontation between Cole and Joseph Smith, Cole eventually stopped printing extracts from the Book of Mormon in his paper.
