Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Music and Worship

An important revelation to Emma Smith noted, "For my soul delighteth in the song of the heart; yea, the song of the righteous is a prayer unto me, and it shall be answered with a blessing upon their heads" (D&C 25:12). Music was an important part of family and community life in America from the earliest colonial times. It also played a significant role in the church services of the early Saints. Emma Smith was given the assignment to collect sacred songs for the Church, and a hymnal was published in 1835.

23The early Church's worship services included the administration of the sacrament. Priesthood bearers performed this duty (see D&C 20:38-40, 46, 58) in a manner prescribed by revelation (see 20:75-79). The Lord commanded the Saints that when they assembled they should "instruct and edify each other" (D&C 43:8). The Lord specified that Sunday should be a sacred and holy day that included fasting and prayer (D&C 59:12-14). Also, special blessing meetings for the Saints were presided over by the Patriarch to the Church.

23Clarinet. Artisans who manufactured musical instruments such as this in America sometimes had a difficult time making a living because so much time was required to make one instrument. Many times, these artisans had to farm or to do other work on the side.

23Harmonica Plate from Nauvoo. Music was a valued part of the Saints' life. When the daily work was done, the saints attended dances and band performances. Most of the musical instruments came from Europe, although simple instruments like the harmonica could be produced locally. Sometimes cabinet makers crafted pianos, harpsichords, and spinets.

23Violin and Case. The artisan normally used spruce for the soundboard or belly of any string instrument. Spruce was strong and provided an excellent tone quality. The backs of the instruments were made of maple. Their parts were never nailed but were instead glued together. After the instrument was completed, it was varnished with many coats. After the varnishing, it was ready to be polished, strung, and sold. The artisan who created the pictured violin carved a unique head on the instrument.

24Bugle. The Saints had a brass band in Nauvoo. The instruments played by the band included trumpets, French horns, clarinets, bugles, trombones, and bass drums.

24The Evening and the Morning Star. Before 1835, the Star started publishing hymns selected by Emma Smith consequent upon her calling from the Lord as recorded in D&C 25:11.

24Pewter Sacrament Cup Used in Nauvoo. The administration of the sacrament was an important part of any early Church worship service. In addition to regular services on the Sabbath, local prayer and blessing meetings were held in intimate home settings with neighbors, even in Nauvoo.

241835 Church Hymnal. Joseph Smith particularly enjoyed music and always encouraged music in Kirtland, Missouri, and Nauvoo. The Saints received great pleasure in singing traditional religious music, but the new faith needed its own hymns to express its doctrines. Besides the music at public occasions, religious meetings, holidays, and weddings, the Saints often sang hymns at partings and at departures for missions.

Cello and Bow. Musical instruments like the cello and violin needed to be made of wood from carefully chosen trees. The best trees were actually those grown in the worst soils. These trees grew stronger because of minerals contained in the soil. An artisan could identify such wood because when it was hit with an axe, the wood seemed to "sing." Apprentices to such musical instrument artisans were taught how to find the trees that sang. Such trees produced blocks of wood that were then aged before the instruments were crafted.
