Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Village and Family Life

The Doctrine and Covenants frequently mentions family matters and community responsibilities (see D&C 20:47, 51; 52:36; 75:28; 93:48; and 134). A feeling of community developed in an area as the population grew.

25Kirtland, located in the Western Reserve area of northeastern Ohio, was first settled in 1811. As the town grew, it was organized into a township in 1818. The Newel K. Whitney store was established in 1823. When the first Mormon missionaries arrived in October 1830, Kirtland was still a small community.

25Individuals shared resources and assisted each other in large tasks, such as raising barns. As the Saints gathered to build their temple, religious commitment to the restored gospel added another dimension to village and family life. People trusted each other and relied on each other's honesty. Few locked their doors, and often a traveler could just walk into a home to find a place by the fire to rest. Life centered around the family and the daily duties of survival.

251838 Plat Map of Adam-ondi-Ahman (Missouri). This map followed the model for all stakes of Zion. It was laid out on a north-south axis from the public building blocks that would have included the temple. The drafting of a plat map was evidence of the formation of a community.

25Brigham Young's Wood Plainer, Ruler, and Promissory Note. As in most early communities, the Saints were always ready to help each other achieve a difficult task. Work parties allowed Saints to complete, in one or two days, tasks that required a single man months to accomplish. Lending was also common in early communities, particularly items like sugar, flour, medicine, and common tools.

26Nauvoo Mansion House Rain Gutter. The tinsmiths were very important in the community because of the large variety of items they could produce, including kitchen wares, tools, and even rain gutters. Items such as these were usually obtained through the barter system. The sense of community or the feeling of an extended family was further enhanced by the barter system.

26Top Quilt. This quilt belonged to Catherine Smith Salisbury. Life in early villages and towns included many social functions. One of the most common social activities for women was a quilting bee. The Saints did not buy material for the quilts but kept instead every scrap of fabric from making clothing. The children were involved in the quilting by passing needles back from the bottom to the top of the quilt. After the women finished the quilt, their families usually came for supper, dancing, and games. Such occasions also provided opportunities for young adults to meet one another.

26Chair Made by Brigham Young. As the community expanded, more and more village artisans produced goods. This included woodworkers. Some of the wood items available included a large assortment of furniture, such as desks, tables, trunks, and benches.

Toothbrush Handle, Hair Curler, Combs, and Hair Grease Container. Bear grease was used forthe hair. The toothbrush bristles were probably made of hoghair. The early Saints had an active social life that includedsurprise parties, holiday parties, and weddings. For theseoccasions, the Saints cleaned up accordingly and put ontheir best dress.
