Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Banking and Economics

The Lord commanded Martin Harris to "pay the debt" to E. B. Grandin for the publication of the first edition of the Book of Mormon (D&C 19:35). Several other revelations deal directly with economic matters (see D&C 64, 72, 104, 111, 115, and 119).

27The Church and its members were part of a larger economic setting in the United States during the first decades following the founding of the Church. Economic considerations constantly plagued the Saints as they attempted to establish communities in Ohio, Missouri, and Illinois.

27During a period when Church expenses had risen dramatically, several Kirtland community leaders established the Kirtland Safety Society. Several banks opened in nearby communities, and with the Church and individual members under financial pressure, the decision to start a bank was a logical one. When the state legislature denied the group a banking charter, an anti-bank company was formed. Within a short time of the company's opening, company officials suspended payment in hard currency; after legal maneuvering and difficulties, the company closed its doors in November 1837, during the 1837 financial crisis that plagued the entire nation.

27While the Saints attempted to manage their temporal concerns, the Lord revealed "line upon line" concerning his own economic order-the law of consecration and stewardship. The Saints accepted this celestial law and sought to live by its principles on several occasions. The core of the law was revealed through Joseph Smith as a commandment that the Saints should "consecrate of thy properties for [the poor's] support that which thou hast to impart unto them, with a covenant and a deed which cannot be broken. And inasmuch as ye impart of your substance unto the poor, ye will do it unto me; and they shall be laid before the bishop of my church and his counselors, two of the elders, or high priests, such as he shall appoint or has appointed and set apart for that purpose." (D&C 42:30-31.)

27Following almost a decade of challenges in keeping this law, the Lord gave the Saints the law of tithing (see headnote to D&C 119).

27Kirtland Safety Society Bank. Individual Saints in the 1830s had little need for a bank. The barter system worked particularly well for farmers and artisans. The general store usually acted as the community bank. The store lent seeds, tools, and wares to farmers, and the farmers settled their debts when their crops were harvested. In establishing a large community, however, with needs including transportation costs, land, publication costs, public works, and the building of a temple, the Saints had to establish a bank. Many surrounding communities smaller than Kirtland had banks. The Saints established a bank in 1836.

28Kirtland Safety Society Bank Note. In part to help relieve Church leaders of the increasing debt the Church had encumbered, the Kirtland Safety Society opened for business during the first week of January 1837. Within the first few days of operation, the one-, two-, and three-dollar denominations began trading. Like any stock certificate or note not issued by the federal government, the bills' value and ability to be exchanged were vulnerable. If a note was redeemed and not reissued, often the word canceled was written across the note.

28Kirtland Safety Society Anti-Bank Note. When the state of Ohio refused to charter the Kirtland Bank, the bank officials decided to operate it as an anti-banking company. Wording modifications that reflected this change in name were stamped on those notes whose design could accommodate such modifications.

28Kirtland Safety Society Bank Iron Safe. The Saints could not obtain a bank charter from the Ohio legislature, so the proposed bank changed its form to an anti-bank. Joseph Smith purchased the safe on 18 October 1836.

28Period United States Coinage. These pieces of coinage include a half-dime, dime, fifty-cent piece, and dollar. They were in use in the 1820s to 1840s. Although gold was the preferred medium of exchange, these coins were more abundant.

29Early 1830s Stewardship Agreement. This stewardship lease is from Edward Partridge, called by revelation as first bishop of the Church (D&C 41:9). In Doctrine and Covenants sections 42 and 51, the Saints were placed under the law of consecration. They were asked to consecrate all their property to the bishop of the Church, who then was to grant them a stewardship over some or all of their properties based upon their circumstances, wants, and needs.

29Nauvoo House Association Notes (First Issue). As a result of the revelation now designated as D&C 124 in the Doctrine and Covenants, the Saints issued stock certificates to build the Nauvoo House. Stock certificates were also issued for land companies, the Nauvoo Music Association, the Seventies, the Nauvoo Seventies Library, and the Nauvoo Agricultural and Manufacturing Association. The sale of stock certificates was the only way to finance such large projects.

29Nauvoo City Scrip. Cities commonly issued scrip to stimulate growth. The Nauvoo scrip was in one denomination of one dollar. Such scrip was usually accepted only in the immediate area. The Saints used many other scrips, including Nauvoo Legion Scrip. This scrip was probably used for the men and for supplies to the legion. The notes were unifaced in the single denomination of one dollar. Arsenal scrip was also issued, which was used to pay for specific equipment such as weapons and ammunition.
