Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Transportation

As early 1831, the Lord told Joseph Smith, "Send forth the elders of my church unto the nations which are afar off; unto the islands of the sea; send forth unto foreign lands; call upon all nations" (D&C 133:8).

30The farther west a person traveled, the more difficult travel became-the roads became trails, and trails became virgin prairies or wooded land. The Saints, like others of the period, traveled by boat as much as possible. Travel on land was long and tiring and sometimes next to impossible. The first Church migration from New York to Ohio was accomplished mainly on the Erie Canal from Palmyra to Rochester, New York. Mormon emigrants, missionaries, and Church leaders traveled throughout the United States and Canada during the first few years by whatever method was available to them-dugout canoes on the Missouri River and keelboat and steamboats on the Mississippi River and on other major waterways. Samuel Smith, the first missionary, walked.

30Horses and oxen were essential for many Saints traveling to Missouri, Illinois, and on to Winter Quarters. During the winter, sleighs were used, and, eventually, in the East, trains were available. Coastline sailing ships helped missionaries and members to travel along the eastern seashore. Large oceangoing ships took the missionaries to the British Isles and later brought thousands of converts to Nauvoo in the 1840s.

30One of the most interesting revelations in the Doctrine and Covenants is D&C 61. There the Lord discusses the dangers of travel, but ultimately said, "It mattereth not unto me, after a little, if it so be that they fill their mission, whether they go by water or by land" (D&C 61:22).

30Ohio-Erie Canal. Some of the water routes used by the Saints included Lake Erie, the Ohio River, the Mississippi River, and canals. A canal-building program eventually connected the Hudson River with the Mississippi River. Law restricted canal barges from traveling more than four miles an hour or ninety-four miles a day. The cabins on the barges were usually divided into male and female quarters, with bunk beds sometimes four high.

30Horse Saddle. Horseback was probably the most common and dependable mode of transportation besides foot. Horseback was also one of the fastest means of travel on land. Carriages, coaches, and wagons were also very popular. The roads were in very poor condition. Even the National Road, one of the best in the country, had stumps in the road. With no surfacing on the roads, traveling by wheeled vehicles was difficult, if not impossible, in bad weather.

31Nineteenth-Century Sleigh. Travel in the winter was enhanced by a sleigh or sled. Sleighs or sleds were less expensive and easier to construct than wheeled vehicles and were thus affordable to more people.

31List of Provisions Handbill. This broadside lists the provisions supplied to those emigrating to the United States aboard the Mormon charters. It states fare prices and was issued in 1844 by British Mission president Reuben Headock.

31The Ship Britannia. This ship carried the first forty Saints from Liverpool, England, to New York City in 1840. A great many Church leaders, missionaries, and migrating Saints traveled in ships along the Atlantic coast and from Europe to the United States. While at sea, they shared the common hazards and discomforts of crossing the ocean with other travelers. These included lack of privacy, inadequate sanitation, disease, storms, poor or inadequate food and water, and the typical harassment and abuse from lustful crew members.

31Nineteenth-Century Ship's Bell. The rhythms of daily ship life were regulated by the ship's bell. While the Saints acted in concert, organizing study groups and prayer meetings and cooking together, the tone of the bell nonetheless reminded them of the many monotonous hours crossing the ocean.

31Hardtack (Sea Biscuit). This extremely hard biscuit would not spoil and was a major staple for most passengers and crew members.

32Mississippi River Steamboat. A great number of early Saints and settlers traveled by steamboat. Steamboats were also the major transporter of goods, especially along the Mississippi River and other large rivers and lakes. Some steamboats could carry over two hundred tons of merchandise. Steamboats docked in Nauvoo several times a day.

321838 Baltimore and Ohio's No. 16 Locomotive. In July 1836, Joseph and several Church leaders traveled from Utica, New York, to Albany on one of the early railway systems. Missionaries, Church leaders, and converts used the emerging railway system for travel when available or within their budgets.
