Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Frontier Life and Amusements

The Saints' strong community life of service provided them with the necessary spiritual, social, physical, and intellectual foundation for success on the frontier (see D&C 82:19). Frontier life was often difficult for the Saints-especially with the added burden of constant persecution. The majority of the Saints were farmers, a hard way of life for the entire family. Self-sufficiency was the general rule for a frontier family. The community life the Saints established was in contrast to that emphasis on individual independence. Despite the taxing demands of frontier life, the Saints participated in numerous amusements. These amusements were an important part of the social fabric and included hunting, fishing, horseback riding, outdoor games, picnics, circuses, bees, parties, Church activities, and parlor games.

33Musket Bullet. Hunting provided food for the Saints, and, when it was done with a friend or in a group, it became recreational. Shooting contests, including turkey shoots, were also held.

33Joseph Smith's Top Hat and Case. The Saints wore their best clothing on significant occasions, such as parties, dances, Church meetings, holiday gatherings, and weddings.

33Emma Smith's Riding Crop. Riding and walking were simple pleasures for the Saints. The Saints also enjoyed other outdoor activities, including ball games, parades, circuses, foot races, stick pulls, picnics, and quoit pitching (quoits were stones thrown similar to the discus).

34Wilford Woodruff's Fishing Pole. Fishing offered settlers an additional food source and could also be very relaxing. The Saints commonly went swimming or went riding on a boat or a steamboat.

34Children's Toy Bear from Nauvoo. Young children played with a variety of toys, including kites, dolls, slings, and whistles. They also played many games, such as hoop games, skip rope, hop scotch, marbles, blindman's buff, fox and hounds, and baseball. Ice skating was a favorite activity during the winter.

34Playbill from Nauvoo. In the Mormon community, numerous theatrical presentations were presented at the Masonic Hall or the Cultural Hall. Eliza R. Snow, Brigham Young, and Heber C. Kimball also took part in productions such as Pizarro.

34Dominoes Used in Nauvoo. The evening hours in any frontier settlement, particularly during the long winters, were spent in many family activities. Adults enjoyed numerous parlor games, including dominoes.
