Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Food and Medicine

The Saints knew that the Lord had given them the bounties of the earth when he stated, "The fulness of the earth is yours" (D&C 59:16). Nevertheless, cooking conditions in the nineteenth century, particularly in the frontier setting, involved a great deal of time, arduous lifting, and reaching. The Lord specifically outlined the use of food and a health code for the Saints in a revelation known as the Word of Wisdom (D&C 89).

41Medical practice was still in its infancy during the 1830s and 1840s. The Saints used whatever knowledge was available to them. The Saints also knew that the elders of the Church could "lay their hands" on the sick to heal them (D&C 42:44, 48) they were promised that those "not appointed unto death, shall be healed" (v. 48); and they were instructed that those who were sick should "be nourished with all tenderness, with herbs and mild food" (v. 43).

41Plow from Nauvoo. Immediately after arriving at a settlement, the majority of the Saints began farming and raising their own animals. During this time, food was usually scarce, and medicine was nonexistent. After a community was established, food became more plentiful, and some medicine could be obtained. The plow was an essential part of life for the farmer. It allowed him to plant and consequently harvest larger gardens and more productive farms than were otherwise possible.

41Hoe Head Used in Nauvoo. After the garden and crops were planted, tools like the hoe further allowed the Saints to harvest large amounts of produce. The Saints took great pride in their gardens and crops, which produced peas, beans, corn, wheat, sweet potatoes, squashes, pumpkins, and melons.

41Corn Husker. Among many other tasks, preparing meals included husking corn, gathering and bringing in eggs, making bread (which included preparing the dough, allowing it to rise, and baking the bread), and churning butter. To make butter, the Saints collected fresh milk in a standard pail, poured the milk into several shallow milk pans, and placed the milk in a cool room until the cream came the top. The cream was then transferred into a churn. After the cream was laboriously churned, the cream turned into butter. The kitchenware had to be very clean because butter absorbs all smells it encounters when it is being made.

42Times and Seasons Advertisement. This advertisement from the 15 March 1841 edition offers to barter goods in exchange for the paper. When large amounts of food became available, the merchants placed advertisements in the local newspapers to let the people know about the merchants' goods. The availability of extra grocery goods created additional challenges in storage. Food had to be preserved and stored for use throughout the year. Fresh meat could be preserved by drying, smoking, pickling, freezing, or (during the winter months) potting. Vegetables and fruits also needed to be preserved. Vegetables were preserved by pickling them in a brine, which is a mixture of water, vinegar, salt, and spices. The pickling gave the vegetables a strong flavor while preserving them. Fruits were preserved in jams and jellies. A mixture of honey or sugar, fruit, cider, and cinnamon was poured into a crock; a layer of melted mutton fat sealed the crock; and leather or an animal bladder served as a lid.

42Earthenware, Including a Plate and Mug Belonging to Joseph and Emma Smith. Some of these ceramics were made in England and were extremely costly.

42Stoneware Used in Nauvoo. Stoneware was used in everyday life by the Saints in Nauvoo. Stoneware was not as beautiful as china but was much less expensive and more practical. Stoneware was made of special clay that held water without being glazed because the clay contained large amounts of silica. The Saints collected and cleaned the clay, shaped it, and then placed the clay object in a kiln.

43Utensils Used by the Saints. The Saints often used trammels, which was a system of hooks that hung on a swinging crane in the fireplace to support pots and kettles over the hearth. Trammels allowed the cook to regulate the amount of heat on the pot. The Saints also cooked with trivets, which were three-legged metal stands that were placed over the fire to support the cooking vessels. The Saints even used toasters. Pots and pans were in short supply because of their expense. The Saints, therefore, usually cooked the whole meal for supper in one pot. In the summer, the heat from the kitchen made the Saints' homes unbearable. To remedy this problem, many of the Saints built summer kitchens, usually apart from the main structure.

43Mortar and Pestle. The apothecary was the town druggist. At this time, medical practices included bleeding, the providing of poultices (mixtures of herbs), and amputation.

43Pill Maker. Medicinal herbs were given to the patient in four different ways-as powder, paste, liquid, or a pill. To obtain a pill, the apothecary took the powder, formed it into a paste similar to a dough, and then ran it through a pill maker that formed small balls.

Tooth Puller. A tooth puller was available at the apothecary and was used to pull an aching tooth. The hook was placed into the groove under the tooth's gum, and the tooth was then wedged out.
