Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Military and Weapons

After the Saints were expelled from Jackson County, Missouri, the Lord indicated they should recruit a group of men to help the persecuted Saints in Missouri regain their land. This group became known in Church history as Zion's Camp (see D&C 103:11, 15, 22, 29-40). During a period when local militia units occupied an important aspect of Jacksonian society, the Saints found themselves in need of protection. From this period until the later Utah period, the Saints often found themselves defending their rights through the organization of local militia units. The most famous, the Nauvoo Legion, was chartered by the state of Illinois.

44David W. Patten's Horn, Pouch, and Rifle. When persecution arose in Missouri, David W. Patten, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, led a group of Saints to protect other Saints being harassed by a mob. Patten's group encountered an armed mob, and he was mortally wounded. Gunsmiths were usually blacksmiths who specialized in producing guns. Although the process was time consuming, the gunsmith etched rifling grooves in the gun barrel, which greatly enhanced the accuracy of the weapon.

44Nauvoo City Charter, Which Contained the Ordinances of the Nauvoo Legion. Like most frontier communities, Nauvoo received the authority to establish a militia as part of its city charter. The Nauvoo Legion was patterned after a Roman army legion. A legion consisted of ten thousand soldiers, who were subdivided into cohorts of one thousand soldiers. The Nauvoo Legion was made up of two cohorts, despite its enlistment of over five thousand men. One cohort consisted of soldiers with horses.

45Simple Shot Pistol, Box, Ball, Powder, and Pouch of Newel K. Whitney. Most male Saints owned weapons and served in local militia units. Militia service was required for males between eighteen and forty-five in the United States. However, because of Zion's Camp, dirks (long daggers), knives, swords, pistols, muskets, and powder horns were in demand in the Kirtland area.

45Stiletto and Sheath. The stiletto and sheath was another weapon used by numerous members of the legion.

45Joseph Smith's Nauvoo Uniform Epaulet and Sash. Americans in allperiods have enjoyed participating inand watching military parades.These parades wereheld often inNauvoo. Theofficers woreuniforms, butthe averagesoldier usuallywore a badge,scarf, or bright-colored shirt.

45Sow Cannon Used by the Nauvoo Legion. This sow cannon was manufactured for use in the War of 1812. The Nauvoo Legion was reported to have had five cannons. They were probably stored in the legion arsenal. The cannons were part of an artillery company that was attached to both cohorts. The legion also included a band.

Nauvoo Legion Sword and Scabbard. Officers of the Nauvoo Legion wore these weapons.
