Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Lamanites

In an early revelation dated July 1828, the Lord informed the young prophet that the modern witness of Christ, the Book of Mormon, "shall come to the knowledge of the Lamanites and the Lemuelites, and the Ishmaelites" (D&C 3:18). Joseph was already aware of the Lamanites' (native American indians) prophetic destiny as a result of his efforts to translate the Book of Mormon.

46Shortly after the Church was founded in 1830, several individuals, including Oliver Cowdery, were called to begin the first mission to the Lamanites (see D&C 28:8; 30:6; 32:2). From this early period, and throughout the Prophet's lifetime, contacts with various native American Indian tribes and groups were frequent. Joseph Smith and other Church missionaries and leaders came in contact with Delaware, Potawatomi, Sac, Fox, and Seneca Indian tribes. As the Saints made their way toward the Great Basin in 1846-47, other groups of native American Indians became acquainted with the Saints.

46Lithograph by John McGahey of Joseph Smith Preaching to the Indians. John McGahey exhibited this lithograph, which indicated, "Joseph Smith, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints addressing the chiefs and braves of several tribes of Indians in the City of Nauvoo, Illinois, North America, June 1843." Joseph Smith considered the Indian tribes of New York, Ohio, Missouri, and throughout the United States as direct descendants of the Lamanites mentioned in the Book of Mormon. He made every effort to convert them to the restored gospel.

46Covenant of Lamanite Missionaries from the Ravenna, Ohio Star. After the missionaries were called (D&C 28:8; 30:6; 32:2), they signed a covenant before leaving on their missions.

47Potawatomi Headdress and Iroquois Moccasins. Headdresses were worn on formal or religious occasions. They not only symbolized wealth but also vitality that reflected spiritual blessings. These Iroquois moccasins are made from buckskin, porcupine quills, and glass beads. Fine and decorative items were often worn by young Indians. Dress played an important role in the courting between the sexes. After an Indian couple was married, dress was apparently much less important.

47Knife and Sheath. This tool could be used for hunting and as a weapon against enemies.

47Ottawa Presentation Tomahawk. Such tomahawks as this one are made from iron, steel, hickory, silver, and lead. Objects such as these were exchanged to signify formal relationships and agreements.

47Potawatomi Garter. The Potawatomi Indians' embroidery of garters, sashes, and shoulder bags incorporated a lot of bead work. These garters had a number of complex patterns. This garter was red and white. White symbolized the powers of peace and purity; red often symbolized conflict or destruction.
