Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Courts and Jails

Two jails dominate the landscape of the Doctrine and Covenants-Liberty Jail and Carthage Jail. As a result of confrontations between the Mormons and other residents of Daviess and Caldwell counties in Missouri, Joseph Smith was arrested on the false charge of treason. Since neither Daviess nor Caldwell county had a jail, the Mormon leaders were sent to Liberty, Clay County, Missouri, where they remained from 1 December 1838 to 6 April 1839 in a "lonesome, dark, dirty prison." Between 20 and 25 March 1839, Joseph wrote two letters concerning his experience within these prison walls. Extracts of these letters were eventually included in the Doctrine and Covenants as D&C 121, 122, and 123.

48The Carthage Jail. D&C 135 relates the events of 27 June 1844. The account of the Martyrdom was written by John Taylor, who was imprisoned with Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, and Willard Richards and who was an eyewitness to the murders of Joseph and Hyrum.

48Handcuffs from Nauvoo. Prisoners who were considered dangerous were placed in handcuffs such as these.

48Liberty Jail Window Bars. The jail window measured one foot by two feet and was typical of the period.

48Liberty Jail Door. The Liberty Jail is approximately fourteen feet square. The interior consisted of an upper and a lower room. The lower room was the "dungeon" and was accessible only through a trapdoor. Joseph described the entrance to the jail as "a screeching iron door."

49Circuit Court Order. Pictured is the Daviess County circuit court order regarding the State of Missouri vs. Joseph Smith, Jr., et al. Joseph and others were brought before Judge King in November 1838 and were charged with several crimes and subsequently jailed in Liberty Jail.

49Joseph Smith's Letter from Liberty Jail. Joseph wrote this letter between 20-25 March 1839 to his family and to Church leaders living in Quincy, Illinois. The letter's inspired content became the basis for Doctrine and Covenants sections 121 through 123.

49Liberty Jail Stone Floor. Conditions in the jail were difficult, especially for Joseph Smith and his party because of their number. The jail was dark, damp, and cramped; dirty straw was the prisoners' only bedding.

The Liberty Jail. Severe conflicts broke out in 1838 between the Saints and the anti-Mormons. Joseph Smith was blamed for these confrontations, and he and other Church authorities were imprisoned in the Liberty Jail during the winter of 1838-39.
