Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Mercantile

As in any frontier town, the Saints' community seemed to revolve around the general store. It was here that the post office was usually located, and thus here news departed and was received, business deals were made, government functions took place, and goods were bartered.

52In the Mormon communities, the general store also had religious significance. Newel K. Whitney, who owned the general store in Kirtland, was instructed by the Lord to retain the store (D&C 63:42) and was later called to be a bishop and to keep the Lord's storehouse (D&C 72:9-10). Joseph Smith with his family boarded at the store. Whitney also had a store in Independence. At Joseph Smith's Red Brick Store in Nauvoo, numerous governmental and religious meetings were held. The inventories from stores in Nauvoo clearly show a trend toward ample and diversified physical possessions.

52Newel K. Whitney's Lap Desk. This desk was used by the storekeeper to fulfill his duties, which included writing contracts, lending money, and recording barters.

52Newel K. Whitney's Store Ledger Book. Two kinds of goods were available for trading at the store-local goods (usually farm products) and "imported" goods (usually goods that could not be produced in the community). Each transaction was recorded in the storekeeper's ledger book.

52Joseph Smith's Office Sign from the Red Brick Store. The general store was usually a two-story building that included an office for the storekeeper. Often, the storekeeper was a public official, and the community's business was handled at the store. The front of the store usually had two display windows with a door in the center. One window displayed merchandise for women, and the other window displayed articles for men.

53Steelyard Weigh Scale. Whether using small or large scales, the storekeeper sold a majority of his goods by weight.

53Nauvoo Blacksmith's Anvil. A farrier worked on horses and wagons, while a blacksmith produced other articles of steel and metal such as kitchen goods (swing cranes) or nails, which were available at the general store.

53Glass Pitcher. This pitcher is one of the typical products shipped from the East Coast or from Europe. Steamboats, ships, and canal boats brought a variety of items to Nauvoo and Kirtland for the Saints to consider purchasing. Among these items were beautiful furniture, china, glass, jewelry, medicines, and hardware.

53Soldering Iron from Nauvoo. A soldering iron was used by tinsmiths to seal joints that would allow kitchen ware to hold liquid.

53Willard Richards's Grooming Kit. Items such as this grooming kit were usually specially ordered from larger cities. Three months or longer were often required for such orders to arrive.

53Haun's Mill Face Wheel. This face wheel transferred the force from the waterwheel to the millstones. Milled grains were an indispensable part of the goods sold at the general store.
