Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Death and Burial

During the early period of Church history, an individual was usually born at home and often died at home. For most persons, life's natural rhythms occurred within the family setting. Many people died in their own beds, surrounded by family members who gathered around their loved ones. Burial was completed rapidly-this was before embalming was introduced as a typical burial procedure in America.

56For some, however, death and burial occurred in a different setting. Doctrine and Covenants section 135, the official announcement of the martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith, was included in the modern scriptures just a few months after the tragic events of June 1844.

56The Nauvoo Expositor. William and Wilson Law started a dissident newspaper in Nauvoo. Joseph Smith, as mayor, ruled the newspaper a nuisance and ordered it destroyed. This order led to the arrest and confinement of Joseph Smith in Carthage.

56Joseph Smith's and Hyrum Smith's Pistols. When the mob stormed Carthage Jail, Joseph was carrying the pepperbox pistol, and Hyrum was carrying the single-barrel pistol. Joseph and Hyrum used these weapons in an effort to fight off the mob.

56Alvin Smith's Tombstone. Family and friends were responsible for buying the coffin and then dressing the body and arranging the funeral. A sexton was the individual who maintained the cemetery and kept proper records. The sexton might also have been a stonecutter who produced tombstones. Alvin Smith, the second son of Joseph and Lucy Mack Smith, was buried in Palmyra, New York.

56Stephen Markham's Cane. This cane was used by John Taylor as he tried to fend off the muskets from being thrust through the prisoners' cell door.

57The Carthage Jail Door. The Carthage Jail was typical of the period. The jailer's residence was downstairs, and the upstairs contained the cells. The mob fired and fought its way through this door to murder Joseph and Hyrum.

57 John Taylor's Watch. This watch stopped a bullet from entering John Taylor's chest.

57Hyrum Smith's Blood-Stained Shirt. Hyrum was killed almost immediately when a musket ball hit him in the face.

57Mob Member's Powder Horn. The powder horn is inscribed "Warsaw regulators, the end of the Polygamist Joseph Smith kilt at Carthage, June 27, 1844."

57Hyrum Smith's and Joseph Smith's Death Masks. These original plaster impressions were taken by the Saints immediately after Joseph's and Hyrum's deaths to preserve a likeness of their physical appearance.

1844 Martyrdom Sampler. Mary Ann Broomhead made this sampler at the age of thirteen. She embroidered the verse with her hair.
