Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Photography and Art

Before photography was invented in 1839 and became accessible to the Saints in Nauvoo in 1844, the Saints relied on sketches, illustrations, and paintings to record events or likenesses of individuals. The sketches were more available and were less expensive than engraved plates for illustrations or a painting. Paintings were usually done with watercolors or oils. Several examples of each medium have survived.

58Daguerreotype (Copy) of the City of Nauvoo by Lucian Foster. Photography was invented in 1839 in the form of the daguerreotype. This unique medium allowed the preservation of the past through pictures. The first recorded photographs in Mormon history were taken by Lucian Foster in Nauvoo, Illinois. Foster arrived in Nauvoo on 27 April 1844. By 10 August 1844, he had established a photo studio and was taking landscape and portrait shots.

581842 American Photographic Camera. This wooden daguerreotype camera provided single exposures, approximately three by three inches. The first daguerreotype camera was constructed in 1839, and the camera pictured is patterned after the first model. The rear section of the camera can be moved to focus the object. A screw then can be tightened when the object is focused properly. The mirror at the extreme rear is at a 45-degree angle and served to reverse the image vertically, but not laterally. The camera was undoubtedly similar to one used by Lucian Foster in Nauvoo.

59Sketch of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Sketches were often done in preparation for a painting. However, at other times sketches were produced as a less expensive way of recording a person's likeness.

59Original Daguerreotype Plate of Eliza R. Snow. Daguerreotypes were popular with the Saints. Although the daguerreotypes were expensive, many Saints obtained their "likenesses" while in Nauvoo. Only a few have been preserved.

59Richards Family Silhouettes. Silhouettes were another less expensive form of recording a person's likeness. These two silhouettes were of Willard Richards's parents, Rhoda and Joseph Richards. Church historians believe Rhoda actually designed and cut the silhouettes.

Painting of Joseph Knight, Sr. Joseph Knight was an early disciple of the Church. One of the Church's earliest congregations was established in Colesville, New York, and met at the home of Joseph and Polly Knight. Having a painting made was usually too expensive and time consuming for the average individual.
