Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Pioneers and Trails

The neighboring towns around Nauvoo, Illinois-including their merchants, innkeepers, blacksmiths, saddlers, and the like-had never before seen a mass movement like the one they witnessed in 1846. The City of Joseph was alive with workshops-scattered throughout the city-as the Saints prepared to go west. Within a year, several communities around Winter Quarters, Nebraska, were established as workshops to help the Saints prepare for their migration to the Great Basin.

60The pioneers sold their property to raise money for the trip. The appropriate tools and goods had to be loaded into wagons and buggies. The decision concerning which items to take was difficult. Few beloved keepsakes, such as painted china or heavy tables with fine clawed feet, could be included in the load. Usually only the most indispensable items could be taken, and all other objects had to be sacrificed to lighten the load. The proper wagons, animals, and tools were necessary if the Saints were to arrive safely at their destination. D&C 136 of the Doctrine and Covenants, entitled "The Word and Will of the Lord," gave the pattern for the organization of the pioneers. The first vanguard company, consisting of 148 people and 72 wagons and carriages-pulled by 211 horses, mules, and oxen-arrived in the Great Basin in July 1847.

60Handcart Used by Mormon Pioneers. In 1856, financial stress led Church leaders to bring groups of Saints across the plains using handcarts. The handcarts were pushed or pulled and could carry from one to five hundred pounds.

60Brigham Young's Compass. A compass was an important instrument for any traveler on the plains.

60Heber C. Kimball's Pioneer Journal. The journal shows sketches along the pioneer trail drawn by Peter O. Hansen for Heber C. Kimball.

60Oxen Yoke. The first group of Saints crossed the plains in wagons. Most often, oxen were used to pull the wagons because oxen had greater endurance, did not need as much water as horses or mules, and could graze easily along the trail.

60 John Young's Flour Sack. Grain and other pioneer provisions were very important to the Saints leaving Winter Quarters. Many times they bartered clothes, furniture, and crops in return for these pioneer necessities.

60Orson Pratt's Telescope and Theodolyte with Box. John Taylor brought back these scientific instruments from England to help the Saints on their trek west. A theodolyte is a surveyor's tool, a necessity for laying out a new city.

60Brass Bucket. This bucket belonged to pioneer T. S. Allred. The pioneer journey was extremely arduous. Usually, only provisions that aided the Saints in crossing the plains were included for the journey. Items such as this bucket served many purposes.

60Brigham Young's Wagon. This was Brigham Young's wagon when he traveled from Winter Quarters to the Salt Lake Valley.

60J. McAllister's Wooden Leg. Great diversity existed among the Saints who crossed the plains. They came from a variety of social, economic, and ethnic backgrounds and had to manage countless and often severe physical and emotional challenges.

Thomas Bullock's Pioneer Company Journal. In his journal, Bullock lists the companies of the Vanguard Pioneer Company-symbolic of twelve men from each of the tribes of Israel.
