Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Illinois

Following their expulsion from Missouri, the Saints began to gather in Illinois (and on the eastern shore of the Mississippi River in Iowa) to build another temple city-Nauvoo. During the Nauvoo period (1839-46), very few written revelations were recorded and published. Earlier, the written revelations had been a major vehicle to establish the Church's organization. However, as Joseph Smith and the Saints matured in spiritual matters, a letter or spoken communication often sufficed to reveal the mind of the Lord. The 1840s, as well as bringing increased interest among the Saints, brought a sense of urgency to Joseph for expounding the doctrinal implications of the Restoration. As a result, Joseph's written revelations largely gave way to public sermons, official newspaper editorials, and letters.

90In Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, several written revelations were recorded. A few were official letters that eventually took on the authority of scripture, much like the New Testament Epistles did for the early Christian church (see D&C 124-29, 132, and 135).

90Edward Hunter Home, Nauvoo, Illinois. Because of threats of unlawful arrest, Joseph Smith was in hiding in the Hunter home. While there, he wrote a letter regarding baptism for the dead. This letter was incorporated into D&C 128.

90

Section Content

124 Major organizational revelation and official call to build the Nauvoo Temple

125 Saints to build up the Iowa settlements of Zarahemla and Nashville

126 For Brigham Young, who is commended for his labors and is called to remain at home

127 Letter from Joseph Smith regarding work for the dead

128 Letter from Joseph Smith regarding work for the dead

129 Three grand keys given to detect false spirits

132 Revelation on eternal sealings, including laws governing plural marriage

135 John Taylor's account of the murders of Joseph and Hyrum Smith

90An important Church branch was located at Ramus, Hancock County, Illinois. Here Joseph stopped on several occasions to visit family members, friends, and Church leaders. Some of Joseph's inspired instructions were canonized (see D&C 130-31).

90

Section Content

130 Instructions given by Joseph Smith on various subjects: Godhead, knowledge, and obedience

131 Instructions given by Joseph Smith on eternal marriage and more sure word of prophecy
