Richard Neitzel Holzapfel, T. Jeffery Cottle, Window to the Past: A Photographic Panorama of Early Church History and the Doctrine and Covenants ( 1993)

Salt Lake City, Utah

The Saints eventually gathered in the Rocky Mountains. Under the direction of Brigham Young, they expanded their geographical kingdom. During the remainder of the nineteenth century and in the twentieth century, many of the succeeding prophets' revelations and visions concerning the Church were recorded and published. A few were included as part of the Doctrine and Covenants, though some only temporarily.

91Manuscript of John Taylor's 1882 Revelation. L. John Nuttall, a secretary to President John Taylor, recorded an important administrative revelation given to President Taylor on 13 October 1882. The revelation called George Teasdale and Heber J. Grant to fill vacancies in the Quorum of the Twelve. This revelation, along with a second revelation recorded the following year, were first published in several foreign-language editions of the Doctrine and Covenants.

921888 Swedish Doctrine and Covenants with John Taylor's Revelation. Several foreign-language editions of the Doctrine and Covenants included two of President John Taylor's revelations (received in 1882 and 1883). These revelations were never officially canonized or published in an English-language edition of the Doctrine and Covenants.

92In Salt Lake City, Salt Lake County, Utah, three important items were received as revelations from the Lord (see D&C 138 and Official Declarations-l-2).

92

Section Content

138 Joseph F. Smith's 1918 "Vision of the Redemption of the Dead"

Official Wilford Woodruff's 1890 Manifesto on plural Declaration-1 marriage

Official The First Presidency's 1978 public announcement Declaration-2 regarding priesthood

921890 Manifesto Pamphlet. On 24 September 1890, President Wilford Woodruff showed fellow Church leaders a document regarding the ending of plural marriage. The document was approved and prepared for publication, and the Manifesto was released to the nation's newspapers on the following day. Eventually, this notice was published in the 1908 Doctrine and Covenants, and in 1981, historical background material was added.

93 James E. Talmage's Diary Entry for 31 October 1918. Following the Church's semiannual general conference, Joseph F. Smith submitted to the members of the First Presidency and Council of the Twelve a vision he received on 3 October 1918. They unanimously accepted it as revelation. In 1976, this vision was officially added to the standard works of the Church and soon afterward was designated as D&C 135 in the Doctrine and Covenants.

93The Book of Covenants, as the Doctrine and Covenants was called by the early Saints, stands as a witness that God and Jesus Christ live.

93Brigham Young noted, "Most of the revelations he [Joseph] received in the early part of his ministry pertained to what the few around him should do in this or in that case-when and how they should perform their duties" (in Journal of Discourses 6:171). Though given to individuals and in most cases in settings very different from the ones we live in today, the revelations are still relevant. In D&C 25, the Lord speaks specifically to Emma Smith but ends the revelation with the words, "And verily, verily, I say unto you, that this is my voice unto all. Amen." (D&C 25:16.) On another occasion, when calling Edward Partridge to serve, the Lord said, "And now this calling and commandment give I unto you concerning all men" (D&C 36:4). What makes scripture so enduring is the fact that applications are innumerable and span all distances of time and space. The Lord counsels his children to benefit from revelations and commandments (see D&C 70:3, 8).

93First Presidency Letter (8 June 1978). As a result of a revelation received in the Salt Lake Temple, Spencer W. Kimball and his counselors in the First Presidency issued a letter informing the Church and the world of a momentous change in Church policy. The letter was included in the 1981 Doctrine and Covenants under the title, "Official Declaration-2."

Although a vast majority of the revelations contained in the Doctrine and Covenants deal with the administration and organization of the Church during the first decade of its existence, these revelations remain the "foundation of the Church" and the "salvation of the world." As the Prophet Joseph Smith testified, they contain the "keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom" and the "riches of eternity." (Far West Record, 12-13 November 1831, Archives Division, Church Historical Department, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Salt Lake City, Utah; see Donald Q. Cannon and Lyndon W. Cook, eds., Far West Record [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Co., 1983], p. 32.)
