A ROMANTIC EPISODE--HEBER'S MARRIAGE WITH VILATE MURRAY--A SOLDIER AND
A FREE MASON--HIS STERN ARRAIGNMENT OF THE ANCIENT ORDER--DEATH OF
HEBER'S FATHER AND MOTHER.

Meanwhile, the sun of love dawned on his horizon. In one of his rides he chanced to pass, one warm summer day, through the little town of Victor, in the neighboring County of Ontario. Being thirsty, he drew rein near a house where a gentleman was at work in the yard, whom he asked for a drink of water. As the one addressed went to the well for a fresh bucketful of the cooling liquid, he called to his daughter Vilate, to fetch a glass from the house, which he filled and sent by her to the young stranger.

Heber was deeply impressed with the beauty and refined modestly of the young girl, whose name he understood to be "Milaty," and who was the flower and pet of her father's family. Lingering as long as propriety would permit, or the glass of water would hold out, he murmured his thanks and rode reluctantly away.

How suggestive this incident, of Whittier's pretty tale, "Maud Muller:"

    "Thanks" said the Judge, "a sweeter draught
    From a fairer hand was never quaffed."

It was not long before he again had "business" in Victor, and again became thirsty (?) just opposite the house where the young lady lived. Seeing the same gentleman in the yard whom he had accosted before, he hailed him and asked him for a cup of water. This time the owner of the premises offered to wait upon him in person, but Heber, with the blunt candor for which he was noted, nearly took the old gentleman's breath by saying, "if you please, sir, I'd rather My-Laty would bring it to me."

"Laty," as she was called in the house, accordingly appeared and did the honors as before, and returned blushing to meet the merriment and good-natured badinage of her sister and brothers.

She, however, was quite as favorably impressed with the handsome young stranger, as he with her. More visits followed, acquaintance ripened into love, and on the 7th of November, 1822, they were married.

Vilate Murray--for that was her name--was the youngest child of Roswell and Susannah Murray. She was born June 1st, 1806, in Florida, Montgomery County, New York. At the time of her marriage she was only in her seventeenth year.

The Murrays, like the Kimballs, were of Scotch descent, and came to America during the Seven Years' War. As a race they were gentle, kind-hearted, intelligent and refined. Through many of them ran a vein of poetry. Vilate herself wrote tender and beautiful verses. She was an ideal wife for a man like Heber C. Kimball, by whom she was ever cherished as the treasure that she was.

Heber was now past twenty-one, and fast developing into as fine a specimen of manhood as one might wish to behold. Tall and powerful of frame, with piercing black eyes that seemed to read one through, and before whose searching gaze the guilty could not choose but quail, he moved with a stateliness and majesty all his own, as far removed from haughtiness and vain pride, as he from the sphere of the upstart who mistakes scorn for dignity, and an overbearing manner as an evidence of gentle blood.

Heber C. Kimball was a humble man, and in his humility, no less than his kingly stature, consisted his dignity, and no small share of his greatness. It was his intelligence, earnestness, simplicity, sublime faith and unwavering integrity to principle that made him great, not the apparel he wore, nor the mortal clay in which his spirit was clothed. Nevertheless, nature had given him a noble presence in the flesh, worthy the godlike stature of his spirit.

    "A combination and a form, indeed,
    Where every God did seem to set his seal
    To give the world assurance of a man."

The son and grandson of a soldier, he had early enrolled in an independent horse company of the New York State militia. Under Captain Sawyer, of East Bloomfield, and his successor in command, he trained fourteen years; one year more would have exempted him from further military service. He remarks, with honest pride, that he was never brought before a court martial or found delinquent in his duty.

Heber was also a Free Mason. In 1823 he received the first three degrees of masonry in the lodge at Victor. The year following, himself and five others petitioned the chapter at Canandaigua, the county seat of Ontario County, for the degrees up to the Royal Arch. The petition was favorably considered, but before it could be acted upon the Morgan anti-mason riot broke out, and the Masonic Hall, where the chapter met, was burned by the mob and all the records consumed.

Says Heber, "There are thousands of Masons who lived in those days, who are well aware of the persecution and unjust proceedings which were heaped upon them by the anti-Masons; not as many as three of us could meet together, unless in secret, without being mobbed.

"I have been as true as an angel from the heavens to the covenants I made in the lodge at Victor.

"No man was admitted into a lodge in those days except he bore a good moral character, and was a man of steady habits; and a man would be suspected for getting drunk, or any other immoral conduct. I wish that all men were masons and would live up to their profession; then the world would be in a much better state than it is now."

Commenting on the degeneracy of the Ancient Order--the old, old story of the persecuted becoming persecutors--he continues:

"I have been driven from my houses and possessions, with many of my brethren belonging to that fraternity, five times, by mobs led by some of their leading men. Hyrum Smith received the first three degrees of masonry in Ontario County, New York. Joseph and Hyrum Smith were Master Masons, yet they were massacred through the instrumentality of some of the leading men of that fraternity, and not one soul of them has ever stepped forth to administer help to me or my brethren belonging to the Masonic Institution, or to render us assistance, although bound under the strongest obligations to be true and faithful to each other in every case and under every circumstance, the commission of crime excepted."

Yes, Masons, it is said, were even among the mob that murdered Joseph and Hyrum in Carthage Jail. Joseph, leaping the fatal window, gave the masonic signal of distress. The answer was the roar of his murderers' muskets and the deadly balls that pierced his heart.

Heber continued to prosper in business, working in his pottery in summer, and at his forge in winter. He purchased land, built houses, planted orchards, and otherwise "situated himself to live comfortably."

In the spring of 1825, he gave his father a home with him in Mendon. The old gentleman was now a widower, his wife, Heber's mother, having died in February, 1824, at West Bloomfield, of consumption. Her husband survived her a little over a twelve-month, when he, too, fell a victim to the same malady.

It is a coincidence worthy of note that the deaths of Heber and Vilate were also about one year apart, she passing away first, and he, like his father, following soon the footsteps of his beloved partner to the spirit land.

We have traced his life's record through its initial stages. He was now fairly on the threshold of his remarkable career.
