THE REDEMPTION OF ZION--ENOCH'S CITY TO RETURN--OBJECT OF THE UNITED
ORDER--CAUSE OF THE JACKSON COUNTY EXPULSION--THE WHEAT FROM THE
CHAFF.

The redemption of Zion! The building of the new Jerusalem!

Theme of the ancient prophets and glory of the latter days!

Such was the sublime mission given to the Saints of the Most High. Thus came the word of the Lord concerning it, March, 1831:

    "Wherefore, I, the Lord, have said, gather ye out from the eastern
    lands, assemble ye yourselves together ye elders of my Church; go
    ye forth into the western countries; * *

    "And with one heart and with one mind, gather up your riches that
    ye may purchase an inheritance which shall hereafter be appointed
    unto you,

    "And it shall be called the New Jerusalem, a land of peace, a city
    of refuge, a place of safety for the Saints of the Most High God;

    "And the glory of the Lord shall be there, and the terror of the
    Lord also shall be there, insomuch that the wicked will not come
    unto it, and it shall be called Zion.

    "And it shall come to pass, among the wicked, that every man that
    will not take his sword against his neighbor, must needs flee unto
    Zion for safety.

    "And there shall be gathered unto it out of every nation under
    heaven; and it shall be the only people that shall not be at war
    one with another.

    "And it shall be said among the wicked, let us not go up to battle
    against Zion, for the inhabitants of Zion are terrible; wherefore
    we cannot stand.

    "And it shall come to pass that the righteous shall be gathered
    out from among all nations, and shall come to Zion, singing with
    songs of everlasting joy."

With this glorious object in view, this sublime motive firing their souls and filling their hearts with holy zeal, the Saints, in the summer of 1831, had commenced gathering upon the land of Zion--Jackson County, Missouri, the chosen site of the great city and temple of God. Their purpose, to fulfil prophecy, to found the modern Zion, New Jerusalem, capital city of the kingdom of God. A counterpart of the Zion of Enoch, sanctified of old and taken into the heavens, to return in latter times as a leaven of righteousness, to leaven this lump of clay, the mother earth of our mortality, and make it like unto itself, and in due time a glorified planet, purified, redeemed, and from sin forever free.

To prepare the world for that supreme hour "when the Lord shall bring again Zion," was and is the mission of the Saints of latter days. And this that the scripture might be fulfilled, which says:

    "The Lord hath brought down Zion from above.

    "The Lord hath brought up Zion from beneath.

    "The earth hath travailed and brought forth her strength:

    "And truth is established in her bowels:

    "And the heavens have smiled upon her:

    "And she is clothed with the glory of her God:

    "For he stands in the midst of his people."

The meeting of the Zions! The marriage of the worlds! Zion from beneath, the type of truth from earth, embracing Zion from above, the symbol of righteousness from heaven.

"And they twain shall be one!"

Preparatory to this miraculous event, and indeed to render it possible, the order of Enoch, the system of divine economy whereby the Zion of the ancients was redeemed and sanctified, had been newly revealed to the Zion-builders of the last days.

What says Moses of Enoch and his city?

    "And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one
    heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no
    poor among them."

Oh, the sweetness of those simple words! Oh, the sublimity of the picture they portray! Liberty, equality, fraternity! This is Zion--THE
PURE IN HEART!

But the Saints in Jackson County, Missouri, were not all that the Lord requires of a people chosen to execute a purpose so sacred, so sublime. "There were jarrings, and contentions, and envyings, and strifes, and lustful and covetous desires among them; therefore by these things they polluted their inheritances." Then was the lash of the Philistine applied, and they were driven forth from the goodly land. Satan hath his mission, as well as Christ.

Be it not inferred, however, that these hapless victims of mobocratic tyranny were utterly wicked and depraved, or that all were equally culpable in the eyes of Him, who, to punish the transgressors, permitted their enemies to come against them. With all their faults they were better far than their oppressors, more than the peers, in every Christian virtue, of the people of the world around them. Yet, judged by the higher law, the Gospel standard, which the world had not received, and were not under the same obligation to obey, these "children of the Light" were found remiss in many things.

The Kingdom of heaven is likened unto a field of grain, gathered unto the threshing-floor. The purpose of divine punishment is to purify. Upon the wheat and the chaff, alike, fell the iron flail of persecution.
