THE ZION'S CAMP EXPEDITION--JOSEPH AS A PROPHET-GENERAL--FINDING OF
THE BONES OF ZELPH, THE ANCIENT--REBELLION IN THE CAMP--JOSEPH
PREDICTS A SCOURGE--HEBER'S FAILURE AS A LAUNDERER--ZION'S CAMP SAVED
BY A STORM.

"Gather up the strength of my house, and go up and redeem Zion!" Such was the burden of God's command to Joseph and his brethren in Kirtland. Such was their interpretation of the divine message and call.

Bidding farewell to his family and friends, whom he hardly dared hope he would ever meet again in the flesh, Heber enrolled himself in the little band of heroes who set out from Kirtland early in May, 1834. They were about one hundred strong, well armed and equipped, and were led by the Prophet Joseph in person. Subsequently their number increased to two hundred and five souls. But Heber will tell his own story of that eventful pilgrimage. Says he:

"Brother Joseph received a revelation concerning the redemption of Zion, part of which remains to be fulfilled. He sent messengers to the east and to the west and to the north and to the south, to gather up the Elders, and he gathered together as many of the brethren as he conveniently could, with what means they could spare, to go up to Zion, to render all the assistance that we could to our afflicted brethren. We gathered clothing and other necessaries to carry up to our brethren and sisters who had been plundered; and putting our horses to the wagons, and taking our firelocks and ammunition, we started on our journey; leaving only Oliver Cowdery, Sidney Rigdon and a few aged workmen who were engaged on the temple; so that there were very few men left in Kirtland. Our wagons were about full with baggage, etc., consequently we had to travel on foot.

"We started on the 5th of May, and truly this was a solemn morning to me. I took leave of my wife and children and friends, not knowing whether I would see them again in the flesh, as myself and brethren were threatened both in that country and in Missouri by enemies, that they would destroy us and exterminate us from the land.

"There were about one hundred brethren in our company who started for Zion. These brethren were nearly all young men, and nearly all Elders, Priests, Teachers and Deacons. The second day we arrived at New Portage, being about forty miles, at which place on the 7th we made regulations for traveling, and appointed a paymaster, whose name was Frederick G. Williams, and put all our moneys into a general fund. Some of the brethren had considerable, and others had little or none, yet all became equal. While here one of my horses received a kick from another horse, which obliged me to trade away my span, and get another span of older horses, from Jonathan Taylor. We then proceeded on our journey twelve miles to the Chippeway River. Here we pitched our tents under a fine grove.

"The next day we were divided into companies of twelve each, and captains were appointed over each company. I organized my company in the following manner, appointing two to attend to cooking, two to see that fires were made, two to prepare the tent at night and likewise the bedding, and also to strike the tent each morning, two to fetch and provide water, one to do the running, two to attend the horses, see that the wagon was greased and everything prepared for starting. My business was to see that the company was provided for, and that all things were done in order. Our living generally was very good, being able to buy bread from the bakers or inhabitants on the way through the settled part of the country. After this we purchased flour and had to bake our own bread. We sometimes had to live on Johnny cake and corn dodger, and sometimes our living was scant. Every night before we went to bed we united in our tent and offered up our prayers before the Lord for protection. This was done by all the companies, at the sound of a trumpet; and at the sound of a trumpet in the morning, every man was upon his knees, each one being called upon in his turn to be mouth in prayer. The same order was attended to in each tent. There were general officers appointed over the company, viz: Joseph Smith, commander; Dr. F. G. Williams, quartermaster and historian of the camp; Zerubbabel Snow and Nathan Tanner, commissaries of subsistence; Sylvester Smith, adjutant; and Roger Orton, captain of the guard.

"On the 8th we started on our journey, and on Saturday the 10th we passed through Mansfield, and camped for the Sabbath in Richfield. On Sunday the 11th Brother Sylvester Smith preached and the sacrament of bread and wine was administered to the company. On Monday the 12th we crossed over the Sandusky plains, and through the Indian settlements. We then passed through a long range of beech woods where the roads were very bad. In many instances we had to fasten ropes to the wagons to haul them out of the sloughs and mud holes by hand. While passing through the woods the brethren scattered on each side of the road and went to hunting for wild game. We came to Belle Fontaine, where we first discovered refractory feelings in Sylvester Smith.

"We passed through a very pleasant country to Dayton, Ohio, where we crossed the Miami river, which is a very beautiful stream; the water being only about two and a half feet deep, most of the brethren waded it. We arrived at this place on Friday the 16th. The brethren were in good spirits, and the Lord was with us. On Saturday the 17th we passed into Indiana, just over the line betwixt the States of Ohio and Indiana, where we camped for the Sabbath, having traveled forty miles that day; our feet were very sore and blistered, and our stockings were wet with blood, the weather being very warm. I walked most of the journey, letting the lame and footsore ride in my stead. I frequently invited the Prophet to ride, seeing him lame and footsore. On such occasions he would bless me and my team with a hearty good will. My team performed the journey very well.

"During the night a spy from the enemy attempted to get into our camp, but was stopped by the guard. We had our sentinels or guards appointed every night, on account of spies continually harrassing us. This evening there was quite a difficulty between some of the brethren and Sylvester Smith, on occasion of which Brother Joseph was called to decide the matter. Finding quite a rebellious spirit in Sylvester Smith, and to some extent in others, he said they would meet with misfortunes, difficulties and hindrances, 'and you will know it before you leave this place;' exhorting them to humble themselves before the Lord, and become united, that they might not be scourged. A very singular occurrence took place that night and the next day, concerning our teams. On the following morning when we arose we found almost every horse in the camp so badly foundered that we could scarcely lead them a few rods to the water. The brethren then deeply realized the effects of discord. When Brother Joseph learned the fact he exclaimed to the brethren that for a witness that God overruled and had His eye upon them, that all those who would humble themselves before the Lord should know that the hand of God was in this misfortune, and their horses should be restored to health immediately; and by twelve o'clock the same day the horses were as nimble as ever, with the exception of one of Sylvester Smith's which soon afterwards died.

"May 21st we passed through Indianapolis, the capital of Indiana, where we crossed White River. The teams forded the river, and most of the brethren crossed over the new bridge which was unfinished. We had been threatened by our enemies that we should not go through the town, but we passed through unmolested. Everything appeared to be in perfect silence as we went through, although the people looked aghast as if fear had come upon them. At night we camped on an open spot, the top of an eminence. Here we lost one horse.

"On Sunday, the 25th, we arrived at the edge of Illinois; we had no meeting, but attended to washing and baking to prepare for our journey. On the 26th we resumed our march. At night we were alarmed by the continual threatening of our enemies. I would here remark that notwithstanding so many threats were thrown out against us, we did not fear, nor hesitate to proceed on our journey, for God was with us, and angels went before us, and we had no fear of either men or devils. This we know because they (the angels) were seen. On Tuesday we came to the Okaw, a fork of the Kaskaskia River, where we found two canoes; we lashed them together and they served as a kind of ferry boat. We took our baggage out of our wagons, put it on board and ferried it across; then took our wagons and horses, and swam them across, and when they got to the opposite shore the brethren fastened ropes into the tongues of the wagons and helped the horses and wagons out of the river. Others felled trees and laid them across the river, and thus helped themselves over. In this way we all crossed in safety. Wednesday, the 28th, we reached the township of Decatur, where we lost another horse. Saturday the 31st, at night, we camped one mile from Jacksonville and prepared for the Sabbath.

"On Sunday, June 1st, we had preaching all day, and many of the inhabitants of the town came out to hear. Brother John S. Carter preached in the morning. By this time the inhabitants began to flock down in companies to hear the preaching, as they understood we were professors of religion and had a meeting in the morning. Brother Joseph then proposed that some of the brethren should set forth different portions of the Gospel in their discourses. He called upon Brother Joseph Young to preach upon the principles of free salvation. He then called upon Brother Brigham Young to speak, who set forth baptism as essential to salvation. He was followed by Brother Orson Hyde, who proved by the scriptures that baptism was for the remission of sins. Lyman E. Johnson spoke at some length upon the necessity of men being upright in their walk, and keeping the Sabbath day holy. Brother Orson Pratt delivered an excellent discourse on the principles of the final restoration of all things. The services of the day were concluded by a powerful exhortation from Eleazer Miller. His voice was said to be heard a mile and a half. I would here remark concerning Brother Eleazer Miller, who was one of the first that brought the Gospel to us at Mendon, New York: when he used to retire to a little grove near my house for secret prayer, he would get so filled with the Spirit and the power of the Holy Ghost that he would burst out in a loud voice so that he was heard by the surrounding inhabitants for more than a mile. After the services were over, many strangers were in our camp making remarks upon the preaching which they had heard. They said that Brother Joseph Young, by his preaching, they should judge was a Methodist. They thought Brother Brigham Young was a close communion Baptist. Brother Orson Hyde they supposed was a Campbellite or reformed Baptist. Brother Lyman E. Johnson they supposed was a Presbyterian, and Brother Orson Pratt a Restorationer. They enquired if we all belonged to one denomination. The answer was, we were some of us Baptists, some Methodists, some Presbyterians, some Cambellites, some Restorationers, etc.

"On Monday morning when we passed through Jacksonville, they undertook to count us; and I heard one man say, who stood in the door of a cabinet shop, that he had counted a little rising of five hundred, but he could not tell how many there were. This thing was attempted many times in villages and towns as we passed through, but the people were never able to ascertain our number.

"While traveling in Indiana some spies came into our camp. While we were eating dinner on the 21st of May, three gentlemen came riding up on very fine looking horses and commenced their enquiries of various ones concerning our traveling in so large a body, asking where we were from, and where we were going. The reply was as usual, some from Maine, some from New York, some from Massachusetts, some from Ohio, and some replied, we are from the east, and as soon as we have done eating we shall be going to the west again. They then addressed themselves to Dr. Williams, to see if they could find out who the leader of the camp was. The doctor replied, we have no one in particular. They asked if we had not a general to take lead of the company. The reply was, no one in particular. But, said they, is there not some one among you whom you call your captain, or leader, or superior to the rest? He answered, sometimes one, and sometimes another, takes charge of the company so as to not throw the burden upon any one in particular. These same spies, who had come from the west, passed us that same day, and the next.

"On Monday, June 2nd, we crossed the Illinois River. The enemy had threatened that we should not pass over, but we were ferried across without any difficulty. Here we were counted by the ferryman and he declared we were five hundred in number, although there were only about one hundred and fifty of us. Our company had increased since we started from Kirtland in consequence of many having volunteered and joined us from the different branches of the Church through which we had passed on our journey. We camped on the west bank of the river until the next day.

"On Tuesday, the 3d, several of us went up with the Prophet to the top of a mound on the bank of the Illinois River, which was several hundred feet above the river, and from the summit we had a pleasant view of the surrounding country. We could overlook the tops of the trees and the meadow or prairie on each side the river as far as our eyes could extend, which was one of the most pleasant scenes I ever beheld. On the top of this mound there was the appearance of three altars, which had been built of stone, one above the other, according to the ancient order; and the ground was strewn with human bones. This caused in us very peculiar feelings, to see the bones of our fellow creatures scattered in this manner,--fellow creatures who had been slain in ages past. We felt prompted to dig down into the mound, and sending for a shovel and hoe, we proceeded to move away the earth. At about one foot in depth we discovered the skeleton of a man, almost entire; and between two of his ribs we found an Indian arrow, which had evidently been the cause of his death. We took the leg and thigh bones and carried them to Clay County. All four appeared sound. Brother Brigham Young has yet the arrow in his possession. It was a common thing to find bones thus bleaching upon the earth in that country.

"The same day we pursued our journey. While on our way we felt anxious to know who the person was who had been killed by that arrow. It was made known to Joseph that he had been an officer who fell in battle, in the last destruction among the Lamanites, and his name was Zelph. This caused us to rejoice much, to think that God was so mindful of us as to show these things to His servant. Brother Joseph had enquired of the Lord and it was made known to him in a vision.

"While we were refreshing ourselves and teams, about the middle of the day, Brother Joseph got up in a wagon and said he would deliver a prophecy. After giving the brethren much good advice, he exhorted them to faithfulness and humility, and said the Lord had told him that there would be a scourge come upon the camp in consequence of the fractious and unruly spirits that appeared among them, and they would die like sheep with the rot; still if they would repent and humble themselves before the Lord, the scourge in a great measure might be turned away; 'but, as the Lord lives, this camp will suffer for giving way to their unruly temper;' which afterwards actually did take place to the sorrow of the brethren.

"The same day when we had got within one mile of the Snye, we came to a very beautiful little town called Atlas. Here we found honey, for the first time on our journey, that we could buy. We purchased about two-thirds of a barrel. We went down to the Snye and crossed over that night in a ferry boat and camped for the night on the west bank. There was a great excitement in the country through which we had passed, and also ahead of us; the mob threatened to stop us; guns were fired in almost every direction through the night.

"We pursued our journey on the 4th and camped on the bank of the Mississippi River. Here we were somewhat afflicted, and the enemy threatened much that we should not cross over the river out of Illinois into Missouri. It took us two days to cross the river, as we had but one ferry boat, and the river was one mile and a half wide. While some were crossing others spent their time in hunting, fishing, etc. When we had all got over we camped about one mile from the little town of Louisiana, in a beautiful oak grove, immediately on the bank of the river.

"At this place there were some feelings of hostility again manifested by Sylvester Smith, in consequence of a dog growling at him while he was marching his company up to the camp, he being the last that came over the river. The next morning Brother Joseph said that he would descend to the spirit that was manifested by some of the brethren to show them the folly of their wickedness. He rose up and commenced by saying, 'If any man insults me, or abuses me, I will stand in my own defence at the expense of my life; and if a dog growl at me, I will let him know that I am his master.' At this moment Sylvester Smith, who had just returned from where he had turned out his horses to feed, came up, and hearing Brother Joseph make those remarks said, 'If that dog bites me I'll kill him.' Brother Joseph turned to Sylvester and said, 'If you kill that dog I'll whip you;' and then went on to show the brethren how wicked and unchristian-like such conduct appeared before the eyes of truth and justice.

"On Friday, the 6th, we resumed our journey. On Saturday night we camped among our brethren at Salt River, in the Allred settlement, in a piece of woods by a beautiful spring of water, and prepared for the Sabbath. On the Sabbath we had preaching. We remained here several days, washing our clothes and preparing to resume our journey. Here we were joined by Hyrum Smith and Lyman Wight, with another company. The camp now numbered two hundred and five men, all armed and equipped. It was delightful to see the company, for they were all young men, with one or two exceptions, and all in good spirits.

"We were now reorganized in the following order: Joseph Smith was acknowledged commander-in-chief; Lyman Wight was chosen general of the camp; then Brother Joseph chose twenty men for his life guard, I being one of them; Brother George A. Smith was Brother Joseph's armor-bearer; Hyrum Smith was chosen captain of the life guard; the remainder of the camp was organized into companies as before stated. We had twenty-five wagons, two horses on each, and on some three. One day while we remained here our general marched us out on a large prairie. He then proceeded to inspect us, examine our firelocks, etc. Afterwards we were marched in platoons, and, an object being placed, we discharged our pieces in order to try them. We were drilled about half a day, and then returned to the camp.

"My first attempt at washing my clothes took place at Salt River. My shirts being extremely dirty, I put them into a kettle of water and boiled them for about two hours, having observed that women who washed boiled their clothes, and I supposed by so doing they boiled out the dirt; I then took them and washed them, endeavoring to imitate a woman washing as near as I could. I rubbed the clothes with my knuckles instead of the palm of my hand, and rubbed the skin off so that my hands were very sore for several days. My attempts were vain in trying to get the dirt out of the clothes. I wondered at this considerably, and scolded and fretted because I could not get the dirt out, and finally gave it up, and wrung them and hung them out to dry. Having no flat-irons to iron them, I took them to Sisters Hollbrook and Ripley to get them ironed. When they saw them they said I had not washed my clothes. I told them I had done my best, and although I had boiled them two hours before washing, and had washed them so faithfully that I had taken the skin off my knuckles, still I had not been successful in getting the dirt out. They laughed heartily, and informed me that by boiling before washing I had boiled the dirt into them.

"On the 12th we again resumed our march; many of the inhabitants went with us several miles; they seemed to have much respect for us. We traveled about fourteen miles and camped on a large prairie.

"We tarried in the middle of this prairie, which was about twenty-eight miles across, on account of a rupture which took place in the camp. Here F. G. Williams and Roger Orton received a very severe chastisement from Brother Joseph for not obeying orders. In this place further regulations were made in regard to the organization of the camp.

"A day or two after this, Bishop Partridge met us, direct from Clay County, as we were camping on the bank of the Wacondah River, in the woods. We received much information from Brother Partridge concerning the hostile feelings and prejudices that existed against us in all quarters of Missouri. It gave us great satisfaction to receive intelligence from him, as we were in peril and threatened all the time. I will here mention one circumstance that transpired during our stay at this place, which was that of Brother Lyman Wight baptizing Dean Gould, as he was not previously a member of the Church, yet had accompanied us all the way from Kirtland.

"We pursued our journey, following the bank of the river, for several miles. As we left the river and came into a very beautiful prairie, Brother William Smith killed a very large deer, which made us some very nourishing soup, and added to our comfort considerably.

"On Wednesday, the 18th, at night, we camped one mile from the town of Richmond, Ray County. On Thursday, the 19th, we arose as soon as it was light and passed through the town before the inhabitants were up. As Luke Johnson and others were passing through before the teams came along, Brother Luke observed a black woman in a gentleman's garden near the road. She beckoned to him and said, 'come here massa.' She was evidently much agitated in her feelings. He went up to the fence and she said to him, 'there is a company of men lying in wait here who are calculating to kill you this morning as you pass through.' This was nothing new to us as we had been continually threatened through the whole journey, and death and destruction seemed to await us daily. This day we only traveled about fifteen miles. One wagon broke down and the wheels ran off from another, and there seemed to be many things to hinder our progress, although we strove with all diligence to speed our way forward. Our intentions were when we started to go through to Clay County that day; but all in vain.

"This night we camped on an elevated piece of land between two branches of the Fishing River. Just as we halted and were making preparations for the night, five men rode into the camp and told us we should see hell before morning, and such horrible oaths as came from their lips I never heard before. They told us that sixty men were coming from Richmond, who had sworn to destroy us, also seventy more were coming from Clay County, to assist in our destruction. These men were black with passion, and armed with guns, and the whole country was in a rage against us, and nothing but the power of God could save us. All this time the weather was pleasant. Soon after these men left us we discovered a small black cloud rising in the west, and not more than twenty minutes passed away before it began to rain and hail; but we had very little hail in our camp. All around us the hail was heavy; some of the hailstones, or rather lumps of ice, were as large as hens' eggs. The thunder rolled with awful majesty, and the red lightnings flashed through the horizon, making it so light that I could see to pick up a pin almost any time through the night. The earth quaked and trembled, and there being no cessation it seemed as though the Almighty had issued forth his mandate of vengeance. The wind was so terrible that many of our tents were blown down. We were not able to hold them up; but there being an old meeting house close at hand, many of us fled there to secure ourselves from the storm. Many trees were blown down, and others were twisted and wrung like a withe. The mob came to the river two miles from us, but the river had risen to that height that they were obliged to stop without crossing over. The hail fell so heavily upon them that it beat holes in their hats, and in some instances even broke the stocks off their guns; their horses, being frightened, fled, leaving the riders on the ground. Their powder was wet, and it was evident that the Almighty fought in our defense. This night the river raised forty feet.

"In the morning I went to the river in company with Brother Joseph Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young and others, as we had it in contemplation to proceed that morning to Liberty, Clay County; but we could not continue our journey as there was no way to cross the river. It was then overflowing its banks; and I have seen the river since and proved that it was fully forty feet from the top of its banks to the bottom. Previous to this rain falling, it was no more than ankle deep. Such a time never was known by us before; still we felt calm all night, and the Lord was with us. The water was ankle deep to us all night, even on that eminence, so we could not sleep.

"At this place W. W. Phelps, S. W. Denton, John Corrill and many others from Liberty joined us; from whom we received much information from the brethren who had been driven from Jackson County, and learned of the fixed determination of our enemies to drive or exterminate them from that county.

"The next day, when we moved into the country we saw that the hail had destroyed the crops, and we saw that it had come in some directions within a mile and in other directions within a half mile of our camp. After passing a short distance the ground was literally covered with branches of the trees which had been cut off by the hail. We went a distance of five miles on the prairie to get food for our horses and also to get some provisions for ourselves, and to get into some secure place where we could defend ourselves from the rage of the enemy. We stayed there three or four days, until the rage of the people was somewhat allayed.

"On the 21st Colonel Sconce and two other leading men from Ray County came to see us, desiring to know what our intentions were, 'for,' said he, 'I see that there is an almighty power that protects this people, for I started from Richmond, Ray County, with a company of armed men, having a fixed determination to destroy you, but was kept back by the storm and was not able to reach you.' When he came into camp he was seized with such a trembling that he was obliged to sit down in order to compose himself. When he desired to know what our intentions were, Brother Joseph arose and began to speak; and the power of God rested upon him. He gave a relation of the sufferings of our people in Jackson County, and also many of our persecutions and what we had suffered from our enemies for our religion; and that we had come one thousand miles to assist our brethren, to bring them clothing, and to reinstate them upon their own lands; that we had no intentions to molest or injure any people, but only to administer to the wants of our afflicted brethren; and that the evil reports which were circulated about us were false, and were circulated by our enemies to get us destroyed.

"After he had finished speaking, the power of which melted them into compassion, they arose and offered him their hands, and said they would use their influence to allay the excitement which everywhere prevailed against us. They accordingly went forth and rode day and night to pacify the people. They wept because they saw we were an afflicted people, and that our intentions were pure.

"The next day the sheriff of that county, named Neil Gilliam, came to deliver a short address to us. We formed into companies and marched into a grove a little distance from the camp, and there formed ourselves into a circle, and sat down upon the ground. Previous to Mr. Gilliam's address he (Gilliam) said, I have heard much concerning Joseph Smith, and I have been informed that he is in your camp; if he is here I would like to see him.' Brother Joseph arose and said 'I am the man.' This was the first time he was made known during the journey of one thousand miles. Mr. Gilliam then arose and gave us some instructions concerning the manners and customs of the people, their disposition, etc., and what course we should take in order to gain their favor and protection.

"On the Sabbath day while we were in this place, being in want of salt, I took it upon me to go to some of the inhabitants and get some. Brother Cyrus Smalling took his rifle and went along with me. After passing through a path enclosed by hazel bushes, about two miles from the camp, I discovered a deer a little distance ahead of us standing across the path. I made motions to Brother Smalling, and he, drawing up his rifle over my shoulder, which served for a rest, fired and hit the deer just behind the shoulder. It ran a few rods and fell. We cut a pole and fastening the deer on it, got it on our shoulders and carried it along to camp, when we dressed it and divided it among the different companies, and had an excellent feast.

"Here Brothers Ezra Thayer and Thomas Hayes were taken sick with the cholera. We left them there, and also brother Joseph Hancock, who had been taken with the cholera during the storm, and who was the first person attacked with it. Brother Joseph called the camp together, and told us that in consequence of the disobedience of some who had not been willing to listen to his words, but had been rebellious, God had decreed that sickness should come upon us, and we should die like sheep with the rot; and said he, 'I am sorry, but I cannot help it.' When he spake these things it pierced me like a dart, having a testimony that so it would be."
