BUILDING THE TEMPLE--JOSEPH AND HEBER WORKING IN THE QUARRY--THE
THEOLOGICAL SCHOOL--A LESSON ON FAITH--CALL OF THE TWELVE--HEBER C.
KIMBALL ORDAINED AN APOSTLE.

The work now engaging, almost exclusively, the attention of the Church in Kirtland, was the building of the Temple. This edifice was begun in June, 1833. The walls were partly reared when, in the year following, the expedition for the relief of the Missouri Saints took from Kirtland nearly all the able-bodied men whose means and energies, otherwise, would have been employed upon the Lord's House.

But the sacred enterprise was not suffered to languish. The elders left in charge were untiring in their efforts to promote the work. The brethren labored day and night, and the sisters--among the foremost, as ever, in a good cause--were not one whit behind. Says Heber:

"Our women were engaged in knitting and spinning, in order to clothe those who were laboring at the building; and the Lord only knows the scenes of poverty, tribulation and distress which we passed through to accomplish it. My wife had toiled all summer in lending her aid towards its accomplishment. She took a hundred pounds of wool to spin on shares, which, with the assistance of a girl, she spun, in order to furnish clothing for those engaged in building the temple; and although she had the privilege of keeping half the quantity of wool for herself, as a recompense for her labor, she did not reserve even so much as would make a pair of stockings, but gave it for those who were laboring at the house of the Lord. She spun and wove, and got the cloth dressed and cut and made up into garments, and gave them to the laborers on the temple. Almost all the sisters in Kirtland labored in knitting, sewing, spinning, etc., for the same purpose; while we went up to Missouri to endeavor to reinstate our brethren on the lands from which they had been driven.

"Elder Rigdon, when addressing the brethren upon the importance of building this house, spake to this effect: That we should use every effort to accomplish this building by the time appointed; if we did the Lord would accept it at our hands; and on it depends the salvation of the Church, and also of the world. Looking at the sufferings and poverty of the Church, he frequently went upon the walls of the building, both by night and day, and wept, crying aloud to the Almighty to send means whereby we might accomplish the building.

"After we returned from our journey to the West, the whole Church united in this great undertaking, and every man lent a helping hand. Those who had not teams went to work in the stone quarry and prepared the stones for drawing to the house.

"The Prophet, being our foreman, would put on his tow frock and tow pantaloons and go into the quarry. The Presidency, High Priests and Elders all alike assisting. Those who had teams assisted in drawing the stone to the house. These all laboring one day in the week, brought as many stones to the house as supplied the masons through the whole week. We continued in this manner until the walls of the house were reared. The committee who were appointed by revelation to superintend the building were Hyrum Smith, Reynolds Cahoon and Jared Carter. They used every exertion in their power to forward the work."

During the winter of 1834-5, Heber attended the theological school established in Kirtland. Here originated the lectures on faith, contained in the book of Doctrine and Covenants. It was the custom, at these meetings, to call upon a certain number to speak for the edification of the others. Heber, on one occasion, was invited to address them on the subject of faith. Every passage of scripture bearing on the theme having been quoted by previous speakers, and not wishing to repeat what they had said, he was left to depend entirely upon the Spirit. He began by relating the following anecdote, the incident of which had occurred in his own family:

"My wife, one day, when going out on a visit, gave my daughter Helen Mar charge not to touch the dishes, for if she broke any during her absence she would give her a whipping when she returned. While my wife was absent my daughter broke a number of the dishes by letting the table leaf fall, and then she went out under an apple tree and prayed that her mother's heart might be softened, that when she returned she might not whip her. Her mother was very punctual when she made a promise to her children, to fulfill it, and when she returned she undertook, as a duty, to carry this promise into effect. She retired with her into her room, but found herself powerless to chastise her; her heart was so softened that it was impossible for her to raise her hand against the child. Afterwards, Helen told her mother she had prayed to the Lord that she might not whip her."

Heber paused in his simple narrative. Tears glistened in the eyes of his hearers; the Prophet Joseph was weeping like a child. He told the brethren that that was the kind of faith they needed; the faith of a little child, going in humility to its Parent, and asking for the desire of its heart. He said the anecdote was well-timed.

A grammar school was opened in Kirtland the same winter, taught by Sidney Rigdon and William E. McLellin. Most of the Elders, including the Prophet, attended this school. Some of them were very apt pupils and made rapid headway. Heber's progress, however, was only moderate. Grammar, as a study, afforded him little delight. The mysteries of syntax seemed to elude his mental grasp, as the will-o'-the-wisp the eye and hand of its pursuer. A lover of choice language, and, when loftily inspired, a user of much that was beautiful and sublime; a never-failing fountain of poetic thought and imagery; the technicalities of his mother tongue nevertheless seemed to baffle him. His forte lay elsewhere. He was a philosopher, rather than an orator. Many excelled him in speaking, but few, as thinkers, were his equals. If, in the gift of speech, the power of expression, he fell below many of his confreres, he had thoughts, ideas, inspirations, toward which, as eagles toward the sun, their loftiest oratory soared in vain. His words, though humble, were as sparks of prophecy from the Spirit's flaming forge; his inspired utterances, casual as they sometimes seemed, were like oracles and decrees of fate.

"I used to tell Brother Heber I never wanted him to say anything but good of me," an Apostle once remarked, significantly, in the hearing of the writer.

Some six weeks after the establishment of the grammar school, a meeting of the Camp of Zion was called to assemble, to receive what was termed "a Zion's blessing." At this meeting it was announced by the Prophet that "those who went to Zion with a determination to lay down their lives, if necessary, it was the will of God that they should be ordained to the ministry and go forth to prune the vineyard for the last time, or the coming of the Lord, which was nigh--even fifty-six years should wind up the scene."

Foremost of these evangelists, were to be chosen twelve men, to be known as the Twelve Apostles.

The calling of the Twelve had been revealed to Joseph as early as June, 1829. In the same revelation it was given to Oliver Cowdery and David Whitmer--whose calling, the Lord said, was the same as that of the Apostle Paul--to "search out the Twelve," and make known to them their mission.

Little thought Heber that he was to be one of them, and would live to make his name illustrious as a bearer of glad tidings to the nations. It is doubtful that he even knew, at that time, of the intention to choose the Apostles. The revelations were not published then, as now, and few had access to the manuscripts in those early days.

The day set for the choosing of the Twelve was Saturday, February 14th, 1835. The meeting having been duly organized, an expression was taken whereby the Elders present signified their willingness and "anxious desire" to have the Spirit of the Lord dictate in the choice of the Apostles. The three witnesses--Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer and Martin Harris, each in turn then offered prayer. They were blessed under the hands of the First Presidency, and then proceeded to call forth the Twelve.

The first three chosen were Lyman E. Johnson, Brigham Young and Heber
C. Kimball. They were called into the stand, and, after expressing
themselves in relation to the holy calling about to be conferred upon them, were ordained under the hands of the First Presidency and the Three Witnesses. "These brethren," says Heber, "ordained us to the Apostleship." Here is a copy of his ordination blessing:

    "Heber C. Kimball shall be made like unto those who have been
    blessed before him, and he shall be favored with the same
    blessing; that he may receive visions, the ministration of angels,
    and hear their voices, and even come into the presence of God.
    That many millions may be converted by his instrumentality, that
    angels may waft him from place to place, and that he may stand
    unto the coming of our Lord; that he shall be made acquainted with
    the day when Christ shall come; that he shall be made perfect in
    faith; that the deaf shall hear, the lame shall walk, the blind
    shall see, and greater things than these shall he do; and that he
    shall have boldness of speech before the nations, and great
    power." Etc.

The next day Orson Hyde, David W. Patten, Luke S. Johnson, William E. McLellin, John F. Boynton and William Smith were chosen in like manner. The remaining three of the Twelve were Parley P. Pratt, Orson Pratt and Thomas B. Marsh, who were absent at the time of choosing. Parley was ordained an Apostle on February 21st, Thomas B. Marsh on the 25th or 26th of April, and Orson Pratt on the 26th of that month.

No history of this important event would be complete without the famous "Charge to the Twelve," delivered by President Oliver Cowdery. It was as follows:

    "DEAR BRETHREN:--Previously to delivering the charge I shall read
    a part of a revelation. It is known to you that previous to the
    organization of this Church in 1830, the Lord gave revelations or
    the Church could not have been organized.

    "The people of this Church were weak in faith compared with the
    ancients. Those who embarked in this cause were desirous to know
    how the work was to be conducted. They had read many things in the
    Book of Mormon concerning their duty and the way the great work
    ought to be done; but the minds of men are so constructed that
    they will not believe without a testimony of seeing or hearing.
    The Lord gave us a revelation that in process of time there should
    be twelve chosen to preach His Gospel to Jew and Gentile. Our
    minds have been on a constant stretch to find who these twelve
    were.

    "When the time should come, we could not tell, but we sought the
    Lord by fasting and prayer, to have our lives prolonged to see
    this day, to see you, and to take a retrospect of the difficulties
    through which we have passed. But having seen the day, it becomes
    my duty to deliver to you a charge. And first, a few remarks
    respecting your ministry. You have many revelations put into your
    hands, revelations to make you acquainted with the nature of your
    mission. You will have difficulties by reason of your visiting all
    the nations of the world. You will need wisdom in a two-fold
    proportion to what you have ever had. You will have to combat all
    the prejudices of all nations." He then read the revelation and
    proceeded to say, "Have you desired this ministry with all your
    hearts? If you have desired it, you are called of God, not of man,
    to go into all the world." He read again from the revelation, what
    the Lord said to the twelve brethren. "You have your duty
    presented in revelation. You have been ordained to the Holy
    Priesthood. You have received it from those who had their power
    and authority from an angel. You are to preach the Gospel to every
    nation. Should you in the least degree come short of your duty,
    great will be your condemnation, for the greater the calling, the
    greater the transgression. I, therefore, warn you to cultivate
    great humility, for I know the pride of the human heart. Beware
    lest the flatterers of the world lift you up. Beware lest your
    affections are captivated by worldly objects.

    "Let your ministry be first. Remember the souls of men are
    committed to your charge, and if you mind your calling you shall
    always prosper. You have been indebted to other men in the first
    instance for evidence, on that you have acted. But it is necessary
    that you receive a testimony from Heaven for yourselves, so that
    you can bear testimony to the truth of the Book of Mormon, and
    that you have seen the face of God; that is more than the
    testimony of an angel. When the proper time arrives, you shall be
    able to bear this testimony to the world. When you bear testimony
    that you have seen God, this testimony God will never suffer to
    fall, but will bear you out, although many will not give heed, yet
    others will. You will therefore see the necessity of getting this
    testimony from Heaven. Never cease striving until you have seen
    God face to face. Strengthen your faith, cast off your doubts,
    your sins and all your unbelief, and nothing can prevent you from
    coming to God. Your ordination is not full and complete till God
    has laid His hand upon you. We require as much to qualify us as
    did those who have gone before us. God is the same. If the Savior
    in former days laid His hands on His disciples, why not in the
    latter days?

    "With regard to superiority I must make a few remarks. The ancient
    Apostles sought to be great; but, brethren, lest the seeds of
    discord be sown in this matter, understand the voice of the Spirit
    on this occasion, God does not love you better or more than
    others. You are to contend for the faith once delivered to the
    Saints. Jacob, you know, wrestled till he obtained. It was by
    fervent prayer and diligent search that you have obtained the
    testimony that you are now able to bear. You are as one. You are
    equal in bearing the keys of the kingdom to all nations.

    "You are called to preach the Gospel of the Son of God to the
    nations of the earth. It is the will of your Heavenly Father that
    you proclaim His Gospel to the ends of the earth and the islands
    of the sea. Be zealous to save souls. The soul of one man is as
    precious as the soul of another. You are to bear this message to
    those who consider themselves wise, and such may persecute you;
    they may seek your life. The adversary has always sought the lives
    of the servants of God. You are, therefore, to be prepared at all
    times to make a sacrifice of your lives, should the Lord require
    them in the advancement and building up of His cause. Murmur not
    at God. Be always prayerful, be always watchful. You will bear
    with me while I relieve the feelings of my heart. We shall not see
    another day like this. The time has fully come. The voice of the
    Spirit has come to set these men apart. You will see the time when
    you will desire to see such a day as this, and you will not see
    it. Every heart wishes you peace and prosperity, but the scene
    with you will inevitably change. Let no man take your Bishopric,
    and beware that you lose not your crowns. It will require your
    whole souls. It will require courage like Enoch's. The time is
    near when you will be in the midst of congregations who will gnash
    their teeth upon you. This Gospel must roll and will roll till it
    fills the whole earth.

    "Did I say congregations would gnash upon you? Yea, I say nations
    will gnash upon you. You will be considered the worst of men. Be
    not discouraged at this. When God pours out His Spirit the enemy
    will rage, but God, remember, is on your right hand and on your
    left. A man, though he may be considered the worst, has joy who is
    conscious that he pleases God. The lives of those who proclaim the
    true Gospel will be in danger. This has been the case ever since
    the days of righteous Abel.

    "The same opposition has been manifest whenever men came forward
    to publish the Gospel. The time is coming when you will be
    considered the worst by many, and by some the best of men. The
    time is coming when you will be perfectly familiar with the things
    of God. This testimony will make those who do not believe your
    testimony, seek your lives. But there are whole nations who will
    receive your testimony. They will call you good men. Be not lifted
    up when you are called good men. Remember you are young men, and
    you shall be spared. I include the other three. Bear them in mind
    in your prayers, carry their cares to a throne of grace. Although
    they are not present yet you and they are equal.

    "This appointment is calculated to create an affection in you, for
    each other, stronger than death. You will travel to other nations.
    Bear each other in mind. If one or more is cast into prison, let
    the others pray for him and deliver him by their prayers.

    "Your lives shall be in great jeopardy, but the promise of God is
    that you shall be delivered. Remember you are not to go to other
    nations till you receive your endowment. Tarry at Kirtland until
    you are endowed with power from on high. You need a fountain of
    wisdom, knowledge and intelligence such as you never had. Relative
    to the endowment, I make a remark or two, that there be no
    mistake. The world cannot receive the things of God. He can endow
    you without worldly pomp or great parade. He can give you that
    wisdom, that intelligence and that power which characterized the
    ancient Saints and now characterizes the inhabitants of the upper
    world. The greatness of your commission consists in this; you are
    to hold the keys of this ministry. You are to go to the nations
    afar off; nations that sit in darkness. The day is coming when the
    work of God must be done. Israel shall be gathered. The seed of
    Jacob shall be gathered from their long dispersion. There will be
    a feast to Israel the elect of God. It is a sorrowful tale, but
    the Gospel must be preached and His (God's) ministers be rejected,
    but where can Israel be found, and receive your testimony and not
    rejoice? Nowhere. The prophecies are full of great things that are
    to take place in the last days. After the elect is gathered out,
    destruction shall come on the inhabitants of the earth. All
    nations shall feel the wrath of God after they have been warned by
    the Saints of the Most High. If you will not warn them others will
    and you will lose your crowns. You must prepare your minds to bid
    a long farewell to Kirtland, even till the great day come. You
    will see what you never expected to see. You will need the mind of
    Enoch or Elijah and the faith of the brother of Jared. You must be
    prepared to walk by faith, however appalling the prospect to human
    view. You, and each of you should feel the force of the imperious
    mandate. Son, go labor in my vineyard, and cheerfully receive what
    comes, but in the end you will stand while others will fall. You
    have read in the revelation concerning ordination. Beware how you
    ordain, for all nations are not like this nation. They will
    willingly receive the ordinances at your hand to put you out of
    the way. There will be times, when nothing but the angels of God
    can deliver you out of their hand. We appeal to your intelligence,
    we appeal to your understanding, that we have so far discharged
    our duty to you. We consider it one of the greatest condescensions
    of our Heavenly Father in pointing you out to us. You will be
    stewards over this ministry.

    "We have work to do that no other men can do. You must proclaim
    the Gospel in its simplicity and purity, and we commend you to God
    and the word of His grace. You have our best wishes, you have our
    most fervent prayers that you may be able to bear this testimony,
    that you have seen the face of God. Therefore call upon Him in
    faith and mighty prayer till you prevail, for it is your duty and
    your privilege to bear such testimony for yourselves. We now
    expect you to be faithful, to fulfill your calling, there must be
    no lack here. You must fulfill in all things, and permit us to
    repeat, all nations have a claim on you. You are bound together as
    the three witnesses were, you, notwithstanding can part and meet
    and meet and part again till your heads are silvered o'er with
    age."

He then took them separately by the hand and said: "Do you with full purpose of heart take part in this ministry, to proclaim the Gospel with all diligence with those your brethren, according to the tenor and intent of the charge you have received." Each of them answered in the affirmative.

Thus were chosen the first Twelve Apostles of the last dispensation. The first quorum of Seventies, their co-laborers in the ministry, was called into existence about the same time, its members being selected, as the Twelve had been, from the survivors of Zion's Camp, whose faith and integrity had been tried and proven.

The Apostles assembled from time to time to receive instructions from the Prophet, and strengthen each other in the Lord. One evening when they had met together for this purpose, the grand revelation on Priesthood (now forming the first half of Section 107 of the book of Doctrine and Covenants) was given.

Sunday, April 5th, 1835. Says Heber: "The Twelve had not all, as yet, been together, and as the time drew near that we should travel to the east, we appointed this day to bear our testimony unto our brethren and friends. We were all assembled together with the exception of Brother Orson Pratt, who had not yet been with us. We proceeded to speak according to our ages, the oldest speaking first. This day Brothers Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young and Heber C. Kimball spoke. Sunday, 12th, Brothers Orson Hyde, William E. McLellin, Parley P. Pratt, and Luke S. Johnson spoke. Sunday, 19th, Brothers William Smith, John F. Boynton and Lyman E. Johnson spoke, closing the testimony of the Twelve Apostles to the people in Kirtland at that time. Sunday, 26th, Brother Orson Pratt entered the house while we were opening the meeting and praying and wishing for his arrival. He was ordained an apostle, and we received our charge from Joseph Smith, the Prophet."

The eldest of the Apostles, Thos. B. Marsh, thus became president of the quorum; though the Twelve were all equal in authority. This order was agreeable to the will of Heaven.
