HEBER'S DESCRIPTION OF THE TEMPLE--ITS DEDICATION--ANGELS
ADMINISTER--THE "BELOVED DISCIPLE" JOHN SEEN--THE SOLEMN ASSEMBLY--THE
ELDERS ENDOWED WITH POWER FROM ON HIGH--HEBER'S LONE MISSION.

The Kirtland Temple was dedicated on the 27th of March, 1836. It was yet in an unfinished state, but for some time had been used for meetings and councils of the Priesthood. From Heber's pen we have the following description of the edifice and the ceremonies of its dedication:

"This building the Saints commenced in 1833, in poverty, and without means to do it. In 1834 they completed the walls, and in 1835-6 they nearly finished it. The cost was between sixty and seventy thousand dollars. A committee was appointed to gather donations; they traveled among the churches and collected a considerable amount, but not sufficient, so that in the end they found themselves between thirteen and fourteen thousand dollars in debt. This house was 80 x 60 feet, and 57 feet high to the eaves. It was divided into two stories, each 22 feet high and arched overhead. Ten feet were cut off from the front by a partition, and used as an entry or outer court, which also contained the stairs. This left the main room 55 x 65 feet in the clear, both below and above. In each of these rooms were built two pulpits, one in each end. Each pulpit consisted of four different apartments; the fourth standing on a platform raised a suitable height above the floor; the third stood directly behind and elevated a little above the fourth; the second in rear of and elevated above the third; and in like manner the first above the second. Each of these apartments was just large enough and rightly calculated to seat three persons, and the breastwork in front of each of these three last mentioned was constituted of three semicircles joining each other, and finished in good style. The fourth or lower one, was straight in front, and had an elegant table leaf attached to it, that could be raised at pleasure for the convenience of administering the sacrament, etc. These pulpits were alike in each end of the house. One was for the use of the Melchisedek or High Priesthood, and the other for the Aaronic or lesser Priesthood. The first or highest apartment was occupied by the First Presidency over the whole Church; the second apartment by the Melchisedek High Priesthood; the third by the President of the High Priest's Quorum; and the fourth by the President of the Elders and his two counselors. The highest apartment of the other pulpit was occupied by the Bishop of the Church and his two counselors; the next by the President of the Priests and his two counselors; the third by the President of the Teachers and his two counselors; and the fourth by the President of the Deacons and his two counselors.

"Each of these apartments had curtains hanging from the ceiling over head down to the top of the pulpit, which could be rolled up or dropped down at pleasure; and when dropped down would completely exclude those within the apartment from the sight of all others. The room itself was finished with slips and seats so calculated that by slipping the seats a little the congregation could change their faces toward either pulpit they chose; for in some cases the high Priesthood would administer, and in other cases the lesser Priesthood would administer. The room was also divided into four compartments by means of curtains or veils hanging from the ceiling over head down to the floor, which could be rolled up at pleasure, so that the house could be used all in one or divided into four rooms and used for different purposes. Thus the house was constructed to suit and accommodate the different quorums of the Priesthood and worship peculiar to the Church. The first story or lower room was dedicated for divine worship alone. The second story was finished similar in form to the first, but was designed wholly for instructing the Priesthood, and was supplied with tables and seats instead of slips. In the attic, five rooms were finished for the convenience of schools and for different quorums of the Church to meet in. There was no baptismal font in this temple, the ordinance of baptism for the dead not having been revealed.

"At the time of dedication the first story was finished, also the attic, but the second story was in an unfinished condition.

"At the dedication an address was delivered by Elder Rigdon, from Matthew 8th chap., 18th, 19th and 20th verses--more particularly the 20th. He spoke two hours and a half. The tenor of his discourse went to show the toils, sufferings, privations, and hardships the brethren and sisters had to endure while building this house, and compared it with the sufferings of the Saints in the days of the Savior. After the address the voice of the assembly was taken in reference to receiving and upholding the several presidents of the different quorums in their standing. The vote was unanimously in the affirmative in every instance. A hymn was sung, and then we had an interesting address from President Joseph Smith, and closed with a dedication prayer written by the Prophet.

"During the ceremonies of the dedication, an angel appeared and sat near President Joseph Smith, sen., and Frederick G. Williams, so that they had a fair view of his person. He was a very tall personage, black eyes, white hair, and stoop shouldered; his garment was whole, extending to near his ankles; on his feet he had sandals. He was sent as a messenger to accept of the dedication. The Priesthood was organized according to the proper order. During the whole of the dedication each quorum was placed in its respective station. Everything was conducted in the best of order, and profound silence maintained."

The Temple having been dedicated, the Apostles and Elders received their endowments, according to the promise of the Lord in Missouri. Says Heber:

"We had been commanded to prepare ourselves for a solemn assembly. At length the time arrived for this assembly to meet; previous to which the Prophet Joseph exhorted the Elders to solemnize their minds, by casting away every evil from them, in thought, word and deed, and to let their hearts become sanctified, because they need not expect a blessing from God without being duly prepared for it, for the Holy Ghost would not dwell in unholy temples. This meeting took place soon after the house of the Lord had been dedicated. * * *

"When the Prophet Joseph had finished the endowments of the First Presidency, the Twelve and the Presiding Bishops, the First Presidency proceeded to lay hands upon each one of them to seal and confirm the anointing; and at the close of each blessing the whole of the quorums responded to it with a loud shout of Hosanna! Hosanna! etc.

"While these things were being attended to the beloved disciple John was seen in our midst by the Prophet Joseph, Oliver Cowdery and others. After this all the quorums arose in order, together with the three Presidencies; and the Twelve then presented themselves separately and individually before the First Presidency, with hands uplifted towards heaven, and asked of God whatever they felt to desire; and after each individual petition the whole of the quorums answered aloud Amen! Hosanna! Hosanna! Hosanna! To God and the Lamb, forever and ever, amen and amen!

"The 6th day of April being the day appointed for fasting and prayer, all the Elders, Priests, Teachers and Deacons, numbering about four hundred, met together in the House of the Lord to attend to further ordinances; none being permitted to enter but official members who had previously received their washings and anointings. Water being provided, the First Presidency, after girding themselves with towels, proceeded to wash the feet of the Twelve. After they got through the Twelve girded themselves and washed the feet of the Seventies. They then took their seats, each quorum seating themselves in their respective places and continued in fasting and prayer, prophesying and exhortation until evening. A sufficient quantity of bread having been provided to feed this whole assembly, it was broken by the First Presidency of the Church and Twelve, after which the congregation knelt while a benediction was pronounced upon it by the First Presidency; and afterwards the Twelve took it and administered to the congregation. Then wine, also being provided, was blessed by the First Presidency and in like manner served to the congregation by the Twelve. This order of things is similar to that which was attended to by the Savior, amongst His disciples, previous to His ascension. The meeting continued on through the night; the spirit of prophecy was poured out upon the assembly, and cloven tongues of fire sat upon them; for they were seen by many of the congregation. Also angels administered to many, for they were also seen by many.

"This continued several days and was attended by a marvelous spirit of prophecy. Every man's mouth was full of prophesying, and for a number of days or weeks our time was spent in visiting from house to house, administering bread and wine, and pronouncing blessings upon each other to that degree, that from the external appearances one would have supposed that the last days had truly come, in which the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon all flesh, as far as the Church was concerned, for the sons and daughters of Zion were full of prophesying. In this prophesying great blessings were pronounced upon the faithful, and also great cursings upon the ungodly, or upon those who had smitten us. During this time many great and marvelous visions were seen, one of which I will mention which Joseph the Prophet had concerning the Twelve. His anxiety was and had been very great for their welfare, when the following vision was manifested to him, as near as I can recollect:

"He saw the Twelve going forth, and they appeared to be in a far distant land. After some time they unexpectedly met together, apparently in great tribulation, their clothes all ragged, and their knees and feet sore. They formed into a circle, and all stood with their eyes fixed upon the ground. The Savior appeared and stood in their midst and wept over them, and wanted to show Himself to them, but they did not discover Him. He (Joseph) saw until they had accomplished their work, and arrived at the gate of the celestial city; there Father Adam stood and opened the gate to them, and as they entered he embraced them one by one and kissed them. He then led them to the throne of God, and then the Savior embraced each one of them and kissed them, and crowned each one of them in the presence of God. He saw that they all had beautiful heads of hair and all looked alike. The impression this vision left on Brother Joseph's mind was of so acute a nature, that he never could refrain from weeping while rehearsing it."

"I continued through the winter," says Heber, "some of the time going to school, and the residue laboring with my hands, until May, 1836, when I enquired of the Prophet Joseph if I should go on a mission to preach, or go to school; he replied I might do either, for the Lord would bless me in the course I should pursue. Accordingly, on the 10th of May I left Kirtland and proceeded to Fairport, where I took steamboat and arrived in Buffalo the next day. From that place I passed on to the northeast, preaching where doors were open, and baptizing for the remission of sins such as believed.

"June 13th, I arrived at Sackett's Harbor. I had the pleasure of meeting Brothers Luke Johnson and Orson Pratt, who were laboring with all their might for the cause of God in that region.

"From that place I went on the steamer United States to Ogdensburg, St. Lawrence Co., N. Y., and from thence passed on about three miles from the village, when I was stopped by a shower of rain, which drove me into the house of Mr. Chapin for shelter, and making known my calling, the people immediately desired a meeting, and called in their neighbors, when I preached to them for about an hour. Many staid until midnight, and before I was up the next morning they called upon me requesting I should preach again that day in the school house, which I did, and at night it was again thronged with those who were eager to hear. The second morning they likewise called on me, and would not let me go until they knew the truth of my testimony, for by this time the country round was in an uproar of excitement. On the fourth morning I was called out of bed, and baptized three. I remained seven days preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of Heaven, and baptized and confirmed seven. The promise was fulfilled, for those who believed spoke in tongues, and the sick were healed. A woman named Davis had been confined to her bed for five years, not able to do anything during that time, and scarcely able to sit up, who was given up to die by the doctors. I baptized and confirmed her a member of the Church, and at the same time prayed for her, and rebuked the disease, and commanded it to depart from her in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. She began to amend from that very hour, and in less than one week she was performing her usual household duties, walked into the streets and attended meetings, to the astonishment of the people. Sister Chapin and others were also healed of their infirmities. Sister Davis' husband was considered a staunch Universalist. He was convinced and baptized."

Thence I journeyed to Plattsburg, where I staid all night with a Mr. Mansfield, who was very friendly to me. I then went in a steamer to St. Albans, Vt., and visited my friends in Sheldon and Bakersfield, traveled through various parts of Vermont, visited Wright's settlement on the top of the Green Mountains, where some were believing. I met Elder Solon Foster at Potsdam, preaching there once, and eight or nine bore testimony to the truth of the Gospel.

"After an absence of about five weeks I returned to Ogdensburg, met the brethren whom I had baptized, and they rejoiced at my return. When I got to the house of Brother Heman Chapin, he was grinding his scythe and fixing his cradle to commence cutting his wheat. I proposed to him if he would furnish me a tow frock and pantaloons to put on, and a rake, I would go into the field and rake and bind all he could cut. He declared there was no man living could do it. Said I, 'never mind, Brother Chapin, its nearly as easy for me to do it as to say it.' The next morning after the dew had passed off we went into the field, commencing at a piece of wheat which he said had three acres in it. Said I, 'go ahead, Brother Heman, we'll cut down this piece before dinner.' About the time he took the last clipp of the three acres I had it bound in a bundle before he had hardly a chance to look round, and about that time the horn blew to call us to dinner. We started back to his house; he never spoke or said one word to me, appearing rather confounded. The next Sabbath such a congregation of hearers I had never seen in the United States; for priests and people had come for twenty-five miles distance, to see and hear that "Mormon" who had performed a thing that had never before been done in that country, for Brother Chapin had proclaimed this occurrence unknown to me. I tarried several days in those regions, preaching and baptizing.

"August 25th, while we were assembled for a meeting our hearts were filled with joy by the arrival of Joseph Smith, Sen., the patriarch, and his brother John Smith, who were on a mission to bless the churches in the eastern states.

"On the 27th, the church, numbering twenty, that I had baptized, came together and received patriarchal blessings under the hands of President Joseph Smith, Sen.

"Sunday, 28th, Father John Smith preached at 10 a. m., and four of us bore testimony to the Book of Mormon and the truth of the work. In the afternoon we administered the sacrament, confirmed three and blessed the little children of the branch.

"Monday, 20th, we ordained Levi Chapin a Teacher and Alvin Simons an Elder to watch over the church. I then went to Black Lake, preached and baptized one; then preached at Potsdam and baptized another. Returned to the township of Oswegatchie, called the church together at Ogdensburg, which numbered twenty-eight, and bade them farewell. I left the church rejoicing in the Lord, and many around believing the testimony.

"Thence I pursued my journey to Victor, Ontario County, where I met Vilate, my wife, who was visiting her friends, and I tarried a few days with them. Thence we pursued our journey to Buffalo. Here a magistrate came forward and paid five dollars for our passage to Frankfort, a distance of one hundred and eighty miles. The passengers were chiefly Swiss emigrants. After sitting and hearing them for some time, the Spirit of the Lord came upon me, and I was enabled to preach to them in their own language. They seemed much pleased and treated us kindly. We had a very heavy gale while going up the lake, so that every passenger almost and some of the hands were very sick. Many were frightened, and one woman died, she being very feeble when she came on board. But we reached our destination without accident, and arrived in Kirtland, October 2nd. I was gone nearly five months, visited many of my friends, preached much, and baptized thirty. This was the first mission I took alone. The Lord was with me and blessed me, and confirmed the word with signs following."
