ZION'S SHIP AMONG THE BREAKERS--"SOMETHING NEW MUST BE DONE TO SAVE
THE CHURCH"--HEBER C. KIMBALL APPOINTED TO OPEN THE BRITISH
MISSION--SPIRITUAL THINGS TO THE FRONT--RIGHTING THE SHIP--HEBER'S
PROPHECY TO WILLARD RICHARDS--"YEA, IN THE NAME OF THE LORD, THOU
SHALT GO WITH ME"--THE DEPARTURE FOR ENGLAND.

At this crisis in the affairs of the Church, the Lord revealed to Joseph that "something new" must be done for its salvation. The good ship Zion, storm-tossed and tempest-driven, her sails rent, her timbers sprung, a portion of her officers and crew in open mutiny, was drifting with fearful rapidity toward the rocks and breakers of destruction.

Joseph was denounced as a "fallen prophet" by men who had been his immediate friends and confidential advisers, and the divinity of his mission was being doubted by many who had received through him a testimony of the truth, the gift of the Holy Ghost, a knowledge of God and Christ, whom to know is life eternal.

"No quorum in the Church," says he, "was entirely exempt from the influence of those false spirits who were striving against me for the mastery. Even some of the Twelve were so far lost to their high and responsible calling, as to begin to take sides, secretly, with the enemy."

What "new thing," under these circumstances, was destined to "save the Church?" In what way was Joseph's mission, as a prophet of the living God, to be revindicated in the eyes of the Saints and of the world?

"On Sunday, the 4th day of June, 1837," says Heber C. Kimball, "the Prophet Joseph came to me, while I was seated in front of the stand, above the sacrament table, on the Melchisedek side of the Temple, in Kirtland, and whispering to me, said, 'Brother Heber, the Spirit of the Lord has whispered to me: 'Let my servant Heber go to England and proclaim my Gospel, and open the door of salvation to that nation.'"

The thought was overpowering. He had been surprised at his call to the apostleship: now he was overwhelmed. Like Jeremiah he staggered under the weight of his own weakness, exclaiming in self-humiliation: "O, Lord, I am a man of stammering tongue, and altogether unfit for such a work; how can I go to preach in that land, which is so famed throughout Christendom for learning, knowledge and piety; the nursery of religion; and to a people whose intelligence is proverbial!"

"Feeling my weakness to go upon such an errand, I asked the Prophet if Brother Brigham might go with me. He replied that he wanted Brother Brigham to stay with him, for he had something else for him to do. The idea of such a mission was almost more than I could bear up under. I was almost ready to sink under the burden which was placed upon me.

"However, all these considerations did not deter me from the path of duty; the moment I understood the will of my heavenly Father, I felt a determination to go at all hazards, believing that He would support me by His almighty power, and endow me with every qualification that I needed; and although my family was dear to me, and I should have to leave them almost destitute, I felt that the cause of truth, the Gospel of Christ, outweighed every other consideration.

"At this time many faltered in their faith; even some of the Twelve were in rebellion against the Prophet of God. John F. Boynton said to me, 'If you are such a fool as to go at the call of the fallen prophet, Joseph Smith, I will not help you a dime, and if you are cast on Van Dieman's land, I will not make an effort to help you.' Lyman E. Johnson said he did not want me to go on my mission, but if I was determined to go, he would help me all he could; he took his cloak from off his back and put it on mine; which was the first cloak I ever had.

"Brothers Sidney Rigdon, Joseph Smith, Sen., Brigham Young, Newel K. Whitney and others said, 'Go and do as the Prophet has told you, and you shall prosper and be blessed with power to do a glorious work.' Hyrum, seeing the condition of the Church, when he talked about my mission, wept like a little child; he was continually blessing and encouraging me, and pouring out his soul in prophecies upon my head; he said: 'Go, and you shall prosper as not many have prospered.'"

Elder Orson Hyde, who had had some disagreement with the authorities and was thought to be disaffected, gave a noble proof of his integrity by asking forgiveness of the brethren, and requesting the privilege of accompanying Apostle Kimball on his mission to England. He was accordingly set apart, with Elder Kimball and Priest Joseph Fielding, for that purpose.

Says Heber: "The Presidency laid their hands on me and set me apart to preside over the mission, and conferred great blessings upon my head; said that God would make me mighty in that nation in winning souls unto Him; angels should accompany me and bear me up, that my feet should never slip; that I should be mightily blessed and prove a source of salvation to thousands, not only in England but America.

"After being called on this mission, I daily went into the east room in the attic story of the temple and poured out my soul unto the Lord, asking His protection and power to fulfill honorably the mission appointed me by His servants. A short time previous to starting, I was laid prostrate on my bed with a stitch in my back, which suddenly seized me while chopping and drawing wood for my family. I could not stir a limb without crying out from the severeness of the pain. Joseph, hearing of it, came to see me, bringing Oliver Cowdery and Bishop Partridge with him; they prayed for and blessed me, Joseph being mouth, beseeching God to raise me up; he then took me by the right hand and said, 'Brother Heber, I take you by your right hand in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, and by virtue of the Holy Priesthood vested in me I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to arise, and be thou made whole.' I arose from my bed, put on my clothes, and started with them and went up to the temple, and felt no more of the pain afterwards."

Though amazed and overwhelmed at his call to this duty, the voice of the Spirit in his own heart had long since told him that he would some day be required to perform just such a work. As with all men of destiny, the mountain of his mission loomed before him dimly in the distance, casting its shadow athwart his soul, and there were times when, worn and wearied with life's common cares, he sought within that shade shelter and repose from the noontide's heat and toil. Thus doth the ideal subserve the real, of which, what is it but the prophecy?

Some months prior to his appointment, in a conversation with Willard Richards in the streets of Kirtland, soon after the latter was baptized, Heber, filled with the spirit of prophecy, had predicted for himself a mission to the shores of Europe.

"Shall I go with thee?" enquired Willard.

"Yea, in the name of the Lord, thou shalt go with me when I go," Heber replied.

But Willard was now in the eastern states, on a special business mission, and the day of Heber's departure was drawing near. Just one day before he left for England, Elder Richards returned, and was reminded by the Apostle of the prediction he had uttered five months before. Willard, being involved in business, and not having received a formal call, did not see how he could go. But, on consulting with the First Presidency, and obtaining their consent, and his partner in business, Brigham Young, agreeing to take charge of their affairs in his absence, he was enabled to fulfill his covenant with Heber, and was set apart the same evening to accompany the mission to England.

Heber received the following letter of recommendation from the First Presidency:

    "At a conference of the Elders of the Church of Latter-day Saints,
    held in Kirtland, Geauga County, Ohio, on the fourth day of June,
    in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and
    thirty-seven, Elder Heber C. Kimball, the bearer of this, was
    unanimously appointed, set apart and ordained to go at the head of
    this mission to England, to proclaim the Gospel of Jesus Christ to
    the people of that nation, as it is believed and practiced by us.
    From the long acquaintance which we have had with this our worthy
    brother, his integrity and zeal in the cause of truth, we do most
    cheerfully and confidently recommend him to all candid and upright
    people as a servant of God and faithful minister of Jesus Christ.
    We do furthermore beseech all people who have an opportunity of
    hearing this our brother declare the doctrine believed by us, to
    listen with attention to the words of his mouth.

                                              "JOSEPH SMITH,
                                              "SIDNEY RIGDON,
                                              "HYRUM SMITH,

    "Presiding Elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
    Saints."

The day of departure came; Tuesday, June 13th, 1837. The solemn scene of Heber's parting with his family cannot be more tenderly or graphically told than in the words of Elder Robert B. Thompson, who thus describes it:

"The day appointed for the departure of the Elders to England having arrived, I stepped into the house of Brother Kimball to ascertain when he would start, as I expected to accompany him two or three hundred miles, intending to spend my labors in Canada that season.

"The door being partly open, I entered and felt struck with the sight which presented itself to my view. I would have retired, thinking that I was intruding, but I felt riveted to the spot. The father was pouring out his soul to that

    'God who rules on high,
      Who all the earth surveys:
    That rides upon the stormy sky,
      And calms the roaring seas,'

that he would grant him a prosperous voyage across the mighty ocean, and make him useful wherever his lot should be cast, and that He who 'careth for sparrows, and feedeth the young ravens when they cry' would supply the wants of his wife and little ones in his absence. He then, like the patriarchs, and by virtue of his office, laid his hands upon their heads individually, leaving a father's blessing upon them, and commending them to the care and protection of God, while he should be engaged preaching the Gospel in a foreign land. While thus engaged his voice was almost lost in the sobs of those around, who tried in vain to suppress them. The idea of being separated from their protector and father for so long a time was indeed painful. He proceeded, but his heart was too much affected to do so regularly. His emotions were great, and he was obliged to stop at intervals, while the big tears rolled down his cheeks, an index to the feelings which reigned in his bosom. My heart was not stout enough to refrain; in spite of myself I wept, and mingled my tears with theirs. At the same time I felt thankful that I had the privilege of contemplating such a scene. I realized that nothing could induce that man to tear himself from so affectionate a family group, from his partner and children who were so dear to him,--nothing but a sense of duty and love to God and attachment to His cause."

In order to realize the situation so touchingly described, it must be remembered that in those early days, ere the age of steamships and railways had fairly arrived, a mission to Europe, comparatively easy now, seemed almost like a voyage to another world.

Heber continues:

"At 9 a. m., I bade adieu to my family and friends, and in company with Elders Orson Hyde, Willard Richards, and Priest Joseph Fielding, started without purse or scrip on my mission, this being the first foreign mission of the Church of Christ in the last days. We arrived at Fairport on Lake Erie that afternoon, and about an hour after took passage on a steamboat for Buffalo.

"We were accompanied by Brothers Brigham Young, John P. Greene, Levi Richards, and Sisters Vilate Kimball, Rhoda Green, Mary Fielding, and others, to Fairport. Sister Mary Fielding gave me five dollars, with which I paid my passage and Brother Hyde's to Buffalo; we were also accompanied to Buffalo by R. B. Thompson and wife, who were on their way to Canada, where he intended to labor in the ministry. After a pleasant voyage we reached Buffalo the next day, where we expected to receive some funds from Canada to assist us on our journey, but were disappointed, as Brothers Goodson, Russell and Snyder did not meet us there according to promise.

"From Buffalo we went down by the canal towards Lyonstown. While walking on its bank I found an iron ring about one and one-fourth inches in diameter, which I presented to Elder Richards, saying, 'I will make you a present of this; keep it in remembrance of me; for our friendship shall be as endless as this ring.' We had but very little means, but determined to prosecute our journey, believing that the Lord would open our way. We accordingly took passage in a line boat on the Erie Canal to Utica, a distance of 250 miles; from thence on the railroad to Albany, where our party divided.

"From Albany I went with Brother Richards about 30 miles, to his father's, in Richmond, Berkshire County, Massachusetts, where we arrived on the 20th, and obtained forty dollars from his brother William which he was owing to him. This enabled us to prosecute our journey. We bade them a last farewell, as Willard's father and mother and sister died a short time afterwards. The next day we returned to Albany and took passage in a steamboat to New York, where we arrived on the evening of June 22nd, and again met Orson Hyde and Joseph Fielding. We also met with Brothers John Goodson, Isaac Russell and John Snyder, who had come by the way of Canada to join the mission.

"We found a vessel ready to sail, but not having sufficient means, we were obliged to wait until we could obtain funds to pay our passage, and procure an outfit for the voyage. We found Elder Elijah Fordham, the only member of the Church in that city, who having no house of his own, we lodged at Mrs. Fordham's, Elijah's sister-in-law. Being short of funds, we hired a small room in an unfinished store-house of Brother Fordham's father, who was very wealthy, as he owned many storehouses and buildings, but never invited us into his house to sleep or eat, though he did invite us to assist him two days in raising a building, as a compensation for lying on his store-house floor.

"Brother Fordham seemed to be mute in relation to Mormonism. I told him if he was faithful and remained in New York, there would be a branch of the Church raised up before we returned.

"Sunday, 25th, we fasted, prayed, administered the sacrament, held council for the success of the mission, and had a joyful time. In the afternoon two sectarian priests came in, to find fault, but they were soon confounded, and left.

"On the 28th we deposited 180 of Orson Hyde's "Timely Warnings," in the New York post office, addressed to the priests and ministers of different denominations in the city. We also distributed many to the citizens, and at the same time conversed with them on the subject of the Gospel. Our sojourn in the city opened the door for Brothers Parley and Orson Pratt to introduce the Gospel there. Many persons who subsequently came into the Church have referred to the "Timely Warnings" which they had read. We spent considerable time in prayer to our Heavenly Father for His guidance and protection; to make our way plain before us; to bless us with a prosperous voyage across the mighty ocean; make us a blessing to each other, and the captain and crew with whom we should sail.

"In New York we were subject to many inconveniences; had to lay amid straw and blankets upon the ground; to buy our victuals; yet we did not feel discouraged; believing that the Lord would open up our way and guide us to our destination.

"Brother Fordham made me a present of ten dollars, and concluded to accompany us on our mission, but upon mature consideration, we thought it best for him to stay there; believing that the Lord had a people in that city, and that there would be a church built up there before our return.

"Having obtained sufficient money to pay our passage across the Atlantic, eighteen dollars each, we laid in a stock of provisions, and went on board the new packet ship Garrick, of 900 tons, bound for Liverpool."
