FAREWELL TO NATIVE LAND--"UPON THE WIDE, WIDE SEA"--HEBER'S DREAM OF
JOSEPH--A SHIP OUT OF HER RECKONING--A DYING CHILD HEALED--APOSTLE
HYDE PREACHES ON BOARD--ARRIVAL AT LIVERPOOL--THE ELDERS LEAP ASHORE.

    "Adieu, adieu, my native shore
      Fades o'er the waters blue;
    The night-winds sigh, the breakers roar,
      And shrieks the wild sea-mew.
    Yon sun that sets upon the sea
      We follow in his flight;
    Farewell, awhile, to him and thee,
      My native land--Good night!"

At ten o'clock on the morning of July 1st, 1837, the Garrick weighed anchor, and, being towed down the river by a steamer as far as Sandy Hook, set sail oceanward. A few hours later Heber lost sight of his native land. Say he:

"I had feelings which I cannot describe, when I could no longer behold its shores, and when I bade adieu to the land of my birth, I felt to exclaim:

    'Yes, my native land, I love thee:
    All thy scenes I love them well:
    Friends, connections, happy country,
    Can I bid you all farewell?
        Can I leave you,
    Far in distant lands to dwell?'

"However, when I reflected on the causes which had induced me to leave it for awhile, and the work which depended upon me, I could likewise say:

    "I go, but not to plough the main,
      To ease a restless mind."

"I was actuated by a different motive than either to please myself, or gain the riches and applause of the world; it was a higher consideration than these that induced me to leave my home. It was because a dispensation of the Gospel had been committed to me; and I felt an ardent desire that my fellow creatures in other lands might hear the sound of the everlasting Gospel, obey its requisitions, rejoice in the fullness and blessings thereof, and escape the judgments which will come upon the ungodly."

Only souls where sentiment and feeling dwell, who have been upon the mighty waters, floating like an insect on a leaf amid the immensity of the liquid waste, can realize that awful loneliness, that sense of helplessness and utter dependency upon a power superior to man's. Atheism, thy home is not the boundless deep! Ocean, thou art religious, thou art worshipful, and throwest heavenward the thoughts of man as though they were thy spray!

Especially was it so with Heber and his companions, God-fearing men, upon whom rested the burden of a mission fraught with salvation to thousands. The solemnities of eternity encompassed them. They felt as little children in the presence of the Infinite. And children they were in their humility. Not in their own strength went they forth, but in the strength of Him who made the seas, and who holdeth their waters in the hollow of His hand.

"Angels shall accompany thee and bear thee up!"

Were they not even now upon the vessel, in mid-ocean, guiding it unerringly toward its destiny? Aye, lest at any time that fated bark should "dash its foot against a stone."

"While crossing the sea," says Heber, "I dreamed that the Prophet Joseph came to me while I was standing upon the forecastle of the ship, and said, 'Brother Heber, here is a rod (putting it into my hands), with which you are to guide the ship. While you hold this rod you shall prosper, and there shall be no obstacles thrown before you but what you shall have power to overcome, and the hand of God shall be with you.' After this I discovered every kind of obstruction was placed before the ship to stop its progress; but the bow being sharp, the obstacles were compelled to move out on either side; and when the ship would come to a mountain, it would plow its course straight through, as though it was in water. This rod which Joseph gave me was about three and a half feet in length. His appearance was just as natural as I ever beheld him in the flesh. He blessed me and disappeared."

It is a singular fact that during fifty years, the period covered by the history of Mormon emigration from the nations abroad, not a ship-load of Latter-day Saints, not a vessel bearing the Elders of Israel to or from foreign shores, has ever been lost at sea. Even rough captains and sailors have learned to regard this with feelings akin to reverential awe, and to accept as a good omen, an assurance of a safe and prosperous voyage, the presence of Mormon Elders or emigrants among their ship's passengers.

In such a light, Heber's dream of Joseph and the rod wherewith he was to "guide the ship," takes on added interest and significance.

Remarkable, too, that this same ship, the Garrick, now on its first voyage, after twice ploughing the Atlantic with Apostles Kimball and Hyde on board--for on this vessel they returned to America--was doomed, on almost its very next voyage, to go down at sea, in the year 1841.

Heber continues his narrative:

"During the voyage we were hailed by a large vessel throwing up a signal of distress. Our captain hauled to, and with his speaking trumpet enquired what was wanted. The answer was, 'we are bound for Quebec, but are lost, having lost our reckoning.' Our captain took an observation, and through his speaking trumpet gave them the latitude and longitude, and the course for them to steer, showing them that they were about a thousand miles from the American shore. They replied that they thought they were close to the shore and were afraid of running on the reefs for several days past. This reminded me that when a person has lost his course, or is out of the way, it is necessary to apply to the Lord, through a Prophet, Seer and Revelator, to put him right.

"Our passage was very agreeable, the winds for the most part being favorable. On the banks of Newfoundland we saw several large fish, called by some, whales, and by others, finners; also many porpoises and different species of fish. We were kindly treated by the officers and crew; their conduct was indeed praiseworthy. Had we been their own relatives, they could not have behaved more kindly, or treated us better. Thus the Lord answered our prayers, for which I desire to praise His holy name.

"The Lord also gave us favor in the eyes of the passengers, who treated us with the greatest respect. During the voyage, a child belonging to one of the passengers was very sick, and given up by the doctor to die; consequently its parents had given up all hopes of its recovery, and expected to have to commit their little one to the ocean. Feeling a great anxiety for the child, I went to its parents and reasoned with them, and laid before them the principle of faith, and told them that the Lord was able to restore their child, notwithstanding there was no earthly prospect of its recovery. To which they listened with great interest. Shortly after, having an opportunity to secretly lay hands upon the child, I did so, and in the name of Jesus Christ rebuked the disease which preyed upon its system. The spirit of the Lord attended the administration, and from that time the child began to recover, and in two or three days after it was running about, perfectly well. Afterwards I informed the parents that I had laid hands on their child, and they acknowledged that it was healed by the power of the Almighty.

"Our health, while on the water, was good, with the exception of Brothers Richards and Fielding, who were sick a day or two.

"Sunday, July 16th, I went to the captain and asked the privilege for one of us to preach on board. He very obligingly agreed, and appointed 1 o'clock, p. m., when it would be most suitable for himself and the crew to attend. I requested Elder Hyde to speak, and notified the captain, crew and passengers of the intended meeting for preaching on the aft quarter deck. At the time appointed there was a congregation of between two and three hundred persons assembled, who listened, with great attention and deep interest, to the discourse. I think I never heard Brother Hyde speak with such power and eloquence. He spoke on the subject of the resurrection, which was necessarily condensed, the time being limited on account of the duties of the crew. The congregation was composed of persons of different faiths, and from different nations, English, Irish, Scotch, French Germans, etc.,--both Jews and Christians. A great feeling was produced upon the minds of the assembly, who had never heard the subject treated in like manner before; and from the conversation we had afterwards with several of them, I believe that good was done. The congregation appointed a committee who came to us and returned thanks for the favor conferred on them.

"On the 18th, the captain sent a man up to the masthead to look for land. He had not been up long before he cried out, "land," which was the Irish shore. It caused joy and gratitude to arise in my bosom to my heavenly Father for the favorable passage so far, and the prospect of soon reaching our destination. We sailed up the Irish Channel, having Ireland on our left and Wales on our right. The scenery was very beautiful and imposing.

"At daybreak, on July 20th, we arrived in the river Mersey, opposite Liverpool, being eighteen days and eighteen hours from our departure from the anchorage at New York. The packet ship South America, which left New York at the same time we did, came in a few lengths behind, thus losing a wager of ten thousand dollars which had been made the day of starting. She had been seen daily during the voyage, but never passed us. The sight was very interesting to see these two vessels enter port with every inch of canvas spread.

"When we first sighted Liverpool I went to the side of the vessel and poured out my soul in praise and thanksgiving to God for the prosperous voyage, and for all the mercies which He had vouchsafed to me, and while thus engaged, and contemplating the scene presented to my view, the spirit of the Lord rested down upon me in a powerful manner, and my soul was filled with love and gratitude. I felt humble, while I covenanted to dedicate myself to God, and to love and serve Him with all my heart.

"Immediately after we anchored, a small boat came along-side, when several of the passengers, with Brothers Hyde, Richards, Goodson and myself got in and went to shore. When we were within six or seven feet of the pier, I leaped on shore, followed by Elders Hyde and Richards, and for the first time in my life I stood on British ground, among strangers, whose manners and customs were different from my own. My feelings at that time were peculiar, particularly when I realized the importance and extent of my mission; the work to which I had been appointed and in which I was shortly to be engaged. However, I put my trust in God, believing that He would assist me in publishing the truth, give me utterance, and be a present help in time of need.

"Elders Hyde, Richards, and myself, being without purse or scrip, wandered in the streets of Liverpool, where wealth and luxury abound, side by side with penury and want. I there met the rich attired in the most costly dresses, and the next minute was saluted with the cries of the poor with scarce covering sufficient to screen them from the weather. Such a wide distinction I never saw before. Looking for a place to lodge in, we found a room belonging to a widow in Union Street, which we engaged for a few days."
