THE ELDERS SEPARATE FOR THE BETTER PROSECUTION OF THEIR WORK--JENNETTA
RICHARDS--THE PRESTON BRANCH ORGANIZED--HEBER GOES TO WALKERFOLD--
ANOTHER MINISTER'S "CRAFT IN DANGER"--MORE OF HEBER'S PROPHECIES--
"WILLARD, I BAPTIZED YOUR WIFE TO-DAY."

Having gained a foothold in Preston, and lifted the ensign of the latter-day work, around which the ransomed of the Lord were beginning to rally, the Elders decided to separate and carry the Gospel into other counties. They met in council the day after the first baptisms in the River Ribble, and "continued in fasting and prayer, praise and thanksgiving until two o'clock in the morning." Elders Richards and Goodson were appointed to go on a mission to the city of Bedford, and Brothers Russell and Snyder to Alston, in Cumberland. Apostles Kimball and Hyde, with Priest Fielding, were to remain and labor in and around Preston. A day or two later the brethren departed for their fields of labor.

The second important step in the founding of the British mission was now taken.

"On Wednesday, August 2nd," says Elder Kimball, "Miss Jennetta Richards, a young lady, the daughter of a minister of the Independent Order, who resided at Walkerfold, about fifteen miles from Preston, came to the house of Thomas Walmesley, with whom she was acquainted. Calling in to see them at the time she was there, I was introduced to her, and we immediately entered into conversation on the subject of the Gospel. I found her very intelligent. She seemed very desirous to hear the things I had to teach and to understand the doctrines of the gospel. I informed her of my appointment to preach that evening, and invited her to attend. She did so; and likewise the evening following. After attending these two services she was fully convinced of the truth.

"Friday morning, 4th, she sent for me, desiring to be baptized, which request I cheerfully complied with, in the river Ribble, and confirmed her at the water side, Elder Hyde assisting. This was the first confirmation in England. The following day she started for home, and wept as she was about to leave us. I said to her, 'Sister, be of good cheer, for the Lord will soften the heart of thy father, that I will yet have the privilege of preaching in his chapel, and it shall result in a great opening to preach the Gospel in that region.' I exhorted her to pray and be humble. She requested me to pray for her, and gave me some encouragement to expect that her father would open his chapel for me to preach in. I then hastened to my brethren, told them of the circumstances and the result of my visit with the young lady, and called upon them to unite with me in prayer that the Lord would soften the heart of her father, that he might be induced to open his chapel for us to preach in."

While awaiting the issue of this event, the brethren continued their ministerial labors. The record resumes:

"Sunday, 6th, Elder Hyde preached in the marketplace to a numerous assemblage, both rich and poor, who flocked from all parts 'to hear what these dippers had to say.' After he was through with his discourse I gave an exhortation, and when I had concluded a learned minister stepped forth to oppose the doctrines we advanced, but more particularly the doctrine of baptism, he being a great stickler for infant baptism. The people thinking that he intended to offend us, would not let him proceed, but seemed determined to put him down, and undoubtedly would have done so had not Brother Hyde interposed and begged permission for the gentleman to speak; telling the congregation that he was prepared to meet any arguments he might advance. This appeased the people, who listened to the remarks of the reverend gentleman, after which Brother Hyde spoke in answer to the objections which had been offered, to the satisfaction of nearly all present, and the minister appeared somewhat ashamed. Some of the people hissed at him and told him not to do the like again. One individual came up and asked him what he now thought of his baby baptism; when another took him by the hand and led him out of the throng."

It was now deemed advisable to confirm all who had been baptized and organize them into a branch, twenty-eight persons having been baptized in Preston, but only one confirmed. The converts were accordingly requested to meet at the house of Sister Ann Dawson, where the Elders had their lodgings. It was the evening of the third Sabbath they had spent in England. The meeting having convened, after some preliminary remarks by the Elders, they confirmed twenty-seven members and organized the Preston branch, the first branch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in a foreign land. While attending to these sacred duties, the Spirit of the Lord was poured out upon them in a powerful manner, causing them to rejoice exceedingly.

And now came the fulfillment of Heber's prophecy to Jennetta Richards, daughter of the minister of Walkerfold. The early part of the week brought two letters to Elder Kimball, one from Miss Richards, and the other from her father. The latter read as follows:

    Mr. H. C. Kimball,

                     Sir:--You are expected to be here next Sunday.
    You are given out to preach in the forenoon, afternoon and
    evening. Although we be strangers to one another, yet, I hope we
    are not strangers to our blessed Redeemer, else I would not have
    given out for you to preach. Our chapel is but small and the
    congregation few,--yet if one soul be converted it is of more
    value than the whole world.

                              "I remain, in haste,
                                        "JOHN RICHARDS."

Taking coach from Preston on the following Saturday afternoon, a little before dark Heber arrived at the door of the Revered John Richards, in Walkerfold. On entering the house he was warmly greeted by Mr. Richards, who said: "I understand you are the minister lately from America?" Heber replied in the affirmative. The reverend gentleman then bade him welcome and exclaimed: "God bless you!" Refreshments were served and conversation ensued until a late hour, to the satisfaction of the whole family.

"Next morning," says Heber, "I accompanied the reverend gentleman to his chapel at the hour appointed. He gave out the hymns and prayed, and I preached to an overflowing congregation on the principles of salvation. I likewise preached in the afternoon and evening, and they seemed to manifest great interest in the things which I laid before them. Nearly the whole congregation were in tears. After I had concluded the services of the day Mr. Richards gave out another appointment for me to preach on Monday evening, which I attended to. By request of the congregation I likewise preached on Wednesday evening. A number believed the doctrines I advanced, and on Thursday, 17th, six individuals, all members of Mr. Richards' church, came forward for baptism. James Smithies and his wife Nancy were two of the number."

This result was more than the good pastor had anticipated. He had listened with deep interest to, and had been willing for his congregation to hear, the simple yet powerful testimony of the Mormon Apostle, who, fired with the Holy Ghost, and all unmindful of the studied arts and graces of pulpit oratory, spake, like his Master of yore, "as one having authority." But conversions of this kind he had not counted upon. Fearful of losing his entire flock, and also his salary, if any more such preaching were to be heard in his chapel, he informed Elder Kimball that he would be obliged to close his pulpit against him. Unlike Mr. Fielding, however, he manifested no bitterness of spirit, but after denying him this privilege, continued to treat his Mormon guest with great kindness and hospitality.

Heber's mind had been prepared for the change. "One night," says he, "while at Mr. Richards' house, I dreamed that an elderly gentleman came to me and rented me a lot of ground, which I was anxious to cultivate. I immediately went to work to break it up; and observing young timber on the lot, I cut it down. There was also an old building at one corner of the lot which appeared ready to fall. I took a lever and endeavored to place the building in a proper position, but all my attempts were futile, and it became worse. I then resolved to pull it down, and with the new timber build a good house on a good foundation. While thus engaged, the gentleman of whom I had rented the place came and found great fault with me for destroying his young timber, etc.

"This dream was fulfilled in the following manner: After Mr. Richards let me preach in his chapel, I baptized all of his young members, as I had before baptized his daughter. He then reflected upon himself for letting me have the privilege of his chapel; told me that I had ruined his church, and had taken away all his young members. I could not but feel pity for the old gentleman, but I had a duty to perform which outweighed all other considerations."

Heber now began to preach in private houses, which were opened in the neighborhood, and "ceased not to declare the glorious tidings of salvation." Among his interested auditors, still, was the Reverend John Richards. His daughter Jennetta was very sorrowful over the turn affairs had taken, and wept much at his refusal to allow Elder Kimball to preach in his chapel. Heber told her to be of good cheer, for he believed that the Lord would soften her father's heart, and cause him to reopen his chapel.

The fulfillment is noted as follows:

"Sunday, 27th, I went along with him to his meeting, feeling a desire to hear him preach. After he had finished his discourse, I was agreeably surprised to hear him give out another appointment for me to preach in his chapel. I accordingly preached in the afternoon and evening. The words were with power. The effect was great upon the people, for they were in tears, and the next day I baptized two more, both of them members of Mr. Richards' church. Although he had preached in that parish upwards of thirty years, and his members, as well as the inhabitants of the place and vicinity, were very much attached to him, yet when the fulness of the Gospel was preached, the people, notwithstanding their attachment to and regard for their venerable pastor, when convinced of their duty came forward and followed the footsteps of the Savior, by being buried in the likeness of His death."

While laboring in this neighborhood, Heber had a dream in which Willard Richards appeared to him and said: "You are wanted at Preston, and we cannot do without you any longer."

"The next morning," says he, "I started for Preston where I found that I was anxiously expected by the brethren, who had received a letter from Brother Richards, and one from Brother Russell, giving an account of their proceedings since they left Preston. There was also a letter from my wife, which contained many precious items of news from Kirtland. Elder Hyde praised the Lord on seeing me. Brother Goodson had likewise returned from Bedford, where he and Brother Richards had labored; he gave us an account of their mission and success in raising up a little branch of nineteen."

Another of Heber's prophecies--one of those seemingly casual though fateful utterances for which he was famous--must here be mentioned.

"Willard, I baptized your wife to-day," were his words addressed to Elder Richards just after Jennetta Richards joined the Church. Willard and Jennetta had not yet seen each other. The sequel is in Willard's own words, taken from his diary. Time: March, 1838:

"I took a tour through the branches, and preached. While walking in Thornly I plucked a snowdrop, far through the hedge, and carried it to James Mercer's and hung it up in his kitchen. Soon after, Jennetta Richards came into the room, and I walked with her and Alice Parker to Ribchester, and attended meeting with Brothers Kimball and Hyde at Brother Clark's.

"While walking with these sisters, I remarked, 'Richards is a good name; I never want to change it; do you, Jennetta.' 'No; I do not,' was her reply, 'and I think I never will.'"

"Sept. 24th, 1839, I married Jennetta Richards, daughter of the Rev. John Richards, independent minister at Walkerfold, Chaigley, Lancashire. Most truly do I praise my Heavenly Father for His great kindness in providing me a partner according to His promise. I receive her from the Lord, and hold her at His disposal. I pray that He may bless us forever. Amen!"
