THE TEMPERANCE REFORM IN PRESTON--A WORK PREPARATORY TO THE
GOSPEL--PREACHING IN THE "COCK PIT"--HEBER WRITES HOME AN ACCOUNT OF
HIS MISSION--THE WORK IN CUMBERLAND--EPISODE OF MARY SMITHIES--"SHE
SHALL LIVE TO BECOME A MOTHER IN ISRAEL."

One of the great movements in England, commenced just prior to the landing of the Elders, was the temperance reform. Undoubtedly this was a work preparatory to the advent of the Gospel, and one recognized as such, not only by the Elders, but by their converts connected with the temperance cause.

"In almost every place we went," says Elder Kimball, "where there was a temperance hall, we could get it to preach in, many believing that we made men temperate faster than they did; for as soon as any obeyed the Gospel they abandoned their excesses in drinking; none of us drank any kind of spirits, porter, small beer, or even wine; neither did we drink tea, coffee or chocolate."

It is an interesting fact that this temperance movement began in Preston, where later was first proclaimed in Britain the glad tidings of the Gospel. Very fitting and appropriate, and quite in keeping with our theme, that the lesser movement should thus precede the greater, and from the same starting-point go forth preparing the way.

Herein, too, is sound Gospel philosophy. The spirit of the Lord and the demon of alcohol are essentially antagonistic. That which corrupts the body or darkens the mind, has nothing in common with Mormonism. The Holy Ghost dwelleth not in unclean tabernacles. To be ready for the reception of that spirit which maketh manifest the things of God, and retain its light within the lamp of the soul, the heart must be pure, the mind unclouded, the body clean and undefiled.

On the first Sunday in September, 1837, the Saints in Preston commenced holding meetings in what was known as the "Cock Pit." It was a large and commodious place, capable of seating eight hundred persons, and situated in the center of the town. It had formerly been used by the sporting fraternity for the purpose indicated by its name, but recently had been converted into a temperance hall. Says Heber, describing this unique, historic edifice:

"The space for cock-fighting was an area of about twelve or fifteen feet in the center, around which the seats formed a circle, each seat rising about a foot above another, till they reached the walls of the building. When we leased it the area in the center was occupied by the singers, and our pulpit was the place where the judges formerly sat, who awarded the prizes at cockfights. We had to pay seven shillings per week for the use of it, and two shillings per week for lighting; it being beautifully lit up with gas. The building was about twenty-five feet from 'the Old Church,' probably the oldest in Lancashire."

On the 6th of September Elder Kimball paid a visit to the little branch in Walkerfold, where the Saints were suffering much persecution. Some had been driven from their homes, and otherwise ill treated for the cause of Christ, by their own fathers and mothers. The sight of Heber's face revived their sinking spirits, and they again rejoiced in the Lord. Later in the month he again visited the branch at Longridge and Walkerfold, and found it prospering. Several more were added to the Church during his stay. He next visited and preached at Barshe Lees and Ribchester, baptizing two persons at the former place, and then returned to Preston.

About this time Heber wrote a letter to his wife, in Kirtland, giving some account of his mission. In it the following passages occur:

"You stated in your letter that some of the Twelve were coming to England next spring, calculating to bring their wives with them. This I have no objections to, but if they do they had better bring money to support them. They had better take Brother Joseph's advice and leave their wives at home, for if they bring them here they will repent the day they did so. I do not wish to bring my wife to this country to suffer. If they could see the misery that I do they would not think of such a thing. The Savior says, 'he that is not willing to leave father and mother, wife and children, brothers and sisters, houses and lands, for my sake and the Gospel, is not worthy of me.' We have hired our lodgings since we have been here and bought our own provisions. We eat but one meal a day at home, for the brethren invite us to dinner and supper with them, and they frequently divide their last loaf with us. They do all in their power, and I feel to bless them in the name of the Lord. There are 55 baptized in Preston, and it is as much as they can do to live, and there are but two or three that could lodge us over night if they should try; in fact there are some that have not a bed to sleep on themselves. The Lord says 'take no thought for the morrow,' and this is the way I feel for the present. I commit myself into His hands, that I may always be ready to go at His command. I desire to be content with whatsoever situation I am placed in.

"I feel contented about you. I know the Lord will take care of you, and preserve you until I come home, and feed you and clothe you, and the children. Give me your prayers and you shall have mine. Be faithful, my dear companion; our labors will soon be over, when we shall meet to part no more forever."

Thus, it appears, the work in England was beginning to attract the attention of the Church at home, and stirring a desire in the breasts of the Apostles to "thrust in their sickles and reap" where the field was so "white unto the harvest." Heber's practical advice about leaving their wives at home while they went forth in the ministry, had its effect upon the minds of the brethren, and the custom has prevailed from that day to this, almost universally throughout the foreign missions of the Church.

In the meantime how fared it with the brethren in the north, Elder Russell and Priest Snyder, who had been sent with the Gospel into Cumberland?

"Brother Snyder returned from the north where he had traveled in company with Brother Russell. He stated that they met with considerable opposition while preaching the gospel, that they had baptized about thirty, and that others were investigating. After spending a few days with us," says Elder Kimball, "he and brother Goodson took their leave for America. Brother Goodson pretended to have business of importance which called him home. He had over 200 books of Mormon and Doctrine and Covenants which he refused to let me have, although I proffered to pay him the money for them on my return to America. He carried them back, and on arriving in Iowa Territory he burned them, at which time he apostatized and left the Church.

"Although we were deprived of the labors of Brothers Goodson and Snyder, the work of the Lord continued to roll forth with great power, for those of us who remained received greater strength. Calls from all quarters to come and preach were constantly sounding in our ears, and we labored night and day to satisfy the people, who manifested such a desire for the truth as I never saw before. We had to speak in small and very crowded houses, and to large assemblies in the open air. Consequently our lungs were often very sore, and our bodies worn down with fatigue. Sometimes I was guilty of breaking the priestly rules. I pulled off my coat and rolled up my sleeves and went at my duty with my whole soul, like a man reaping and binding wheat, which caused the hireling priests to be very much surprised. They found much fault with us, and threatened us continually, because we got all of their best members. We told them all we wanted was the wheat; they could keep the rest."

Next comes an interesting incident in Heber's ministry, relating closely to one branch of his numerous family. Says he:

"I will mention a circumstance in relation to the first child born in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in Great Britain, which was on the 7th of October, 1837, at Barshe Lees. She was the daughter of James and Nancy Smithies, formerly Nancy Knowles. After she was born her parents wanted to take her to the church to be sprinkled, or christened, as they call it. I used every kind of persuasion to convince them of their folly; it being contrary to the scriptures and the will of God; the parents wept bitterly, and it seemed as though I could not prevail on them to omit it. I wanted to know of them why they were so tenacious. The answer was, 'if she dies she cannot have a burial in the churchyard.' I said to them, 'Brother and Sister Smithies, I say unto you in the name of Israel's God, she shall not die on this land, for she shall live until she becomes a mother in Israel, and I say it in the name of Jesus Christ and by virtue of the Holy Priesthood vested in me.' That silenced them, and when she was two weeks old they presented the child to me; I took it in my arms and blessed it, that it should live to become a mother in Israel. She was the first child blessed in that country, and the first born unto them."

The child's name was Mary Smithies. She grew to womanhood, emigrating with her parents to America, and became Heber's wife, and the mother of five of his children.

Apostle Kimball next took a tour through some villages south of Preston, in company with Brother Francis Moon. The people "flocked in crowds" to hear him. At Longridge five preachers were among the large congregation of interested listeners. At Eccleston he had the privilege--a rare one--of preaching in a Methodist chapel. During this journey he baptized ten persons, two of whom were Methodist preachers.

By this time the Church in Preston had become numerous, and it was found necessary to organize them into five branches, which was accordingly done on the 8th of October. Priests and Teachers were ordained to take charge of the branches. Thursday evenings were set apart for prayer meetings in various places, and on the Sabbath the whole body assembled at the main hall to partake of the sacrament, and receive general instructions. The greatest harmony and love prevailed, and "as little children" the Saints rejoiced in doing the will of God. Heber spent the principal part of his time in the country, "leaving Preston Monday mornings, and returning on Saturday evenings."
