HEBER WRITES TO WILLARD IN BEDFORD--THE ELDERS BECOME LICENSED
PREACHERS--THE "MILK" AND "MEAT OF THE WORD"--RAPID SPREAD OF THE
WORK--MIRACLES--HEBER'S DREAM OF THE BULL AND FIELD OF GRAIN--A
DISAPPOINTED MOB.

Feeling some anxiety about the work in Bedford, where Elder Richards was still laboring, Heber wrote to him as follows:

                                 "PRESTON, OCT. 12th, 1837.

    "Dear Brother Richards:

             "With pleasure I take my pen in hand to let you know that
    I have not forgotten you. Brother Hyde and myself have labored all
    the time, night and day, so that we have not had much time to
    sleep. There are calls on the right and left. In Preston there
    are about one hundred and sixty members. At Walkerfold I have
    built up one branch; one in Barshe Lees, in Yorkshire; one in
    Ribchester; one in Penwortham, and one in Thornley. We have built
    up those branches besides laboring in Preston nearly all the time;
    so you can judge whether or no we have been idle. There are ten
    calls where we can only fill one. Have had a very bad cold on my
    lungs, so that I have had to hold up for a few days, to recruit my
    health. Our congregations have been so large that our lungs have
    failed to make all the people hear. Brother Fielding has been with
    me part of the time; he has not preached much, but has baptized,
    and visited from house to house.

    "The harvest is ripe and many are thirsting for the word of life.
    May God give you energy to go forth in His name, and cry aloud and
    spare not; and I say unto you, Brother Richards, if you stay in
    that place much longer there will contentions arise, until the
    little branch will be broken up and scattered to the four winds.
    And I say this in the name of the Lord: go forth into the country
    without purse or scrip, as God has commanded, and if you should
    leave the branch two or three weeks the Saints will take no harm,
    and the Lord will bless you in so doing. Go fifteen or twenty
    miles; cry repentance, and let the big things alone; for this is
    the way that the hearts of the people are closed up in Bedford, by
    Elder Goodson preaching those things he was commanded to let
    alone. I have scarcely meddled with the prophecies; I have only
    preached the first principles of the Gospel to the people, doing
    the same that I teach you to do. The churches in the country I
    stay with a few days, and then leave them two or three weeks; they
    are praising the Lord and are glad to see me when I visit them.

    "Brother Richards, I am not forgetful of your kindness to me and
    the brethren while with us; but I have a godly jealousy over you
    for your welfare and prosperity in the cause of Christ.

                                         "HEBER C. KIMBALL."

Willard, it appears, had been praying to receive the mind and will of the Lord through his brethren, the Apostles, to direct him in his labors. His prayer being answered, he went forth with renewed energy, preaching and baptizing, laboring diligently and with success, until March, 1838, when he returned to Preston.

Heber continues: "The effect of the Gospel of Jesus Christ now began to be apparent, not only in the hearts of believers, but likewise in the hearts of those who rejected it. Our meeting in Preston being disturbed by the Methodist ministers, we got our hall licensed, and two gentlemen named Joseph Brown and Arthur Burrows, who were policemen, proffered their services to preserve the peace, and protect us from any further disturbance; which they continued to do as long as we stayed in that land. Many began to persecute us for preaching without a license from the authority of the nation. This idea of obtaining a license from the secular authority was somewhat novel to us; but after consulting our friends, amongst whom was Mr. John Richards' son, an attorney practising in Preston, we found it was according to the laws of England. Brothers Hyde and I therefore made application to the Quarter Sessions and obtained licenses, by the assistance of Mr. Richards; and for which service he refused compensation.

"The following is a copy of my license:

    "'LANCASHIRE TO WIT. }     This is to certify that at the General
    Quarter Sessions of the Peace, held by adjournment at Preston in
    and for said county, the eighteenth day of October, in the first
    year of the reign of Her Majesty, Queen Victoria, Heber Chase
    Kimball came before the Justices present, and did then and there
    in open court, take the oaths appointed to be taken, instead of
    the oaths of allegiance and supremacy; and also the abjurgation
    oath; and subscribed his name thereto, pursuant to the several
    laws in that behalf made and provided.

                                 "'E. GORST,
                       "'Deputy Clerk of the Peace in and
                              for said county.'

"Having now obeyed the requisitions of the law, we felt ourselves tolerably secure, knowing that our enemies could not lawfully harm us. I wrote to Brother Richards that I had taken the oath to be true to Her Majesty and see that the laws were executed, also the abjurgation oath provided for foreigners who were not naturalized, and obtained a license as a preacher of the Gospel; and recommended him to do the same at Bedford: but they made him take the oath of allegiance before they granted him his license to preach. After we had obtained our licenses, to our surprise we found there were only a few licensed preachers in Preston; and when they abused me I told them if they did not cease their abuse I would see the laws put in force according to the oaths I had taken; and this generally silenced them.

"Although we had many persecutors who would have rejoiced at our destruction, and who felt determined to overthrow the work of the Lord, yet there were many who were friendly, who would have stood by us under all circumstances, and would not have been afraid to hazard their lives in our behalf. The church in Preston now numbered two or three hundred souls, with more being added continually.

"November 14th, I wrote to Willard Richards, exhorting him to teach the first principles of the Gospel only; telling him that if the people would not receive them they would not receive anything else; the more simple he could be, the better it would be for his hearers, Brother Goodson having left about 20 Books of Mormon in his possession, I told him to sell all that he could, either to saint or sinner; to get him some clothes, and to make himself warm and comfortable."

The wisdom of the Apostle's counsel to give first the "milk of the word" to those who were infants in faith, reserving the "meat" for such as became strong, is self-evident. No vessel can contain beyond its capacity. Food, in kind and quantity, must ever keep pace with the growth, and be suited to the condition of the one to whom it is administered.

It is human nature to oppose that which is new. The pride of man revolts at the idea of admitting himself in error, and his preconceived notions to be false, or even defective. The flesh, naturally inert, dislikes change that brings toil and study, even for the soul's salvation. Self-interest pleads in various ways, in favor of the old, and against the new. Thus hoary tradition, antique error, sits warmed and comforted, a welcome guest, alike in palace and in hovel, while Truth, a pilgrim, hungry and cold, without stands shivering in the frosty air.

All truth may be new to the ignorant, though old as eternity to the Gods, and whom the Gods make wise. Much that is true, is not expedient. The Prophet Joseph could not tell all he knew, even to the Elders; nor the Elders all they knew to the people, Paul, caught up unto "the third heaven;" Joseph, unto "the seventh heaven," saw and heard things unspeakable, things "unlawful to be uttered." The mysteries of God's kingdom are not for the world, nor for novices in the faith until it is wisdom in the Lord, "lest they perish."

The effect of Elder Goodson's folly in reading to the Reverend Mr. Matthews the vision of the triple glories, when his mind was just beginning to grasp the Gospel's first principles--sufficiently novel and far enough advanced to test his neophyte faith to the utmost--is only one of many like instances in Mormon missionary experience. Prudence demands that truth be inculcated by gradual degrees. "Cry nothing but repentance to this generation," is a word of supreme wisdom to the Lord's servants, laboring in His vineyard among the tender vines and fragile flowers of humanity. Eagles build their nests in strong and high places. Truth is loftier and mightier than many eagles.

The Apostle's record continues:

"Having an appointment to preach in the village of Wrightington, while on the way I stopped at the houses of Brothers Francis Moon and Amos Fielding, when I was informed that the family of Matthias Moon had sent a request for me to visit them, that they might have the privilege of conversing with me on the subject of the Gospel. Accordingly Brother Amos Fielding and I paid them a visit that evening. We were very kindly received by the family, and had considerable conversation on the subject of my mission to England, and the great work of the Lord in the last days. They listened with attention to my statements, but at the same time they appeared to be prejudiced against them. We remained in conversation until a late hour, and then returned home. On our way Brother Fielding observed that he thought our visit had been in vain, as the family seemed to have considerable prejudice. I answered, 'be not faithless but believing; we shall yet see great effects from this visit, for I know that some of the family have received the testimony, and will shortly manifest the same;' at which remark he seemed surprised.

"The next morning I continued my journey to Wrightington and Hunter's Hill. After spending two or three days in that vicinity preaching, I baptized seven of the family of Benson, and others, and organized a branch.

"I returned by the way of Brother Fielding's, with whom I again tarried for the night. The next morning I started for Preston, but when I got opposite the lane leading to Mr. Moon's, I was forcibly led by the Spirit of the Lord to call and see them again. I therefore directed my steps to the house. On my arrival I knocked at the door. Mrs. Moon exclaimed, 'come in! come in! You are welcome here! I and the lassies (meaning her daughters) have just been calling on the Lord, and praying that He would send you this way.' She then informed me of her state of mind since I was there, and said she at first rejected my testimony, and endeavored to think lightly on the things I had advanced, but on trying to pray, the heavens seemed to be like brass over her head, and it was like iron under her feet. She did not know what was the matter, saying, 'certainly the man has not bewitched me has he?' and upon inquiring she found it was the same with the lassies. They then began to reflect on the things I told them, and thinking it possible that I had told them the truth, they resolved to lay the case before the Lord, and beseech Him to give them a testimony concerning the things I had testified of. She then observed that as soon as they did so light broke in upon their minds; they were convinced that I was a messenger of salvation; that it was the work of the Lord, and they had resolved to obey the Gospel. That evening I baptized Mr. Moon and his wife, and four of their daughters.

"The same night I went to Leyland, and stayed with Francis Moon, and the next morning I went to Preston where I stayed about three weeks with Brother Hyde.

"During this time our enemies were not idle; they heaped abuse upon us with an unsparing hand and issued torrents of lies concerning us, which I am thankful to say did not injure us. Among those most active in publishing falsehoods against us and the truth were many of the clergy, who were afraid to meet us face to face in honorable debate, although particularly requested so to do. We only asked three days' notice of the time of discussion, so as to notify the people. But they sought every opportunity to try to destroy our characters, and propagate their lies concerning us, thus showing that they loved darkness rather than light. We frequently called upon the ministers of various denominations, who had taken a stand against us, to come forward and investigate our religion before the world, in an honorable manner, and bring forth their strong reasons to disprove the things we taught, and convince the people by sound argument and the word of God, if they could, that we did not preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ. This they declined. They kept at a respectful distance, and only came out when they knew we were absent, with misrepresentations and abuse. It is true we suffered some from the statements which they thought proper to make, when we could not get an opportunity to contradict them; but generally their reports were of such a character as carried their own refutation with them.

"I visited Mr. Moon again, and baptized the remainder of his family, consisting of thirteen souls, the youngest of whom was over twenty years of age. They received the Gospel as little children, and rejoiced exceedingly in its blessings. The sons were very good musicians, and the daughters excellent singers. When they united their instruments and voices in the songs of Zion, the effect was truly transporting.

"Before I left England there were about thirty of that family and connections baptized, five of whom, Hugh, John, Francis, William and Thomas Moon, were ordained to be fellow laborers with us in the vineyard, and I left them rejoicing in the truths they had embraced.

"In all my labors I was greatly assisted by the Spirit of the Lord, and my soul was comforted exceedingly; for the sick were healed, the lame walked, and in several cases where persons had lain upon their beds in a consumptive state for many years and were not able to sit up, they would be taken in a carriage, perhaps a mile, to the water, where I baptized, laid my hands upon them and confirmed them, that they might receive the Holy Ghost, and rebuked their disease in the name of Jesus Christ, and said unto them 'be thou made whole,' and they would leap and shout glory to God, and begin to mend from that hour. This was a common occurrence on our first mission to England. Many scores of persons were healed by our sending a handkerchief to them.

"I was instrumental in building up churches in the following places, viz.; Eccleston, Wrightington, Askin, Dauber's Lane, Exton, Chorley, Whittle, Hunter's Hill, and Leyland Moss, after laboring about four weeks, and baptizing in the neighborhood of two hundred persons, which caused me to rejoice that I had not labored in vain. More loving and affectionate Saints I never saw before; they were patterns of humility. All the above villages are within a short distance of each other, and near to Preston.

"After my return from those places I took a tour to the northeast of Preston, in company with Brother Joseph Fielding, where we labored a short time with considerable success, and raised up churches in Ribchester, Thornley, Stoney Gate Lane, and at Clithero, a market town containing several thousand inhabitants. At Clithero I baptized a preacher named Thomas Smith and six members of the Methodist Church, immediately after I had preached the first time.

"One night while at the village of Ribchester I dreamed that in company with another person I was walking, and we saw a very extensive field of wheat; more so than the eye could reach; such a sight I had never witnessed. The wheat appeared perfectly ripe and ready for harvest. I was very much rejoiced at the glorious sight which presented itself; but judge of my surprise, when on taking some of the ears and rubbing them in my hands, I found nothing but smut; not any sound grain could I find. I marveled exceedingly and felt very sorrowful, and exclaimed 'what will the people do for grain! Here is a great appearance of plenty, but there is no sound wheat.'

"While contemplating the scenery, I looked in another direction, and saw a small field in the form of the letter L, which had the appearance of something growing in it. I immediately directed my steps to it, and found that it had been sown with wheat, some of which had grown up six inches high, other parts of the field not quite so high, and some had just sprouted. This gave me some encouragement to expect that at the harvest there would be some good grain. While thus engaged, a large bull, looking very fierce and angry, leaped over the fence, ran through the field, and stamped down a large quantity of that which had just sprouted, and after doing considerable injury he leaped over the fence and ran away. I felt very much grieved that so much wheat should be destroyed when there was such a prospect of scarcity.

"When I awoke next morning the interpretation was given me. The large field with the great appearance of grain, so beautiful to look upon, represented the nation in which I then resided; which had a very pleasing appearance and a good show of religion; which made great pretensions to piety and goodness, and consequently of the gifts of the Spirit. The small field I saw, clearly represented the region of country where I was laboring, and where the word of truth had taken root, which was in the shape of the letter L, and it was growing in the hearts of those who had the gospel, some places having grown a little more than others. The village I was in was that part of the field where the bull did so much injury; for during my short visit there, most of the inhabitants were believing, but as soon as I departed, a clergyman belonging to the Church of England came out and violently attacked the truth, made a considerable noise, crying, "False Prophet! Delusion!" and after trampling on truth and doing all the mischief he could before I returned, he took shelter in his pulpit.

"However he did not destroy all the seed, for after my return I was instrumental in building up a branch in Ribchester. A mob of Catholics had combined, that when I went to baptize any persons they would pelt me with stones. I made arrangements with each of the candidates to go singly to the place of baptism, and about the time the last one got there I started quickly, got to the place and baptized them all. As I was baptizing the last one the mob came up and were disappointed in their vengeance, for I came out of the water, and they did not know how many I had baptized."
