THE WORK OF GOD NOT DEPENDENT UPON MAN--HUMILITY A SOURCE OF
POWER--EVERY MAN CHOSEN AND FITTED FOR HIS SPHERE--EXAMPLE OF PAUL THE
APOSTLE--HEBER "HITS THE ROCK" IN LONGTON--THE APOSTLES VISIT THE
BRANCHES PRIOR TO RETURNING TO AMERICA.

Preaching the Gospel and converting sinners unto Christ never yet depended for success upon man's learning or the music of oratory. The unlettered fishermen of Galilee, proclaiming in simple words "Christ crucified," were far more powerful in winning souls from error's ways and melting the hearts of the multitude, than would all the orators have been; the Herods, Ciceros, or Demosthenes, of Judea, Greece and Rome.

The reason is not, as some suppose, that learning and oratory are valueless in the cause of Christ, or necessarily a hindrance, as was Saul's armor upon youthful David. The example of the eloquent and erudite Paul suffices to disprove such a fallacy. The secret is simply this: that God had chosen those humble fishermen, and not the learned orators of the age, for that especial work, and endowed them with power from on high. No man, learned or unlearned, can build up God's Kingdom, except He be with him, and the Holy Ghost work through him. God is the doer of His work, not man, and no flesh can glory in His presence. It was the Holy Ghost in Paul, as it was the Holy Ghost in Peter, not the learning or illiteracy of either, that wrought the wonders of which they were capable.

The Holy Ghost dwells only in hearts that are pure and humble. Humility, next to virtue, is the one grand requisite of a servant of God. Pride and vanity are synonyms of weakness; humility, another name for strength. Men of learning and language, whom nature and education have made "spokesmen," need not be any less humble--though men of little learning and much language are very apt to be. Pride, in rags or in purple, is the offspring of ignorance; while learning is the parent of humility.

The eloquent and learned man, humble and filled with the Holy Ghost, is manifestly more capable, in his sphere, and more successful, than one without his advantages would be. But turn the tables, reverse the conditions, and, in his sphere, the unlearned man, intelligent, God-fearing and inspired, looms a giant, where his more polished brother might seem a pigmy by comparison. The faculty of adapting self to circumstances is invaluable for the missionary to possess. In saying that he was "all things to all men," the brave and faithful Paul did not brand himself a hypocrite. Rather, did he not mean he could accommodate himself to his surroundings; enter into the feelings and sympathies of "all men:" the high, the low, the rich, the poor, the learned and the illiterate; at home in palace or in hovel; feasting in gratitude at luxury's board, or sharing thankfully the crust of poverty; holding spell-bound by his oratory the charmed sages of Athens, or melting his jailor's heart with the simple pathos of his tale.

Such was Paul, the eloquent and learned Apostle; a vessel formed and fashioned, like all others, for his work. It was his mission to be "brought before Caesar"; the mission of most of his brethren to preach, like their Master, "the Gospel to the poor." It will yet fall to the lot of God's servants to stand before kings and rulers, as did Elijah, Nathan and Daniel of old. But in the days of Heber, of Joseph, and of Brigham, the Gospel was chiefly to the poor and humble, who received it gladly and rejoiced in the God of their salvation.

Returning now to the Apostles in Preston:

"Immediately after the conference," wrote Heber, "Elder Hyde and I went to a village near the sea shore called Longton, where we published to the listening crowds the glad tidings of salvation. Brothers Hyde and Goodson had preached several discourses there, and numbers were believing, but none had been baptized. The people asked Brother Hyde why he did not 'bring Kimball down, to hit the rock a crack with his big sledge and let the water flow out.' I preached from Hebrews 6th chapter, 1st verse: 'Therefore not leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto perfection; not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God.' I preached a plain and simple discourse, and according to my calling I taught them to repent and be baptized, that they might be saved, and if they did not they would be damned. Elder Hyde bore testimony. After meeting I baptized ten, and in the morning after, several more. It being very cold weather--the streams all frozen over--we had to repair to the sea to administer the ordinance.

"January 24th, I left Preston and went to Longton with Brother Hyde. We preached once each, and baptized ten; from thence returned to Preston and stayed two or three days. Then I started on a mission to Eccleston and other places, visiting six branches and strengthening them. I was absent about eighteen days and baptized fifteen; the weather being so cold that many dared not go into the water. Returned to Preston and stayed three days. On the Sabbath Elder Hyde and myself administered the sacrament and confirmed twelve. From thence went to Longton and baptized three, ordained one priest, one teacher, and one deacon, and blessed about thirty children. Again returned to Preston. From thence went to Whittle; preached once, and baptized five; and returned to Preston February 23rd.

"From this time to our departure from England we were continually engaged in the work of the ministry, proclaiming the everlasting Gospel in all the regions round, and baptizing all who believed and repented of their sins. The Holy Ghost, the comforter, was given to us and abode with us in a remarkable manner."

"The time when we expected to return to our native land being near at hand, it was considered best for us to spend the short time we had to remain in visiting and organizing the branches; placing such officers over them, and giving such instructions as would be beneficial to them during our absence. Accordingly Brothers Hyde, Fielding and myself visited a branch nearly every day, and imparted such instructions as the Spirit directed. We first visited the branches south of Preston, and after spending some time in that direction we journeyed to the north, accompanied by Brother Willard Richards, who had returned from Bedford March 7th, where he had been proclaiming the Gospel. In consequence of sickness his labors had not been so extensive as they otherwise would have been, and were confined within a short distance of the city of Bedford, where he raised up two small branches of about forty members, which he set in order, and ordained James Lavender an Elder, and other officers to preside. He had labored under considerable difficulty in consequence of the conduct of Elder Goodson, who taught many things which were not in wisdom, and which proved a barrier to the spread of the truth in that region. His health being poor, he was not able to preach much.

"While we were attending to our duties in that section we received a very pressing invitation from a Baptist church, through the medium of their deacon, to pay them a visit, stating that the society were exceedingly anxious to hear from our lips the wonderful things we had proclaimed in the regions round about. We endeavored to excuse ourselves from going, as our engagements were such that it would require the short time we had to stay to attend them. They seemed determined not to take a denial and pleaded with such earnestness that we could not resist their entreaties, and we finally consented to go and preach once. Having arrived at the village, which was between Downham and Burnley, we found a large congregation already assembled in the Baptist chapel, anxiously waiting our arrival. The minister gave out the hymns and Elder Hyde spoke on the resurrection with great effect, after which the minister gave out another hymn, which was sung by the assembly, and then he requested me to address them. I spoke briefly on the first principles of the Gospel. During the services the congregation was overjoyed, tears ran down their cheeks, and the minister could not refrain from frequently clapping his hands for joy, while in the meeting. After the service was over he took us to his house where we were very kindly entertained. After partaking of his hospitality, he with some more friends accompanied us to our lodgings, where we remained in conversation until a very late hour. The next morning while we were preparing to depart we were waited upon by several of the citizens who requested us to preach again that day, stating that great interest was felt by the inhabitants, many of whom were in tears, fearing they should hear us no more, and that a number of influential men had suspended operations in their factories to allow their workmen the privilege of hearing us preach; but we were obliged to deny them, as it was necessary to attend to the appointments we had previously made. We could scarcely go away from them, and when we did so they wept like little children. Such a desire to hear the Gospel I never saw equalled before.

"After commending them to the grace and mercy of God, we went to Downham, where we preached in the afternoon, after which we baptized several and confirmed forty. In the evening we called the churches of Chatburn, Downham, Clithero and Waddington together, and after confirming some, we ordained Priests, Teachers and Deacons to preside over the branches.

"From thence we went to Preston, and after a short stay visited Penwortham and Longton, and organized the churches in those places, which numbered about fifty members each."
