DEPARTURE FOR LIVERPOOL--HEBER'S LETTER TO THE SAINTS IN CHATBURN AND
DOWNHAM--HIS PREDICTION CONCERNING THOMAS WEBSTER--ITS STRICT
FULFILLMENT.

At nine o'clock on the morning of April 9th, Elders Kimball, Hyde and Russell left Preston for Liverpool. Through the kindness of the Saints, many of whom assembled to bid them farewell, they were provided with means to take them back to Kirtland. With tearful eyes they were gazed at by the multitude until the coach was lost to view.

"Notwithstanding the variegated scenery of the country," says Heber, "which in England is very beautiful, my mind reverted back to the time when I first arrived in that country, and the peculiar feelings that possessed me when I traveled from Liverpool to Preston eight months before. Then I was a stranger in a strange land, and had only to rely upon the kindness and mercy of that God who had sent me there. While I mused on these things, my soul was humbled within me, for I had now hundreds of brethren to whom I was united in bonds the most endearing and sacred, and who loved me as their own souls, and whose prayers would be continually offered up for my welfare and prosperity.

"After a ride of about four hours we arrived at Liverpool, and ascertaining that the ship in which we intended to sail would not leave port as early as expected, in consequence of a great storm, in which several vessels had been wrecked and many lives lost, we took lodgings for a few days until the vessel should depart.

"We were accompanied by Elders Fielding and Richards, who felt desirous to obtain all the information they could respecting the government of the Church, as our opportunities of instruction had been limited while in Preston, it being almost impossible to have much private intercourse, as there were so many who wished to converse with us on the subject of the Gospel, etc. But in this they were disappointed, for as soon as it was known in Preston and other places that our departure was delayed, Elder Clayton and numbers of the brethren came to visit us in Liverpool.

"I wrote the following farewell to the Church of Latter-day Saints in Chatburn and Downham:

                              "'LIVERPOOL, April 15, 1838.

    "'Beloved Brethren:

                 "'Having given all diligence to make known unto you
    the common salvation of our Lord Jesus Christ, which ye have so
    joyfully received from my lips, I feel now to write to you a few
    words for your consolation, and the confirming of that hope which
    is possessed by you, that ye may be steadfast and immovable,
    always abounding in the work of the Lord, that it may be made
    manifest unto all men that our labors have not been in vain.

    "'Be kind and affectionate one towards another, manifesting your
    faith by your works--doing as well as saying. If there is any one
    among you destitute of daily food, feed him; if any one be naked,
    clothe him; if any one be cast down, raise him up; if any among
    you are sick, send for the Elders, or Priests, that they may come
    and pray for you, and lay their hands upon you, and the prayer of
    faith shall heal the sick; therefore, brethren, let your faith be
    centered in God, for He is able to do all things, to forgive sins
    and heal the sick, for you know this, that God has said these
    signs shall follow them that believe.

    "'Now, brethren, I exhort you in the name of my Master, to contend
    for that faith which was once delivered to the Saints; for the
    same faith will produce the same effects; for God has not changed,
    neither has His word changed; heaven and earth shall pass away,
    but there shall not one jot or tittle of His word fail; all shall
    be fulfilled, whether it be by His own voice or the voice of His
    servants, it is all the same; therefore, brethren, do not live by
    bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth forth from the
    mouth of God.

    "'Dear brethren and sisters, be patient, be humble, be prayerful,
    visit your secret places. Pray in your families morning and
    evening, ye who are heads of families, and neglect not the
    assembling of yourselves together; but speak often one to another
    concerning the things of the kingdom, and diligently follow after
    every good thing, remembering that the diligent hand maketh rich.
    Let these things be and abound with you, and ye shall be neither
    barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of God. Let your eyes be
    single, and your bodies shall be filled with light.

    "'Now, to you, brethren, who have been ordained to watch over the
    flock, I would say, stand in your places and magnify the offices
    which ye have received of the Lord Jesus, to feed His sheep. Feed
    the lambs; watch over the flock in all things; be not partial to
    any one; remember these things, and the blessing of God shall
    attend you in all things.

    "'Dear brethren and sisters, I give you the gratitude of my heart
    for the kindness which you have bestowed upon me and my brethren;
    for when I was hungry, ye fed me; when I was naked, ye clothed me;
    when I was destitute, ye gave me money; when I was a stranger, ye
    took me in and lodged me; and, as ye have done these things to me
    and my brethren in our necessities, my heavenly Father shall
    minister unto you in your necessities; for I am not forgetful of
    those things and I do ever remember you in my prayers, praying my
    heavenly Father to sustain you, and enable you to walk worthy of
    the holy vocation unto which ye have been called, unto the end.
    Amen.

    "'Finally, brethren and sisters, farewell. Pray for me and my
    brethren; and may the God of all grace sanctify you wholly, and
    bring you into my Father's kingdom.

    "'Adieu. This from your beloved brother in Christ,

                                        "'HEBER C. KIMBALL.'"

One more incident remains to be told, ere with the Elders we take leave of England. At Liverpool, April 13th, "Good Friday," Apostle Kimball penned the following:

    "Dear Brothers and Sisters in Preston:

                                "It seemeth good unto us and also unto
    the Holy Spirit to write you a few words which cause pain in our
    hearts, and will also pain you when they are fulfilled before you;
    yet you shall have joy in the end. Brother Webster will not abide
    in the Spirit of the Lord, but will reject the truth, and become
    the enemy of the people of God, and expose the mysteries which
    have been committed to him, that a righteous judgment may be
    executed upon him, unless he speedily repent.

    "When this sorrowful prediction shall be fulfilled, this letter
    shall be read to the Church, and it shall prove a solemn warning
    to all to beware.

    "Farewell in the Lord."

This letter, signed by the two Apostles, Heber C. Kimball and Orson Hyde, was sealed in the presence, and committed to the care, of Elders Joseph Fielding and Willard Richards. These brethren, on returning to Preston, had Elder William Clayton and Deacon Arthur Burrows examine the sealed missive critically, and placed marks and dates upon it, in order to be able to testify, if necessary, that it had not been opened.

The fulfillment of the prediction was most accurate. Thomas Webster, the individual referred to in the epistle, was a member of the Preston branch, a man of promise and ability, quite popular with the Saints, and his integrity at the time unquestioned. Desiring that he should prosper. Presidents Fielding and Richards watched over and prayed for him, and "he continued to grow in the knowledge of the kingdom, and spoke with power for some months." A change then came over him; he became dissatisfied, and preferred certain charges against the presiding Elders. These charges were proven to be false, or of no account, and Webster was required to acknowledge his error, or cease acting in his office. He refused to do either. On the following Sunday, in a private house, he administered the sacrament to six of his followers, one of whom had been excommunicated from the Church, while another had not even been baptized. For this offense Webster was deprived of his membership.

The letter of the Apostles was then opened and read to the Church, Brothers Clayton and Burrows first testifying publicly that the seal had never been broken. It was feared that Webster's popularity would draw many after him, but the reading of the prediction concerning him utterly destroyed his influence, and more fully confirmed the Saints in their faith.

Webster, ambitious to create a following, and well aware of his popularity, applied for permission to come before the Church and publicly plead his cause, which request was wisely denied, as he had refused to appear, when required, the Sabbath before. Soon after placards were posted up in different parts of Preston reading as follows; "A lecture will be delivered at Mr. Giles' chapel, to expose the mysteries of Mormonism, by Thomas Webster." This announcement he fulfilled, though with little effect, thus making good in strictest detail the prophecy of Heber C. Kimball, uttered six months before.

Return we now to the Apostles and Elder Russell, in Liverpool, about to take passage on board the Garrick, bound for New York.
