THE ELDERS SAIL FOR HOME--A STORM AT SEA--HOW HEBER FOUND FAVOR WITH
THE STEWARD--ARRIVAL AT NEW YORK--THE "GARRICK" AGAIN VICTORIOUS--
JOURNEY TO KIRTLAND--ON TO FAR WEST--HAPPY MEETING WITH JOSEPH AND THE
BRETHREN.

Homeward bound!

Sheathed the sword and furled the banner.

The battle won, the fortress stormed and taken.

For a little season, rest and change, ere again the trumpet sounds, and the warrior is resummoned to the fray.

It was indeed a campaign of victory from which the Elders were returning. The laurel wreath was theirs, bravely and fairly earned.

Yet not for worldly honors and applause had they been striving. These, to the true servant of Christ, are ever the last consideration. The praise of man they neither expected nor desired. Their reward was with them, a reward never wrongly bestowed; the approval of a good conscience and the favor of their Maker; meed only of worthy motives, and of duty well performed.

Again on board the Garrick, upon the bosom of the heaving main.

It was on the 20th of April, 1838, that the Elders embarked for home.

"Soon after we left Liverpool," says Heber, "a great storm came on, with a head wind, which continued without cessation for several days, and did considerable damage to the vessel; the bowsprit was broken twice, by the force of the wind, with only the jib sail set; the boom likewise came down with great force, near where the captain was standing, but he fortunately escaped; several other parts of the rigging were much torn and injured. During the continuance of the storm, Brothers Hyde and Russell were very sick. After this we had more favorable weather.

"When we had been on the water two weeks, I asked permission of the captain for one of us to preach, which request was cheerfully complied with, and the second cabin was prepared for the occasion. Brother Russell preached, after which Brother Hyde made some observations; they were listened to with great attention, and the congregation appeared very much satisfied.

"The Lord gave us favor in the eyes of the captain and passengers, who treated us with respect and kindness. One reason for obtaining this universal favor of the ship's company was, the steward of the ship had charge of a fine Durham cow, which was larger than the medium size of our oxen; the cow became sick and the steward was very sorry, because she was their only dependence to supply the cabin passengers with milk. I went and looked at the cow and discovered that she could not raise her cud. I told the steward to cut for me a half dozen slices of fat pork, as large as my hand, which he did; and I gave them to the cow, when she soon got well. From that time forth the steward sent us turtle soup, wine, and every luxury the ship afforded, and made us many presents.

"May 12th, we came in sight of New York, and in the evening secured a landing, after a passage of twenty-two and a half days."

It will be remembered that the Garrick, on its first voyage, bearing these Elders to England, won a wager of ten thousand dollars, arriving at Liverpool a few lengths ahead of the packet ship South America, both vessels having left New York at the same time, and keeping in sight of each other during the whole of the way. Another victory was now scored by the Garrick in arriving at the port of New York.

Was it because these Mormon Apostles were again on board, returning themselves from a great spiritual contest, in which God had given them the victory? Judge, reader, for yourself. Here is the Apostle Heber's record of the event:

"There was a wager made at Liverpool whether the New England or the Garrick would arrive in port first. When we passed Sandy Hook the New England was four or five miles ahead of us; some of our officers remarked she would go in before us, but I told them she would not, as I had said at Liverpool we would go in first. At this time neither of the ships were sailing more than three knots an hour, when suddenly the wind left the sails of the New England, and a fair wind struck our sails, and we ran in one hour ahead of her."

Continuing, the prophet Heber says:

"We landed and went into the city of New York with several of the passengers, who purchased some refreshments, and after we returned, bade us partake with them, and we all rejoiced together; we then bowed before the Lord and offered up the gratitude of our hearts for all His mercies, in prospering us on our mission, and bringing us safely across the mighty deep, to behold once more the land of our nativity, and the prospect of soon embracing our families and friends.

"Sunday, 13th, we went in search of Brother Fordham, whom we found after some trouble. He was glad to see us, and immediately took us to the house of Brother Wandel Mace, where we were glad to see our beloved brother Orson Pratt, who was then laboring in that city, and who, with his brother Parley P. Pratt, had been instrumental in bringing many into the kingdom there. And now I had the pleasure of witnessing the fulfillment of the prophecy I delivered to Brother Fordham when I started for England.

"We accompanied Brother Orson Pratt to the house where the Saints assembled to worship. We found about eighty persons assembled, all of whom had recently joined the Church. After singing and prayer, I was requested to give an account of our mission to England, which I did. In the evening Elders' Russell and Hyde preached; afterwards some came forward and offered themselves as candidates for baptism. The short time we were in New York was spent very agreeably with the Saints.

"On the 14th we bade adieu to the brethren, and continued our journey by steamboat, railroad and canal, and arrived at Kirtland May 22nd, having been absent eleven months and nine days.

"I found my family in good health, and as comfortably situated as I could expect; our joy was mutual. The Saints likewise welcomed us home, for which I felt thankful to my heavenly Father.

"But my journey was not yet ended; for soon after my arrival in Kirtland I commenced making preparations to move my family to the State of Missouri, where Brother Joseph and the greater part of the authorities of the Church, and almost all the members who had any faith in Mormonism, had already removed. The cause of their removal to the west was the persecutions to which they were subject in Kirtland. The brethren who yet resided there, although very kind and affectionate, were weak in the faith, in consequence of trials and temptations. This caused us to grieve exceedingly, and we resolved to cheer them up as much as we possibly could. We preached in the house of the Lord a few times, recounted our travels and the great success that had attended our labors; also the marvelous work which the Lord had commenced in England. They began to take courage, their confidence increased, their faith was strengthened, and they again realized the blessings of Jehovah.

"About the 1st of July I commenced my journey with my family, accompanied by Elders Orson Hyde, Erastus Snow and Winslow Farr, two brothers by the name of Badger, and the widow Beeman, with their families, numbering about forty souls. We took wagons to Wellsville, on the Ohio River, about a hundred and thirty miles; then took steamboat to St. Louis, also thence to Richmond on Missouri River. Elder Hyde stayed at Richmond several days. We there procured wagons and went to Far West, where we arrived in safety on the twenty-fifth of July, and had a happy meeting with Joseph, Hyrum and Sidney, some of the Twelve, and numbers of our friends and brethren, some of whom were so glad to see us, that tears started in their eyes when we took them by the hand.

"During our journey from Kirtland to Missouri, the weather was extremely warm, in consequence of which I suffered very much, my body being weakened by sickness, and I continued very feeble for a considerable length of time.

"Sunday, July 20th, I met Joseph, Sidney and Hyrum on the public square, as they started for Adam-Ondi-Ahman. Joseph requested me to preach to the Saints and give them a history of my mission, saying, 'It will revive their spirits and do them good,' which I did, although I was scarcely able to stand. I related many things respecting my mission and travels, which were gladly received by them, whose hearts were cheered by the recital, while many of the Elders were stirred up to diligence, and expressed a great desire to accompany me when I should return to England."

CHAPTER XXIX

THE LAND WHERE ADAM DWELT--THE SAINTS IMPELLED TOWARD THEIR
DESTINY--PERSECUTION REVIVES--ADAM-ONDI-AHMAN--THE ALTAR OF THE
ANCIENT OF DAYS.

The land where Adam dwelt. The site of the Garden of Eden. The place where the Ancient of Days shall sit, and the God of heaven shall again visit His people. As saith the prophet Daniel:

    "I beheld till the thrones were cast down and the Ancient of Days
    did sit, whose garment was white as snow, and the hair of his head
    like the pure wool: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his
    wheels as burning fire.

    "A fiery stream issued and come forth from before him: thousand
    thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
    stood before him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened.
    * * *

    "I saw in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of man
    came with the clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days,
    and they brought him near before him.

    "And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that
    all people, nations, and languages should serve him: his dominion
    is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his
    kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. * * * * * *

    "I beheld and the same horn made war with the Saints, and
    prevailed against them;

    "Until the Ancient of Days came, and judgment was given to the
    Saints of the Most High; and the time came that the Saints
    possessed the kingdom."

Here, in this most ancient region, where, parallel with the stream of Time, the great river of mortal life arose, had pitched their tents the Saints of latter days.

Here dwelt Adam and Eve in the world's infancy; here they tasted of the fruit forbidden, and were driven forth from Eden, their fall predestined that mortal man might be. Here the great sire of mankind built altars unto God, offering sacrifice unto the Father in commemoration of the atonement of the Son. Here fell the first martyr; here righteous Abel's blood was spilt; here burst the awful thunders of heaven's awakened wrath upon the guilty head of earth's first murderer. Here Adam, bowed with age, blessed the righteous residue of his seed, and predicted whatsoever should befall his posterity to the latest generation.

All this ere the days of Peleg, in whose days "was the earth divided;" ere Enoch's city rose to heaven, or the ark of Noah floated over a wave-buried world. Ere Babel's towering folly mocked the skies; ere wrecked was language on confusion's strand; ere the great river of humanity, dividing into rills, went forth to water with the streams of life the soil of every land.

Here, in the times of restitution, when all things in Christ are gathered in one, Adam, Michael, the great Prince, Ancient of Days, is to come in power and glory, revisiting the scenes of his earthly pilgrimage.

America, the old world, not the new! Cradle of man, mother of nations, grave of empires!

Unto Missouri, land of promise; the ancient, the chosen, the favored above all other lands, had the Lord's Prophet, Joseph, led His covenant people.

Spring Hill, Daviess County, Missouri, one of the settlements of the Saints in this region, had been renamed by revelation, Adam-ondi-Ahman, because, said the Lord, "it is the place where Adam shall come to visit his people, or the Ancient of Days shall sit, as spoken of by Daniel the Prophet."

Verily were the Saints of the Most High being driven toward their destiny. The "horn" that made war with them and "prevailed against them," was surely pushing them on to final victory. Was it not destiny, too, that they should thus retrace the steps of their great ancestor, who, driven forth from Eden,[A] dwelt in Adam-ondi-Ahman?

Heber was now with his people at Far West, in "the land where Adam dwelt," ready to perform his part of the labor in preparing the kingdom of the Son of God for the coming of the Ancient of Days.

"Soon after my arrival," says he, "Bishop Partridge gave me a lot and sufficient lumber to build a house. Charles Hubbard made me a present of forty acres of land, and another brother gave me a cow. All the brethren were remarkably kind in contributing to my necessities. About the last of August, after I had spent much labor, and nearly finished my house, I was obliged to abandon it to the mob, who again commenced persecuting the Saints, driving off their cattle and destroying their property."

The origin of this persecution was much the same as that of the Jackson County trouble, five years before. The thrift and enterprise of the Saints, with their growing power and influence, had aroused the jealous fears of their Gentile neighbors, and what the scheming villainy of political demagogues left undone, the malice of sectarian priests accomplished, in kindling the wrath of the ignorant and fanatical against them.

An election riot in Gallatin, Daviess County, on the 6th of August, 1838, where a combined effort was made to prevent the Mormons from voting, and several of the brethren were under the necessity of using force to defend themselves against their bullying assailants, was made the pretext for further outrages against the community to which they belonged. The Saints in that locality being helplessly in the minority, were at the mercy of the mob which now rose against them.

One of the methods employed by the leaders of the lawless banditti to enlist sympathy for their own cause, and arouse the public mind against their victims, was to destroy property belonging to non-Mormons, their own followers in some instances, and then ride through the country advertising it as the work of Mormons, against whom any tale, however false or atrocious, was readily believed. Some of the mob even fired upon a church while its occupants were worshiping on the Sabbath day, and then spread the alarm that the Mormons had "riz" and were destroying property, demolishing churches and interfering with free religious worship.

These atrocious falsehoods, worthy only of fiends incarnate, bore legitimate fruit in deeds equally devilish and appalling. The people rose en masse; the Saints were driven from their homes, their houses plundered and burned, their fields laid waste, and men, women and children fled for their lives in all directions, pursued by their merciless oppressors.

What followed, Heber's record thus relates:

"After hearing of the mobbing, burning and robbing in Gallatin, Daviess Co., and the region round about, the brethren of Caldwell went directly to Adamondi-Ahman, which is on the west fork of Grand River. Thomas B. Marsh, David W. Patten, Brigham Young, myself, Parley P. Pratt and John Taylor amongst the number. When we arrived there we found the Prophet Joseph, Hyrum Smith and Sidney Rigdon, with hundreds of others of the Saints preparing to defend themselves from the mob who were threatening the destruction of our people. Men, women and children were fleeing to that place for safety from every direction; their houses and property were burnt and they had to flee half naked, crying, and frightened nigh unto death, to save their lives.

"While there we laid out a city on a high elevated piece of land, and set the stakes for the four corners of a temple block, which was dedicated, Brother Brigham Young being mouth; there were from three to five hundred men present on the occasion, under arms. This elevated spot was probably from two hundred and fifty to five hundred feet above the level of Grand River, so that one could look east, west, north or south, as far as the eye could reach; it was one of the most beautiful places I ever beheld.

"The Prophet Joseph called upon Brother Brigham, myself and others, saying, 'Brethren, come, go along with me, and I will show you something.' He led us a short distance to a place where were the ruins of three altars built of stone, one above the other, and one standing a little back of the other, like unto the pulpits in the Kirtland Temple, representing the order of three grades of Priesthood; 'There,' said Joseph, 'is the place where Adam offered up sacrifice after he was cast out of the garden.' The altar stood at the highest point of the bluff. I went and examined the place several times while I remained there."

An episode of peace in time of war. A glimpse of heaven's blue through a rift in the gathering storm.

A fiery ordeal was before the Saints. The Church, tried with poverty and tempted by the prospect of wealth, had survived and maintained its integrity. It had also withstood the world's scorn, the wrath and ridicule of the ungodly. Nor had fiery trials been wanting, whereby the faith of some had been proven, the supposed faith of others weighed in the balance and found wanting. A general test was now to be applied. The faith and integrity of the whole Church were about to pass through the fierce flames of affliction; between the upper and nether millstones of official tyranny and mob violence.
