THE FALL OF FAR WEST--JOSEPH AND HIS BRETHREN BETRAYED TO THE
ENEMY--HEBER FACING THE TRAITORS--HIS FEARLESS DENUNCIATION AND FIRM
TESTIMONY--ATROCITIES OF THE MOB--HEBER's PROPHECY OF RETRIBUTION--HE
VISITS THE PROPHET IN RICHMOND JAIL.

The thunder-cloud of war now rolled upon the doomed city of Far West. Heber's narrative continues:

"On the 30th we discovered several thousand of the mob coming to Far West, under pretence of being government troops; they passed through our corn and wheat fields, making a complete desolation of everything they came across.

"Brother Brigham and I were appointed captains of fifty, in a hurry, and commanded to take our position, right in the thoroughfare on which the mob was advancing to the city, momentarily anticipating the awful tragedy of a bloody massacre. Joseph was with us giving counsel.

"The army came up to within good rifle shot, and halted; seeing our temporary fortifications, which we had thrown up the night previous, by pulling down some of our houses, and fixing up our wagons; they dared not approach nearer, but retreated to Goose Creek, about three-fourths of a mile, screaming, hallooing and screeching; the devils in hell could not have made a more hideous howling. The mob declared there were fifteen hundred of us; but to my certain knowledge there were only about one hundred and fifty in that line.

"The word came to us that Joseph Smith and several others were to be given up, otherwise they would massacre every man, woman and child. In order to prevent this horrible threat from being executed, Joseph gave himself up, with Elders Sidney Rigdon, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, and George W. Robinson, they having been betrayed into the mob camp by Col. George M. Hinkle and other apostates, on the 31st of October.

"November 1st, the mob, professing to be the regular militia of the state of Missouri, numbering about 7,000, surrounded Far West, we were all taken prisoners and then marched a short distance into a hollow, where Col. Lucas had previously pointed his cannon, in full range, so that if we had not laid down our arms, he could easily sweep us into eternity, which was his design. We were then formed into a hollow square, and commanded by Col. Lucas to ground arms and deliver up our weapons of war, although they were our own private property. We were then marched back a short distance, on the public square in Far West, where we were again formed into a hollow square, near the house of Brother Beeman.

"The mob then commenced plundering the citizens of their bedding, clothing, money, wearing apparel, and everything of value they could lay their hands upon; and also attempting to violate the chastity of the women in sight of their husbands, pretending they were hunting for prisoners and fire-arms.

"The most of us had not had any food for twenty-four hours, not having time to go to our houses to get it. When these troops surrounded us, and we were brought into a hollow square, the first persons that I knew were men who had once professed to be beloved brethren, and they were the men who piloted these mobs into our city, namely William McLellin and Lyman E. Johnson, two of the twelve; John Whitmer and David Whitmer, two of the witnesses to the Book of Mormon; William W. Phelps and scores of others, hail fellows well met. A portion of the troops were painted like Indians, and looked horrible, led by Neil Gillium, who styled himself 'The Delaware Chief;' who, with many others cocked their guns upon us and swore they would blow our brains out, although we were disarmed and helpless.

"William E. McLellin wanted to know where Heber C. Kimball was. Some one pointed me out to him as I was sitting on the ground. He came up to me and said: 'Brother Heber, what do you think of the fallen prophet now? Has he not led you blindfolded long enough? Look and see yourself, poor, your family stripped and robbed, and your brethren in the same fix; are you satisfied with Joseph?' I replied, 'Yes, I am more satisfied with him a hundred fold than ever I was before, for I see you in the very position that he foretold you would be in; a Judas to betray your brethren, if you did not forsake your adultery, fornication, lying and abominations. Where are you? What are you about? You, and Hinkle, and scores of others; have you not betrayed Joseph and his brethren into the hands of the mob, as Judas did Jesus? Yes, verily, you have; I tell you Mormonism is true, and Joseph is a true prophet of the living God; and you with all others that turn therefrom will be damned and go to hell, and Judas will rule over you.'

"Soon after this, when things began to be a little more quiet, I desired to go to my home to get something to eat as I had not eaten anything for many hours. I asked some of the mob standing near, if I could not have the privilege to go to my house, a little distance off; they referred me to their captain, who was Bogard, the Methodist preacher. I went to him and told him what I wanted. He first spoke of sending some one with me, as I would be liable to be shot if found alone. In a short time says he, 'I will go with you.' He went down to my house; my wife prepared some dinner, and he ate with me; then we returned, and I took my seat on the ground with my brethren who were under guard.

"The next day, 2nd, I was permitted to return to my house, but was told not to leave the city, as it was surrounded by a strong guard to prohibit anyone leaving the place; they were engaged in taking every man who seemed to have any influence, and putting them in chains to stand a trial. They were pointed out by the apostate allies of the mob.

"We were brought up at the point of the bayonet and compelled to sign a deed of trust, transferring all our property to defray the expenses of this war made on us by the State of Missouri. This was complied with, because we could not help ourselves. When we walked up to sign the deeds of trust to pay these assassins for murdering our brethren and sisters, and their children; ravishing some of our sisters to death; robbing us of our lands and possessions and all we had on earth, and other similar "services," they expected to see us cast down and sorrowful, but I testify as an eye witness that the brethren rejoiced and praised the Lord, for His sake taking joyfully the despoiling of their goods. Judges and magistrates, Methodist, Presbyterian, Campbellite and other sectarian priests stood by and saw all this going on, exulting over us, and it seemed to make them more angry that we bore our misfortunes so cheerfully. Judge Cameron said, with an oath, 'See them laugh and kick up their heels. They are whipped, but not conquered.'

"On the 6th, Gen. Clark delivered his noted extermination speech, and read over the names of the brethren who were made prisoners, to await a trial for something, they knew not what, and placed under a strong guard. In order that the tyrant may not be forgotten I insert a portion of his speech:

    "Gentlemen, you whose names are not attached to this list of
    names, will now have the privilege of going to your fields and of
    providing corn, wood, etc., for your families. Those who are now
    taken will go from this to prison, be tried and receive the due
    demerit of their crimes. But you (excepting such as charges may be
    hereafter preferred against) are at liberty as soon as the troops
    are removed that now guard the place, which I shall cause to be
    done immediately. It now devolves upon you to fulfill the treaty
    that you have entered into, the leading items of which I shall now
    lay before you.

    "The first requires that your leading men be given up to be tried
    according to law; this you have complied with.

    "The second is that you deliver up your arms--this has also been
    attended to. The third stipulation is that you sign over your
    properties to defray the expenses that have been incurred on your
    account; this you have also done. Another article yet remains for
    you to comply with, and that is, that you leave the State
    forthwith; and whatever may be your feelings concerning this, or
    whatever your innocence is, it is nothing to me. General Lucas
    (whose military rank is equal to mine) has made this treaty with
    you, and I approve of it. I should have done the same had I been
    here, and am therefore determined to see it executed.

    "The character of this State has suffered almost beyond
    redemption, from the character, conduct and influence that you
    have exerted; and we deem it an act of justice to restore her
    character by every proper means.

    "The order of the Governor to me was that you should be
    exterminated, and not allowed to remain in the State. And had not
    your leaders been given up, and the terms of the treaty complied
    with before this time, your families would have been destroyed
    and your houses in ashes.

    "There is a discretionary power vested in my hands, which,
    considering your circumstances, I shall exercise for a season. You
    are indebted to me for this clemency. I do not say that you shall
    go now, but you must not think of staying here another season, or
    of putting in any crops; for the moment you do this the citizens
    will be upon you; and if I am called here again, in case of
    non-compliance with the treaty made, do not think I shall act as I
    have done now. You need not expect any mercy, but extermination,
    for I am determined the Governor's order shall be executed.

    "As for your leaders, do not think, do not imagine for a moment,
    do not let it enter your minds that they will be delivered and
    restored to you again, for their fate is fixed, the die is cast,
    their doom is sealed.

    "I am sorry, gentlemen, to see so many apparently intelligent men
    found in the situation that you are; and oh! if I could invoke
    that great Spirit of the unknown God to rest upon and deliver you
    from that awful chain of superstition, and liberate you from those
    fetters of fanaticism with which you are bound--that you no longer
    do homage to a man.

    "I would advise you to scatter abroad and never again organize
    yourselves with Bishops, Priests, etc., lest you excite the
    jealousies of the people and subject yourselves to the same
    calamities that have now come upon you.

    "You have always been the aggressors, you have brought upon
    yourselves these difficulties, by being disaffected, and not being
    subject to rule, and my advice is, that you become as other
    citizens, lest by a recurrence of these events you bring upon
    yourselves irretrievable ruin."

    "He also said: 'You must not be seen as many as five together, if
    you are, the citizens will be upon you and destroy you, but you
    should flee immediately out of the state. There is no alternative
    for you but to flee, you need not expect any redress; there is
    none for you.'"

"I was present," continues Heber, "when that speech was delivered, and I can truly say 'he is a liar and the truth is not in him,' for not one of us had made any such agreement with Lucas, or any other person; what we did was by compulsion in every sense of the word, and as for Gen. Clark and his 'unknown God,' they had nothing to do with our deliverance, but it was our Father in heaven, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, in whom we trust, who liveth and dwelleth in the heavens, and the day will come when our God will hold him in derision with all his coadjutors."

"Joseph Smith, Sidney Rigdon, Hyrum Smith, Parley P. Pratt, Lyman Wight, Amasa Lyman and George W. Robinson were marched off for Independence, Jackson County. It was rumored that all of the men who were in the Crooked River battle would be taken prisoners, therefore many of them fled to the north, before the guards were placed around the city.

"I have no doubt that I would also have been taken a prisoner, for every means was adopted by Hinkle to have me taken, but he could not remember me. The mob had not become acquainted with Brother Brigham, as he lived three or four miles from the city on Mill Creek; and I had not been there over three weeks when the mobbing commenced, and was only known by the brethren, and many of them I had not seen since my arrival."

Heber's wonderful influence over men, that power of controlling and subduing their passions which won for him from the Prophet Joseph the surname of "peace-maker," here found an opportunity for its exercise.

"One afternoon," says he, "I sent my son William on an errand, a short distance, when one of the guards drew up his rifle and threatened to blow out his brains if he stepped one inch further towards the house. Through the agency of some of my brethren I was notified of it. I went to the man and spoke to him in a friendly manner, and conversed with him about the beautiful country, it being more beautiful than England and the nations I had been traveling in. He became very much interested; in a short time I pointed out my son William; says I, 'that is my son.' He said, 'if that is one of your sons, he may pass, he may go home;' afterwards the man came to my house several times and became very friendly.

"I merely mention this, to show the perils we were in, men, women and children; death and destruction waiting on us; and this spirit aroused by apostates such as Hinkle, who sold Joseph and his brethren, and actually received money for betraying them.

"The murders, house-burnings, robberies, rapes, drivings, whippings, imprisonments, and other sufferings and cruelties inflicted upon the people of God, under the illegal orders of Missouri's Executive, have only in part been laid before the world, and form a page in history unsurpassed and unparalleled in the history of religious persecution--that foulest of all crimes. This historic page alone can credit Lilburn W. Boggs and his minions with feeding the ministers of the proscribed religion on the flesh of their murdered brethren; the odium of which is fully shared by the ministers of different denominations who participated in these vile atrocities. If hell can furnish a parallel where is it?

"I have not the ability to write what I saw and felt and realized, but will leave it to eternity to reveal the scenes of those days. I can say before God, angels, heaven and earth, that I am innocent of violating any law of the state of Missouri, and my brethren are equally innocent and virtuous, true to their God and their country.

"The measure they meted to the Latter-day Saints shall be measured to them again, and upon all those who had a hand in our persecution and expulsion, and those who consented to it, four-fold, full, running over, and pressed down; and AS THE LORD GOD ALMIGHTY LIVETH, I SHALL
LIVE TO SEE IT COME TO PASS![A]

"After the mob departed, I accompanied Brother Brigham to Richmond jail, to see our brethren. We found Joseph, Hyrum, Sidney and others chained together in one room, and others confined in other places, amongst the most dissolute associations. We scarcely had the privilege of speaking to our brethren more than to say, 'how do you do,' every eye being upon us in suspicion. We put up at a public house for the night, and I bear testimony, from our feelings and the spirit manifested in that house, that there were legions of devils present; I do not remember that either of us slept any that night.

"November 29th, the brethren were removed to Liberty Jail, in Clay County, and put in close confinement."
