MEMORIAL TO THE MISSOURI LEGISLATURE--A CHAPTER OF INFAMY--HOW
MISSOURI REDRESSED THE WRONGS OF THE SUFFERING SAINTS--BRIGHAM AND
HEBER SETTING IN ORDER THE CHURCH--ARRANGING FOR THE EXODUS.

The brethren who retained their liberty addressed a memorial to the Missouri Legislature, setting forth the wrongs that the Saints had suffered in that state, and humbly petitioning for redress of grievances. As a concise statement of the Missouri persecutions, with much of which the history of Heber C. Kimball is identified, and himself being one of the signers of the document, it is here given a place in this volume:

    "We, the undersigned petitioners and inhabitants of Caldwell
    County, Missouri, in consequence of the late calamity that has
    come upon us, taken in connection with former afflictions, feel it
    a duty we owe to ourselves and our country to lay our case before
    your honorable body for consideration.

    "It is a well known fact, that a society of our people commenced
    settling in Jackson County, Missouri, in the summer of 1831, where
    they, according to their ability, purchased lands and settled upon
    them, with the intention and expectation of becoming permanent
    citizens in common with others.

    "Soon after the settlement began, persecutions began; and as the
    society increased persecution also increased, until the society at
    last was compelled to leave the county; and although an account of
    these persecutions has been published to the world, yet we feel
    that it will not be improper to notice a few of the most prominent
    items in this Memorial.

    "On the 20th of July, 1833, a mob convened at Independence, a
    committee of which called upon a few of the men of our Church
    there, and stated to them that the store, printing office, and
    indeed all other mechanic shops must be closed forthwith and the
    society leave the county immediately.

    "These propositions were so unexpected that a certain time was
    asked for to consider the subject, before an answer should be
    returned, which was refused, and our men being individually
    interrogated, each one answered that he could not consent to
    comply with their propositions. One of the mob replied that he was
    sorry, for the work of destruction would commence immediately. In
    a short time the printing office, which was a two-story building,
    was assailed by the mob and soon thrown down, and with it much
    valuable property destroyed. Next they went to the store for the
    same purpose; but Mr. Gilbert, one of the owners, agreeing to
    close it, they abandoned their design. Their next move was the
    dragging of Bishop Partridge from his house and family to the
    public square, where, surrounded by hundreds, they partially
    stripped him of his clothes, and tarred and feathered him from
    head to foot. A man by the name of Allen was also tarred at the
    same time. This was Saturday and the mob agreed to meet the
    following Tuesday, to accomplish their purpose of driving or
    massacreing the society.

    "Tuesday came, and the mob came also, bearing with them a red flag
    in token of blood. Some two or three of the principal men of the
    society, offered their lives if that would appease the wrath of
    the mob, so that the rest of the society might dwell in peace upon
    their lands. The answer was that unless the Society would leave
    en masse, every man should die for himself. Being in a
    defenseless situation, to save a general massacre, it was agreed
    one half of the society should leave the county by the 1st of
    January, and the remainder by the first of the following April. A
    treaty was entered into and ratified and all things went on
    smoothly for awhile. But some time in October, the wrath of the
    mob began again to be kindled, insomuch that they shot at some of
    our people, whipped others, and threw down their houses and
    committed many other depredations; indeed the society of Saints
    were harassed for some time both day and night, Their houses were
    brick-batted and broken open, women and children insulted, etc.

    "The store-house of A. S. Gilbert and Co. was broken open,
    ransacked and some of the goods strewed in the streets.

    "These abuses, with many others of a very aggravated nature, so
    stirred up the indignant feelings of our people, that when a party
    of them, say about thirty, met a company of the mob of about
    double their number, a skirmish took place, in which some two or
    three of the mob, and one of our people were killed. This raised,
    as it were, the whole country in arms, and nothing would satisfy
    them but the immediate surrender of the arms of our people, and
    they forthwith to leave the county. Fifty-one guns were given up,
    which have never been returned or paid for, to this day.

    "The next day parties of the mob, from fifty to seventy, headed by
    priests, went from house to house, threatening women and children
    with death if they were not off before they returned. This so
    alarmed them that they fled in different directions: some took
    shelter in the woods, while others wandered on the prairies till
    their feet bled. In the meantime, the weather being very cold,
    their sufferings in other respects were very great.

    "The society made their escape to Clay County as fast as they
    possibly could, where the people received them kindly and
    administered to their wants. After the society had left Jackson
    County, their buildings, amounting to about two hundred, were
    either burned or otherwise destroyed; and much of their crops, as
    well as furniture, stock etc., which if properly estimated would
    make a large sum, for which they have not as yet received any
    remuneration.

    "The Society remained in Clay County nearly three years, when at
    the suggestion of the people there, they removed to that section
    of the country known now as Caldwell County. Here the people
    purchased out most of the former inhabitants, and also entered
    much of the wild land. Many soon owned a number of eighties, while
    there was scarcely a man that did not secure to himself at least a
    forty.

    "There we were permitted to enjoy peace for a season; but as our
    society increased in numbers and settlements were made in Daviess
    and Carroll Counties, the mob spirit spread itself again.

    "For months previous to our giving up our arms to General Lucas'
    army, we heard little else than rumors of mobs collecting in
    different places, and threatening our people. It is well known
    that the people of our Church, who had located themselves at De
    Witt, had to give up to a mob, and leave the place,
    notwithstanding the militia were called out for their protection.

    "From De Witt the mob went towards Daviess County, and while on
    their way there took two of our men prisoners and made them ride
    upon the cannon, and told them they would drive the Mormons from
    Daviess to Caldwell and from Caldwell to hell, and that they would
    give them no quarter, only at the cannon's mouth. The threats of
    the mob induced some of our people to go to Daviess to help to
    protect their brethren, who had settled at Diahman on Grand river.
    The mob soon fled from Daviess County; and after they were
    dispersed and the cannon taken, during which time no blood was
    shed, the people of Caldwell returned to their homes, in hope of
    enjoying peace and quiet; but in this they were disappointed, for
    a large mob was soon found to be collecting on the Grindstone
    forks of Grand River, from ten to fifteen miles off, under the
    command of Cornelius Gillium, a scouting party of which came
    within four miles of Far West and drove off stock belonging to our
    people in open day light.

    "About this time word came to Far West, that a party of the mob
    had come into Caldwell County to the south of Far West, and were
    taking horses and cattle, burning houses and ordering inhabitants
    to leave their homes immediately; and that they had then actually
    in their possession three men prisoners. This report reached Far
    West in the evening and was confirmed about midnight. A company of
    about sixty men went forth under the command of David W. Patten
    to disperse the mob as they supposed. A battle was the result, in
    which Captain Patten and two of his men were killed and others
    wounded. Bogart, it appears, had but one killed and others
    wounded. Notwithstanding the unlawful acts committed by Captain
    Bogart's men previous to the battle, it is now asserted and
    claimed that he was regularly ordered out as a militia captain to
    preserve the peace along the line of Ray and Caldwell Counties.
    That battle was fought four or five days previous to the arrival
    of General Lucas and his army. About the time of the battle with
    Captain Bogart a number of our people who were living near Haun's
    mills, on Shoal Creek, about twenty miles below Far West, together
    with a number of emigrants who had been stopped there in
    consequence of the excitement, made an agreement with the mob
    which was about there, that neither party should molest the other,
    but dwell in peace. Shortly after this agreement was made a mob
    party of from two to three hundred, many of whom are supposed to
    be from Chariton County, some from Daviess, and also those who had
    agreed to dwell in peace, came upon our people there, whose number
    in men was about forty, at a time when they little expected any
    such thing and without any ceremony, notwithstanding they begged
    for quarter, shot them down as they would tigers or panthers. Some
    few made their escape by fleeing, eighteen were killed and a
    number more were severely wounded.

    "This tragedy was conducted in the most brutal and savage manner.
    An old man, after the massacre was partially over, threw himself
    into their hands and begged for quarter when he was instantly shot
    down; that not killing him they took an old corn cutter and
    literally mangled him to pieces. A lad of ten years of age, after
    being shot down also begged to be spared, when one of them placed
    the muzzle of his gun to his head and blew out his brains.

    "The slaughter of these not satisfying the mob they then proceeded
    to rob and plunder.

    "The scene that presented itself after the massacre to the widows
    and orphans of the killed is beyond description. It was truly a
    time of weeping, of mourning and of lamentation.

    "As yet we have not heard of any being arrested for these murders,
    notwithstanding there are men boasting about the county that they
    did kill on that occasion more than one "Mormon;" whereas all our
    people who were in the battle with Captain Patten against Bogart,
    that can be found, have been arrested, and are now confined in
    jail to await their trial for murder.

    "When General Lucas arrived near Far West and presented the
    Governor's order, we were surprised greatly, yet we felt willing
    to submit to the authorities of the state. We gave up our arms
    without reluctance. We were then made prisoners and confined to
    the limits of the town for about a week, during which time the men
    from the country were not permitted to go to their families many
    of whom were in a suffering condition for the want of food and
    firewood, the weather being very cold and stormy. Much property
    was destroyed by the troops in town during their stay there, such
    as burning house logs, rails, corn cribs, boards, etc., the using
    of corn and hay, the plundering of houses, the killing of cattle,
    sheep, and hogs and also the taking of horses not their own; and
    all this without regard to owners or asking leave of anyone. In
    the meantime men were abused, women insulted and abused by the
    troops--and all this while we were kept prisoners.

    "Whilst the town was guarded we were called together by the order
    of General Lucas, and a guard placed close around us, and in that
    situation were compelled to sign a deed of trust for the purpose
    of making over our individual property, all holden as they said,
    to pay all the debts of every individual belonging to the Church,
    and also to pay for all damages the old inhabitants of Daviess may
    have sustained in consequence of the late difficulties in that
    county.

    "General Clark now arrived and the first important move made by
    him was collecting of our men together, on the square, and
    selecting out about fifty of them' whom he immediately marched
    into a house and confined close. This was done without the aid of
    the sheriff or any legal process. The next day forty six of those
    taken were driven, like a parcel of menial slaves, off to
    Richmond, not knowing why they were taken, or what they were taken
    for. After being confined in Richmond more than two weeks, about
    one half were liberated. The rest, after another week's
    confinement, were most of them required to appear at court and
    have since been let to bail.

    "Since General Clark withdrew his troops from Far West, parties of
    armed men have gone through the county, driving off horses, sheep
    and cattle and also plundering houses. The barbarity of General
    Lucas' troops ought not to be passed over in silence. They shot
    our cattle and hogs merely for the sake of destroying them,
    leaving them for the ravens to eat.

    "They took prisoner an aged man named Tanner, and without any
    reason for it, he was struck on the head with a gun, which laid
    his skull bare. Another man by the name of Carey was also taken
    prisoner by them and without any provocation had his brains dashed
    out by a gun. He was laid in a wagon and there permitted to remain
    for the space of twenty-four hours, during which time no one was
    permitted to administer to him comfort or consolation; and after
    he was removed from that situation, he lived but a few hours.

    "The destruction of property at and about Far West is very great.
    Many are stripped bare as it were and others partially so.
    Indeed, take us as a body, at this time we are a poor and
    afflicted people, and if we are compelled to leave the state in
    the spring, many, yes a large portion of our society, will have to
    be removed at the expense of the state, as those who might have
    helped them are now debarred that privilege in consequence of the
    deed of trust we are compelled to sign, which deed so operated
    upon our real estate that it will sell for little or nothing at
    this time.

    "We have now made a brief statement of some of the most prominent
    features of the troubles that have befallen our people since our
    first settlement in the state, and we believe these persecutions
    have come in consequence of our religious faith, and not for
    immorality on our part. That instances have been, of late, when
    individuals have trespassed upon the rights of others and thereby
    broken the laws of the land, we will not attempt to deny; but yet
    we do believe that no crime can be substantiated against any of
    the people who have a standing in our Church of an earlier date
    than the difficulties in Daviess County.

    "And when it is considered that the rights of this people have
    been trampled upon from time to time with impunity, and abuses
    heaped upon them almost innumerable, it ought in some degree to
    palliate for any infraction of the law which may have been made on
    the part of our people.

    "The late order of Governor Boggs to drive us from this state, or
    exterminate us, is a thing so novel, unlawful, tyrannical and
    oppressive, that we have been induced to draw up this memorial,
    and present this statement of our case to your honorable body,
    praying that a law may be passed, rescinding the order of the
    Governor to drive us from the state, and also giving us the
    sanction of the Legislature to inherit our lands in peace.

    "We ask an expression of the Legislature, disapproving of the
    conduct of those who compelled us to sign a deed of trust, and
    also disapproving of any man or set of men taking our property in
    consequence of that deed of trust, and appropriating it to the
    payment of damage sustained in consequence of trespasses committed
    by others.

    "We have no common stock; our property is individual property and
    we feel willing to pay our debts as other individuals do. But we
    are not willing to be bound for other peoples' debts also. The
    arms which were taken from us here, which we understand to be
    about six hundred and thirty, besides swords and pistols, we care
    not so much about, as we do the pay for them, only we are bound to
    do military duty, which we are willing to do, and which we think
    was sufficiently manifested by the raising of a volunteer company
    last fall at Far West, when called upon by General Parkes to raise
    troops for the frontier.

    "The arms given up by us we consider were worth between twelve and
    fifteen thousand dollars; but we understand they have been greatly
    damaged since taken, and at this time probably would not bring
    near their former value. And as they were both here and in Jackson
    County, taken by the militia, and consequently by the authority of
    the state, we therefore ask your Honorable Body to cause an
    appropriation to be made by law, whereby we may be paid for them,
    or otherwise have them returned to us and the damages made good.
    The losses sustained by our people in leaving Jackson County, are
    so situated that it is impossible to obtain any compensation for
    them by law, because those who have sustained them are unable to
    prove those trespasses upon individuals. That the facts do exist
    that the buildings, crops, stock, furniture, rails, timber, etc.,
    of the society, have been destroyed in Jackson County, is not
    doubted by those who are acquainted in this upper country; and
    since trespasses cannot be proven upon individuals, we ask your
    Honorable Body to consider this case and if in your liberality and
    wisdom you can conceive it to be proper to make an appropriation
    by law to these sufferers, many of whom are still pressed down
    with poverty in consequence of their losses, would be able to pay
    their debts, and also in some degree be relieved from poverty and
    woe; whilst the widow's heart would be made to rejoice, and the
    orphan's tears measurably dried up and the prayers of a grateful
    people ascend on high, with thanksgiving and praise to the author
    of our existence for that beneficent act.

    "In laying our case before your Honorable Body, we say that we are
    willing, and ever have been, to conform to the Constitution and
    laws of the United States, and of this state. We ask in common
    with others the protection of the laws. We ask for the privilege
    guaranteed to all free citizens of the United States and of this
    state, to be extended to us, that we may be permitted to settle
    and live where we please, and worship God according to the
    dictates of our conscience without molestation. And while we ask
    for ourselves this privilege we are willing all others should
    enjoy the same.

    "We now lay our case at the feet of your Legislature, and ask your
    Honorable Body to consider it, and do for us, after mature
    deliberation, that which your wisdom, patriotism and philanthropy
    may dictate.

    "And we as in duty bound will ever pray.

    "A committee appointed by the citizens of Caldwell County, to
    draft this memorial and sign it in their behalf. {

                                          EDWARD PARTRIDGE,
                                          HEBER C. KIMBALL,
                                          JOHN TAYLOR,
                                          THEODORE TURLEY,
                                          BRIGHAM YOUNG,
                                          ISAAC MORLEY,
                                          GEORGE W. HARRIS,
                                          JOHN MURDOCK,
                                          JOHN M. BURK.

                            "Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri,
     Dec. 10, 1838."

The only recognition given by the Legislature to this pathetic appeal, this soul-harrowing recital of "bitter, burning wrongs," enough to melt a heart of stone,

    "To stir a fever in the blood of age,
    And make the infant's sinews strong as steel,"

was the appropriation of the paltry sum of two thousand dollars, to be distributed among the people of Daviess and Caldwell Counties, "the Mormons not excepted."

O lavish generosity! Two thousand dollars for a city sacked and pillaged, fields and farms laid waste, and homes given to the flames; not to mention murders, rapes, expulsions and other outrages nameless for their enormity, committed upon a helpless people by a ruthless mob, in the sovereign name of the state of Missouri!

"THE MORMONS NOT EXCEPTED!"

O world-wide philanthropy! Magnanimity unparalleled! As though the Mormons had not been the main, and well-nigh only sufferers from this horrible and hellish invasion. Indeed, the only other losses sustained--barring those inflicted by the oppressed people in sheer self-defense--were from depredations by the mobocrats themselves upon their own sympathizers, committed in such a way as to seem the work of Mormons, who were falsely accused of the devilish deeds and the public mind thus inflamed against them.

And then, the manner of distributing this princes' ransom! Surely the tactics of the average Indian agent and post-trader there had their origin. The notorious Judge Cameron had charge of the distribution; a wretch whose unpitying gaze had surveyed complacently the wrongs and cruelties heaped upon the helpless Saints, his serene equanimity of temper being disturbed only by the patience and superhuman cheerfulness of the brethren when compelled at the point of the bayonet to sign away their property to pay the expenses of the war waged against them. He was assisted by a man named McHenry.

Says Heber C. Kimball:

"Judge Cameron drove in the hogs belonging to the brethren (many of which were identified) shot them down in the streets, and, without further bleeding they were half-dressed, cut up and distributed by McHenry to the poor, charging four or five cents per pound; which, together with a few pieces of refuse calicoes, at double and treble price, soon consumed the appropriation."

And thus did the great state of Missouri redress the wrongs of ten thousand innocent people, robbed and trampled on without provocation by its mob militia, led on and fired to their deeds of blood and plunder by political demagogues and hireling priests of Christendom. And this in the broad daylight of the nineteenth century, in a land of religious liberty, on soil consecrated by the blood of patriots-- ancestors of the people thus trampled on and despoiled--and in the presence of American judges, magistrates and priests, affecting the calling, but disgracing the name, of Christian!

Brigham and Heber, in the absence of their fellow Apostles--the remainder of the Twelve who had not gone over to the enemy, being in prison for the Gospel's sake, or away on missions--proceeded to set in order the Church at Far West, which was more or less scattered and demoralized from the effects of the recent persecution. They were obliged to move secretly and with the utmost caution, their lives and liberties being in jeopardy from apostate spies and prowling mobocrats. They reorganized the High Council, "expressed their fellowship with all who desired to do right," and filled the vacancies occasioned by the absence of brethren who had fled out of the state to save their lives.

On the nineteenth of December, they ordained John Taylor and John E. Page to the apostleship.

The next step of the Apostles was to arrange for the exodus of the Saints en masse, from this land of tyrants, traitors and mobocrats, the blood-stained soil of Missouri.
