THE APOSTLES SAIL FOR HOME--ARRIVAL AT NEW YORK--HEBER'S LETTER TO THE
"MILLENNIAL STAR"--HAPPY MEETING WITH THE PROPHET AND THE SAINTS AT
NAUVOO--LABORS SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL--HEBER'S PHRENOLOGICAL CHART.

On the 20th day of April, 1841, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, George A. Smith and Willard Richards, with a company of Saints, sailed from Liverpool on board the ship Rochester, bound for New York. They landed there on the 20th of May, having been just one month upon the water, and remained in that city until the 4th of June.

In a letter to the editor of the Millennial Star, Heber thus relates what followed:

"On the 4th of June I started for home, in company with Elders Young and Taylor. Elder O. Pratt remained in New York to republish the book he had printed in Edinburgh, Scotland, giving a history of the coming forth of the Book of Mormon, and of which he intended to publish 5,000 copies. Elders G. A. Smith and Hadlock stayed in Pennsylvania, not having the means of getting home. I had to borrow four pounds myself, and the Saints in New York gave us some help. May the Lord bless them fourfold.

"We went by way of Philadephia to Pittsburg, the distance being four hundred miles by railway and canal. We went on the swift line, for which we paid fourteen dollars, the slow line carrying for nine dollars. After staying four days at Pittsburg, we set sail on board the steamboat Cicero on the 12th of June, and when we had proceeded about fifteen miles she ran on a sand bank, where we were detained three days; in fact the boat ran aground several times, the water was so low. We were three weeks on board before we arrived at Nauvoo. I never experienced warmer weather at this season before, and many persons are dying of cholera on board the steamboats on the river. I would advise persons coming by way of the rivers to start earlier in the spring. It will be much cheaper for the Saints to come by way of New Orleans, the cost of which is about five pounds ten shillings, and they will come much quicker and with greater ease. If they prefer coming by way of New York, they will do well to go from thence by way of Chicago, as it will be both cheaper and quicker than by way of Philadelphia. I would advise the Saints to come in the cool part of the season, on account of their health.

"We landed in Nauvoo on the 1st of July, and when we struck the dock I think there were about three hundred Saints there to meet us, and a greater manifestation of love and gladness I never saw before. President Smith was the first one that caught us by the hand. I never saw him feel better in my life than he does at this time; this is the case with the Saints in general. When we got in sight of Nauvoo we were surprised to see what improvements had been made since we left home. You know there were not more than thirty buildings in the city when we left about two years ago, but at this time there are twelve hundred, and hundreds of others in progress which will be finished soon. On Friday last seventy Saints came to Nauvoo, led by Lorenzo Barnes, from Chester County, Pennsylvania, in wagons, living in tents by the way. On the next day a company came in wagons from Canada, all in good spirits; and in two or three days after they all obtained places to live in. They are coming in from all parts of this vast continent daily and hourly, and the work is spreading in all of this land, and calls for preaching in all parts. You will recollect that when we built our houses in the woods there was not a house within half a mile of us. Now the place, wild as it was at that time, is converted into a thickly populated village. Our old friends who were driven from Missouri are my neighbors; for instance, the Allreds, Charles Hubbard, Charles Rich, and hundreds of others that I could mention that you know. I wish you were here, if it were right. I can say with propriety, as to the knowledge I have of things, I never knew the Church in so good a state as at the present time; they feel well and in good spirits, and filled with love and kindness. Most of our English brethren have got themselves places and houses built for them, and others building, and many of them say they never felt better in their lives and have no desire to return to their native land, for they have houses and land of their own, what they never before were in possession of. They are generally enjoying good health and spirits. There has been some sickness among them during their long journey, and a few deaths. I will mention some names. Thomas Smith and his wife, and his daughter Diana; she died the day I got home. Brother Smith and his wife died before they got to St. Louis. They were from Clithero, Lancashire. Brother Henry Nightingale. He got shot through his thigh; it was an accident. He survived the misfortune only two weeks. His wife was at my house this week. He died about the time I got home. He was from Preston. John Stevenson, from Longton; also Sister Wyche, from the Potteries; William Blacast's wife, from Longton, is dead; also Brother Rigby's wife, from Clayton, and James Carlbridge, from Thornby. The sickness is generally among the new comers.

"On the 3rd of July the Nauvoo Legion was called out to celebrate our independence. There was judged to be about 8,000 people present. There was an oration delivered by President Rigdon to the satisfaction of all present. We had a heavenly time; all was peace and harmony; there was no drunkenness on that day as I discovered; there is no public house that keeps spirits, nor grocery, and in fact none except in case of sickness is used in the city of Nauvoo. You will not find a more temperate people than the Latter-day Saints in this or any other country.

"I never saw crops look better than they do in this place at present. The wheat is in general cut, and secured. Provisions are cheaper; flour is $2.25 a hundred and will be less soon. Corn is brought into the city for twenty-five cents a bushel; bacon from seven to eight cents per pound; butter ten cents; other things in proportion. The whole country for many miles is cultivated with corn, wheat, potatoes, and all kinds of produce; it looks as though the blessing of God rested upon the crops in this region, and it is noticed by the inhabitants that come from other parts, for the crops are better here than in other parts of the country, or counties around this place. Most of the Saints have plenty growing to last them for a year, and to spare; and the blessing of God rests on this people, and I know for one that God is here, and that to bless his people, and the devil cannot hinder, for it is the work of the great God, and it must and will roll forth.

"On the 4th of July, being the Sabbath day, the Saints came together to the amount of 5,000 to hear us give a detail of our mission to England. Then was a time of rejoicing I assure you. Our place of meeting was in a grove close by the temple, as we have no other place at present. There is every effort made to complete the house of the Lord; they devote every tenth day for that purpose. The basement story is nearly finished, which is considered to be half of the stone work. It is going to be very magnificent. They intend to have the walls finished this fall if possible. Elders G. A. Smith and Hadlock got here on the 14th, both well. We found our families well, except Sister Taylor, who was quite low. She has now recovered.

"Elders Young and Taylor send much love to you all, and I am sure all would if they knew that I was writing to you. Give my love to Elders Snow, Richards and Adams, and to all of the officers and members in that land. Please to give my respects to Sister Pratt and to Sister Olive and to all your families. My wife joins with me in love to you both and to Sister Olive and Mary Ann, and may the Lord bless you with long life and good days, and keep you safe till you return to your own country with your own family, is the wish and prayer of your brother in Christ. Elder Orson Pratt arrived here this week; he went to Sackett's Harbor; his wife's sister came with him. He and his family are well. Your brother William is well.

"As to crops that are growing in the Iowa, there is thought to be enough to supply all the Saints in Nauvoo and Iowa for one year. Such sights you never saw before. There is a greater improvement by one half than there was in Far West in the same time. Our enemies begin to threaten us, for you know they cannot bear to see us prosper.

"I must now come to a close. There are five of the Twelve got home. We are all well and in good spirits. We think much about you and yours, and our brethren and sisters in that land. I hope we shall see them all soon, and hope also that they may be faithful, and hearken unto counsel, for they that hearken to counsel will be wise, and their lives will be prolonged on the earth. I exhort them to observe these things, and to be subject to the powers that be. They have my best wishes for their welfare both temporal and spiritual. Now, fare you well a little season, my dear brother in Christ."

Heber's time was now more or less taken up with temporal affairs. The work of God was growing so rapidly that the Prophet, in order to devote more of his time to spiritual concerns, was obliged to roll some of the burden of the public business from his own shoulders upon those of the Twelve. At a conference held on the 16th of August, 1841, Joseph remarked "that the time had come when the Twelve should be called upon to stand in their place next the First Presidency, and attend to the settling of immigrants, and the business of the Church at the Stakes, and assist to bear off the kingdom victorious to the nations." They were also directed to build the cities which Joseph had designed, namely, Nauvoo, Zarahemla, Warren, Nashville and Ramus, and while attending to these duties in person, to send missionaries into different parts to preach the gospel.

Brigham and Heber also served in a semi-military capacity, being made chaplains in the Nauvoo Legion soon after their return from England.

At intervals, while engaged in the new labors assigned them, the Twelve continued to send their general epistles to the churches abroad.

At the close of the April conference of 1842, Presidents Young, Kimball and others of the Twelve ordained two hundred and seventy-five Elders, the largest number ordained in one day since the formation of the Church. Thus, in labors spiritual and temporal, under the direction of the Prophet of God, Heber and his brethren continued to fulfill their sacred mission.

About this time there came to Nauvoo a celebrated phrenologist of the period, who applied to the Prophet for the privilege of examining the heads of himself and several of his chief Apostles, designing to publish their charts. Joseph, Brigham, Heber and Willard were chosen for types, and their charts were incorporated in the Prophet's history. Here is Heber's:

Phrenological Chart of Elder Heber C. Kimball; by A. Crane, M. D., Professor of Phrenology.

PROPENSITIES.

Amativeness.--10, large. Extreme susceptibility; passionately fond of the company of the other sex.

Philoprogenitiveness.--7, full. Interested in the happiness of children; fond of their company.

Inhabitiveness.--4, medium or small. Somewhat indifferent to places as such; easily changes location.

Adhesiveness.--8, f. Solicitous for the happiness of friends, and ardent attachments to the other sex.

Combativeness.--7, f. Great powers of exertion and sustaining under opposition and difficulties.

Destructiveness.--6, m. Ability to control the passions, and is not disposed to extreme measures.

Secretiveness.--9, l. Great propensity and ability to conceal feelings, plans, etc.

Acquisitiveness.--6, m. Freeness to spend money; love of it chiefly for its uses and what it will buy.

Alimentativeness.--7, f. A good appetite, but not excessive; partiality for a variety of rich, hearty dishes.

Vitativeness.--6, m. or s. Indifferent to life; views the approach of death without fear.

FEELINGS.

Cautiousness.--8, f. Provision against prospective dangers and ills, without hesitation or irresolution.

Approbativeness.--10, l. Ambition for distinction; sense of character; sensibility to reproach, fear of scandal.

Self-esteem.--9, l. High-mindedness, independence, self-confidence, dignity, aspiration for greatness.

Concentrativeness.--7, f. Can dwell on a subject without fatigue, and control the imagination.

Benevolence.--9, l. Kindness, goodness, tenderness, sympathy.

Veneration.--8, f. Religion, without great awe or enthusiasm; reasonable deference to superiority.

Firmness.--10, l. Stability and decision of character and purpose.

Conscientiousness.--9, l. High regard for duty, integrity, moral principle, justice, obligation, truth, etc.

Hope.--7, f. Reasonable hopes, a fine flow of spirits; anticipation of what is to be realized.

Marvelousness.--7, f. Openness to conviction without blind credulity; tolerable good degree of faith.

Imitation.--10, f. A disposition and respectable ability to imitate, but not to mimic, or to act out.

Prepossession.--7, l. or f. Attached to certain notions; not disposed to change them, etc.

Ideality.--10, l. Lively imagination; fancy, taste love of poetry, elegance, eloquence, excellence, etc.

PERCEPTIVES.

Admonition.--7, f. or m. Desirous to know what others are doing; ready to counsel, and give hints of a fault or duty, etc.

Constructiveness.--9, l. Great mechanical ingenuity, talent and skill.

Tune.--9, v. l. or l. Great musical taste and talent; conception of melody.

Time.--4, s. or v. s. Forgetfulness of dates, ages, appointments, day of the month, etc.

Locality.--11, v. l. or l. Great memory of places and position.

Eventuality.--10, l. Retentive memory of events and particulars.

Individuality.--8, f. With very large causality, and comparison, great observation, with deep thought, etc.

Form.--8, f. Cognizance, and distinct recollection of shapes.

Size.--5, m. s. or v. s. Inaccurate measurement of magnitude, distance, etc.

Weight.--11, v. l., l. or f. Knowledge of gravitation, momentum, etc.

Color.--9, f. or m. Moderate skill in judging of colors, comparing and arranging them.

Language.--7, f. Freedom of expression, without fluency or verbosity; no great loquacity.

Order.--9, l. Love of arrangement, everything in its particular place.

Number.--8, f. Respectable aptness in arithmetical calculations, without extraordinary talent.

REFLECTIVES.

Mirthfulness.--10, l. Wit, fun, mirth, perception and love of the ludicrous.

Causality.--9, l. Ability to think and reason clearly, and perceive the relations of cause and effect.

Comparison.--10, l. A discrimination; power of illustration; ability to perceive and apply analogies.

This chart is not only worth preserving as a curiosity, but it is, in many respects, an excellent index of Heber's character and idiosyncrasies.
