HEBER'S LAST MISSION TO THE GENTILES--JOSEPH SMITH A CANDIDATE FOR THE
PRESIDENCY OF THE UNITED STATES--THE APOSTLES HIS ELECTIONEERERS--THE
MARTYRDOM--RETURN OF THE TWELVE TO NAUVOO.

On the 21st of May of the fateful year 1844, Heber C. Kimball left Nauvoo on his last mission to the Gentiles. He accompanied President Brigham Young and other Apostles and Elders, about one hundred in all. The object of their mission was unique. It was to present to the nation the name of Joseph Smith as a candidate for the presidency of the United States.

The steamer Osprey, on which the Elders took passage for St. Louis, left the wharf at Nauvoo amid the cheers and acclamations of those on shore, who shouted: "Joseph Smith, the next President of the United States!"

Alas! little knew those faithful souls, who went forth full of hope and patriotism that bright May morning, that they had looked their last upon the living features of their beloved Prophet, whom they were thus offering as a political savior to the nation; that within six weeks, while they were yet absent on their errand, a deed would be done which, for cruelty and atrocity, and for fearful consequences upon the guilty--shedders of innocent blood!--must stand without a parallel in the annals of modern crime.

Doubtless there was a destiny in the absence from the Prophet's side, at such a time, of men like Heber C. Kimball and Brigham Young. Of all those about him, upon these men, as upon two pillars of power, Joseph at that time most leaned. Of the original Twelve Apostles, according to the Prophet's own testimony, this twain alone had never "lifted up their heels against him." Satan knew best when to strike, and chose the fell moment to lay his fatal snare when Brigham, Heber and others of Joseph's wisest counselors were away. God had so ordered and permitted.

St. Louis was reached by the Apostles on the 22nd of May. Calling the Church together in that city, Elders Young and Kimball instructed them spiritually and politically. The Saints there numbered nearly seven hundred souls. Thence, a journey of thirteen days brought them to the capital of the nation.

Heber C. Kimball and Lyman Wight were now traveling together. Following is a digest of their letters to the Prophet, Elder Wight acting as scribe:

    "We have got a petition signed, with our names attached, in behalf
    of the Church, asking for a remuneration for our losses, and not
    for our rights, or redress, for they would not receive such a
    petition from us. It was thought by Judge Semple, Judge Douglas,
    General Atchison, and Major Hughes, that our petition would carry
    if it was not too late in the season. Judge Semple handed it to
    the committee on public lands. He said he would do the best he
    could for us. General Atchison is of the opinion if we could sue
    the state of Missouri for redress of grievances, that there was
    virtue enough in the state to answer our demands, 'for,' said he,
    'they are ashamed of their conduct.' Douglas and Semple are of
    the same opinion. Brother Kimball and myself spared no pains
    during our stay at Washington. We left on the 11th inst. for
    Wilmington, Delaware. Thence journeying to Philadelphia on the
    13th.

    "On the 21st we shall attend conference at Wilmington, and go
    thence to New York and Boston, and so continue from place to place
    until we shall have accomplished the mission appointed unto us. *
    * * Just returned from Wilmington Conference, accompanied by
    several of the brethren and sisters who went from this place. We
    can truly say that this was one of the most pleasant trips in our
    life. We went down on the steamer Balloon, and returned by
    railway.

    "Our Conference commenced on Saturday, the 22nd. The brethren came
    in from the adjacent country, and after much instruction from
    Brothers Kimball and Wight, we took a vote to know whether they
    would go whithersoever the Presidency, Patriarch and Twelve went,
    should it be to Oregon, Texas or California, or any other place
    directed by the wisdom of Almighty God. The Saints, numbering
    about one hundred, rose to their feet and exclaimed,
    'whithersoever they go, we go,' without a dissenting voice. This
    was truly an interesting meeting. We have not the least idea that
    any one will back out; they are nearly all men of wealth and have
    commenced this morning to offer all surplus property for sale,
    that whenever you say go, they are ready. We ordained ten as
    promising young Elders as we ever laid hands upon. They pledged
    themselves to start this week and go through the state of Delaware
    from house to house, and proclaim that the Kingdom of Heaven is at
    hand.

    "On Sabbath, the 23rd, we preached alternately to a large and
    respectable congregation, and left the warmest of friends in that
    place, both in and out of the Church.

                           "Yours as ever,
                                         "H. C. KIMBALL,
                                         "LYMAN WIGHT."

A letter from Vilate Kimball to her husband, from which we make the following extracts, describes the scenes that were then taking place in Nauvoo:

                                            "June 7th, 1844.

    "MY DEAR HUSBAND:

    "Nauvoo was never so lonesome since we lived here as it is now. I
    went to meeting last Sunday for the first time since conference.
    Neither Joseph, nor Hyrum, nor any of the Twelve were there, and
    you may be assured that I was glad when meeting was over. * * *

    "June 11th. Nauvoo was a scene of excitement last night. Some
    hundreds of the brethren turned out and burned the press of the
    opposite party. This was done by order of the city council. They
    had only published one paper (Nauvoo Expositor) which is
    considered a public nuisance. They have sworn vengeance and no
    doubt they will have it.

    "June 24th. Since I commenced this letter, varied and exciting
    indeed have been the scenes in this city. I would have sent this
    to you before this time, but I have been thrown into such
    confusion I know not what to write. Nor is this all: the mails do
    not come regularly, having been stopped by high water, or the
    flood of mobocracy which pervades the country. I have received no
    letter by mail from you since you left.

    "Nothing is to be heard of but mobs collecting on every side. The
    Laws and Fosters and most of the dissenting party, with their
    families, left here a day or two since. They are sworn to have
    Joseph and the city council, or to exterminate us all. Between
    three and four thousand brethren have been under arms here the
    past week, expecting every day the mob would come upon us. The
    brethren from the country are coming in to aid in the defense of
    the city. Brother Joseph sent a message to the Governor,
    signifying if he and his staff would come into the city he would
    abide their decision; but instead of the Governor coming here he
    went to Carthage, and there walked arm and arm with Law and
    Foster, until we have reason to fear he has caught their spirit.
    He sent thirty men from there day before yesterday to arrest
    Brother Joseph, with an abusive letter, saying, if thirty men
    cannot do the business thousands can, ordering the brethren who
    had been ordered out to defend the city against the mob to deliver
    up their arms to their men and then disperse.

    "Yesterday morning (although it was Sunday) was a time of great
    excitement. Joseph had fled and left word for the brethren to hang
    on to their arms and defend themselves as best they could. Some
    were dreadfully tried in their faith to think Joseph should leave
    them in the hour of danger. Hundreds have left; the most of the
    merchants on the hill have gone. I have not felt frightened,
    neither has my heart sunk within me till yesterday, when I heard
    Joseph had sent word back for his family to follow him, and
    Brother Whitney's family were packing up, not knowing but they
    would have to go, as he is one of the city council. For a while I
    felt sad enough, but did not let anybody know it, neither did I
    shed any tears. I felt a confidence in the Lord that He would
    preserve us from the ravages of our enemies. We expected them
    here to-day by the thousands, but before night yesterday, things
    put on a different aspect--Joseph returned and gave himself up for
    trial. He sent a messenger to Carthage to tell the governor he
    would meet him and his staff at the big mound at eight o'clock
    this morning, with all that the writ demanded. They have just
    passed here to meet the Governor for that purpose. My heart said,
    'Lord, bless those dear men and preserve them from those that
    thirst for their blood!' What will be their fate the Lord only
    knows, but I trust He'll spare them. The governor wrote that if
    they did not give themselves up, our city was suspended upon so
    many kegs of powder, and it needed only one spark to touch them
    off. If you were here you would be sure to be in their midst,
    which would increase my anxiety."

Now fell the thunderbolt!

On the 20th of June Joseph, feeling himself hedged around by his enemies, had written for the immediate return of the Apostles. It was his last communication to them in mortality. Seven days later, on the evening of the 27th of June, 1844, Joseph and his brother Hyrum were assassinated in Carthage Jail.

Heber and Lyman Wight were in Salem, Massachusetts, when the dreadful news came. It struck Heber to the heart. He tried hard not to believe. Yet he, and the Apostles generally, traveling in different parts, on the night of the assassination had felt a severe mental shock, for which they could not account until the terrible news reached their ears.

Grief-stricken and almost crushed with sorrow, the Twelve turned their sad steps homeward. Heber and Lyman took the cars for Boston, where they remained during the day, and then proceeded to New York. Returning to Boston to consult with their quorum, on the 24th of July in company with President Brigham Young they set out for home. At Albany they were joined by Orson Hyde, Orson Pratt and Wilford Woodruff. They traveled night and day, and arrived at Nauvoo on the 6th of August, forty days after the martyrdom.
