CHOICE OF JOSEPH'S SUCCESSOR--A MIRACLE--THE MANTLE OF JOSEPH FALLS
UPON BRIGHAM YOUNG--HEBER C. KIMBALL HIS RIGHT HAND MAN.

In the death of its Prophet and Patriarch, the Church had received a stunning blow, but with superhuman vitality it revived from the shock, and rose up in God-like energy to renew its mission of salvation to mankind. Mighty men were they who had fallen, but God's work rests not upon man, and under the magic stroke of the wand of Omnipotence other great men had risen to fulfill their destiny and perpetuate the works and memories of the martyred slain.

But who was now the leader of Israel? Such was the problem presenting itself to the people. In the absence of their Prophet the Saints felt like sheep without a shepherd. He had carried the Church, as if an infant in arms, from the very hour of its birth, nursing it with the milk of revelation. It was now no longer a babe, yet still, as a little child, it had need to be led, by one in whom was the spirit and wisdom of the heavens.

A crisis had come. The First Presidency was no more. Death had dissolved that quorum. Next, stood the Twelve, an independent body, now holding the keys of the kingdom, from Joseph, its earthly founder.

But this fact, though known to the Apostles, upon whom he had rolled that burden and conferred that authority, was not so patent to the people. The order of the Priesthood was not so well known then as now. Experience had not supplemented revelation on these points, and doubtless there were many Saints in Nauvoo, as there are many now, who were not informed upon things which had been plainly taught them for years.

Besides, Sidney Rigdon, one of the three first presidents, was alive, to press his claims to the leadership, and not a few of the Saints openly favored his ambitious pretensions.

Who was to decide in such a controversy, and how was the right man to be known?

God had provided the way.

Elder Rigdon, on hearing of the martyrdom, had come in haste from Pittsburgh, whither he had retired some months before from the troubles and turmoils of persecuted Saint-life in Nauvoo, to offer himself as the "guardian" and "great leader" whom he declared was necessary to save Israel. Thus, the true shepherd, having "laid down his life for the sheep," the false one returned when the wolves had fled and the danger was thought to be over, to seize the laurels which another's valor had won. And this, forsooth, was the comforting message that he bore to the affrighted people:

    "The anti-Mormons have got you! You can't stay in the country!
    Everything is in confusion! You can do nothing! You lack a great
    leader! You want a head; and unless you unite upon that head
    you're blown to the four winds. The anti-Mormons will carry the
    election. A guardian must be chosen."

Such was the situation at Nauvoo when Brigham, Heber and their companions returned. Parley P. Pratt and George A. Smith had arrived some time before.

The great day came which Sidney Rigdon had set apart for the choosing of a guardian for the Church--August 8th, 1844. Sidney had spoken, urging his own claims as "the identical man whom all the prophets had written and sung about" with their eyes upon that very hour and occasion; which vain-glorious remark provoked from Parley P. Pratt the humorous retort that he, himself, was "the identical man that the prophets had not sung or written one word about." Brigham Young was now addressing the vast congregation which assembled on that memorable day, in the grove where the Prophet had so often given the word of the Lord to Israel:

"If the people want Brother Rigdon to lead them, they may have him," Brigham declared. "But I say unto you, the Twelve have the keys of the kingdom of God in all the world. The Twelve are pointed out by the finger of God. Here is Brigham; have his knees ever faltered? Have his lips ever quivered? Here is Heber and the rest of the Twelve, an independent body, who have the keys of the Priesthood, the keys of the kingdom of God to deliver to all the world; this is true, so help me God! They stand next to Joseph, and are the First Presidency of the Church."

It was the voice of "one having authority." The dullest ear could detect the difference between such tones, such words, trembling with power, and the vain and empty babblings of the special pleader, Sidney. Which of these men the Spirit had chosen, was already manifest to the pure in heart among that mighty multitude.

But a still more marvelous manifestation awaited them. As Brigham proceeded his whole being became transfigured; his face shone like an angel's; his form seemed to dilate and expand, as though he were being lifted from the floor; his voice changed; his look, his very manner was that of another.

IT WAS JOSEPH, NOT BRIGHAM, WHO WAS SPEAKING!

Thousands saw it and testified of its truth. The mantle of the dead Prophet had fallen upon the shoulders of the living. Joseph, from behind the vail, had pointed out his own successor. God spake that day through Brigham Young, "and all the people said Amen!"

No truer friend had Brigham Young than Heber C. Kimball.[A] "Brother Brigham" had been his choice from the first, for he knew that he was the chosen of the Almighty, and as he had before stood by Joseph, he now stood firm at the side of his successor, a pillar of faith and power not to be broken.
