THE WORK MOVES ON IN SPITE OF PERSECUTION AND APOSTASY--THE NAUVOO
TEMPLE FINISHED AND DEDICATED--THE SAINTS PREPARE FOR THEIR REMOVAL TO
THE ROCKY MOUNTAINS.

The work of God was only expedited by the efforts made for its overthrow. The Apostles continued to send out missionaries to the nations, and hurried on the completion of the Temple.

Elder Rigdon, after his ineffectual attempt to seize the leadership of the Church, had returned to Pittsburg, to nurse, as best he might, his wounded pride and disappointed ambition. Many, like him, were apostatizing and dividing into factions, but the main body of the Saints, "taking the Holy Spirit for their guide," stood true to Brigham and the Twelve. The Spirit was poured out mightily upon the faithful, and the good work, in spite of persecution and apostasy, went rolling on.

[Illustration: Residences of Church leaders in Nauvoo.]

It soon became evident to the enemy that the death of the Prophet, so far from destroying, or even impeding Mormonism, had only given it fresh impetus, an energy which they feared, if allowed to increase, might prove irresistible. They therefore renewed the attack, Brigham, Heber and the Twelve now being the especial objects of their animus.

Does not this fact, alone, tell where lay the authority?

The chief inciters of the opposition were the Laws, the Fosters, and the Higbees, apostates who had betrayed and sacrificed Joseph and Hyrum, with others who now joined them in their warfare against the Twelve. The most strenuous efforts were made, generally under cover of law, to get President Young into their power; and even his life, it is said, was attempted by the midnight assassin. Knowing their fell purpose, and remembering the fate of the martyrs, Joseph and Hyrum, who had tested the virtue of official pledges and the protecting majesty of the law in Illinois, Brigham and Heber wisely determined not to be taken.

From their secret retreats, where they were compelled to hide, at times, from the malice of their would-be destroyers, the Apostles came forth, on the morning of Saturday, the 24th of May, 1845, to lay the cap-stone on the south-east corner of the Temple. The edifice was in due time completed and dedicated, and many of the Elders and Saints received their endowments within its sacred walls.

The incident which gave rise to the story of "Bogus Brigham," with which many of our readers are no doubt familiar, happened about this time. The sheriff from Carthage was at the door of the Temple to arrest President Young, who was inside the building. Bishop William Miller, who resembled the President, throwing on Heber C. Kimball's cloak, (mistaking it for Brigham's, which was of the same size and color) sallied out and was arrested in his stead and taken to Carthage. The ruse worked so well that it was not discovered until after their arrival at the anti-Mormon headquarters, where "Bill Miller" was recognized, and the wrath and discomfiture of his captors knew no bounds. The real Brigham was, of course, by that time, well out of the way and laughing at the chagrin of his persecutors.

In the meantime, preparations were in progress for the exodus. The anti-Mormons were clamoring for the removal of the entire community of Latter-day Saints from the state, and they, seeing no alternative but to comply with this outrageous demand, or experience a repetition of the murderous scenes of Missouri, had resolved to again sacrifice their homes and seek a land of peace and liberty in the wilds of the savage west.

Before coming to the conclusion to thus expatriate themselves, the Saints, through their leaders, had petitioned the President of the United States, James K. Polk, and the Governors of all the states excepting Missouri and Illinois, for aid and protection from the efforts of those who were plotting their destruction. But the appeal was in vain. The Church leaders then entered into negotiations with their enemies, of the nature of which the following document will testify:

                            "NAUVOO, ILLINOIS, Oct. 1st, 1845.

    "To Gen. J. Hardin, W. B. Warren, S. A. Douglas and J. A.
    McDougal:

    "MESSRS:--In reply to your letter of this date, requesting us 'to
    submit the facts and intentions stated by us in writing, in order
    that you may lay them before the Governor and people of the
    state,' we would refer you to our communication of the 24th ult.
    to the 'Quincy Committee,' etc., a copy of which is herewith
    enclosed.

    "In addition to this we would say that we had commenced making
    arrangements to remove from the country previous to the recent
    disturbances; that we have four companies, of one hundred families
    each, and six more companies now organizing, of the same number
    each, preparatory to a removal.

    "That one thousand families, including the Twelve, the High
    Council, the trustees and general authorities of the Church, are
    fully determined to remove in the spring, independent of the
    contingencies of selling our property; and that this company will
    comprise from five to six thousand souls.

    "That the Church, as a body, desire to remove with us, and will,
    if sales can be effected so as to raise the necessary means.

    "That the organization of the Church we represent is such that
    there never can exist but one head or presidency at any one time.
    And all good members wish to be with the organization: and all are
    determined to remove to some distant point where we shall neither
    infringe nor be infringed upon, so soon as time and means will
    permit.

    "That we have some hundreds of farms and some two thousand houses
    for sale in this city and county, and we request all good citizens
    to assist in the disposal of our property.

    "That we do not expect to find purchasers for our temple and other
    public buildings; but we are willing to rent them to a respectable
    community who may inhabit the city.

    "That we wish it distinctly understood that although we may not
    find purchasers for our property, we will not sacrifice it, nor
    give it away, or suffer it illegally to be wrested from us.

    "That we do not intend to sow any wheat this fall, and should we
    all sell, we shall not put in any more crops of any description.

    "That as soon as practicable, we will appoint committees for this
    city, La Harpe, Macedonia, Bear Creek and all necessary places in
    the county, to give information to purchasers.

    "That if these testimonies are not sufficient to satisfy any
    people that we are in earnest, we will soon give them a sign that
    cannot be mistaken--WE WILL LEAVE THEM.

    "In behalf of the Council, respectfully yours, etc.,

                                   "BRIGHAM YOUNG, President,
                                   "WILLARD RICHARDS, Clerk."

Agreeable to the terms of this covenant, which satisfied the commissioners named, and for a time also satisfied the anti-Mormons whom they represented, the Saints, trusting in God, and hoping little from their cruel and inhuman oppressors, were now preparing for the exodus of the Church and its pilgrimage to the Rocky Mountains--an event foreseen and predicted by the Prophet Joseph in August, 1842.
