ARRIVAL AT GRAND ISLAND--THE PIONEER BUFFALO HUNT--HEBER KILLS HIS
FIRST BISON--THE SPIRIT OF LEVITY REBUKED--THE PIONEERS REACH FORT
LARAMIE.

About the 1st of May the Pioneers reached Grand Island. Here the prairies swarmed with buffalo, in herds of tens of thousands. A grand hunt was indulged in by the brethren, most of whom had never seen a buffalo before, and after much exciting sport, ten of the animals were killed and brought to camp. The following sketch, descriptive of this, the first buffalo hunt of the Pioneers, is from the graphic pen of Horace K. Whitney:

    "Some time before we arrived here, we saw through a spy-glass
    three buffalo grazing on the top of the bluff to our right, some
    five or six miles. Two or three footmen went out in pursuit, also
    three horsemen, viz., Porter Rockwell, Thomas Brown and Luke
    Johnson. Just before we arrived here we saw a large herd some
    distance in advance of us, also about five or six miles to our
    right. Brother O. Pratt counted seventy-four by the aid of his
    spy-glass. They are now quite visible from our present stopping
    place. It is about fifty yards across the channel to Grand Island
    at this place. We traveled about four miles and crossed a slough
    or pond, which 'puts up' from the river, about noon. Soon after,
    Porter, T. Brown and Luke Johnson returned. They had wounded, as
    they supposed mortally, two buffaloes, which, however, managed to
    get away from them. About one o'clock p.m., we descried, at the
    distance of five or six miles to our right, on the side of the
    hill or bluff, two or three herds of buffalo grazing. An immediate
    halt was made. A band of ten or twelve horsemen (hunters) speedily
    collected and made arrangements for the chase. They soon got ready
    and started. Brother Heber soon followed. The wagons traveled
    along slowly, being in full view of the chase. The horsemen took a
    circuitous route, in order to head the herd, but were prevented
    from doing so immediately by an unforeseen occurrence. An antelope
    passing by near us was shot at by one of the brethren (a footman)
    but the shot did not take effect. Directly the animal made
    towards the bluff, seeing which, two dogs went off in full chase.
    The three went right among the buffaloes which, alarmed at the
    appearance of the dogs, began to move off. Soon after, the
    horsemen made their appearance upon the brow of the hill.

    "Now commenced a scene which defies all description. Every
    spy-glass that could be found in the camp was put into immediate
    requisition, and the scene became one of intense interest to us
    all, as spectators. As soon as the buffaloes discovered the
    approach of the hunters, they increased their speed (which before
    had been slow) to a full gallop, and, passing along the side of
    the hill were followed by the hunters in quick and hot pursuit,
    leaving a cloud of dust in their rear. Most of the hunters, by
    riding in among them, succeeded in getting a fair shot, although
    they did not all prove fatal, a number of the herd making their
    escape that were shot through the body. Brother Heber rode in
    among them, made a shot at one and brought him down. His horse,
    partly alarmed at the discharge of the gun, and partly at the
    sight of the animals, suddenly started and came very near throwing
    him. Porter rode up to one (by way of experiment) and shot him
    full in the forehead, but without making the least impression, the
    hide of the skullpiece being an inch thick, besides being covered
    with a large mass of coarse matted hair, as we discovered after
    the animals were brought in. The chase ceased about 4 p.m. and the
    hunters came up to us about 5 p.m. The fruits of the day's work
    were as follows: one bull, three cows, and six calves, making ten
    buffaloes. Five wagons were immediately unloaded to bring in the
    game. A little after dark they returned, and the meat was
    distributed, one quarter of an animal being given to each ten."

After this day's sport, President Young cautioned the brethren not to kill game wantonly, as it was displeasing to the Lord. Said he: "If we slay when we have no need, we will need when we cannot slay."

The advice was timely. A spirit of excessive levity had crept into the camp, dancing, card-playing and other games, some of them vain and foolish in the extreme, occupying most of the time of the brethren when they had stopped for rest.

Heber, noticing this tendency, reproved them and warned them of the evil results to which such things would lead. Next day, Saturday, May 28th, President Young addressed the camp in relation to the same subject. He sharply rebuked the offenders, and declared that he would not go one step farther in company with such a spirit as they then possessed. He appealed to them as men of God, to bear in mind their high and holy calling and the noble purpose of their mission. Apostle Orson Pratt and others also spoke, counseling the brethren to use their spare time in reading, and storing their minds with useful knowledge; to cease their profanity, loud laughter and excess of mirth, and fast and pray more, that the spirit of their mission might rest upon them.

A general reformation was the result. The brethren repented, and, confessing their faults, resolved to eschew the evils complained of. They faithfully kept their word, and a better feeling prevailed in the camp from that hour.

On the second of June the Pioneers arrived opposite Fort Laramie, 543 miles from Winter Quarters, which distance they had traveled in about seven weeks. Here they were joined by a small company of Saints from Mississippi, who had spent the winter in Pueblo. The first half of their journey to the mountains was now over.
