THE FAMINE OF '56--HEBER A SECOND JOSEPH--A SAVIOR TO HIS PEOPLE--
VILATE A MINISTERING ANGEL--A STRANGE PIECE OF COUNSEL--PRESIDENT
KIMBALL'S LETTERS, DESCRIPTIVE OF THE FAMINE, TO HIS SON WILLIAM,
IN ENGLAND.

In this famine, which was likened unto the famine of Egypt, Heber C. Kimball played a part like unto that of Joseph of old; feeding from his own bins and storehouses, filled by his providence and foresight in anticipation of the straitness of the times, the hungry multitude--kindred, strangers and all--who looked to him for succor. His own family were put upon short rations, to enable him to minister more effectually to the wants of others.

He had taken his own counsel, and stored up grain for the famine he had predicted, and when the time of scarcity came he had on hand thousands of bushels of wheat, with bran and shorts, corn and barley in abundance; all of which, however, was used before the next harvest-time.

Several hundred bushels of wheat he lent to President Young, to help feed those who were dependent on the President, while he himself personally undertook to relieve hundreds of the poor of Salt Lake City.

The following letter from Bishop John B. Maiben forms an interesting link in the historic chain of that period:

                                  "MANTI, SANPETE CO.,
                                          "January 16th, 1877.

    "S. F. Kimball,
             "Salt Lake City,

                       "DEAR BROTHER:--In answer to your enquiries in
    relation to the flour I distributed for your father, I will say:

    "That during the early part of the year 1856, in what is known as
    the "time of the famine," when a great many persons who in other
    respects were esteemed well to do, were under the necessity of
    eating thistle roots, sego roots and other wild plants for
    sustenance of themselves and families, owing to the extreme
    scarcity of breadstuff, there being none in the market at any
    price; at this critical juncture President Heber C. Kimball, who
    had by wise economy and prescient forethought garnered up a
    quantity of surplus grain, requested my assistance to distribute
    flour to the families of the Saints in small quantities adapted to
    their number and necessity, charging them only $6.00 per 100 lbs,
    then the standard Tithing Office price. Although there was no
    flour in the market, still some individuals were selling at $25.
    to $30. per 100 lbs. To the best of my recollection some 20,000 to
    30,000 lbs. of flour were thus distributed in various amounts,
    varying from five to fifty lbs., according to the size of the
    family.

    "This act of generosity and fatherly care on the part of the late
    Heber C. Kimball was only in keeping with his general character as
    a man of sterling integrity and a faithful steward before the Lord
    to his fellow-men, and thus his memory is justly enshrined in the
    hearts of the Saints, who fondly cherish the hope to enjoy his
    society after a glorious resurrection.

                                     "Yours Very Truly,
                                               "J. B. MAIBEN."

Many are the acts of mercy and charity related of President Kimball and his family, especially his noble and unselfish partner, Vilate, during this time of sore distress. They kept an open house, and fed from twenty-five to one hundred poor people at their table, daily, besides making presents innumerable of bread, flour and other necessaries, which were then literally worth their weight in gold.[A]

It was Vilate's chief delight to sally forth with a basket on her arm, filled with nicely cooked edibles and little domestic comforts, and seek out some poor, obscure person, in need of help, though perhaps too proud or timid to make it known. She would often go to the houses of such persons, on finding that they were away from home, and provide for their needs in their absence, in order that they might meet a glad surprise on their return, without knowing the good angel who had visited them.

It is related that, during this famine, a brother, sorely in need of bread, came to President Kimball for counsel how to procure it.

"Go and marry a wife," was Heber's terse reply, after relieving the immediate wants of the applicant.

Thunderstruck at receiving such an answer at such a time, when he could hardly provide food for himself, the man went his way, dazed and bewildered, thinking that President Kimball must be out of his mind. But the more he thought of the prophetic character and calling of the one who had given him this strange advice, the less he felt like ignoring it. Finally he resolved to obey counsel, let the consequences be what they might. But where was the woman who would marry him? was the next problem. Bethinking himself of a widow with several children, who he thought might be induced to share her lot with him, he mustered up courage, proposed and was accepted.

In that widow's house was laid up a six months' store of provisions!

Meeting President Kimball shortly afterwards, the now prosperous man of family exclaimed:

"Well, Brother Heber, I followed your advice--"

"Yes," said the man of God, "and you found bread."

President Kimball's letters to his son William, who was then in England, will fully tell the story of the famine, and also many of the current events of that period:

                         "GREAT SALT LAKE CITY,
                                  "February 29, 1856.

    "TO MY DEAR SON WILLIAM, AND TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN:

    "My family, with yours, are all in good health and spirits. I have
    been under the necessity of rationing my family, and also yours,
    to two-thirds of a pound of breadstuff per day each; as the last
    week is up to-day, we shall commence on half a pound each--at the
    same time they all begin to look better and fatter, and more
    ruddy, like the English. This I am under the necessity of doing.
    Brother Brigham told me to-day that he had put his family on half
    a pound each, for there is scarcely any grain in the country, and
    there are thousands that have none at all scarcely. We do this for
    the purpose of feeding hundreds that have none.

    "My family at this time consists of about one hundred souls, and I
    suppose that I feed about as many as one hundred besides.

    "My mill has not brought me in, for the last seven months, over
    one bushel of toll per day, in consequence of the dry weather, and
    the water being frozen up--which would not pay my miller. When
    this drought came on, I had about seven hundred bushels of wheat,
    and it is now reduced to about one hundred and twenty-five
    bushels, and I have only about twenty-five bushels of corn, which
    will not provide for my own family until harvest. Heber has been
    to the mill to-day, and has brought down some unbolted flour, and
    we shall be under the necessity of eating the bran along with the
    flour, and shall think ourselves doing well with half a pound a
    day at that. * * * We have some meat and perhaps about seventy
    bushels of potatoes, also a very few beets and carrots; so you can
    judge whether or not we can get through until harvest without
    digging roots; still we are altogether better off than the most of
    the people in these valleys of the mountains. There are several
    wards in this city who have not over two weeks' provisions on
    hand.

    "I went into the tithing office with Brother Hill and examined it
    from top to bottom, and, taking all the wheat, corn, buckwheat and
    oats, there were not to exceed five hundred bushels, which is all
    the public works have, or expect to have, and the works are pretty
    much abandoned, the men having been all turned off, except about
    fifteen who are at work on Brother Brigham's house and making some
    seed drills for grain, as we will be obliged to put in our grain
    by drilling, on account of the scarcity, which probably will not
    take over one-third of the grain it would to sow broadcast.

    "We shall probably not do anything on the public works until
    another harvest. The mechanics of every class have all been
    counseled to abandon their pursuits and go to raising grain. This
    we are literally compelled to do, out of necessity. Moreover,
    there is not a settlement in the Territory but is also in the same
    fix that we are. Some settlements can go two months, some three,
    some can, probably, at the rate of half a pound per day, till
    harvest. Hon. A. W. Babbitt even went to Brother Hyde's provision
    store the other day, and begged to get twenty or twenty-five
    pounds of flour, but could not. This I was told by William Price
    who is the salesman of the store. Money will not buy flour or
    meal, only at a few places, and but very little at that. I can
    assure you that I am harrassed constantly; I sell none for money
    but let it go where people are truly destitute. Dollars and cents
    do not count now, in these times, for they are the tightest that I
    have ever seen in the Territory of Utah. You and your brethren
    can judge a little by this. As one of the old Prophets said,
    anciently, 'as with the people so with the Priest,' we all take it
    together.

    "Some of the people drop many big tears, but if they cannot learn
    wisdom by precept, nor by example, they must learn it by what they
    suffer.

    "Now is the time for us to be like unto Joseph of old--lay up
    stores for ourselves, and our children; and thousands, and
    hundreds of thousands from the old world, the United States, and
    North and South America will flee to this place to get down by the
    side of Joseph's cribs, and granaries, and storehouses, to get
    that which will sustain life from "these poor deluded creatures"
    that they drove from the United States, and were not willing that
    they should have shelter in the land of their birth, and the
    privilege of worshiping our God and our Father who organized and
    prepared this earth for His children, and those who would keep His
    commandments; and killed our Prophet, our Patriarch, and Apostles,
    and hundreds of others and thousands of men, women, and children,
    the widows and fatherless, who died on the plains in consequence
    of their oppression. Will they receive the rod in consequence of
    this? Yes, I can say in truth, in the name of Israel's God, they
    shall receive fourfold pressed down. I can say in my heart, I wish
    to God this people would all listen to counsel, and do at the
    start as they are told, and move as one man, and be one. If this
    were the case, our enemies would never have any more power over
    us, our granaries never would be empty, nor would we see sorrow.
    There is not a good, wise, humble Saint that is filled with the
    elements of eternal lives, but what knows that this is true as
    well as myself. * * * * * *

    "Now, as to my own stock--cattle, horses and sheep. My sheep are
    on Antelope Island. Peter Hanson is with them, and Joseph Toronto
    is with Brother Brigham's, five miles beyond. Some portions of the
    Island are covered with snow nearly three feet deep. The sheep
    range on the tops of the mountains where the wind has blown off
    the snow, and they do first rate. My cattle, sixty head of them,
    were put in Cache valley with the church cattle, and those of
    other individuals, numbering about two thousand five hundred head,
    with some forty or fifty horses, some six or eight of which were
    mine. When the snow fell in that valley about ten inches deep,
    the fatter portion of the cattle broke and came over into Box
    Elder and Weber valleys, and scattered hither and thither. It is
    supposed that one-half of those two thousand five hundred head are
    dead. Whether mine are all dead I know not. My John horse fled
    out of that valley down on the Weber and died. Old Jim, Elk, Kit
    and Kurley remained in Cache valley, and they were with about
    forty head of other horses when last seen, but they have not been
    heard of for a considerable time, and whether living or dead we
    know not. The snow is about waist deep in that valley. Week before
    last, Heber and some other boys started to go there, but when they
    got to the divide between that valley and Box Elder, the snow was
    about twelve feet deep, and they were obliged to return. Heber
    found the Lize mare and your two mules on the Weber, and brought
    them home. They were so poor that they almost staggered.

    "The Carr boys have lost most all of their cattle, as they were in
    Cache valley. Old Daddy Stump went there also, and most of his
    died. Brother Shurtliff had some ninety cows of Brother
    Brigham's, and he says that they are all dead except ten or a
    dozen. Brothers Hooper and Williams told me that they had lost
    about seven hundred head. Mr. Kerr, a Gentile, told me that he
    had six or seven hundred head, and they were all dead. Messrs.
    Gilbert and Gerrish had about as many, and they are all dead, as
    are also Livingston and Bell's, and, from the accounts from all
    the brethren north of this place, we learn that they have lost
    half of their stock, and this destruction seems to be more or less
    throughout the Territory, and many cattle and horses are dying in
    the city There may be more or less of these cattle living, but
    they are scattered from the Malad to this place. There are some
    forty head of cattle on the Island, probably living.

    "Some of the Indians have killed some cattle in Utah Valley. Judge
    Drummond, being there, issued a writ for them. T---- J---- had
    the writ, and summoned a posse, without consulting Brother
    Brigham, and, anxious to obtain a few dimes from Uncle Sam, went
    over to Cedar Valley, and came to the lodge where the Indians
    were. Battest drew his rifle upon George Parish, who warded it
    off on firing, and one of the brethren drew a revolver, and shot
    Battest through the head, and he fell dead. In a very short time
    after this three of our brethren were found dead; one of their
    names was Carson. They were herd boys. Brother Hunsaker's son
    has never been found yet--supposed to be dead. Last evening we
    received news that two more of the brethren were dead, and one
    mortally wounded, and that the horses were taken from the company
    who were going to get back some of the cattle from the Indians. It
    happened in the cedars, between Rush and Cedar valleys, the
    brethren not expecting any Indians were anywhere about.

    "The more reckless portion of the Indians have gathered together,
    and taken something over one hundred head of cattle and horses,
    and the last we heard, they were making their way toward the
    Sevier, taking the west side of the mountains, on the borders of
    the desert. General Wells has issued orders to Gen. Cownover to
    raise men and pursue them, and take away the cattle from them. We
    have received no news as yet from this company. This difficulty
    has arisen from our Judges, Kinney and Drummond, and some of our
    foolish brethren who are ready to run at their nod.

    "There have been courts in session here for weeks and weeks, and I
    suppose that one hundred and fifty or two hundred of the brethren
    have been hanging around, with the council house filled to the
    brim. This scenery continuing for a long time, one day Brother
    Brigham sent Thomas Bullock to take their names, for the purpose
    of giving them missions, if they had not anything to do of any
    more importance. So Brother Brigham counseled me to make a
    selection--for Los Vegas some thirty, who are ordered to sell
    their possessions and go with their families as soon as the
    weather will permit, for the purpose of going down on to the Rio
    Virgin to raise cotton; Another company of forty-eight to go to
    Green River to strengthen up that settlement, make farms, build
    mills, etc., and some thirty-five or forty to go north to Salmon
    River, where Thomas J. Smith is, to strengthen up that post; some
    thirty to go to Carson Valley to strengthen that post; some thirty
    to go into the lead business near the Los Vegas; and eight to go
    to the East Indies. There are eighteen called to Europe, and seven
    to Australia.

    "We left Fillmore on the day of the adjournment of the
    Legislature, which took place at five o'clock A. M. We got home in
    about four days.

    "The Deseret Dramatic Association are now performing on the
    evenings of Wednesdays and Saturdays; "She stoops to Conquer"
    comes off for the second time to-morrow night. A benefit to
    Bernard Snow is to be given on Monday night, when will be played,
    'Virginius.'

    "Brother Smoot has made a selection of one hundred men,
    principally young men, to go back with ox teams to fetch on the
    Church goods that lie in Missouri and St. Louis, if there are
    cattle enough left alive to do so. Your brother David, Brigham
    Young, Jr., and George Grant's son George, will go with them.

    "Heber and Phoebe are living with Ruth and Christeen. Heber is a
    very steady, good boy, and takes a great burden from my shoulders,
    by waiting on the family and seeing to things.

    "You can say to the brethren that I see their wives occasionally
    at the public places. They are all well so far as I know; I have
    all I can do and no time to visit. Say to all the brethren that
    they are most kindly remembered by me. I would be glad to write to
    them all.

    "This letter is for the benefit of all, as it gives the general
    news. We shall expect to see you home next season, as Brother
    Brigham has sent word, which you will get before you get this.

    "God bless Brother Franklin, Brother Spencer, yourself, with all
    the rest of the brethren. Your dear mother is sitting beside me
    and wishes to be remembered kindly to her son William.

    "Brother Brigham and all the brethren are well and would say, if
    they were present, Amen.

    "From your father in the gospel of your Lord and Savior Jesus
    Christ, to his son, William H. Kimball.

                                           "HEBER C. KIMBALL."

The story is continued in his letter of a later date, as follows:

                                   "GREAT SALT LAKE CITY,
                                              "April 13th, 1856.

    "My Son William:

    "We have not received a line from you or Daniel since August 19th,
    and all the news that we have received was from a business letter
    that came from Franklin, by the last southern mail. * * * * *

    "As to matters at home, things are going on in peace, with the
    exception of the disturbances with some of the Utes. They have
    killed eight of our brethren in Utah, and drove away many cattle
    and horses.

    "The times are said to be more close this season than they have
    ever been in the valleys; and this is universal through all the
    settlements. There are not more than one-half of the people that
    have bread, and they have not more than one-half or one-quarter of
    a pound a day to a person. A great portion of the people are
    digging roots, and hundreds and thousands, their teams being dead,
    are under the necessity of spading their ground to put in their
    grain. There is a pretty universal break with our merchants, as
    there is no one to buy their goods, and their stock are mostly
    dead. My family, with yours, have only one-half a pound of
    bread-stuff to a person, a day. We have vegetables and a little
    meat. We are doing first rate, and have no cause but to be very
    thankful; still I feed hundreds of others, a little, or they must
    suffer. Brother Brigham, myself, and others have been crying unto
    this people for more than three years, to lay up their grain for a
    time when they would have much need of it. My family, with yours,
    I can say with propriety, look more healthy, and fair, and rugged,
    and athletic, than they did when they had plenty to eat. * *

    "I shall be very glad when you return home to take a little of my
    burden off my shoulders, for it has been extremely hard for me and
    your mother to calculate, devise and administer to near one
    hundred that are dependent on us, besides hundreds of others that
    are teasing us constantly for something to eat; still your father
    has got a spirit in him that is like an old lion, that endures by
    the help of the Almighty; but your mother is very sympathetic, and
    it gives her much sorrow, not because your children and mine cry
    for bread, but because of others. There was no need of my
    rationing my family, but I did it for the sake of keeping hundreds
    of others alive. I foresaw these times more than three years ago,
    and prepared myself, more or less, for it.

    * * * * * *

    "This people have been told to build forts around their cities,
    and gather up together and be one, and to build store-houses and
    lay up grain to last seven years, and hundreds of other things.
    Have they done it? No. What is the consequence? Eight more of our
    brethren slain! No bread! No clothing except what we buy of the
    ungodly, when they are universally taught to make their clothing,
    so that we may be independent of any of the nations; for the
    connection between us and the world will be closed, in a measure.
    This you and your brethren in the old world can see through a
    glass clearly, not darkly. War, death, desolation of nations,
    famine and desolating sickness, are becoming prevalent throughout
    the old world, and in the United States it will be more so, and
    that soon, and they (the United States) will have all they can do
    to attend to their own concerns at home, without troubling
    themselves about the Mormons.

    "At our April conference there were about three hundred
    missionaries selected for different missions; some thirty or forty
    to go to Europe and the United States, and about one hundred to
    Carson Valley, to try to sustain that place; a large company to
    Green River, another to Los Vegas and another to Salmon River. All
    business is given up for the present on the public works. Not much
    of any building is going on in the city, as all mechanics are
    advised to go to tilling the earth. The majority of the people
    feel well; your mother's health is rather poor, still she is
    about. I see Mary and Melissa and the children every day. Helen,
    your sister, has just come in with the little Vilate--well, Heber,
    David and all the boys, with all the family, are well, and say,
    'Give my kind love to brother William, and all the faithful
    Elders.' I am still continuing my own improvements, making good
    rock fence and setting out many fruit trees.

    "Now I will come to a close by saying, God bless you and Franklin,
    Daniel and all in that land, and all that believe on your words.
    Even so, amen.

                                          "HEBER C. KIMBALL."

And thus did this father in Israel not only give to the people the word of the Lord in time for a general provision against the day of famine, but when it came, his patriarchal care and benevolence were the means of preserving many from absolute want, and some perhaps from starvation.
