THE HAND-CART EMIGRATION--PERISHING IN THE SNOW--HEROIC CONDUCT OF
WILLIAM H. AND DAVID P. KIMBALL--PRESIDENT KIMBALL'S PLEA AND
EXERTIONS IN BEHALF OF THE SUFFERERS--THE UTAH WAR--THE GREAT
REBELLION.

The year 1856 witnessed another calamity, upon the harrowing details of which it would indeed be painful to dwell. It was the year of the famous hand-cart emigration, in which several hundred souls, overtaken by winter on the plains, perished in the snows and from starvation.

On hearing of the situation of these poor emigrants, the most strenuous efforts were made by the authorities and the people in the Valley to rescue them from their terrible fate. Presidents Young, Kimball and others despatched all their teams, loaded with bedding and provisions, to the relief of the sufferers, and prayers in public and in private were offered up throughout the entire Territory for the deliverance of the unfortunate companies from the destruction impending over them.

Among those sent out to meet the hand-carts, were two of the sons of President Kimball, William H. and David P., the former of whom had just arrived home from England; also Joseph A. Young, George W. Grant and others. These brave men by their heroism--for it was at the peril of their own lives that they thus braved the wintry storms on the plains--immortalized themselves, and won the undying gratitude of hundreds who were undoubtedly saved by their timely action from perishing.

David P. Kimball, George W. Grant and C. Allen Huntington carried upwards of five hundred of these emigrants on their backs across the Sweetwater, breaking the thin ice of the frozen river before them, as they waded from shore to shore. The effects of the severe colds then contracted by these brethren, remained with them, and finally conduced to the death of the two former, while the survivor, Brother Huntington, is a sufferer from the same cause to this day.

The situation and sufferings of the emigrants were the main theme of the Tabernacle discourses at the time. President Kimball thus refers to them on the 2nd of November of that fatal year:

"Some find fault with and blame Brother Brigham and his council, because of the sufferings they have heard that our brethren are enduring on the plains. * * But let me tell you most emphatically that if all who were entrusted with the care and management of this year's immigration had done as they were counseled and dictated by the First Presidency of this Church, the sufferings and hardships now endured by the companies on their way here would have been avoided. Why? Because they would have left the Missouri river in season, and not have been hindered until into September. * * Our brethren and sisters on the plains are in my mind all the time, and Brother Brigham has given, to those who wish it, the privilege of going back to help bring them in. If I do not go myself I will send a team, though I have already sent back nearly all my teams, and so has Brother Brigham. Those who have gone back never will be sorry for or regret having done so. If brothers Joseph A. Young, my son William H., George D. Grant, and my son David P. had not gone to the assistance of those now on the plains I should always have regretted it. If they die during the trip, they will die while endeavoring to save their brethren; and who has greater love than he that lays down his life for his friends?"

"Were I in the situation of some of you, I would not sleep another night before starting to the assistance of the people that are now struggling through the snow. * * As Brother Brigham has said, I would rather be helping in those on the plains than be here, if circumstances and duty would permit. We offered our offering and started to go but the Lord ordered it otherwise and we came home. But we have done a better work than if we had gone. * * There would have been no general stir in behalf of our brethren on the plains; but scores and hundreds have now gone to meet them, and they have had good weather so far, have they not?"

The last of the hand-cart companies, the fifth one of the season, commanded by Edward Martin, arrived in Salt Lake City about the 1st of December. They had numbered nearly six hundred souls at starting, but lost over one-fourth of their number by death.

Let the curtain fall over the tragic scene.

During the exciting period of the "Utah War," the subject of which, treated at length, would cover the four years from 1857 to 1861, the time of the sojourn of "Johnston's army" in the valley, Heber was one with Brigham in the bold yet patriotic stand taken by Zion's leader in repelling the hostile invasion. We need not dwell upon the oft-told tale. President Kimball was a man of peace, and not of war, and, though not lacking in courage, preferred to battle with error and the powers of evil, than with his fellow-men.

In the spring of 1858, when the Saints, to the number of 30,000, abandoned their homes at the approach of the army, President Kimball accompanied the exodus of his people south as far as Provo, whence he returned, after peace was assured, to his home in Salt Lake City early in July. The soldiers had marched quietly through the deserted city, crossed the Jordan, and camped at Cedar Valley, forty miles south-west, opposite the town of Lehi, where they founded Camp Floyd, afterwards renamed Fort Crittenden, and occupied it until the autum of 1861, when the troops were withdrawn to take part in the war of the Great Rebellion.[A]

Apropos of the war:--In an old memorandum book belonging to President Kimball, in which he sometimes noted down his thoughts, appears the following:

                              "GREAT SALT LAKE CITY,
                                          "March 27th, 1859.

"The word of the Lord to me, Heber C. Kimball. At 9 o'clock in the evening the Lord said to me that division would take place between the north and south within six years, and much blood would be spilt, and I should live to see it."
