ANECDOTES AND REMINISCENCES OF HEBER C. KIMBALL--THE MAN AS OTHERS
KNEW HIM--GOLDEN GRAINS FROM THE SANDS OF MEMORY.

At this point in our history we deem it proper to introduce a series of anecdotes and reminiscences relating to President Kimball, nearly all of which were contributed, at the author's invitation, especially for this work. These flowers of incident culled from the gardens of recollection, cannot fail to interest the reader, while they illustrate, as nothing else could, the character and conduct of this remarkable man.

The first is from Brother N. B. Baldwin, of Fillmore, who writes as follows:

"My first acquaintance with Elder Kimball was in Zion's Camp, in the Spring and Summer of 1834. The following winter the young and middle-aged Elders, all who conveniently could, were called in to attend school in Kirtland, Ohio. William E. McLellin was the teacher of the grammar classes, grammar being then taught on the Kirkham plan, by lecture and repetition. Our class consisted of Joseph Smith (who, in the absence of the teacher at other duties, took charge of the class), David W. Patten, Heber C. Kimball, Benjamin Winchester, Nathan B. Baldwin and others that I do not now recollect.

"It seemed to be very hard for Brother Kimball to memorize sentences by hearing them repeated. One time when he was thus at fault, Joseph, in a jocular mood, said to him; 'Repeat that correctly, or I will take a stick and whip you as I would a little child.'

"With his model meekness, Brother Kimball smilingly said; 'Well, you may whip me.'

"'Yes,' said Joseph, 'it would be just about like whipping a little child. YOU ARE JUST AS INNOCENT AS A LITTLE CHILD.'"

This simple anecdote furnishes not only a key to the character of Heber C. Kimball, showing his native meekness and veneration, but also an evidence of the estimation in which he was held by the Prophet, even at that early day. Jesus said that "except ye become as little children ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven."

ELDER WILLIAM B. BARTON contributes the following:

"It was my happy privilege, while filling a mission to England in 1874-5-6 to receive my appointment to labor in the Liverpool Conference. This conference included, among others, a few branches that were left of the once flourishing conferences of Clithero and Preston. I realized that I was traveling on historic ground. I found some few Saints still in that land, who were personally acquainted with the early Elders and Apostles who first preached and established the gospel in Preston; and I found that while all were kindly remembered, none had made as indelible and lasting an impression on their minds as Brother Heber C. Kimball. They pointed out with pleasure and reverence the places where he and others had stood forth proclaiming the restored gospel. Among these were the Market-place, the Cock Pit, and the Rev. James Fielding's Chapel. I was fortunate in securing a photograph of this chapel, but had no idea at the time that it would ever be used to illustrate a history of the founder of the British mission.

"This Mr. Fielding and a Mr. Aitken were two of twelve men who had united together and made a vow that they would neither eat nor drink until the Lord revealed to them whether he would raise up His Church in their day. The Lord did make known to them that he had already established His Church on the earth, and in due time His servants would be sent with authority to preach and baptize. Brother Kimball visited Mr. Aitken and bore a powerful testimony of the truth, and prophesied to him that if he rejected the message of salvation, he would lose his influence, his flock would leave him, and he would go down; all of which was fulfilled to the very letter, with regard to him and Mr. Fielding also. Mr. Fielding had commenced to build a more commodious church, but he never finished it, and he himself was for a long time an inmate of Grosvenor hospital; a place where unfortunate and aged clergymen spent their declining years."

"Among the early converts of Apostle Kimball in that land were the sisters Mary Ann and Margaret Heaton Topping, whose parents were opposed to and never joined the Church. Brother Kimball counseled them to obey their parents, and told them that the time would come when they would cease to object to their attending the meetings of the Saints. Said he: 'When I say come, come, and all will be well,' which promise was literally fulfilled. He warned one of these sisters not to marry a young man she was engaged to, as he would apostatize and leave the Church, and told her that her future husband was not then in the Church, but would come in and remain faithful; and, said he, 'You shall see the man you are going to marry at the conference that I will notify you to attend.' These remarkable promises were all fulfilled, and Sister Topping is alive to-day to bear witness of their truth."

BROTHER CHARLES HUBBARD, an old friend of Heber's, whom he mentions repeatedly in his history, relates this incident:

"As is well known, President Brigham Young, when he crossed the Mississippi River from Montrose, in September, 1839, and started on his mission to England, was very sick. He was brought to the house of Heber C. Kimball, in Nauvoo. Brother Kimball was also sick with the same disease (ague) but after the fever went off he climbed upon his house and was trying to finish the roof, when his brother missionary (Brigham) came out to walk a little to try his strength. In the effort he fainted and fell to the ground. Brother Kimball, not having strength to lift him, called to me, just across the river, to come and help assist Brother Brigham into the house, where, after placing him upon the bed, we administered to him and he recovered consciousness. When I left, Brother Heber followed me to the door and said:

"'Charley, I doubt very much if Brigham ever rises from that bed.'

"But he had no sooner uttered the words, than he spoke up, as with another voice, and said, 'He shall live, and shall start upon this mission with me to-morrow morning.' And they did start the very next morning, on their mission to England.'"

ELDER JACOB HAMBLIN leaves the following on record:

"At the April conference I, with others, was called on a mission to the Indians in Southern Utah, in 1854. We commenced our labors at a place we called Harmony.

"About the end of May of that year, President B. Young, Heber C. Kimball, P. P. Pratt and others, to the number of twenty persons, came to visit us. President Young gave much instruction, etc. Brother Kimball prophesied that if the brethren were united they would be prospered and blessed, but if they permitted the spirit of strife and contention to come into their midst, the place would come to an end in a scene of bloodshed.

"Previous to this meeting, President Young asked some brethren who had been into the country south of Harmony, if they thought a wagon road could be made down to the Rio Virgin. Their replies were very discouraging, but in the face of this report Brother Kimball prophesied in this meeting that a road would be made from Harmony over the Black Ridge, and a Temple would be built on the Rio Virgin, and the Lamanites would come from the east side of the Colorado River and get their endowments in it. All these prophecies have been fulfilled."

One of the Elders laboring in the Manti Temple writes:

"In an early day when President Young and party were making the location of a settlement here, President Heber C. Kimball prophesied that the day would come when a temple would be built on this hill. Some disbelieved and doubted the possibility of even making a settlement here. Brother Kimball said, 'Well, it will be so, and more than that, the rock will be quarried from that hill to build it with, and some of the stone from that quarry will be taken to help complete the Salt Lake Temple.' On July 28th, 1878, two large stones, weighing respectively 5,600 and 5,020 pounds, were taken from the Manti stone quarry, hauled by team to York, the U. C. R. R. terminus then, and shipped to Salt Lake City to be used for the tablets in the east and west ends of the Salt Lake City Temple.

"At a conference held in Ephraim, Sanpete County, June 25th, 1875, nearly all the speakers expressed their feelings to have a temple built in Sanpete County, and gave their views as to what point and where to build it, and to show the union that existed, Elder Daniel H. Wells said 'Manti,' George Q. Cannon, Brigham Young, Jr., John Taylor, Orson Hyde, Erastus Snow, Franklin D. Richards, Lorenzo Young, and A. M. Musser said 'Manti stone quarry.' I have given the names in the order in which they spoke. At 4 p. m. that day President Brigham Young said: 'The Temple should be built on Manti stone quarry.' Early on the morning of April 25th, 1877, President Brigham Young asked Brother Warren S. Snow to go with him to the Temple hill. Brother Snow says; 'We two were alone: President Young took me to the spot where the Temple was to stand; we went to the southeast corner, and President Young said; 'Here is the spot where the prophet Moroni stood and dedicated this piece of land for a Temple site, and that is the reason why the location is made here, and we can't move it from this spot; and if you and I are the only persons that come here at high noon to-day, we will dedicate this ground."

The late George Nebeker said that President Kimball told him, many years ago, that he would live to see the kings and great ones of the earth pass by his door. Brother Nebeker resided in the nineteenth ward. The railway at that time was not thought of in Utah. But the iron horse now rushes along the street immediately in front of Brother Nebeker's family residence, and he himself lived to see such celebrities as President Grant, the Emperor of Brazil and other royal and great ones literally pass by his door.

MRS. MAMIE HOOPER JENNINGS, daughter of the late Captain Hooper, relates:

"Brother Kimball gave my father a half dollar, telling him that as long as he kept it he should never want for money. Father placed faith in the promise, and testified often that he had realized its truth; he had never wanted for money, in any sum, from that time."

A FRIEND:

"He said to me one day, taking up a small stick from the ground, 'You see this stick. If it had remained down there you never would have noticed that there was any dirt clinging to it. But now that I hold it up you observe it is covered with dirt. It is just so when a man is put into office. He may be just as clean before he gets there as those around him, but his being lifted up above them makes his faults more manifest, and he is far more apt to be criticised than before.'"

The veteran Bishop, A. H. RALEIGH, speaks thus from his exile:

"Having fortunately been privileged with a personal acquaintance with the late Heber C. Kimball, from the early days of Nauvoo to the time of his decease, a period of about twenty-five years, I venture confidently to submit that no stronger or more forcible illustration of the peculiarity of his character can be presented than the notable eccentricity manifested in the subdivisions of plat E. Salt Lake City, which he fashioned by personally directing city surveyor J. W. Fox, Sen., in laying out and platting, and myself in naming the streets, while drafting the resolution which, when passed by the City Council, made it a legal survey. Though it has undergone some slight changes in the remodeling of a few lots, as also a few streets, and changing a few of these names, with a small addition to the plat, far the most of the original remains to be a lasting monument to his memory. The great variety of form and size of lots, involving corners, angles, widths and lengths of streets, together with their peculiar names, almost exhausting the names of the fruit and vegetable kingdom, are all characteristic of the man, familiarly called 'Brother Heber,' ever evincing a strong desire to imitate nature in its eternal variety and beauty; the same in his plain, easy, natural demeanor in his daily intercourse with his fellows, either in public or private life, giving evidence of the presence of one of nature's noblemen, one of the noblest works of God,--an honest man."

FATHER J. L. HEYWOOD writes from Panguitch:

"Brother Kimball was naturally of a jovial turn of mind. When working at the pottery business he would sometimes use a chip to turn his crocks, remarking that he 'did not care who stole his trade, as long as they did not steal his tools.'

"In relation to some protuberances on his forehead he remarked that they were the 'horns of Joseph' with which to push the people together, referring to his labors as an Apostle.

"President B. Young once said that Brother Kimball could go to the city of Washington, D.C., and build up a church, and the way he would do it was by beginning so small."

ELDER JUNIUS F. WELLS:

"One day he entered the Union Academy, taught by Dr. Doremus, and taking off his high-crowned straw hat that he used so much to wear, made a profound bow to the school, without saying a word. Then, while the students were gazing at him with fixed eyes and open mouths, he said solemnly: 'Boys; never call your father the old man.' With another polite bow, and without saying another word, he turned and left the hall. The impression made by his presence and laconic speech was most profound."

ELDER CHARLES W. STAYNER:

"President Kimball's hat blew off on Main Street, one day, and as he was pursuing it, one of a party of men with whom he had been conversing on the corner, laughed at him. Stopping in his chase, he turned around and addressing that person said: 'Never mind; your hat will blow off some day, but your head will be in it.' The man to whom he spoke afterwards apostatized."

SOLOMON F. KIMBALL:

"I heard father prophecy that a certain Elder would lose all his means and die a poor man, because he neglected his spiritual duties to attend to his temporal affairs. I have seen that prophecy fulfilled."

JAMES LAWSON'S narrative:

"In 1855, Heber C. Kimball sent for me (I had just been married thirteen days) and said, 'Brother James' I want you to give your wife Betsy a divorce,' I said, 'Brother Kimball what is the matter? There is nothing wrong with us, and we think everything of each other?' He said, 'Nothing is the matter, but here is the divorce and I want you to sign it.' I signed it and he told me to send her home to her mother (Sarah Noon[A]) which I did. At the same time I asked her if she had been making any complaints to Bro. Kimball against me. She said, 'Never, to anybody.' I did not sleep a wink that night, and no one knows what I suffered in my feelings. I prayed frequently to the Lord and enquired of Him what all this meant. Towards morning I received an answer to my prayers. The Spirit said unto me, 'Be comforted, my servant James, all will come out right.' Soon after this Brother Kimball went to the Legislature, which was held at Fillmore, and was absent from home about two months. When he returned he gave me a mission to Carson Valley and told me to get Betsy and bring her to the Endowment House with me. I did so and he sealed us for time and all eternity.

"After this took place I said, 'Brother Kimball what did you do that for?' He said, 'Brother James, I did it to try you as I was tried. I will tell you. After I had returned from my second mission to England in 1841, the Prophet Joseph came to me one evening and said, 'Brother Heber, I want you to give Vilate to me to be my wife,' saying that the Lord desired this at my hands.' Heber said that in all his life before he had never had anything take hold of him like that. He was dumbfounded. He went home, and did not eat a mouthful of anything, nor even touch a drop of water to his lips, nor sleep, for three days and nights. He was almost continually offering up his prayers to God and asking him for comfort. On the evening of the third day he said, 'Vilate, let's go down to the Prophet's' and they went down and met him in a private room. Heber said, 'Brother Joseph, here is Vilate.' The Prophet wept like a child, said Heber, and after he had cleared the tears away, he took us and sealed us for time and all eternity, and said, 'Brother Heber, take her, and the Lord will give you a hundred fold."

COL. ROBERT SMITH, a veteran friend of President Kimball's, and for many years almost like a member of his family, says:

"In 1857, I was working for Brother Heber and asked him for some goods, which he refused to let me have. Feeling bad over it, I went home and laid the matter before the Lord. The next morning when I came to work, Brother Heber called me into his room and said, 'Robert, what have you been complaining to the Lord for, about his servant Heber? Here are the things you asked me for, and after this don't go to the Lord about every little thing that happens."

"In the year 1855, he was moving a herd of sheep on to the Church Island, with a flat boat; the water was very shallow in some places and the boat got fastened on a sand-bar, and we could not get it off. There were about six of us in all. After working for some time and accomplishing nothing, Brother Heber returned to the shore, which was but a short distance, and getting behind some grease-wood he bowed down in prayer. Then coming back to the boat, he said, 'come boys, let's give her another trial, she'll move now.' All took hold and pushed and it went off the bar all right, and we arrived at the Island that night."

"At one time, putting his hand on his heart, he remarked that unless a man knew that Jesus was the Christ, he could not stand in this Church.

"He said that the Lord would allow all manner of abominations to come to Zion, in order to purify His people. This was in 1856.

"He saw in vision a U. S. Marshal in pursuit of one of his daughters, who had a small babe in her arms.[A]

"He said that this government would dissolve pretty much all the laws passed by our legislature, and that the time would come when the government would stop the Saints from holding meetings. When this was done the Lord would pour out His judgments."

"At family prayers, just a little while before his death, he remarked that the angel Moroni had visited him the night before and informed him that his work on this earth was finished, and he would soon be taken."

FATHER O. N. LLILJENQUIST once said to the author:

"My first impression of President Kimball was far from favorable. He was preaching in the Tabernacle, and belaboring a certain man very severely, and I did not like his harshness. The next time I met him was in the Endowment House, and if ever I saw a man look like a God, and act as humble as a little child, that man was Heber C. Kimball. All my prejudice vanished in a moment."

BISHOP JAMES WATSON:

"In 1864, soon after my arrival in Utah, I went with my brother Joseph to see President Kimball about a lot I desired to purchase. We found him at his mill on City Creek, superintending some workmen. Being introduced to him, I said: 'President Kimball, I wish to buy a lot which I am informed belongs to you.'

"Eyeing me in a very searching manner, he said: 'I have sold many lots and never received the pay for them,' and then turned away and resumed his directions to the workmen.

"I was very much hurt at his abrupt manner, especially as his words seemed to intimate that I was one who would not pay my debts, a reputation I had not earned. 'Have you any further business with me?' he asked, turning towards me again, after the lapse of a few moments. 'No sir,' said I sternly, and walked away.

"Some time elapsed, and we did not meet, for I avoided him whenever I saw him coming. One day, however, we met face to face, he on his way to the Endowment House, and I near the Temple Block, where I was then working. Smiling amiably and reminding me that I had avoided him several times, he asked: 'Have you got a lot yet?' 'No sir,' I answered, coolly, although my blood was warmed by the recollection which his words called up. 'Well, you'll get one,' said he, 'and you'll get it of me, too.' (I inwardly resolved that I never would.) 'Yes, you'll come and get it of me,' he repeated, and we separated.

"Being determined that his words should not come to pass, (for I was not at all won over by his change of manner) I went and purchased a lot from a sister in the Church, paid her for it, and put up a house on the land. I then asked her for the deed, but she told me she did not have one.

"'Well, who holds the title to the land, then?' I asked.

"'Heber C. Kimball,' she replied.

"I was dumb-founded. 'Well, I shall not buy it of him,' I said to myself, but I resolved to go and get the deed for her. Brother Kimball received me very kindly, and my feelings were somewhat softened towards him. Almost the first question he asked was: 'Have you got a lot yet?' 'Yes, sir,' I replied, and then told him I had come to get sister ------'s deed. 'Why, I cannot give her a deed,' said he, 'for she has never paid me for that lot.' I then told him what I had done, and he said with a smile, 'I told you you would have to come to me for a lot. Wait here a moment,' he added, and went into his office. Returning presently, he handed me a deed for the land, made out in my name, and said: 'There, I'll make you a present of that deed, and you've already paid for the land; God bless you,' and we parted friends.

"Another incident I will relate:

"On the morning of the 15th day of April, 1865, my wife and I were going through the Temple block towards the Endowment House, as we had been previously requested by our Bishop to go and get our endowments. I was in a very thoughtful mood and prayed silently in my own mind that the Lord would give me grace to always adhere to the truth and have my mind quickened by the Holy Ghost, so that I might always be able to decide between truth and error and to have courage to defend the principles of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

"We overtook President H. C. Kimball and were walking leisurely along, when Willard G. Smith overtook us and said to President Kimball, 'Have you heard the news? President Lincoln was assassinated last night while at the theatre in Washington. See the flags are at half mast.' After some little conversation we entered the Endowment House. The thought of the sad death of President Lincoln weighed heavily on my mind, and made a deep impression on me. In going through the House Brother Kimball gave us a very impressive lecture. Fixing his eyes on me, he said:

"'Do you know that you will yet be called upon to stand in front of the enemy?' Then he paused for a reply.

"After studying a few seconds, I answered, 'No, sir.'

"Giving me a piercing look, he said: 'Don't you believe it.' I answered 'No, sir.'

"Gazing at me intently he said, 'Don't you believe what I say?' I answered 'How can I believe, when I have no evidence or knowledge of it?' 'You foolish man,' he said, 'If you had a knowledge you would not require any belief.'

"Pointing to me again, he said: 'You will yet be called upon to stand in front of the enemy, while bullets will fly around as thick as hail. Yet not a hair of your head shall be hurt. Do you believe that?'

"After a little study I answered, 'No, sir.' He seemed a little perplexed at my obstinacy and asked, 'Why don't you believe it?' I said, 'Because I have been in a hail-storm, and I know that it is impossible to be in a hail-storm without being hit, and if the bullets are to fly around me as thick as hail, I am sure I will be hit.' He said 'Don't you think if you saw them coming you could juke them?' I said I thought I could. 'But,' said he, 'they come so quick you cannot do it.'

"Then fixing his eyes upon me, he said: 'The day will come when you will stand in the front rank in face of the enemy, while the bullets will fly around you like a hail-storm, but if you will live pure and keep your garments clean, not one hair of your head will be hurt. Do you believe that?'

"I said: 'Brother Kimball, I believe what you say.'"

ELDER EDWARD STEVENSON:

"I cheerfully contribute the following, concerning one of the greatest prophets of the nineteenth century--Heber C. Kimball: In 1856 a little group of friends, convened in the House of the Lord, were engaged in pleasant conversation on the isolated condition of the Latter-day Saints.

"'Yes,' said Brother Heber (by which name he was so familiarly known), 'we think we are secure here in the chambers of the everlasting hills, where we can close those few doors of the canyons against mobs and persecutors, the wicked and the vile, who have always beset us with violence and robbery, but I want to say to you, my brethren, the time is coming when we will be mixed up in these now peaceful valleys to that extent that it will be difficult to tell the face of a Saint from the face of an enemy to the people of God. Then, brethren, look out for the great sieve, for there will be a great sifting time, and many will fall; for I say unto you there is a test, a TEST, a TEST coming, and who will be able to stand?'

"The emphasis with which those words were spoken I shall never forget.

"I was with Brother Heber on the occasion of his last meeting at Bountiful, Davis County, Utah, just previous to his death. He seemed full to overflowing; for over two hours he held the audience; that meeting and the deep instructions will endure in the hearts of true Saints while eternities roll on.

"While working with him in the House of the Lord in 1856-7, how often I have heard him speak against pride and covetousness and the fear of riches, being fearful of the Lord's displeasure and consequent judgments. Said he: 'If the Saints will repent, the Lord's wrath will be turned away, but they will not repent until it is too late.'"

PRESIDENT A. O. SMOOT:

"A short time before Brother Heber was taken ill with his last sickness, I drove through with him from Provo to Salt Lake. He was unusually free in his conversation, it being almost a ceaseless flow of prophecies in relation to individuals in and out of the Church. He foretold, with what I have since realized to be the greatest accuracy, what would befall certain men. Some of those of whom he prophesied are still in good standing, but many who were in good standing then, have fallen, as he said they would."

PRESIDENT A. F. MCDONALD:

"My first intimate acquaintance with President Kimball occurred in 1868, I being then in charge of the Tithing Office at Provo. He often called into the office to do business. His public discourses about this time were the most earnest and impressive that I had ever heard; and on several occasions in the Provo meeting house, he clearly foreshadowed the time of trial the Saints are now passing through, and to a period still before us. He often used the language 'A test, a test is coming.'

"On one occasion, when he was stopping with us during a two days' conference, he came into the Tithing Yard where I was busy putting up hay, and called me towards him and said: 'Do you want me at your house, or would you rather not have us there?' I answered that it was a pleasure and honor to have him there. Looking intently at me, he said: 'I want to say to you that you have seen your worst days; you have had some hard times and trials in the past, but from this time it will be better for you. In whatever you are called to do, or whatever you put your hands to accomplish, you will be prospered and prevail.' This is true so far in my experience.

"On another occasion in 1863, during a two days' meeting in Provo, I invited several brethren to dinner. Brother Kimball was present. During the chat at the table, conversation turned on the number of children I then had, being at that time six boys; hearing this reply he said: 'Yes, and the next, the seventh, will be a boy also, and he will be the noblest, the most talented, and the greatest you have had.' Brother R. L. Campbell, who I remember was present, said in a free and jocular way: 'If it should come a girl, what then?' Upon which Brother Kimball observed; 'It will not come a girl, but a boy, and you will see it.' One year and four days after, a boy was born, and Brother Kimball, again attending a two days' meeting at Provo, called to see him and directed that he be blessed and given the name of 'Heber,' by which name he is known in our family and has grown to manhood, as we believe to fulfill the words spoken of him.

"On the night of Brother Kimball's accident at Provo, a short time before his death, I was with him. I took a silk handkerchief from my pocket and tied it over his head, and then suggested that I go and call on President B. Young, then at the house of Bishop Wm. Miller, to come and administer to him; but he said: 'I command you to administer to me and anoint me with oil in the name of the Lord; do not be in the least afraid; you hold the same Priesthood and authority from God as President Young or myself, and God hears and answers the prayers of His humblest servants and people.' I administered to him accordingly, and he soon revived, becoming quite free and jocular with us, and about two o'clock in the morning at his suggestion I went home. On the following day, myself and wife called to see him. He was much improved and quite sociable, his conversation being original, incisive, and a continual feast of inspiration. As we were leaving he asked his wife (Lucy W.) to get my handkerchief that I had put on his head the previous night, and addressing my wife he said: 'Here, Betty, take this handkerchief, and be sure that you never wash it, but keep it as it is, and when you have sickness in your family, exercise the prayer of faith, and it will prove a blessing, and will be a bond between you and me for ever!' My wife has sacredly kept that handkerchief."

ELDER JOHN NICHOLSON gives a valued contribution in the following:

"In accordance with your request I furnish you with a brief outline of a discourse delivered by your grandfather, the late Heber C. Kimball, in 1867. The occasion was the usual afternoon service. Whether it was held in the Bowery or the old Tabernacle, I do not distinctly recollect, but think it was the latter. My memory is, however, quite distinct in relation to the subject of the discourse; especially the prophetic part of it, with which I was specially impressed.

"President Kimball opened by stating that there were many within hearing who had often wished that they had been associated with the Prophet Joseph. 'You imagine,' said he, 'that you would have stood by him when persecution raged and he was assailed by foes within and without. You would have defended him and been true to him in the midst of every trial. You think you would have been delighted to have shown your integrity in the days of mobs and traitors.

"'Let me say to you, that many of you will see the time when you will have all the trouble, trial and persecution that you can stand, and plenty of opportunities to show that you are true to God and his work. This Church has before it many close places through which it will have to pass before the work of God is crowned with victory. To meet the difficulties that are coming, it will be necessary for you to have a knowledge of the truth of this work for yourselves. The difficulties will be of such a character that the man or woman who does not possess this personal knowledge or witness will fall. If you have not got the testimony, live right and call upon the Lord and cease not till you obtain it. If you do not you will not stand.

"'Remember these sayings, for many of you will live to see them fulfilled. The time will come when no man nor woman will be able to endure on borrowed light. Each will have to be guided by the light within himself. If you do not have it, how can you stand? Do you believe it?

"'How is it now? You have the First Presidency, from whom you can get counsel to guide you, and you rely on them. The time will come when they will not be with you. Why? Because they will have to flee and hide up to keep out of the hands of their enemies. You have the Twelve now. You will not always have them, for they too will be hunted and will have to keep out of the way of their enemies. You have other men to whom you look for counsel and advice. Many of them will not be amongst you, for the same reason. You will be left to the light within yourselves. If you don't have it you will not stand; therefore seek for the testimony of Jesus and cleave to it, that when the trying time comes you may not stumble and fall.'

"The main object of the discourse was to impress the people with the importance of having light and knowledge direct from God within themselves. The prophetic part was given as the leading reason why they should be in possession of an individual testimony, as it defined to some extent the character of the trials to which the Saints would be subjected. That Brother Kimball's predictions have been, in part, at least, already fulfilled, must be clear to all who are familiar with the events of the last few years. In the course of his remarks on the occasion in point he several times said: 'You will have all the persecution you want and more too, and all the opportunity to show your integrity to God and truth that you could desire.'

"The foregoing statement is probably not as absolutely correct as could have been given immediately after the delivery of the discourse, but it is so in substance. Probably there are many others who heard it who will remember it when it is brought to their recollection."

ELDER HENRY W. NAISBITT adds this endorsement:

"I was present on the occasion when President Heber C. Kimball delivered the discourse described in the foregoing communication, and the statement as therein given is correct, as I remember it."

WM. H. BEARD ESQ. sends the following from his home in Spiceland, Indiana:

"In the spring of 1884, I called at the home of your father, the late lamented H. K. Whitney, and while there had the pleasure of viewing a fairly executed portrait of the deceased President Kimball, and having previously read something of him as viewed by Gentile historians, I conceived the idea of learning from his own people, those who had known him long and well, his religious and social standing, during some of the most eventful periods of his life. I conversed with quite a number of persons who claimed to have known him, and the universal expression was 'he was a true, noble and worthy man.' In glancing over the musty pages of a reporter's book used on that occasion I find an account of the following interview with an old-time friend of the deceased, written with an unsteady hand, but still legible, and marked with conspicuous head lines. I give the report just as it appears, thinking, perhaps, you may find in it a few facts worthy of remembrance.

"The gentleman who favored me with this interview, was bending beneath the weight of accumulated years, but he seemed to possess an extraordinarily brilliant mind, coupled with a remarkable gift of memory. After extending the usual courtesies due a stranger, I ventured to ask: 'Will you please tell me what you know of the late Heber C. Kimball?' A pleasant smile lit up his face, and in a calm, steady voice he proceeded in substance as follows. 'I have known President Kimball for more than half a century. I knew him in his youth, through all the changing developments of his early manhood, and when his hair was whitened, and his cheeks furrowed by the approach of age. He was a brave, noble and dignified man, possessing more true virtues than the world will ever know. He was an affectionate husband, a devoted father and a kind and generous friend. He always had consolation for the despondent, a helping hand for the needy, and a tear for the sorrowing and afflicted. In oratory he was not eloquent, but his thoughts were always expressed in such a calm, pleasing and effective manner as to deeply impress his hearers. He was strong in his religious convictions, thoroughly familiar with every tenet of the Mormon faith, and a fervent advocate of the right. He admired true manliness in every relation of life, and was always found on the side of justice and truth. He firmly believed in the ultimate triumph of the church, and often spoke of the wrongs endured by the Latter-day Saints in their continuous struggles for religious freedom. He was a leading light for his oppressed people, and no one ever knew him unfaithful to his trust, or unduly exacting in his official life. He loved to share our sorrows, and enjoy our happiness, for he had a warm and generous heart. His mind was broad and searching, and had he possessed a penchant for military renown, he could have succeeded admirably as a commander of armies. As a statesman he could have been an honor to the republic, and had it not been for his unpopular faith he could have filled almost any position in life to which humanity aspires. In the death of this great man the Church has lost one of its most valued members; but our society through all the coming years, will remember him in their prayers, and continue to contribute sacred tears to his memory and great moral worth.'"

As an appropriate ending for this chapter, we append a truthful tribute from the pen of PRESIDENT GEORGE Q. CANNON:

"Heber Chase Kimball was one of the greatest men of this age. There was a certain nobility about his appearance as well as his disposition that would have made him conspicuous in any community, and the Church of Jesus Christ afforded ample scope for the exercise of his ability, and the trying scenes through which he passed called into play his best powers.

"He was a man of commanding presence, with eyes so keen as to almost pierce one through, and before which the guilty involuntarily quailed. He was fearless and powerful in rebuking the wrong-doer, but kind, benevolent and fatherly to the deserving. He possessed such wonderful control over the passions of men, combined with such wisdom and diplomacy, that the Prophet Joseph Smith called him 'the peace-maker.' His great faith, zeal, earnestness, devotion to principle, cheerfulness under the most trying circumstances, energy, perseverance and honest simplicity marked him as no ordinary man. He possessed great natural force and strong will power, yet in his submission to the Priesthood and obedience to the laws of God he set a pattern to the whole Church. His example throughout life was one of which his posterity may ever think with pride, and which the Saints generally will do well to follow.

"No man, perhaps, Joseph Smith excepted, who has belonged to the Church in this generation, ever possessed the gift of prophecy to a greater degree than Brother Kimball. Although not at all pretentious, he was somewhat celebrated among his acquaintances for his prophetic inspiration. Scores of predictions were made by him and literally fulfilled.

"Brother Kimball was the only one of his father's family who embraced the gospel, but now his is one of the most numerous families in the Church. At the time of his death, he was the father of sixty-five children, of whom thirty males and eleven females were then living. His direct descendants now number nearly two hundred souls."

CHAPTER LXIV

GEMS FROM THE WORDS OF HEBER--SPIRIT RAPPINGS--ADDRESS AT THE FUNERAL
OF MARY FIELDING SMITH--LOVE, UNITY AND THE COURAGE OF THE RIGHTEOUS
--JOSEPH AND THE KEYS OF THE KINGDOM--CULTIVATION OF SPIRITS--
HEAVEN AND HELL--ADMINISTRATION OF ANGELS AND THE SPIRITS OF THE
ANCIENTS--THE RESURRECTION--THE SPIRIT WORLD--THE CLAY AND THE
POTTER--A CAUSE OF APOSTASY--A MIRACULOUS CANE--THE CHURCH IN HEAVEN.

Before closing the record of his eventful career, we propose to present here some gems from the public sayings of President Kimball, as serving to show still further the spirit and character of the man, his views of life and death, time and eternity, and likewise forming links in the chain of his history that might otherwise be lacking. In the hurry of his later years he kept no regular journal, as in the earlier part of his life, thus leaving his biographer to gather information from whatever sources were available.

These selections cover a period of years, from 1852 down to the time of his death.

His first sermon published in the Journal of Discourses, happens to touch on modern spiritualism. He says:

"The invisible world are in trouble; they are knocking, and rapping, and muttering; and the people are inquiring of them to know concerning the things of God, and there is not a soul of them can tell them anything about the end of the world. They are in a dreadful situation; and in the city of Rochester, near where I used to live, the last information I received from there, there were one hundred and thirty-five spiritual writers in that city. I have a brother-in-law there, who is a Presbyterian priest; he couldn't enquire of God about future things, so he enquired of the spirits; but they could not tell him anything about the dead nor the living. They are just about as intelligent in their revelations as this world are in theirs. They are all in commotion--what is going to be done? I will tell you--God is going to make a short work upon the earth, and the invisible world are troubled about it."

His second published discourse was a funeral address in memory of Mary Fielding Smith, the wife of Hyrum Smith, who died at his house September 22nd, 1852. Here is his tribute to that estimable woman:

"As regards Sister Mary Smith's situation and circumstances, I have no trouble at all, for if any person has lived the life of a Saint, she has. If any person has acted the part of a mother, she has. I may say she has acted the part of a mother, and a father, and a bishop. She has had a large family, and several old people to take care of, and which she has maintained for years by her economy and industry.

"One thing I am glad of, and I feel to rejoice in the providence of God that things have been as they have. She came here sick on the Sabbath, eight weeks ago last Sunday, for me to lay hands upon her. She was laid prostrate upon her bed, and was not able to recover afterwards. I felt as though it was a providential circumstance that it so happened. She always expressed that she knew the thing was dictated by the Lord that she should be placed in my house, though accidentally. She probably would not have lived so long, had she been where she could not have had the same care. On Tuesday evening, eight weeks and two days since, she came here sick; from that time until her death she was prayerful and humble. I have never seen a person in my life that had a greater desire to live than she had, and there was only one thing she desired to live for, and that was to see to her family; it distressed her to think that she could not see to them; she wept about it. She experienced this anxiety for a month previous to her death. * * * I am glad I did right to Sister Mary, and took care of her, and that my family had the pleasure of nourishing her; the satisfaction that this gives me is worth more to me than a hundred thousand dollars. Do I believe they know it in heaven? Yes, as much as you do. I want to live all the time in righteousness, as I know that God sees me and all the works of His hands." * * * * *

A lesson on love and unity is here given:

"The Gospel and plan of salvation that I have embraced, is music to me; it is sweet to my body, and congenial to my spirit; and it is more lovely than anything else I have ever seen since I have been in the world. I love it, and that is why I love this people better than any other people on God's earth, because there was never a better people; that is, I am speaking of the majority of them.

"The world considers it to be quite ridiculous for us to be of one heart and of one mind. It is this union among those who are faithful 'Mormons,' that makes the world afraid of us. * * Jesus says, 'Except ye are one, ye are not mine.' There is more oneness in this people than in any other people that ever lived upon the earth. There was not that oneness in the days of Jesus, and I suppose there never has been since the days of Enoch. Because there was such a oneness among the people of Enoch, and they could not continue to be one and live with the people in the same world, God took them and their city with a part of the earth to Himself, and they sailed away like one ship at sea separating from another."

The power of unity and the courage of the righteous are thus portrayed:

"When Brother Brigham and myself and others left Kirtland to go to Missouri with Joseph Smith, was there any fear in us? No. It never entered into our hearts from the day we started to the time we returned. I had a spirit on me as much superior to this earth, as the earth is superior to the degraded spirits of the wicked that dwell on its face. It was the Spirit of the Lord that stood by me, and diffused strength into my body, and into my limbs, until the very hair of my head felt all alive. Did they fear us in that upper country? Yes, they ran as though they were never going to stop in the world. We felt perfectly able to clear out that country to Nova Scotia, and we could have done it, with two hundred and five men, if the Lord had commanded us, as the Gideonites in days of old. Yes; two hundred and five men, with the Spirit and power of God upon them and their faces shining like the sun, it cannot be told what they could accomplish, neither can we form any conception of it."

Here is a testimony that Joseph gave the keys of the Kingdom to the Twelve:

"Since Brother Joseph stepped behind the vail, Brother Brigham is his lawful successor. I bear testimony of what Brother Joseph said on the stand at Nauvoo, and I presume hundreds here can bear witness of the same. Said he, 'these men that are set here behind me on this stand, I have conferred upon them all the power, Priesthood, and authority that God ever conferred upon me.' There are hundreds present this day who heard him utter words to that effect more than once. The Twelve had then received their endowments. Brother Joseph gave them the endowments, and keys and power were placed upon them by him, even as they were placed upon him by Peter, James and John, who ordained him. That is true, gentlemen, because they held the Apostleship last, and had the authority to confer it upon him, or any whom the Father had chosen. Brother Joseph called and ordained the twelve Apostles of the last days, and placed that power upon them."

Relative to the cultivation of spirits he says:

"If you do not cultivate yourselves, and cultivate your spirits in this state of existence, it is just as true as there is a God that liveth, you will have to go into another state of existence, and bring your spirits into subjection there. Now you may reflect upon it, you never will obtain your resurrected bodies, until you bring your spirits into subjection. I am not talking to this earthly house of mine, neither am I talking to your bodies, but I am speaking to your spirits. I am not talking as to people who are not in the house. Are not your spirits in the house? Are not your bodies your houses, your tabernacles or temples, and places for your spirits? Look at it; reflect upon it. If you keep your spirits trained according to the wisdom and fear of God, you will attain to the salvation of both body and spirit. I ask, then, if it is your spirits that must be brought into subjection? It is; and if you do not do that in those bodies, you will have to go into another estate to do it. You have got to train yourselves according to the law of God, or you will never obtain your resurrected bodies."

Here is a view of the location of heaven and hell:

"You are talking about heaven and about earth, and about hell, etc.; but let me tell you, you are in hell now, and you have got to qualify yourselves here in hell to become subjects for heaven: and even when you have got into heaven, you will find it right here where you are on this earth. When we escape from this earth, we suppose we are going to heaven. Do you suppose you are going to the earth that Adam came from? That Eloheim came from? Where Jehovah the Lord came from? No. When you have learned to become obedient to the father that dwells upon this earth, to the Father and God of this earth, and obedient to the messengers He sends--when you have done all that, remember you are not going to leave this earth. You will never leave it until you become qualified, and capable, and capacitated to become a father of an earth yourselves. Not one soul of you ever will leave this earth, for if you go to hell, it is on this earth; and if you go to heaven, it is on this earth; and you will not find it anywhere else."

It was the view of President Kimball that the angels are daily around us. Says he:

"I am now in my fifty-fourth year; I am a Latter-day Saint, full in the faith, and not only in the faith, but I have a knowledge of the truth of this work. I know that God lives and dwells in the heavens; for I have asked Him scores of times, and hundreds of times, for things, and have received them. Is not that a pretty good proof that He hears me, when I ask him for things and get them; and is not that a proof that He lives, and dwells in the heavens? I think it is. I suppose He dwells there. He could not dwell anywhere else, but in what particular portion He dwells, I do not precisely know, though He is not so far off as many imagine. He is near by, His angels are our associates, they are with us and around about us, and watch over us, and take care of us, and lead us, and guide us, and administer to our wants in their ministry and in their holy calling unto which they are appointed. We are told in the Bible that angels are ministering spirits to minister to those who shall become heirs of salvation."

We have the spirits of the ancients, also, administering to the Saints:

"Who have you now in your midst? Have you Abraham and Isaac and the Apostles Peter, James and John? Yes, you have them right in your midst--they are talking to you all the time." * * * *

"Who are you to be subject to? You say you are willing to be subject to God--to Jesus Christ. You are willing if Peter came along, to listen to him. Well, Peter is here, John is here, Elias is here, Elijah is here, Jesus is here, and the Father is here. What! in person? If not in person, their authority is here, with all the power that ever was or ever will be, to seal men and women up to everlasting."

Of the imperishable part of man and of the resurrection, he says:

"So far as we are concerned, we were taken from the earth, and we may expect to return to it again; and that portion of me which is pure, after the dross of this mortality is separated from it, I expect will be Brother Heber. It is that which will be resurrected; but all that is not pure will remain; that is it will not go back into my body again; and if there are ten parts out of the hundred which are dross and corruption they will remain in the earth; I do not expect to take that up again, but I expect to take up the purified element that will endure forever; still the dross is beneficial in its place."

* * * * * *

"Now, will you go and pollute yourselves, and lose the right and title to a resurrection, to dwell with the Saints, and with God the Father, and His Son Jesus Christ, who is my brother?"

Of the departed Willard Richards and the labors of the Elders of Israel in the spirit world, he gives quite a broad glimpse:

"He (Willard) has gone; and it will not be long before Brother Brigham and Brother Heber follow after. He has gone to the world of spirits to engage in a work he could not do if he had remained in the flesh. I do not believe he could have done as much work for the general good of the cause of God, had he remained in the flesh, as he can accomplish now in the spirit; for there is a work to do there--the Gospel to preach, Israel to gather, that they may purify themselves, and become united in one heart and mind.

"What! in the spirit world? Have I not told you often that the separation of body and spirit makes no difference in the moral and intellectual condition of the spirit? When a person, who has always been good and faithful to his God, lays down his body in the dust, his spirit will remain the same in the spirit world. It is not the body that has control of the spirit, as to its disposition, but it is the spirit that controls the body. When the spirit leaves the body the body becomes lifeless. The spirit has not changed one single particle of itself by leaving the body. Were I to fall into a mud-hole I should strive to extricate myself; but I do not suppose I should be any better, any more righteous, any more just and holy when I got out of it than when I was in it.

"Our spirits are entangled in these bodies--held captive as it were for a season. They are like the poor Saints, who are for a time obliged to dwell in miserable mud shanties that are mouldering away, and require much patching and care to keep them from mingling with mother earth before the time. They feel miserable in these old decaying tabernacles, and long for the day when they can leave them to fall and take possession of a good new house.

"It seems natural for me to desire to be clothed upon with immortality and eternal life, and leave this mortal flesh; but I desire to stick to it as long as I can be a comfort to my sisters, brethren, wives and children. Independent of this consideration I would not turn my hand over to live five minutes. What else could give birth to a single desire to live in this tabernacle, which is more or less shattered by the merciless storms which have beat upon it, to say nothing of the ravages made upon it by the tooth of time? While I cling to it I must of necessity suffer many pains, rheumatism, head-ache, jaw-ache and heart-ache; sometimes in one part of my body and sometimes in another. It is all right; it is so ordained that we may not cling with too great a tenacity to mortal flesh, but be willing to pass through the vail and meet with Joseph, and Hyrum, and Willard, and Bishop Whitney and thousands of others in the world of spirits.

"Are they all together as we are to-day? I believe all Israel have to be gathered; and to accomplish this the Elders, both in this and the world of spirits, will go forth to preach to the spirits in prison. Where? Down in hell. I appeal to the Elders who have been from this place to preach the Gospel to the world, if it was not like going from heaven to hell. It is a world of sorrow, pain, death and misery, and you cannot make anything else of it."

Here is something on death and the after life:

"As for death, I do not trouble myself much about it. When the time comes for me to depart from this life and go into what we call eternity, to pass through the vail, it is simply to leave the body to rest awhile, and blessed are the dead who die in the Lord, for their sleep shall be sweet unto them. Death is merely a sleep of the body, and all the fear I have concerning it is what arises from my conditions. I was taught in my youth that after death I had to go directly into the bowels of hell, and go down, down, down, because there was no bottom to it. I am not troubled about any such thing as that, for I never expect to see any worse hell than I have seen in this world. And those who do not the works of righteousness, and are not worthy to be gathered with the spirits of the Saints, will go into precisely such society, in the world of spirits, as they are now in.

"The spirits of the Saints will be gathered in one, that is, of all who are worthy; and those who are not just, will be left where they will be scourged, tormented and afflicted, until they can bring their spirits into subjection and be like clay in the hands of the potter, that the potter may have power to mould and fashion them into any kind of vessel, as he is directed by the Master Potter."

In another sermon, he thus enlarges upon his favorite theme of "the clay in the hands of the potter:"[A]

"The potter tried to bring a lump of clay into subjection, and he worked and tugged at it, but the clay was rebellious and would not submit to the will of the potter, and marred in his hands. Then of course he had to cut it from the wheel and throw it into the mill to be ground over, in order that it might become passive; after which he takes it again and makes of it a vessel unto honor, out of the same lump that was dishonored. * * There may ten thousand millions of men go to hell, because they dishonor themselves and will not be subject, and after that they will be taken and made vessels unto honor, if they will become obedient. * * Can you find any fault with that?"

He gives the following wise hint on one of the causes of apostasy:

"I will give you a key which Brother Joseph Smith used to give in Nauvoo. He said that the very step of apostasy commenced with losing confidence in the leaders of this Church and kingdom, and that whenever you discerned that spirit, you might know that it would lead the possessor of it on the road to apostasy. * *

"No man or woman can have the spirit of prophecy and at the same time do evil and speak against their brethren; and you will find that man or that woman barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of God, and filled with disputations."

Next come some reminiscent allusions, coupled with a prophecy:

"How much would you give for even a cane that Father Abraham had used, or a coat or ring that the Savior had worn? The rough oak boxes in which the bodies of Joseph and Hyrum were brought from Carthage, were made into canes and other articles. I have a cane made from the plank of one of those boxes, so has Brother Brigham and a great many others, and we prize them highly and esteem them a great blessing. I want to carefully preserve my cane, and when I am done with it here I shall hand it down to my heir, with instructions to him to do the same.[A] And the day will come when there will be multitudes who will be healed and blessed through the instrumentality of those canes, and the devil cannot overcome those who have them, in consequence of their faith and confidence in the virtues connected with them. * * * *

"If I had those relics of Abraham and the Savior which I have mentioned, I would give a great deal for them. In England when not in a situation to go, I have blessed my handkerchief and asked God to sanctify it and fill it with life and power, and sent it to the sick; and hundreds have been healed by it; in like manner I have sent my cane. Dr. Richards used to lay his old black cane on a person's head and that person has been healed through its instrumentality, by the power of God. I have known Joseph hundreds of times to send his handkerchief to the sick, and they have been healed. There are persons in this congregation who have been healed by throwing my old cloak on their beds."

This of the Church organization in heaven:

"When you go into heaven, into the celestial world, you will see the Church organized just as it is here, and you will find all the officers down to the Deacon. Our Church organization is a manifestation of things as they are in heaven, and you are all the time praying that the Church here may be brought into union and set in order as it is in heaven."
