DEATH OF APOSTLE KIMBALL--ALL ISRAEL MOURNS--EXPRESSIONS IN HONOR OF
THE ILLUSTRIOUS DEAD.

The words of Heber were indeed prophetic, that he should not be long on earth after the departure of the beloved wife of his youth. The event for which both had earnestly prayed, that they might live and die, and rise and reign together, was destined by the heavens to be.

On the morning of the 22nd of June, 1868,--eight months later to a day--death again entered the household, leveling his fatal shaft at the mighty heart of its patriarchal head. At the age of sixty-seven years, his mind yet unimpaired, his iron frame unbent by age, but with health shattered by toil and trial in the service of his Maker, Heber
C. Kimball, the Apostle of Jesus Christ, the tried and trusted friend
of God, passed peacefully from earth away.

His death was superinduced by a severe fall, sustained by him several weeks before. He had driven from Salt Lake City to Provo, alone, arriving there in the night. While nearing his residence in that city, where lived his wife Lucy and her family, the wheels of his buggy went suddenly into a ditch, throwing him over the forward wheels violently upon the ground. After lying for some time stunned and helpless, and chilled by the night air, he was finally discovered and assisted into the house by his friend, Bishop A. F. Macdonald.

This accident, though he partly recovered from its effects, was the immediate fore-runner of his fatal sickness.

The Deseret Evening News of Monday, June 22nd, 1868, in an extended editorial thus announced his death:

    "A prince and a great man has this day passed from among us!
    President Heber Chase Kimball, who was born June 14th, 1801, fell
    asleep at 20 minutes to 11 o'clock this morning, June 22nd, after
    a pilgrimage on the earth of sixty-seven years and eight days.
    Many of the residents of this city will be prepared to hear this
    sad news; but upon the Saints throughout this Territory and in
    foreign lands, it will fall unexpectedly and heavily. Two weeks
    ago yesterday he preached in the new tabernacle, and those who
    listened to him on that occasion could not have imagined from his
    appearance that in so brief a period as has since elapsed we
    should only have his lifeless remains to gaze upon. Since he was
    thrown from his buggy last spring in Provo, his family and
    intimate associates have noticed that his health was not so good
    as it had been; but a casual observer would not have perceived any
    change; he moved around and attended to his duties with his
    accustomed diligence and vigor. On the 10th instant, at the mass
    meeting in the new tabernacle, it was remarked that his face was
    very much flushed. He complained that day of dizziness, and
    torpidity of his right side; he attributed the feeling to
    rheumatism, with which he was sometimes affected. The next day,
    Thursday, the 11th, he went down town twice; but his family and
    others noticed that in walking, he did not use his right leg with
    his usual freedom. On Friday, the 12th, he arose in the morning
    and dressed himself; but was compelled to return to bed. His son
    Heber called upon him, and he conversed quite freely with him
    about his affairs. This was the last conversation of any length
    that he had with any person. It was soon plainly apparent that he
    was attacked with paralysis of the right side, and from this time
    until his death, he was only able to utter a sentence
    occasionally, though most of the time he appeared to be fully
    conscious of everything transpiring around him. When his
    particular friends called upon him, especially Presidents Young
    and Wells, he seemed to arouse himself to speak, and by the
    pressure of their hands and the beaming of his countenance, would
    signify his pleasure at seeing them. Until Saturday last it was
    hoped that he would recover and be himself again. Every
    indication of a change for the better was eagerly noted. Every one
    was reluctant to admit that Brother Heber would not recover. If
    such a thought presented itself it was immediately repelled. But
    on Saturday evening it was visible to all that he was changing for
    the worse. Yesterday he failed rapidly. From early in the
    morning until afternoon his body suffered, though he himself
    seemed unconscious of it. He was administered to by President
    Young and the Twelve, and he was much relieved. Towards evening he
    rallied, opened his eyes and for some time was conscious, and
    appeared to recognize those who stood around him. This was the
    last awakening of the faculties prior to death.[A] He relapsed
    into unconsciousness, and gradually passed away without a
    contortion of countenance or the slightest movement of a limb. * *
    * His family and many of his friends were in the room where he
    lay, and so peacefully did life leave his body, that some five
    minutes had elapsed before those who were watching his countenance
    were satisfied that his spirit had fled. Like a babe falling into
    a gentle slumber, he passed away. It was a frequent remark of his
    that he should not die. Those who stood around his bedside were
    reminded of it by President Young--who saw his beloved and
    faithful friend and fellow-laborer breathe his last--quoting the
    remark, and adding that Brother Heber was not dead, he had gone to
    sleep. Gloom and death were not there. None experienced those
    undefinable feelings of dread which sometimes prevail on such
    occasions. Sadness there was; but it was not mingled with doubt;
    it was for the loss of the society of the loving husband, the
    tender father, the steadfast friend, the wise counselor and the
    undaunted leader. Yet this grief was not the only feeling. If
    there can be any pleasure in contemplating the separation of the
    body and spirit under any circumstances, then that chamber in
    which the earthly remains of Heber C. Kimball lay this morning was
    a place of joy. It was a scene of victory and triumph. A faithful,
    unflinching servant of God, one who had passed through the most
    severe ordeals with unyielding integrity, had met man's great
    enemy, and through the atonement of the Savior and the previous
    promises which he had given, had come off conqueror. What a host
    of faithful ones have awaited his arrival in the spirit world!
    Recall the names, beginning with Joseph, the head of the
    dispensation, and what a glorious list is presented to the mind!
    With what ineffable gladness will they meet and welcome him to
    that happy land! Will it not be home to him when he meets those
    bright ones with whom he has labored so long and so familiarly,
    and who know his guileless simplicity, his truthfulness, his
    unshrinking faith, his integrity and worth?

    

    "As this news is flashed with lightning speed from one end of the
    Territory to the other, profound grief will fill every heart. The
    love of the Saints for Brother Heber is deep-rooted and universal.
    A great people will this day mourn in learning of his departure,
    and how deep will be the sorrow also of his brethren and sisters
    in foreign lands! Yet it is not for him we should mourn. He is
    ransomed and free. We yet remain in thralldom. The course of those
    who live is not finished, the battle is not won. The supreme wish
    of every heart who witnessed his departure doubtless was that
    their end might be like his."

On the same day the Mayor of the City issued the following:

    "TO THE CITIZENS OF SALT LAKE CITY.--

    "As a token of respect to the memory of our esteemed friend and
    fellow-citizen, the late HON. HEBER C. KIMBALL, whose demise took
    place at his residence in this city, at 10-40 this a. m., it is
    hereby requested, that all unite throughout the city in closing
    their respective houses of business on Wednesday the 24th inst,
    being the day appointed for the funeral obsequies of deceased.

                                  "DANIEL H. WELLS, Mayor.

    "MAYOR'S OFFICE, SALT LAKE CITY,
            "June 22d, 1868."

The following telegrams, sent from different parts of the Territory, will show how universal was the respect paid to the honored dead:

                                         "LOGAN, 22nd.

    "PRESIDENT B. YOUNG:

    "We feel very sorry, but not without hope, respecting President
    Kimball's death.

                                      "PETER MAUGHAN."

                                     "SPRINGTOWN, 23d.

    "TO THE BISHOPS OF SANPETE CO.:

    "A great and worthy man in Israel is fallen--President Heber C.
    Kimball--not by transgression, but by the providence of God. The
    distance is too great for us to attend his funeral to-morrow.
    This, therefore, is to request your congregations, to meet
    to-morrow at two o'clock p. m., and offer up their prayers and
    condolence in behalf of the bereaved family, as a tribute of
    respect to the memory of the illustrious dead, thereby respecting
    ourselves.

                                        "ORSON HYDE."

                                    "ST. GEORGE, 24th.

    "PRESIDENT B. YOUNG:

    "The Saints of the south, assembled in the St George Bowery,
    mingle their tears with yours in the funeral obsequies of our
    lamented brother, President Heber C. Kimball. With his bereaved
    family we deeply sympathize; with all Israel we mourn his loss,
    and with him we rejoice that he has entered into his glory.

                                       "ERASTUS SNOW."

Here is the City's tribute to his memory:

    "At a regular meeting of the City Council of this city, on Tuesday
    evening last, the 23rd inst, his Honor the Mayor, announced the
    death of the Honorable Heber C. Kimball, and, on his suggestion, a
    committee was appointed to draft resolutions expressive of the
    feeling of the council on the occasion.

    "Councilor Burton, on behalf of the committee, presented the
    following preamble and resolution, which were read and unanimously
    adopted:

    "Whereas, It has pleased the Almighty, in the dispensations of
    His Providence, to remove from our midst by the hand of death our
    esteemed fellow citizen and much beloved President, Heber C.
    Kimball, who, with unwavering integrity and untiring zeal, has
    ever been a faithful laborer in the cause of truth and an earnest
    advocate of civil and religious liberty, and of every principle
    calculated to ennoble and elevate humanity; therefore, be it

    "Resolved, That while we recognize the hand of the Lord in all
    things, we deeply feel the loss which the community has sustained
    in his death, and in common with the citizens of this city and
    Territory, and the Latter-day Saints throughout the world, we most
    sincerely sympathize with his family and friends in this their sad
    bereavement.

    "The Council adjourned without the transaction of further
    business.

                                  "DANIEL H. WELLS, Mayor.
                                  "ROBERT CAMPBELL, Recorder.

    "Council Chamber,
              "June 23rd, 1868."

A full account of the funeral of President Kimball is reserved for the next and final chapter.
