OBSEQUIES OF PRESIDENT KIMBALL--TRIBUTES AND TESTIMONIES OF HIS
BROTHER APOSTLES--"HE WAS A MAN OF AS MUCH INTEGRITY AS ANY MAN WHO
EVER LIVED"--EARTH RETURNS TO EARTH AND THE SPIRIT UNTO GOD WHO GAVE
IT.

The day set for the funeral of President Kimball was Wednesday, the 24th of June. The place, the large Tabernacle, Salt Lake City. His own desire, expressed many times before his death, was that it should be held at his private residence, and with as little display as possible; but out of deference to public sentiment, and to accommodate the great multitude of his friends who desired to be present, it was found necessary to hold the services in the Tabernacle.

Throughout the city on that day, all ordinary business was suspended, and draped flags, at half mast, swung to the breeze from the tops of public and private buildings. It was a general time of mourning. The very heavens seemed weeping in unison with the earth. The skies were hung with black clouds, the solemn thunders roared, the wind sighed and moaned, and the rain fell heavily.

Long before the hour for the commencement of the services, thousands were on their way to the Tabernacle to pay the last tribute of respect to the memory of the mighty dead; one whom all Israel revered and mourned as a father and a friend. Notwithstanding the pouring rain, fully eight thousand people assembled within the vast auditorium. Many of the settlements and counties throughout the Territory were represented by their leading men.

While the masses congregated at the Tabernacle, Presidents Brigham Young and Daniel H. Wells, with the Apostles and many others, representing general and local authorities in the Priesthood, repaired to the late residence of President Kimball, where the funeral procession formed under the personal supervision of President Young.

The procession moved from the residence at 2 o'clock p. m., in the following order:

1st. Croxall's brass band, consisting of Messrs. M. Croxall, C. Evans, R. Golightly, T. McIntyre, W. D. Williams, J. Croxall, T. Croxall, T. Griggs, J. Cartwright, J. Currie, W. Foster, C. Sansom, B. Eardley, H. Sadler, J. Wakeham, W. Adkins, G. Wareing, D. Evans, H. Sperry and W. Lloyd.

2nd. Of the High Council, Elders W. Eddington, J. L. Blythe, C. V. Spencer, W. H. Folsom, T. E. Jeremy, J. Squires, P. Nebeker and G. W. Thatcher.

3rd. Of the Presidency of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, Elders D. Spencer and G. B. Wallace.

4th. Of the Presidency of the Seventies, Elders Joseph Young, L. W. Hancock, A. P. Rockwood, H. S. Eldredge and J. Van Cott.

5th. The Presidency of the High Priests, Elders John Young, S. W. Richards and E. D. Woolley.

6th. Presiding Bishop E. Hunter and his Counselors, L. W. Hardy and J.
C. Little.

7th. Of the Twelve Apostles, Elders Orson Pratt, John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, Geo. A. Smith, Ezra T. Benson, Lorenzo Snow, Geo. Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith.

8th. President Brigham Young and Counselor Daniel H. Wells.

9th. The corpse, in a neat coffin wrapped in black broadcloth and deeply fringed with white cashmere and black lace, borne by twelve pall-bearers, namely, Elders R. T. Burton, T. McKean, G. W. Grant, L. S. Hills, B. Y. Hampton, W. Calder, H. Heath, A. Dewey, H. S. Beatie, H. P. Richards, H. Dinwoodey, and John T. Caine.

Immediately following the remains walked the three eldest sons of President Kimball, namely, William H., Heber P., and David P., succeeded by his wives, the elder sons and daughters, the younger sons and daughters, and many other relatives in the rear. The families of Presidents Young and Wells in carriages, and a number of the most prominent citizens on foot, terminated the procession.

To the solemn strains of the "Dead March in Saul," from Captain Croxall's band, the cortege, passing down East, North and West Temple Streets, successively, to the west gate of Temple Block, entered the Tabernacle at door No. 32, north side, and occupied reserved seats in front of the stand. The casket with the remains was deposited on a draped bier raised from the middle aisle. Seven elegant vases of roses and other beautiful flowers were placed upon the coffin. During the services a bird flew into the building and, alighting on the coffin, remained for several minutes.

In consonance with the solemnity of the scene, the interior of the Tabernacle was draped in mourning.

The assemblage was called to order by President Brigham Young.

The choir then sang the following hymn, composed for the occasion by Sister Eliza R. Snow:

    Be cheer'd, O Zion--cease to weep:
      Heber we deeply loved:
    He is not dead--he does not sleep--
      He lives with those above.

    His flesh was weary; let it rest
      Entombed in mother Earth,
    Till Jesus comes--when all the bless'd,
      To life will be brought forth.

    His mighty spirit, pure and free
      From every bond of Earth,
    In realms of immortality,
      Is crowned with spotless worth.

    He lives for Zion:--he has gone
      To plead her righteous cause,
    Before the High and Holy One--
      Let all the Saints rejoice.

    Let wives and children humbly kiss
      The deep-afflicting rod:
    A father to the fatherless,
      God is the widow's God.

Elder George Q. Cannon offered the opening prayer.

The choir sang "Farewell all earthly honors," with the chorus "There is sweet rest in heaven," and remarks were then made as follows, by the speakers named:

ELDER JOHN TAYLOR.

    "Were I to give way to my feelings at the present time I should
    not be able to address this congregation. I feel as, I suppose,
    most of you feel--sympathy with the family of the deceased who now
    lies before us. When I speak of this as being my feeling, I am
    aware that I express the feeling of the generality of this people.
    In this bereavement that has afflicted us, we all participate. A
    wave of sorrow has rolled throughout the Territory, and feelings
    of sympathy and sorrow gush up from the fountains of every heart.
    We have met at this time to pay the last tribute of respect to no
    ordinary personage, but to a good man who was called and chosen,
    and faithful; who has spent a lifetime in the cause of God, in the
    establishment of the principles of truth and in trying to upbuild
    the Church and Kingdom of God on the earth; who has endeared
    himself by his acts of kindness, affection, integrity,
    truthfulness and probity to the hearts of thousands of Latter-day
    Saints, who feel to mourn at this time with no ordinary sorrow.

    "That he is esteemed and venerated by this people as a friend, a
    counselor and a father, this immense congregation, who have met on
    this inauspicious occasion, is abundant testimony and proof, if
    any is wanting. But his life, his acts, his services, his
    self-abnegation, his devotion to the cause of truth, his
    perseverance in the ways of righteousness for so many years have
    left a testimony in the minds, feelings and hearts of all who feel
    to mourn his departure from our midst. But we meet not at the
    present time particularly to eulogize the acts of Brother Kimball,
    who is one of the First Presidency, and who stands, or who has
    stood as one of the three prominent men that live on the face of
    the earth at the present time.

    "We do not mourn over him as over an individual in a private
    capacity; neither, when we reflect on the circumstances with which
    we are surrounded, and the gospel we believe in, do we mourn that
    he lies there as he is. For although to us he is absent and
    lifeless and inanimate, yet his spirit soars above clothed upon
    with immortality and eternal life. And as he has been in
    possession of the principles of eternal truth, by and bye, when
    the time shall roll around, that gospel and the principles of
    truth that he has so valiantly proclaimed for so many years, will
    resurrect that inanimate clay, and He who, on the earth proclaimed
    "I am the resurrection and the life," will cause him again to be
    resuscitated, reanimated, revivified and glorified, and he will
    rejoice among the Saints of God worlds without end.

    "It is not then an ordinary occasion upon which we have met at the
    present time. It is not to talk particularly about our individual
    feelings and bereavement, although they are keen, poignant and
    afflictive; but we meet at the present time to perform a ceremony
    and to pay our last respects to the departed great one who lies
    before us. We do not mourn as those who have no hope; we do not
    sympathise with any foolish sympathy. We believe in those
    principles, that he, for so many years, has so strenuously
    advocated, and believing in them, we know that he has simply
    passed from one state of existence to another. It is customary
    for men to say "how have the great fallen!" But he has not fallen.
    It is true that he has gone to sleep for a little while. He
    sleeps in peace. He is resting from his labors and is no more
    beset with those afflictions with which human nature always has to
    contend: he has passed from this stage of action, he has got
    through with the toils, perplexities, cares and anxieties in
    regard to himself, his family, and in regard to the Church with
    which he was associated; and in regard to all sublunary things,
    and while mortals mourn "a man is dead," the angels proclaim "a
    child is born."

    "We believe in another state of existence besides this; and it is
    not only a belief, but it is a fixed fact, and hence for a man of
    God to bid adieu to the things of this world is a matter of
    comparatively very small importance. When a man has fought the
    good fight; when he has finished his course; when he has been
    faithful, lived his religion and died as a man of God, what is
    there to mourn for? Why should we indeed be sorrowful? There is a
    church here on earth; there is a church also in the heavens. He
    has migrated from one, and has passed into the other.

    "We have had leave us before, Joseph, Hyrum, David Patten,
    Willard, Jedediah, and a mighty host of good, virtuous, pure, holy
    and honorable men. Some have died, as it were, naturally; others
    have been violently put to death. But no matter, they are each of
    them moving in his own sphere. Brother Kimball has left us for a
    short time that he may unite with them. And whilst we are engaged
    carrying on the work of God, and advancing and maintaining those
    principles which he so diligently propagated and maintained while
    he was on the earth, he is gone to officiate in the heavens with
    Jesus, with Joseph and others for us. We are seeking to carry out
    his will, the will of our President and the will of our Heavenly
    Father, that we may be found fit to associate with the just who
    are made perfect, and be prepared to join with the Church
    triumphant in the heavens. It is this that our religion points us
    to all the time.

    "We embraced the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and he who now lies
    before us was one of the first to proclaim it to thousands that
    are here. And what did that teach us? To repent of our sins, and,
    having faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, to be baptized for the
    remission of our sins, to have hands laid upon us for the
    reception of the Holy Ghost and to gather together to Zion that we
    might be instructed in the ways of life; that we might know how to
    save ourselves--how to save the living and how to redeem the dead;
    that we might not only possess a hope that blooms with immortality
    and eternal life; but that we might have a certainty, an evidence,
    a confidence that was beyond doubt or peradventure, that we were
    preparing ourselves for a celestial inheritance in the kingdom of
    our God. And when a man goes to sleep as Brother Kimball has done,
    no matter how, he lays aside the cares of this world; the weary
    wheels of life stand still, the pulse ceases to beat, the body
    becomes cold, lifeless and inanimate; yet at the same time the
    spirit still exists, has gone to join those who have lived before;
    who now live and will live for evermore. He has trod the path that
    we have all to follow, for it is appointed to man once to die, and
    after that, we are told, the judgment. We have all to pass through
    the dark valley of the shadow of death, and as I said before, it
    matters little which way this occurs; but it does matter a great
    deal to us whether we are prepared to meet it or not; whether we
    have lived the life of the righteous; whether we have honored our
    profession; whether we have been faithful to our trust; whether we
    are prepared to associate with the spirits of the just made
    perfect, and whether when He who has said "I am the resurrection
    and the life" shall sound the trump we shall be prepared to come
    forth in the morning of the first resurrection.

    "Joseph Smith stands at the head of this dispensation. His brother
    Hyrum Smith was associated with him. They were both assassinated.
    No matter; they are gone. Brother Heber is now gone, and whilst we
    mourn the loss they rejoice at meeting one with whom they were
    associated before; for he was the friend of Joseph and Hyrum
    Smith, and he was the friend of God, and God is his friend, and
    they are his friends. And as they associated together in time so
    they will in eternity. It behooves us then not to think so much
    about dying, but about our living, and to live in such a way that
    when we shall fall asleep, no matter when, or how it may
    transpire, that our hearts may be pure before God. When I look
    upon a man like Brother Kimball, I feel like saying let my last
    end be like his. Let my life be as spotless, as holy and as pure,
    that I may stand accepted before God and the holy angels. Our
    ambition ought to be to live our religion, to keep the
    commandments of God, to obey the counsel that those lips now
    silent and cold have so often given to us; to honor our calling
    and profession, that we may be prepared to inherit eternal lives
    in the celestial kingdom of our God. May God help us to do so, in
    the name of Jesus, Amen."

ELDER GEORGE A. SMITH.

    "The occasion which has called us together is truly one of
    mourning; but our mourning is not as the mourning of those who
    have no hope. Our father, our brother, our President, has fallen
    asleep. He has fallen asleep according to the promise that those
    who die unto the Lord should not die, but should fall asleep.
    Still, the circumstances with which, we are surrounded cause us to
    feel keenly, deeply this bereavement of his company, of his
    counsel, of his support, of his society, and the benefit of that
    wisdom which ever flowed from his lips. Short is the journey from
    the cradle to the grave, and all of us are marching rapidly in
    that direction; and the present occasion is certainly calculated
    to inspire in our minds a desire that in all our lives and actions
    we may be prepared for that coming event, that we may be prepared
    to rest in peace, and in the morning of the first resurrection to
    inherit eternal life and celestial exaltation. The association
    which we have had with President Kimball has been of long
    standing. He entered the church early after its organization. In
    1832, with President Brigham Young, he visited Kirtland, and made
    himself personally acquainted with the Prophet Joseph, whose bosom
    friend he was from the time of their first acquaintance until the
    day of his death. President Kimball was a man that seemed
    embarrassed when called upon to speak in public in the early part
    of his ministry. My first acquaintance with him was in 1833, when
    in company with President Young he moved his family to Kirtland.
    The Saints were then building the Kirtland Temple. He had but
    little means, but he subscribed two hundred dollars and paid over
    the money. Efforts were being made to build another house, for
    school and other purposes, and he subscribed one hundred dollars
    for that also, to buy the nails and glass. That was the first
    public meeting at which I ever saw Heber C. Kimball. When he was
    chosen one of the Twelve Apostles, and they were called into the
    stand to bear their first testimony as Apostles to the Saints,
    there was an embarrassment and a timidity about his appearance
    that was truly humble. And when he went abroad to preach, many
    felt almost afraid to have Brother Kimball preach because he had
    not as great a flow of language as some others. But it turned
    out, I am sorry to say, that some of those who were the most
    eloquent seemed to be those who fell off by the wayside. It was a
    dark hour around the Prophet in Kirtland, many having apostatized,
    and some of them prominent Elders, when Brother Kimball and some
    others were called upon to take a mission to England. He went
    abroad when some of the first Elders were covered with darkness,
    and apostasy ran rampant through the Church. He started almost
    penniless, made the trip across the ocean, introduced the gospel
    to England, and laid the foundation for the great work that has
    since been accomplished there, accompanied by Orson Hyde, Willard
    Richards and Joseph Fielding. Brothers Kimball and Hyde remained
    in England about one year, and in that time 1,500 were baptized
    there. It was strange, the power and influence which he had over
    persons whom he had never before seen. On one occasion he went out
    five days to some town which he had never visited before, and
    among people whom he had never seen and who had never seen him,
    yet in those five days he baptized eighty-three persons. It seemed
    that there were a power and influence with him beyond that which
    almost any other Elder possessed. He returned home just in time
    to find the Saints in their troubles in Missouri. He had hardly
    got home until the clouds of mobocracy intensified by apostasy
    again gathered around the Prophet. In a short time after, Joseph
    was in prison and his counselors were in prison and all were
    closely guarded.

    "During this time President Kimball visited the prison, the Judges
    and the governor, and exerted himself to relieve the prisoners;
    and he had a peculiar influence with him, so that he could pass
    among our enemies unharmed, when others were in danger.

    "When the Saints were driven from Missouri, as soon as their feet
    were planted in Nauvoo, he built with his own hands a log cabin
    for his family, and started again to renew his mission to Great
    Britain, with President Young and others of his quorum. It is not
    my intention to trace his history, but I have culled out these few
    circumstances to show you his integrity, his faithfulness, and his
    untiring labors to benefit mankind.

    "We are called now to mourn; but we do not mourn as those who have
    no hope. Brother Kimball was a man who was the son of nature. The
    literature he loved was the word of God. He was not a man to read
    novels. He studied the revelations of Jesus. His heart was filled
    with benevolence. His soul was filled with love; and he was always
    ready to give counsel to the weakest child that came in his way.
    Thousands and thousands will remember him with pleasure.

    "As we follow him to his last resting place, we must recollect
    that those men who stood side by side with Joseph Smith the
    Prophet, who bore with him his burdens, and shared his troubles;
    who stood shoulder to shoulder with President Young while he faced
    the storm of apostasy, mob power and organized priestcraft, are
    rapidly passing away. Brother Kimball was foremost among them.
    Joseph loved him, and truly it may be said that Brother Kimball
    was a Herald of Grace. May we all so live that with our brother we
    may inherit the blessings of celestial grace, is my prayer in the
    name of Jesus, Amen."

ELDER GEORGE Q. CANNON.

    "The scene in which we are participating this day reminds us more
    strongly than any language can do, how frail is mortal existence,
    and how slight a tenure we all have upon this life. Two weeks ago,
    to-day, he, whose lifeless remains we now surround, was moving
    among us in this Tabernacle; if not in the enjoyment of perfect
    health, yet in the enjoyment of such a degree of health as not to
    inspire us with any apprehensions as to his life. If we had been
    asked, How long is Brother Heber likely to live? the probable
    answer would have been, he is as likely to live ten or twenty
    years as any other period. But since then, two weeks, two brief,
    short weeks, have gone, and we have assembled ourselves together
    to pay our last respects to his memory. It seemed to me when I
    entered the building, and sat down and looked upon the
    congregation, that the greatest eloquence I could indulge in would
    be silence. Yet it is due to him that our voices should be heard
    in instruction to those who remain, and in testimony of his great
    worth; and if possible to spread before them, the great and
    glorious example which he has set for us, and which if we will but
    emulate and follow, will result in the attainment of the most
    glorious blessings of which mortal heart can conceive.

    "I have known Brother Heber from my childhood. To me he has been a
    father. I never was with him but what he had good counsel to give
    me. And when I speak this I speak what every one who was
    acquainted with him might say. He was full of counsel, full of
    instruction, and he was always pointed in conveying his counsel in
    plainness to those to whom he imparted it.

    "Have we any cause, in reality, to mourn to-day? Have we any cause
    for grief and sorrow? When I stood by his bedside and saw his
    spirit take its departure there was no death there; there was no
    gloom. I had seen but two persons die before, and they died by
    violence; but when I watched Brother Heber I asked myself, Is this
    death? Is this that which men represent as a monster, and from
    which they shrink with affright? It seemed to me that Brother
    Heber was not dead, but that he had merely gone to sleep. He
    passed away as quietly and as gently as an infant falling asleep
    on its mother's lap; not a movement of a limb; not a contortion of
    his countenance; and scarcely a sigh. The words of Jesus, through
    Joseph, were forcibly brought to my mind,--"they that die in me,
    their death shall be sweet unto them." It was sweet with him.
    There was nothing repulsive, nothing dreadful or terrible in it,
    but on the contrary it was calm, peaceful and sweet. There were
    heavenly influences there, as though angels were there, and no
    doubt they were, prepared to escort him hence to the society of
    those whom he loved and who loved him dearly. I thought of the
    joy there would be in the spirit land, when Joseph, and Hyrum, and
    David, and Willard, and Jedediah, and Parley would welcome him to
    their midst, and the thousands of others who have gone before, and
    like them have been faithful. What a welcome to their midst will
    Brother Heber receive! to labor and toil with them in the spirit
    world in the great work in which we are engaged.

    "It is now twenty-four years lacking three days, since Joseph and
    Hyrum were taken away from us. Twenty-four years so fruitful in
    labor, so abundant in toil, so rich in experience! During that
    period Brother Heber has never wavered, never trembled. It may be
    said of him with as much truthfulness to-day, as was said by
    Brother Brigham on one occasion in Nauvoo, 'his knees never
    trembled, his hands never shook.' He has been faithful to God; he
    has been true to his brethren; he has kept his covenants; he has
    died in the triumphs of the faith; and as the Savior has said,
    'that which is governed by law is preserved by law and perfected
    and sanctified by the same;' so will it be with him. He has gone
    to the paradise of God, there to await the time when this
    corruption shall put on incorruption, when this mortality shall
    put on immortality.

    "My brethren and sisters, here is an incentive to us to be
    faithful. Contrast the death of this man with the death of the
    apostate--the traitor. Contrast the future--as it is revealed to
    us in the revelations of Jesus Christ--of this man, with the
    future of the renegade from the truth, and the wicked and those
    who love not God and who keep not His commandments. Are there any
    incentives presented to us this day to be faithful? They are too
    numerous for me to dwell upon or mention. There is every reason
    why we should be faithful. It is easier to keep the commandments
    of God than it is to break them. It is easier to walk in the path
    of righteousness than it is to deviate from it. It is easier and
    more pleasant to love God than it is to break His commandments.

    "Then let us be true to God. Let us walk each day so that we may
    be worthy, when our life is ended, to associate with him whose
    spirit inhabited this tabernacle that lies here, and with others
    who have gone before, and with those who remain, that we may dwell
    together with them eternally in the heavens; which may God grant,
    for Christ's sake, Amen."

PRESIDENT D. H. WELLS.

    "It is a great calamity to humanity when a great and good man
    falls. Earth needs their services. Good men are too scarce. The
    loss is not so much to them as it is to us who remain--as it is to
    humanity who are still left to wield an influence against the
    wickedness which is on the earth, and to sustain holy and
    righteous principles which the Lord has revealed from the heavens
    for the guidance of man. Herein is the loss which we feel when
    such men as Bro. Kimball are taken away, He has made his mark. He
    has earned imperishable fame, and he will live in the hearts of
    the good, the true and the faithful--in the hearts of the just;
    and he will be remembered by the wicked, for he has often invaded
    the realms of darkness and sustained holy and righteous principles
    with all his might, power and influence, all the days of his life.
    It is true, for him we need not mourn, because he has passed to
    that home where Satan has no power. He has secured to himself a
    crown of eternal glory and righteousness in the celestial kingdom
    of our God. Not that he will come immediately unto this
    exaltation. The Savior of the world, himself, did not enter into
    His glory on the dissolution of His spirit and body; He went first
    to minister to the spirits in prison, being clothed with the holy
    Priesthood. So with our brother and beloved friend, for he is
    still our friend, and, as has been remarked, he was the friend of
    God and of all good men. He is not lost. He has only gone to
    perform another portion of the mission which he has been engaged
    in all his life, to labor in another sphere for the good of
    mankind, for the welfare of the souls of men. But he has laid for
    himself a foundation that is imperishable, on which a
    superstructure of glory and exaltation will grow and increase
    throughout all eternity.

    "I do not stand here to eulogize our friend and brother to-day,
    but to satisfy my own feelings and pay a tribute of respect to his
    memory, for I loved him and he loved me, and he loved this people.
    He has friends also where he is gone. Who can answer the question
    whether they are more numerous than those who have assembled
    together to-day and those throughout this Territory? Who can say
    that they are not more numerous on yonder shore? Yet it matters
    not. Those who are faithful will yet be gathered with him and
    others, and come with him to a celestial glory, and with him dwell
    where there is no sorrow nor affliction. He rests from his labor,
    from the toil which surrounded him on the earth. This is, to-day,
    a source of consolation to his family and friends, to those who
    were intimately connected with him. They may be assured that he
    rests in peace. Let his example be followed; let his teachings be
    remembered; let us all live so that we may have a reasonable hope
    of meeting with him and being associated with him in a never
    ending future.

    "May God help us to be faithful unto the end, as he has been; to
    fight the good fight and keep the faith, that at last, with him
    and those who have gone before, we may be found worthy to walk the
    golden streets of that eternal city, whose builder and maker is
    God: Amen."

PRESIDENT BRIGHAM YOUNG.

    "I wish the people to be as still as possible and not to whisper.
    I do not know that I can speak so that you can hear me; but if I
    can I have a few reflections to lay before you. We are called here
    on this very important occasion, and we can say truly that the day
    of this man's death was far better to him than the day of his
    birth. I will relate to you my feelings concerning the departure
    of Brother Kimball.

    "HE WAS A MAN OF AS MUCH INTEGRITY, I PRESUME, AS ANY MAN WHO EVER
    LIVED ON THE EARTH.

    "I have been personally acquainted with him forty-three years and
    I can testify that he has been a man of truth, a man of
    benevolence, a man that was to be trusted. Now he has gone and
    left us. I will say to his wives and his children, that I have not
    felt one particle of death in his house nor about it, and through
    this scene we are now passing I have not felt one particle of the
    spirit of death. He has fallen asleep for a certain purpose,--to
    be prepared for a glorious resurrection; and the same Heber C.
    Kimball, every component particle of his body, from the crown of
    his head to the soles of his feet, will be resurrected, and he, in
    the flesh, will see God and converse with Him; and see his
    brethren and associate with them and they will enjoy a happy
    eternity together.

    "Brother Kimball has had the privilege of living and dying in his
    own house in peace; and has not been followed up by mobs and
    massacred. I consider this a great consolation to his family and
    friends; and it is a great comfort to me to think that Brother
    Heber C. Kimball had the privilege of dying in peace. It is not a
    matter of regret; it is nothing that we should mourn for. It is a
    great cause of joy and rejoicing and comfort to his friends to
    know that a person has passed away in peace from this life, and
    has secured to himself a glorious resurrection. The earth and the
    fullness of the earth and all that pertains to this earth in an
    earthly capacity, is no comparison with the glory, joy and peace
    and happiness of the soul that departs in peace. You may think I
    have reason to mourn. Brother Heber C. Kimball has been my first
    counselor for almost twenty-four years. I am happy to state, it is
    a matter of great joy to me; this is the third counselor that has
    fallen asleep since I have stood to counsel this people--and they
    have died in the faith, full of hope; their lives were filled up
    with good works, full of faith, comfort, peace and joy to their
    brethren. I have looked over this matter. In the fourteen years
    that Brother Joseph presided over the Church, three of the
    prominent counselors he had apostatized. This was a matter of
    regret. Sidney Rigdon, F. G. Williams and William Law, whom many
    of this congregation knew in Nauvoo, apostatized and left Brother
    Joseph. I have not been under the necessity of mourning and
    lamenting over the apostasy of any one of my counselors, and I
    hope I shall never have this to regret. I had rather bury them by
    the score than see one of them apostatize.

    "A great deal could be said concerning Brother Kimball, whose
    remains are here. He is not dead. His earthly tabernacle has
    fallen asleep to be prepared for this glorious resurrection that
    you and I live for. What can we say to one another? Live as he
    has lived; be as faithful as he has been; be as full of good works
    as his life has manifested to us. If we do so, our end will be
    peace and joy, and we will fall asleep as peacefully. I held my
    watch with one hand and fanned him with the other, while he
    breathed his last.

    "For this family to mourn is perhaps natural; but they have not
    really the first cause to do so. How would you feel if you had a
    husband or a father that would lead you from the truth? I would to
    God that we would all follow him in his example in our
    faithfulness, and be as faithful as he was in his life. To his
    wives, his children, his friends, his brethren and sisters, to
    this family whom God has selected from the human family to be his
    sons and daughters, I say let us follow his example. He has gone
    to rest. We can say of him all that can be said of any good man.
    The Lord selected him and he has been faithful and this has made
    him a great man; just as you and I can become if we will live
    faithful to our God and our religion. There is no man but what can
    do good if he chooses; and if he be disposed to choose the good
    and refuse the evil. If any man choose the evil he will dwindle,
    especially if he has been called to the holy Priesthood of the Son
    of God. Such a man will dwindle and falter, stumble and fall; and
    instead of becoming great and good, he will be lost in
    forgetfulness.

    "We pay our last respects unto Brother Kimball. I can say to the
    congregation, we thank you for your attention. We are happy to see
    you here. It would be a pleasure to us if it would be prudent, and
    we had time, for you to see the corpse; but it would not be
    prudent and we have not the time. This, perhaps, will be a matter
    of regret to many of you; but you must put up with it. I want to
    say to every one who wishes to see Brother Heber again, live so
    that you will secure to yourselves a part in the first
    resurrection, and I promise you that you will meet him and shake
    hands with him. But if you do not live so, I can give you no such
    promise.

    "Now, my friends, I feel to bless you; and the family, the wives
    and the children of Brother Heber C. Kimball. I bless you in the
    name of Jesus Christ. Will you receive the blessings which a
    father and husband has placed upon your heads? If you live for
    them you will enjoy them. I think he has never cursed one of his
    family; but his heart was full of blessings for them. He has
    blessed his brethren and sisters and neighbors and friends. His
    heart was full of blessings; but he was a scourge to the wicked
    and they feared him. Now, my friends, I cannot talk to you, my
    sore throat will not let me. But I feel to thank you for your
    kind attention here to-day, in paying our respects to the remains
    of Brother Kimball, and may God bless you. Amen."

At the close of the President's remarks, the choir sang: "O my Father, Thou that dwellest," and Bishop Edwin D. Woolley pronounced the benediction.

The procession then returned, proceeding to the spot selected by President Kimball as the final resting place of his mortal remains. Here, beside the grave of his beloved Vilate, his body was entombed.

And now occurred a remarkable, though purely natural phenomenon. As the first clods of earth fell upon the coffin, the setting sun burst forth from his cloudy covering, shedding a golden halo of glory upon the scene, while instantaneously in the eastern horizon appeared a rainbow, the bright and beauteous token of promise, directly spanning the grave. It was no illusion; and as the last particles of mother earth were gathered above the still bosom that slept below, the rainbow dissolved.

----

So passed from earth the immortal part of him whom men named Heber C. Kimball; one of God's "noble and great ones," recalled with honor from the toils of time to share with Him the triumphs of eternity. Freed from his mortal prison-house of sorrow and of pain, his mission in this life completed, he sought once more the scenes and society of Home, in the realms of eternal rest.

    Past angels, Gods and sentinels, who guard
    The gates celestial, challengeless and free,
    That sovereign spirit soared unto its own;
    By shouting millions welcomed back again,
    With all his new-won laurels on his brow--
    The meed of valor and of victory--
    To exaltations endless as THE LIVES.

APPENDIX.

A GLIMPSE OF THE GREAT BEYOND--THRILLING EXPERIENCE OF DAVID PATTEN
KIMBALL--LOST IN THE DESERT--COMMUNING WITH THE SPIRITS OF THE
DEPARTED--DAVID PREDICTS HIS OWN DEATH AND THE DEATH OF FOUR
OTHERS--THE FULFILLMENT.

The following narrative, under the caption of "A Terrible Ordeal," was originally published in a little volume called "Helpful Visions," the fourteenth book of the Faith-Promoting Series, issued from the office of the Juvenile Instructor, in 1887. It was edited then, as now, by the author of this work. Its relevancy to the present volume will be apparent as we proceed.

On the 22nd of November, 1883, David Patten Kimball, fourth son of Heber Chase and Vilate Murray Kimball, departed this life. Nearly two years before his death, he wrote to his sister Helen, in Salt Lake City, the letter from which the appended extract is taken. This letter was dated January 8th, 1882. David was then a resident of Jonesville, or Lehi, Arizona, three miles from Mesa, where the letter was written.

The experience related was of so remarkable a character as to meet with dubiety on the part of some, especially those inclined to be skeptical regarding spiritual manifestations. Some went so far as to ascribe the sights and scenes through which the narrator claimed to have passed, to the fevered fancy of a mind disordered by strong drink. Nor is this surprising, when it is remembered that even the Apostles of Jesus, on the day of Pentecost, were accused of being "drunken with new wine," when the power of the Spirit fell upon them and they "spake with tongues and prophesied." Skepticism is the same in all ages. What is here presented is the plain and simple testimony of an honest man, who firmly adhered to it till the day of his death, which occurred in literal fulfillment of things told him "while in the spirit."

Here is the excerpt from David's letter. The events described took place while he was returning home from a trip to Prescott, the capital of Arizona, in the early part of November, 1881:

    "On the 4th of November, I took a very severe cold in a snow storm
    at Prescott, being clad in light clothing, which brought on
    pneumonia or lung fever. I resorted to Jamaica ginger and pepper
    tea to obtain relief and keep up my strength till I could reach
    home and receive proper care. On the 13th I camped in a canyon ten
    miles west of Prescott, my son Patten being with me. We had a team
    of eight horses and two wagons. That night I suffered more than
    death. The next night we camped at Mr. McIntyre's, about twenty
    miles farther on. I stopped there two nights and one day, during
    which time I took nothing to drink but pepper tea. On the 16th we
    drove to Black's ranch, twenty-eight miles nearer home, and were
    very comfortably located in Mr. Black's house.

    "About 11 p. m. I awoke and to my surprise saw some six or eight
    men standing around my bed. I had no dread of them but felt that
    they were my friends. At the same time I heard a voice which
    seemed to come from an eight square (octagon) clock on the
    opposite side of the house. It commenced talking and
    blackguarding, which drew my attention, when I was told to pay no
    attention to it. At this point I heard the most beautiful singing
    I ever listened to in all my life. These were the words, repeated
    three times by a choir: 'God bless Brother David Kimball.' I at
    once distinguished among them the voice of my second wife, Julia
    Merrill, who in life was a good singer. This, of course,
    astonished me. Just then my father commenced talking to me, the
    voice seeming to come from a long distance. He commenced by
    telling me of his associations with President Young, the Prophet
    Joseph and others in the spirit world, then inquired about his
    children, and seemed to regret that his family were so scattered,
    and said there would be a great reformation in his family inside
    of two years. He also told me where I should live, also yourself
    and others, and a great many other things. I conversed freely with
    father, and my words were repeated three times by as many
    different persons, exactly as I spoke them, until they reached
    him, and then his words to me were handed down in a like manner.

    "After all this I gave way to doubt, thinking it might be only a
    dream, and to convince myself that I was awake, I got up and
    walked out-doors into the open air.

    "I returned and still the spirit of doubt was upon me. To test it
    further I asked my wife Julia to sing me a verse of one of her old
    songs. At that, the choir, which had continued singing, stopped
    and she sang the song through, every word being distinct and
    beautiful. The name of the song was, 'Does He Ever Think of Me.'

    "My eyes were now turned toward the south, and there, as in a
    large parquette, I beheld hundreds, even thousands, of friends and
    relatives. I was then given the privilege of asking questions and
    did so. This lasted for some time, after which the singing
    commenced again, directly above me. I now wrapped myself in a pair
    of blankets and went out-doors, determined to see the singers, but
    could see nothing, though I could hear the voices just the same. I
    returned to my couch and the singing, which was all communicative
    and instructive, continued until the day dawned. All this time the
    clock I have mentioned continued its cursing and blackguarding.

    "Mr. and Mrs. Black were up in due time and got breakfast. I arose
    and made my toilet, plain as it was, and took breakfast with my
    host and hostess. When my boy got ready to start, I went to pay my
    bill, and to my surprise heard a voice say or communicate: 'David
    Kimball has paid his bill.' When I got into the wagon, my guards,
    or those who were around my bed during the night, were still with
    me. My father had told me that he and President Young and others
    would visit me the next night.

    "We drove on until about 11 a. m., when a host of evil spirits
    made their appearance. They were determined to destroy me, but I
    had power of mind to pay no attention to them, and let them curse
    all day without heeding them any more than possible. Five times
    they made a rush en masse to come into the wagon, the last one,
    where I was, but were kept off by my friends (spiritual). About 2
    p. m. I told my boy to stop and we would water our horses. We
    used for this purpose barrels that we had along with us. After
    this I walked to the west side of my wagons, and looking to the
    east, I saw and heard the evil spirits floating in the air and
    chanting curses upon Brigham Young. I saw two other groups of the
    same kind, but did not hear them. Then I looked to the south, and
    the whole atmosphere was crowded with fallen spirits, or those who
    had not obtained bodies. Others who tried to torment me were
    spirits who had lived upon the earth. Having seen so many and
    being complimented by my guard for seeing so well, I became a
    little timid and asked my spiritual friends if they had any help.
    The answer was, 'Yes, plenty.' I now told my boy to drive on--he
    was entirely oblivious of all that was taking place with me--and
    soon after I was so exhausted that I fell into a troubled sleep
    and must have slept quite a little while.

    "After I awoke I seemed to be left alone, and was lying on my
    back, when, all at once, I saw an old man and two young girls.
    This vision coming on me so suddenly, I was startled, and finding
    my guard gone, I jumped out of the wagon and got up on the spring
    seat beside my boy. But I could not get away from them. I was
    told in a coarse, gruff voice that the devil was going to kill me,
    and that he would follow me night and day until he destroyed me. I
    remembered the promise father had made me the night before--that
    he intended to visit me the next evening--and I nerved up and
    tried to pay no attention to my persecutors, but I must confess I
    was frightened.

    "We arrived at Wickenburg just at sundown. The old man and the
    girls were tormenting and tantalizing me all the way, but never
    coming very near to me. We got supper and I took a room at
    Peeple's hotel and retired about 10 p. m. When everything was
    quiet my spirit friends, eight in number, returned and my
    tormentors were required to leave. Soon after, a glorious vision
    burst upon me. There were thousands of the Saints presented to
    me, many who had died at Nauvoo, in Winter Quarters, on the plains
    and in Utah.

    "I saw Brother Pugmire and many others whom I did not know were
    dead. When my mother came to me it was so real and I was so
    overjoyed that I exclaimed aloud. So powerful was this vision that
    I asked President Young, who seemed to be directing matters, three
    times to relieve me, or I would faint. A great many others passed
    in regular order; and I recognized nearly all of them, and was
    told the names of all I did not know. My father sat in a chair
    with his legs crossed and his hands clasped together, as we have
    often seen him. Those who passed along had hidden him from my
    view till then.

    "This scene vanished, and I was then taken in the vision into a
    vast building, which was built on the plan of the Order of Zion. I
    entered through a south door and found myself in a part of the
    building which was unfinished, though a great many workmen were
    busy upon it. My guide showed me all through this half of the
    house, and then took me through the other half, which was
    finished. The richness, grandeur and beauty of it defied
    description. There were many apartments in the house, which was
    very spacious, and they differed in size and the fineness of the
    workmanship, according to the merits on earth of those who were to
    occupy them. I felt most at home in the unfinished part, among the
    workmen. The upper part of the house was filled with Saints, but I
    could not see them, though some of them conversed with me, my
    father and mother, Uncle Joseph Young and others.

    "My father told me many things, and I received many reproofs for
    my wrong-doings. Yet he was loth to have me leave, and seemed to
    feel very badly when the time came for me to go. He told me I
    could remain there if I chose to do so, but I plead with him that
    I might stay with my family long enough to make them comfortable,
    to repent of my sins, and more fully prepare myself for the
    change. Had it not been for this, I never should have returned
    home, except as a corpse. Father finally told me I could remain
    two years, and to do all the good I could during that time, after
    which he would come for me; he mentioned four others that he would
    come for also, though he did not say it would be at the same time.

    "On the 18th of November, about noon, we left Wickenburg (which is
    twenty-two miles from Black's Ranch where we stopped the previous
    night) on our journey home. I was exhausted from what I had
    experienced, and could feel my mind fast giving away, but I had
    confidence that I would reach home alive. There were no Elders to
    administer to me and no kind friends to look after my wants except
    my son, who had all he could do in looking after eight horses and
    two wagons. As my mind wandered and grew weaker, I was troubled
    and led by influences over which I had no power, and my friends,
    the good spirits, had all left me.

    "We drove about twenty miles that afternoon, camping about eight
    miles from water, on the Salt River desert, which is about fifty
    miles across. During the fore part of the night I heard the horses
    running as though they were frightened. My son was asleep, but I
    got up and put my overcoat across my shoulders and went out where
    they were and got them quieted down. I was about to return to the
    wagon, when the same old man with gray whiskers, who had tormented
    me before, stepped between me and the wagons. He had a long knife
    in his hand. I was frightened and fled, he pursuing me and telling
    me he was going to kill me. What I passed through I cannot
    describe, and no mortal tongue could tell. I wandered two days and
    three nights in the Salt River desert, undergoing the torments of
    the damned, most of the time, which was beyond anything that
    mortal could imagine.

    "When my mind was restored, and the fever which had raged within
    me had abated, I found myself lying on a bleak hill-top, lost in
    the desert, chilled, hungered, thirsty and feeble. I had scarcely
    any clothing on, was barefooted, and my body full of cactus from
    head to foot. My hands were a perfect mat of thorns and briars.
    This, with the knowledge that no one was near me, made me realize
    the awful condition I was in. I could not walk. I thought I would
    take my life, but had no knife or any thing to do it with. I tried
    to cut an artery in my arm with a sharp rock I had picked up,
    hoping I might bleed to death, but even this was denied me. The
    wolves and ravens were hovering around me, anxiously awaiting my
    death. I had a long stick and I thought I would dig a deep hole
    and cover myself up the best I could, so the wolves would not
    devour my body until I could be found by my friends.

    "On the night of the 21st, I could see a fire about twenty-five
    miles to the south, and felt satisfied that it was my friends
    coming after me. I knew the country where I was; I was about eight
    miles from houses where I could have got plenty of water and
    something to eat, but my strength was gone and my feet were so
    sore I could not stand up. Another long and dreary day passed, but
    I could see nothing but wolves and ravens and a barren desert
    covered with cactus, and had about made up my mind that the
    promise of two years' life, made by my father, was not to be
    realized. While in this terrible plight, and when I had just
    about given up all hope, my father and mother appeared to me and
    gave me a drink of water and comforted me, telling me I would be
    found by my friends who were out searching for me and that I
    should live two years longer as I had been promised. When night
    came I saw another fire a few hundred yards from me and could see
    my friends around it, but I was so hoarse I could not make them
    hear. By this time my body was almost lifeless and I could hardly
    move, but my mind was in a perfect condition and I could realize
    everything that happened around me.

    "On the morning of the 23rd, at daylight, here they came, about
    twenty in all, two of my own sons, my nephew William, Bishop E.
    Pomeroy, John Lewis, John Blackburn, Wiley Jones and others, all
    friends and relatives from the Mesa, who had tracked me between
    seventy-five and one hundred miles. I shook hands with them, and
    they were all overjoyed to see me alive, although in such a
    pitiable plight. My own feelings I shall not undertake to
    describe. I told them to be very careful how they let me have
    water, at first. They rolled me up in some blankets and put me on
    a buck-board and appointed John Lewis to look after me as doctor
    and nurse. After I had taken a few swallows of water, I was almost
    frantic for more, but they wisely refused to let me have it except
    in small doses every half hour.

    "I had about seventy-five miles to ride home. We arrived at my
    place in Jonesville on the afternoon of the 24th of November, when
    my wife and family took charge of me and I was tenderly and
    carefully nourished. In a few days I was around again. I told my
    experience to President McDonald, Bishop Pomeroy, C. I. Robson and
    others, and most of them believed me, but my word was doubted by
    some. The report had gone out that I had been drinking and was
    under the influence of liquor. This was an utterly false report. I
    told them I had just two years to live, so they could tell whether
    it was a true manifestation or not.

    "Now, Sister Helen, during the last twelve years I have had doubts
    about the truth of 'Mormonism,' because I did not take a course to
    keep my testimony alive within me. And the letter I wrote you last
    August, I suppose caused you to feel sorrowful, and you prayed for
    me and God heard your prayers. And our father and mother plead
    with the Lord in my behalf, to whom I will give the credit of this
    terrible but useful ordeal through which I have passed and only in
    part described, an ordeal which but few men have ever been able to
    endure and relate what I have seen and heard.

    "Now, my dear sister, you have a little of your brother David's
    experience, and let who will think that I have been drinking. I
    know these things were shown to me for my own good, and it was no
    dream but a glorious and awful reality. My story is believed by my
    brethren who have respect for me. I will console myself with the
    knowledge I have obtained. Let the world wag on, and let hell and
    the devil keep up their warfare against the Saints of God--I know
    for myself that 'Mormonism' is true. With God's help, while I live
    I shall strive to do good, and I will see you before long and tell
    you all, as it never will be blotted out of my memory.

    "With kind regards, in which my wife and children join, I remain,
    as ever,

                        "Your affectionate brother,
                                            "DAVID P. KIMBALL."

----

ACCOUNT OF PATTEN KIMBALL AND OTHERS, REGARDING THE SEARCH FOR AND
FINDING OF HIS FATHER.

The following is an account furnished by Solomon F. Kimball, brother of David, who was in Mesa at the time of the occurrences described, and thoroughly conversant with the facts:

    "On the morning of November 19th when Patten arose and missed his
    father, he thought probably he had gone out to hunt for the
    horses, and felt no uneasiness concerning him. He made a fire,
    prepared breakfast and waited some time, but could not see or hear
    him anywhere. The horses came strolling into camp and were tied
    up, fed and watered. Patten then ate his meal, saddled a horse and
    rode back towards Wickenburg, until he came to a small place
    called Seymour on the Hassayampa, but could find out nothing of
    his father's whereabouts. He went back to the wagon and hunted the
    country close around camp but found nothing but his father's
    overcoat, which was a few hundred yards from the wagon. It being
    an old camp-ground, it was impossible to find his tracks. He
    finally came to the conclusion that he had gone towards home, so
    he hitched up his team and drove homeward until he came to Mr.
    Calderwood's at Agua Fria (Cold Water). At this place there was a
    well dug on the desert about twenty miles from Salt River. Patten
    had traveled about twenty-two miles before reaching this point,
    but was disappointed in not hearing anything of his father. He had
    traveled all night and Mr. Calderwood was up and around when he
    arrived. He related his story to him and was advised by him to
    leave his team there and take the best pair of horses, and hitch
    them to his buckboard and go on to the Mesa. Here he could get
    help to come and hunt for the missing man. The distance was forty
    miles, which would take all the rest of the day (the 20th). He
    acted on the advice, however, and arrived at his destination at 9
    p. m. The news was circulated, and in less than two hours, twenty
    of the best and most experienced men at Mesa and Jonesville were
    on the road, taking Patten back with them. They also took a wagon
    to carry water and provisions, but most of them were on the best
    of horses. They had sixty miles to ride before beginning the
    search, which was accomplished by daylight next morning. After
    feeding their horses and eating a lunch they held a consultation
    and agreed to abide by the following rule. If any one of the party
    found his tracks he was to make a smoke and this would call the
    others in that direction. They then started out in different
    directions. They scoured the country until about noon, when Sern
    Sorenson and Charles Rogers found his tracks. They supposed they
    were about twelve miles from where he was lost, and about ten
    miles from Agua Fria, close to the main road on the south side.
    They soon gathered some brush and started a fire, putting on
    plenty of green weeds, etc., to cause a smoke, and soon attracted
    the attention of their comrades. His tracks were followed. They
    wound round and round, going in no particular direction. Some
    places he would cross his tracks eight or ten times in going one
    hundred yards, which made it quite difficult to follow.

    "After spending a part of the afternoon in trailing him up, the
    tracks finally took a direct course leading to the north. By this
    time all the searching party were together.

    "Another meeting was held and the plan adopted was for eight
    horsemen, four on each side of his tracks, to ride at a
    considerable distance apart, so as to cut off the track if it
    turned to the right or left, and two or three of the best trailers
    to keep on the tracks, while the buckboard and wagon followed up.
    These were out of sight most of the time, as very good time was
    made by the trailers after this plan was adopted. The ground was
    quite soft, and those on the trail would gallop their horses for
    miles, but darkness soon put an end to their work for this day, a
    good thing for both men and animals.

    "They had traveled upwards of one hundred miles in about twenty
    hours. They were working men and had plenty of strength to carry
    them through under all circumstances. They camped on the highest
    ground that could be found close by, and made a large fire which
    was kept up all night by those on guard.

    "As soon as it was light enough to see the tracks, every man was
    at his place moving as fast as he could under the circumstances.

    "This was the morning of the 22nd. One great drawback they met
    with that day was that when they would come to a deep ravine where
    water had run during rainy weather, the tracks would follow up
    sometimes for miles and then continue in the former direction.
    Places would frequently be found in the sand where the lost one
    had dug down for water with his hands. Now and then they would
    find a piece of his clothing and see places where he had run into
    the fox-tail cactus, cat's-claw and other thorny bushes. One place
    was found where he had broken off the limb of a tree for a walking
    stick. The party followed his tracks all day without stopping,
    only as they were obliged to, on account of losing the trail or
    from some other cause.

    "Darkness overtook them again, but nothing could be seen or heard
    of the missing man. They slept on his tracks, keeping up a fire
    all night as before. His sons and others could not rest, and
    followed his tracks after dark by striking matches and putting
    them close to the ground to see if they might possibly find him.
    Some thought they could hear a sound, but it was so indistinct
    they could not discern the direction from which it came. It was
    indeed he who called, for they were then only a few hundred yards
    from him, but he was too hoarse to make them hear. On the morning
    of the 23rd at daylight his anxious friends were on his tracks,
    and had gone but a short distance when Charles Peterson saw him.
    He had a long staff in his hand, and had raised up as high as he
    could get, being on one knee and the other foot on the ground, and
    was stretching himself as far as he could and looking eagerly for
    their arrival. The crowd made a rush, and in a few seconds were
    with him, Bishop E. Pomeroy being the first. He was in his right
    mind and knew all present, and was glad to shake them by the hand,
    calling each by name. He was in good spirits and joked the boys
    frequently and gave them instructions to be careful in giving him
    water, etc. There was no water except in a canteen that had been
    reserved for his especial use. The company suffered themselves
    for want of water. They had traveled upwards of one hundred and
    fifty miles in less than forty-eight hours.

    "David had dug a deep hole with his stick and had used his hands
    to move the dirt. He said he was digging his own grave. He was
    rolled in blankets and put on the buckboard. All drove to the
    nearest houses, seven or eight miles distant, on the Hassayampa,
    where they refreshed themselves with water and something to eat.
    Soon they were on the road homeward. They drove to Mr.
    Calderwood's, which was about thirty miles, and stayed all night.
    He was very kind to them and told them to help themselves to
    anything he had, such as hay, grain and food. He acted the man in
    every respect. A large number of men had also left Phoenix in
    search of David, among them being the U.S. Marshal, and others.
    White men and Indians were riding over the desert in every
    direction. Next morning the company drove to Jonesville, forty
    miles distant, where they arrived about 3 p.m.

    "David was carried into his house where he was surrounded by his
    loving wife and children.

    "When he recounted his experience, he said that one thing that
    kept him from choking to death for want of water, was the damp
    pebbles which he dug from low ravines and held in his mouth. The
    Indians said that no human being could walk as far as he did and
    go without water four days and five nights and live. The party
    that found him said he must have walked at least seventy-five
    miles, some said one hundred.

    "He testified that on the afternoon of the 22nd, his father and
    mother came and gave him water and told him that his friends would
    find him. His clothing was all gone except his under garments,
    which were badly torn.

    "Before leaving home on his trip to Prescott, David had worked
    several days fixing up his books and accounts and burning up all
    useless papers, after which he told his wife that he felt
    different in starting on this trip from anything that he had ever
    felt before. He said it seemed to him that he should never
    return. He told her that if this proved to be the case, he had
    fixed his business up in such a shape that she would have no
    trouble, and would know as much about it as himself. She
    frequently spoke of these curious remarks, and felt considerably
    worried. When the news came that he was lost, all was plain to
    her, and she never expected to see him come home alive. Nothing
    could comfort her, and she watched night and day until he was
    brought home."

----

In the fall of 1883, David came to Salt Lake City on a visit to his sister Helen and others, to whom he confirmed with his own lips all that his letter contained, and told other things in relation to his marvelous experience. He declared solemnly that he was perfectly sober when he passed through the trying ordeal related, and bore a powerful testimony to the truth of "Mormonism." He seemed a little reticent to most of his relatives, and talked but little of his strange experience, feeling pained that so many doubted his word, and being unwilling to make himself obstrusive. When he bade his friends farewell before returning south, there was something in his manner which seemed to say that he was taking leave of them for all time. This visit was no doubt made with that prospect in view, for it was almost two years from the time he was lost on the desert. He returned home to St. David, Cochise County, Arizona, and almost the next news that came from there was the tidings of his death.

A letter from his nephew, Charles S. Whitney, who was then living with him, written home on the 22nd of November, 1883, contained this:

    "Uncle David died this morning at half-past six, easily, and
    apparently without a bit of pain. Shortly before he died, he
    looked up and called, 'Father, father!' All night long he had
    called for Uncle Heber. You remember hearing him tell how Grand-pa
    came to him when he was lost on the desert, and how he plead for
    two years more and was given that much longer to stay. Last
    Saturday, the day he was so bad, was just two years from the day
    he was lost, and to-day is just two years from the day his father
    and mother came to him and gave him a drink of water, and told him
    that his friends would find him and he should live two years
    longer. He knew that he was going to die, and bade Aunt Caroline
    good-bye day before yesterday."

During the last two years of his life David revealed to three of his personal friends the names of the four persons whom his father had told him in vision that he should come for, at or near the time when he would return for him. He exacted the promise from these friends (who, it seems, had some doubt regarding the divine nature of his vision, which doubt he was anxious to dispel) that they would not divulge the names of these individuals until after their death. The names, with respective dates of decease, are as follows:

William H. Hooper; died December 30th, 1882. Horace K. Whitney; died November 22nd, 1884. Heber P. Kimball; died February 8th, 1885. William Jennings; died January 15th, 1886.

As will be seen, the longest interval given from the death of David P. Kimball is two years, one month and twenty-three days. William H. Hooper, who was the first of the four to go, preceded David by about eleven months, while Horace K. Whitney, the second to depart, followed him one year later to a day.
