Many of my Latter-day Saint sisters believe that women are hardly mentioned in the standard works of the Church. They wonder if that apparent dearth of women in the scriptures implies insignificance. At first glance the scriptures may fail to provide a strong impression of women, but there are reasons for this: individual women are rarely spotlighted; groups of women and anonymous references tend to fade into the background; the topical guide includes few entries dealing with women; and so on.

Actually, the scriptures, especially the Bible, are rich with womanly examples, but to see them, one must focus on them. The terms wife, woman, and mother can be easily skimmed over. Noting them establishes that women took part in events and creates a more balanced picture of family life in ancient times. Too often we see only Moses, when in the same text we could see Shiphrah, Puah, Jochebed, Miriam, and Zipporah. It helps to ask, while reading of battles and migrations, what the women were doing. In some cases, it is necessary to piece the stories together. The story of Sarah is a good example. It is scattered throughout the narrative of Abraham. Because entire chapters are devoted to Abraham's activities and only a few verses to Sarah's, we tend to lose track of her, making her seem shadowy next to her husband. If, on the other hand, we read all the verses about Sarah at one time, she emerges as a strong, spiritual individual who coped well in difficult situations.

Nearly a hundred women are cited by name in the Bible. Several of the same women are also named in the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price. Other women are mentioned in terms of the deeds and roles they performed. In Kings and Chronicles, for example, the phrase, "And his mother was . . . " is often linked with "and he did that which was good (or evil) in the sight of the Lord."

Hebrew women were honored as mothers and wives, but their influence, the dimensions of their lives, was not limited to those roles. Women served as ministers in the temples, as diplomats, midwives, weavers, dancers, innkeepers, harvest gatherers, and more. They ruled nations and households. They started and stopped wars. Some sinned. Others walked uprightly. In every case, however, they made and acted on their own decisions.

The stories of the more famous of these women, Esther, Ruth, Hannah, and so forth, are at once both familiar and ever fresh. Why, one wonders, do they live so vividly in the imagination? Is it because they happen to have been enshrined in scripture? Or is it because they're so palpably alive?

Our Sisters in the Bible recreates these women as real human beings struggling with problems not unlike those women face today. It attempts to understand and interpret their spiritual experience, their faith, and their relationship with God. In a larger sense, it suggests that all women are sisters—the beloved daughters of the same Father.
