Woman, as well as man, is God's crowning creation. Eve was the last of the six days' work God called "good." Like Adam, she was fashioned in God's image. With Adam, she was given charge over all the earth. (See Abraham 4:27-31.)

In the second chapter of Genesis, God states that humankind is not complete without both sexes. "It was not good"—it was not perfection—for the man to be without the woman, or the woman without the man. Neither could achieve exaltation, the ultimate purpose of creation, without the other. Sex is not an afterthought, nor is marriage a civil contract. Marriage means becoming coequal with creation; it is a sacrament in which the laws of morality and the laws of nature are integrated. Adam understood this principle. When he saw his bride for the first time, he burst into poetry: "This is now bone of my bones . . . flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman."

By the third chapter of Genesis, Eve steps forward as a woman of independent will and individual responsibility. The tempter came, and as tempters do, he suggested some niggling motive behind God's restrictions. Eve answered him with a shattering innocence: "We may eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden: but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die."

With half-truths, the tempter painted the downward path as leading up. He said, "Ye shall not surely die: for God doth know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil."

The account goes on to say that the woman saw that the tree was good for food, that it was pleasant to the eye and something to be desired to make one wise. Eve's temptation was threefold: physical (good food), sensual (delightful to the eye), and spiritual (promised wisdom). The sophistication with which Satan laid his scheme reveals how he perceived our mother, Eve. Satan didn't see her as inquisitive, weak, deceitful, or ambitious. He didn't insult her intelligence. If anything, he appealed to her sense of adventure.

Eve has often been maligned for her transgression. A convenient peg upon which to hang unflattering theories about women, she has been blamed for bringing death and sin and work into the world. Fortunately, revelations restored in this dispensation correct that view. As a Latter-day Saint, I know that Eve in no way frustrated the plans of God. Rather, I owe her respect for her courage, which ultimately allowed me, her daughter, to be born. In the Book of Mormon, Nephi writes, "After Adam and Eve had partaken . . . they were driven out of the garden. . . . Adam fell that men might be." (2 Nephi 2:19, 25.)

Likewise, the Genesis account does not separate the man from the woman. Though Adam did not pluck the fruit, he willingly partook. When God confronted him with his transgression, he said, "The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat."

Also confronted by a questioning God, Eve explained, "The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat."

Those answers can be read as honest statements of what happened as readily as attempts to place blame. Neither Adam nor Eve justified their sin. As one, they knowingly ate; as one, they then faced their punishment.

Yet they would never again be as totally "one" as while they were in the garden. In Eden, "they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed." But immediately after sinning, they became uneasy with each other; "and they knew that they were naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons." Somehow their sin had disrupted the most fundamental relationship in the world, that between man and woman. If recrimination was intended in the statement "She gave me of the tree, and I did eat," it was doubtless the mutual recrimination of the sexes, born of sin and a new tension that had come into the world.

Other punishments were also natural consequences. When God said to Eve, 'I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception," he described conditions resulting from her transgression. Yet Eve's was a pleasing punishment. Her desire for her husband was to be as great as his desire for her. Despite the pain and travail of childbearing, she was to be preserved and would know maternal joy. She was to be called the "mother of all living."

The couple's work was to be the bearing, supporting, teaching, and rearing of children. Knowing this, God did not leave them alone to face their new challenge. In Moses we read that "they heard the voice of the Lord from the way toward the Garden of Eden, speaking unto them, and they saw him not; for they were shut out from his presence. And he gave unto them commandments. . . . And Adam knew Eve his wife, and she conceived and bare Cain, and said: I have gotten a man from the Lord."

Eve knew that her child came not merely from her flesh, but from God. By the time her first child was born, God, not the serpent, ruled her life, for she had risen above her transgression. She already knew of the Redeemer and looked forward to his coming.

I am sure it was to the birth of the Redeemer that Paul alluded when he spoke of Eve and her daughters, saying, "Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing." It is not the physical act of bearing children that saves womankind; it is the Savior, born of a woman through Eve's lineage, who saves.

Yet no matter how perfectly Eve understood the plan of salvation, she was handicapped as all mothers are. She could not force her knowledge upon her son, nor could she love that knowledge into him. With the birth of Cain came the first generation gap, for he did not know the experiences of his parents. To him, the garden was only a story. We read that "Cain hearkened not, saying: Who is the Lord that I should know him?" (Moses 5:16.)

Eve suffered the anxieties, heartaches, and torments suffered by all mothers of disobedient children through the centuries. We are told that "Adam and his wife mourned before the Lord, because of Cain." (Moses 5:27.)

But Eve, evidencing some of the same courage with which she ate the fruit, did not give up hope: "And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called his name Seth: For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew." (Genesis 4:25.)

"And God revealed himself unto Seth, and he rebelled not." (Moses 6:3.)

Eve's creation is described with the same wonder as the stars, the sun, the moon, and all the other things God created and called "good." From the rapture with which Adam greeted her, I assume that she was pleasing to look at—not in the sense of high fashion, but in the sense of radiant, healthy vibrancy. The serpent approached her with great subtlety and respect. She fell, but in doing so she furthered God's plan and made mortality possible. Eve was teachable. When her association with God dwindled to hearing his voice somewhere near the garden, she still listened and heeded. Expressing her joy in mortality with great eloquence, she declared, "Were it not for our transgression we never should have . . . known good and evil, and the joy of our redemption, and the eternal life which God giveth unto all the obedient." And then, we are told, "Eve blessed the name of God, and they [Adam and Eve] made all things known unto their sons and their daughters." (Moses 5:11-12.)

I am proud to be one of those daughters. I am moved to know that my mother, Eve, wanted her offspring to have the same joy she experienced. Though she was frustrated, disappointed, robbed of one son, and shamed by another, through it all she persevered. Eve was the first woman, the first wife, the first mother, and the first repentant sinner. Adam called her the "mother of all living," but Eve earned her name.

Scripture references: Genesis 1, 2, 3, 4; 5:1-2; 2 Corinthians 11:3; 1 Timothy 2:13; 1 Nephi 5:11; 2 Nephi 2:18-25; Mosiah 16:3; Alma 12:21, 26; 42:2, 7; Helaman 6:26; Ether 8:25; Moses 2:27; 3:21-25; 4:6-27; 5:1-27; 6:2,9; Abraham 4:27-31; 5:14-21; Doctrine and Covenants 20:18-20; 138:39
