At first I thought Sarah was lost in the shadow of her husband. Although extolled by many (including the Apostle Peter) as a model, obedient wife, she is too quickly passed over. Under closer examination, however, I began to view her not as submissive, but as quietly confident. She felt a true affection for her husband Abram, a feeling he returned in kind. Never in any of their wanderings, trials, or disappointments, did he presume to interfere with her authority—not even when it concerned the bondwoman Hagar and the son he had fathered by her.

Hagar was Sarah's sorest trial in a life that seemed a continuous testing of her faith in God's promises. But Hagar, too, was tried. When circumstances and her own haughtiness brought her to the point where she had no reason to expect special consideration, God befriended her and gave her a promise. It was not Sarah's promise, but her own, and it was more glorious than any she might have hoped for.

Similarly, God overwhelmed Sarah. After she had despaired, given up, scoffed at the thought of being blessed, she suddenly found herself the fulfillment of all that had been covenanted. Such bespeaks the closeness, the individuality of God's relationships with his female children.

She was called Sarai when, in her mid-years, she left her settled home in the teeming, cultured city of Ur and took up the life of a nomad. In the company of her husband Abram, their father Terah, and their nephew Lot, she traveled to Haran, the place of their family origins. There Terah died. There too, after Abram saw the three daughters of Onitah sacrificed for refusing to relinquish their beliefs, and after nearly becoming an offering himself, he received his first call from God: "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land that I will shew thee. And I will make of thee a great nation."

Once again leaving their home, Sarai and Abram traveled through the wastelands. When Lot became disagreeable, Abram separated from him. Sarai shared her husband's purpose and his dreams, and she was willing to share the heartaches and trials that went with them.

In the plain of Moreh in the valley of Shichem, Abram built an altar. He later built altars on a mountain east of Beth-el and on the plain at Mamre. Sarai worshipped with him at these altars, becoming, as Peter says, "heir" with Abram of "the grace of life."

Then a famine drove them to seek refuge in Egypt. Women of Sarai's day considered travel the one thing most fatal to beauty; yet when Sarai arrived in Egypt, her still-radiant beauty was enough to cause a minor sensation. It was a matter of course in those days for a prince to help himself to any handsome woman who caught his eye, and to kill her husband if the husband objected. Knowing that Sarai's beauty would endanger Abram, the Lord suggested that he conceal his real relationship to her. (See Abraham 2:22-25.)

Being so directed, Sarai agreed to call herself Abram's sister. It was a partial truth, as Sarai was indeed Abram's half-sister. They shared the same father.

As they feared, Pharaoh immediately took Sarai into his harem, giving Abram substantial presents of sheep, oxen, camels, and servants. From that moment, however, things went badly for Pharaoh. A series of plagues came upon his court. The historian Josephus credits Sarai herself with the negotiations that won her release. Courageous and faithful to her marriage vows, she admitted to her royal admirer that she was the wife of Abram and the cause of the present difficulties. Fearing divine displeasure, the Pharaoh called for Abram, giving him more presents, and sent Sarai away with him.

I can only guess at what that experience meant to Sarai. She had been inside the harem in the palace of Pharaoh. Even the briefest stay in that center of power among the beautiful women gathered from Greece, Phoenicia, Arabia, and Ethiopia must have been an education.

In the events to follow—the separation of Abram and his nephew, the battle of the kings, the imprisonment and rescue of Lot, and the receiving of the blessing of Melchizedek—the scriptures make no mention of Sarai except to suggest that during her husband's absence she took charge, assisted by his steward.

The magnitude of her responsibility is best expressed in numbers. At Abram's call, no less than three hundred eighteen servants, born in his house and trained to arms, accompanied him to rescue his nephew. Assuming that those left behind to tend Abram's numerous flocks and herds must have been at least equal in number, the complete entourage could have consisted of some six hundred forty able-bodied men, not including women and children. Over these people Abram exercised absolute power. He delegated that authority to Sarai in his absence.

Even when her husband was at home, Sarai shouldered considerable responsibility. She directed the women who produced many of the essential goods for the family. These women ground meal, baked bread, wove cloth, and made clothing. They carried water, gathered herbs, and entertained guests. They were the guardians of medical and hygienic information, caring for the sick as well as bearing and rearing the children. This they did as members of a camp that was always on the move.

I interpret the silence of the scriptures as evidence of Sarai's competence. She executed her responsibilities without complaint or reason to be complained of. She might even have prided herself on her position and on the promise God had made her husband, if it had not been for her growing fear, as the years passed, that she was the obstacle to its fulfillment.

Concubines were common during this time, and I find it remarkable that neither Sarai nor Abram had resorted to such means of having children before they did. It was ten years after they left Haran before Abram took Hagar to wife—ten years since he had first received the promise. There is no indication that he ever reproached Sarai for her barrenness, though as the years passed, the flocks and herds increased, but Abram didn't.

Because in the scriptures years of history are condensed into a few words, it sometimes seems that biblical characters lived charmed lives. This brevity can lead to the misconception that favored servants of God were spared day-to-day frustrations, that they were immune to crushed hopes and human emotions. Nothing could be further from the truth. Yet only once did Abram betray his grief. In secret, he chided the Lord, saying that he from whom a great nation was to spring had only a servant for an heir. The Lord responded with a reiteration of his promise.

Acting under the 'law of Sarah" (see D&C 132:65), Sarai suggested that Abram accept Hagar as his concubine. They hoped that in his doing so, the promise might be fulfilled. Hagar was an Egyptian, given to Sarai by Pharaoh and taken by Abram and Sarai out of Egypt to a foreign land and a strange way of life. Likely she was young, a favorite of her mistress, and likely she had no say in the matter. She was considered property and was so subservient that the thought of her consorting with Abram gave Sarai the least possible pang. Her child, if she had one, was to be raised by Sarai as her own. The arrangement was an expedient, physical adjustment, with Hagar providing a fertile womb, nothing more.

But when the slave girl conceived, the relationship changed. Sarai was somehow made to assume full blame for the childless marriage. Abram, no matter how perfunctory his embraces had been, could hardly help seeing Hagar as the instrument by whom the promise was to be fulfilled. And Hagar, about to become the mother of her master's heir, could hardly be blamed for taking advantage of her new status. She who had had nothing now possessed the one thing her mistress most desired.

Sarai might have turned her anger inward, but she possessed too great a sense of her own dignity, too full a knowledge of her rights. She was outraged by Hagar's unexpected trammeling of the favor she had herself extended.

In giving herself airs, Hagar underestimated her mistress. Sarai, fully knowing what a child meant to her husband, knowing she had failed to provide that child, and knowing that she herself had suggested that Abram take Hagar, rose up in righteous indignation. She who had been humiliated enough by her barrenness was not about to suffer the sneering triumph of this younger woman.

Abram had been promised posterity. His wife was barren. He had begotten a child upon her bondwoman so that the promise appeared to be within his grasp. Yet when Sarai complained that Hagar had become insolent, he unhesitatingly restored her to her rightful place. He said to Sarai, "Behold, thy maid is in thy hand, do to her as it pleaseth thee."

Sarai dealt harshly with Hagar. She may have physically abused her. But whatever the punishment, it was not severe enough to cause bodily harm. Hagar still had the ability to flee, and she did. Growing heavy with her master's child, she must have expected Abram to protect and support her. But he hadn't; nothing had changed. Doubly burdened with that shattering revelation, she fled alone into the desert.

If that wasn't sufficient to dash her dreams, in the desert she was addressed by an angel as "Hagar, Sarai's maid." She was told to return and submit to her mistress. In the eyes of God, nothing had changed either. But the angel continued, assuring her that though her master and mistress had put her into this predicament, she and the child she carried were the objects of God's love. She was told that her seed would be multiplied and that her son would bear a name that would ever remind her that God had seen her affliction. She was given other promises as well. When the angel finished, Hagar exclaimed, "Thou God seest me." She then returned to Sarai and Abram and submitted herself to them.

Thirteen years passed, during which Hagar's son Ishmael was reared and treated as Abram's heir. Sarai's last hope of having a child waned and died, but there seems to have been no further enmity between Sarai and Hagar. Sarai may even have formed an attachment for Hagar's child; certainly Abram did.

Then one day the Lord instructed Abram to change his name to Abraham and his wife to change her name to Sarah, preparatory to taking on the long-promised blessing and covenant, marking his descendants as the chosen of the Lord, the lineage of the Messiah, the everlasting inheritors of Canaan. Abraham greeted the announcement with wonder and joyous laughter for Sarah's sake. Yet his affection for Hagar's child made him cry out, "O that Ishmael might live before thee!" The Lord soothed the anxious father with a repetition of the promise he had given Hagar. Sarah's would be the covenant seed; but Ishmael, too, would be blessed and multiplied.

Sarah's reaction to the bestowal of her new name and this reiteration of the old promise is not described. She probably dismissed it as too painful a recollection of the old hopes she had already laid to rest. But shortly after the announcement, Abraham offered his hospitality to three strangers. They foretold the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah and the birth of Isaac. Listening at the tent door, Sarah laughed to herself. Having a child at her age seemed as likely as fire coming out of heaven to consume the wicked cities on the plain.

She was immediately chastised. God asked Abraham, "Wherefore did Sarah laugh? . . . Is anything too mighty for the Lord?" Her innermost thoughts revealed, she tried to deny that she had laughed, but was silenced. Yet there was a certain meekness about the rebuke, calling her not so much to repentance as to greater faith. The promise flashed back as brightly and vividly as when it was first given, and Sarah must have known in an instant that all the years she had waited, all the bitter humiliations she had suffered, had not been in vain.

A strange incident follows. Before the birth of Isaac, Abraham took his camp into Gerar, where Abimelech was king. By this time Sarah was ninety years old, yet her beauty became a problem once again. Abraham resorting to his earlier stratagem, introduced her as his sister. Again she was immediately drawn into the king's harem; again God troubled the king, and again Sarah was restored to Abraham with gifts and the king's pledge of free passage across the land. I wonder if, in regaining her ability to conceive, Sarah was somehow rejuvenated, her beauty and youth restored. However it came to pass, Sarah conceived and gave birth to a son. She named him Isaac, meaning, "laughter."

Hagar's son was immediately deposed. Despite his seniority and the years of privilege he had enjoyed, he was still a slave's child, always to be ranked beneath a son of Sarah, be it the first or the tenth. To Hagar, the birth of Isaac must have been a grievous disappointment, and to the young Ishmael, educated with the idea that he was his father's heir, the change in his status must have seemed cruel and confusing. This state of affairs continued three, perhaps four years, until Isaac's weaning festival, during which Sarah noticed Ishmael mocking her son. With lightning prescience she saw the dangers of keeping Hagar and Ishmael in her household.

Abraham was less decisive. If Sarah had asked him to punish the pair, no doubt he would have done so. Banishing them was another matter. The scriptures say that "the thing was very grievous to Abraham's sight," and that he sought counsel from the Lord.

The thought of Hagar and her son, expelled from their home and driven into the desert with nothing more than a bottle of water, can easily excite more sympathy than the harsh Sarah, who, for what seems a trifling offense, demanded such severe retribution. Abraham himself must have seen error and misunderstanding on both sides. But the Lord confirmed Sarah's request. Offering Abraham consolation in the promise that he would protect and preserve Ishmael and make him also a mighty nation, the father of twelve princes, the Lord commanded Abraham to listen to his wife.

I feel a touching sympathy for the way Abraham sacrificed his own feelings and let his elder son go. He had flocks, herds, servants, and great wealth, but he gave none to Ishmael. The Lord had promised to provide for the boy; what could he add to that? Taking bread and a bottle of water and placing it on Hagar's shoulder, he sent the two into the desert.

Hagar wandered until the water was gone. Then, not wanting to see her child die, she left him under a bush and went away to weep. She was a slave, praised by none and loved by few except God, who comforted her whenever she asked. He sent her angels and wonderful promises. I can think of few women who could claim to be better blessed than Hagar.

An angel appeared saying, "What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not." Repeating the promise that Ishmael would become a great nation, God opened Hagar's eyes; she saw a lifegiving well of water, and she and her son drank.

The scriptures add that God was with Ishmael as he grew and dwelt in the wilderness. Ishmael became an archer, and Hagar found him a wife among her own people.

The fact that the Lord watches over, protects, and has purposes for all nations of the earth is confirmed repeatedly by the prophets: "Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel? saith the Lord. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtar, and the Syrians from Kir?" (Amos 9:7.) And again, "I remember one nation like unto another." (2 Nephi 29:7-8.)

As God promised, Ishmael became a great nation. Hundreds of years later the Moslem prophet, Muhammad, praised and acknowledged God for the preservation of his ancestress Hagar.

For Sarah, too, things worked out well. Not only was she honored as the mother of God's chosen nation, but she was given the time and pleasure of raising her child free from jealous discord. In that, God was kind. I wonder if the scriptures' silence concerning her role in the near sacrifice of Isaac is a kindness, as well. Was that final trial of faith given to Abraham alone?

Sarah must have known that in his devotion to God, Abraham would not withhold even Isaac. Did she know and trust in him as completely as he trusted God? Or was that the final, searing test of her faith—watching them leave, waiting, not knowing the outcome for six days while they traveled to the mountain and back? Whatever her role, Sarah met the test. She is acknowledged by Paul as one of those great in faith.

The near-sacrifice of Isaac is the best known incident in the life of Abraham. It is also the event in which Sarah is least visible. But in the larger scope of their married life, her presence is unmistakable. Though she lived thousands of years ago in a foreign land, I find her wise and meticulous cultivation of her marriage as laudable today as when Peter and Paul spoke her praises.

Husbands and wives who forfeit spiritual aspirations—God's promises—for more expedient pleasures often find themselves, like Hagar, facing the desert alone. The freedom that allows a person to achieve his or her full potential comes from skillfully balancing individual agency and needs against the rights and needs of the union, sacrificing some to nourish the self much more in the rich medium of a warm, supporting family.

In my opinion, it was such marital skill, not groveling submission, that made Sarah the model, obedient wife. It was that skill that earned her a full and equal partnership in the fulfillment of God's promise. Yet one need not achieve Sarah's excellence to have value in God's eyes. Hagar didn't, and she was visited by angels.

Scripture references:

Sarah Genesis 11:29-31; 12:5-20; 16:1-8; 17:15-21; 18:6-15; 20:2-18; 21:1-1-2; 23:1-20; 24:36; 25:10-1-2; 49:31; Isaiah 51:2; Romans 4:19; 9:9; Hebrews 11:11; 1 Peter 3:6; 2 Nephi 8:2; Doctrine and Covenants 132:34-37, 65; Abraham 2:2-4, 15-25

Hagar Genesis 16:1-16; 17:20; 21:8-21; 25:12; Galatians 4:24-25

Daughters of Onitah Abraham 1:8, 11-12
