Rebekah is the wife who tricked her blind old husband into blessing her favorite son, Jacob, when the family legacy should have gone to his elder brother, Esau. The rights and wrongs of that affair echo to this day. Some see Rebekah as a scheming, autocratic matriarch. Others excuse her, saying that while her method was deceitful, her motive was pure. I have no intention of taking either side. To me, Rebekah is far too rich a character to categorize.

Her story begins at the death of Sarah. Likely Rebekah never met her mother-in-law. Abraham and Sarah lived in Canaan, a land distant from their own childhood homes. A sense of that distance burst upon Abraham when his wife died: "And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the sons of Heth, saying, I am a stranger and a sojourner with you: give me a possession of a burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight." (Genesis 23:3-4.)

Shortly after that, with a deepening sense of his own mortality and his alienation in Canaan, Abraham called for his eldest servant, probably Eliezer, and made him vow to see that Isaac did not take a Canaanite woman to wife. The servant was to journey back to the country of their origin, find a woman among Abraham's kindred, and then return with her to Canaan.

Abraham may have been too old or too ill to make the trip himself, but Isaac's acquiescence in the choice was taken for granted. The servant made only one objection: what if the woman didn't want to come?

Abraham assured his servant that the Lord would send an angel before him. But if the woman would not come, then he was to be free of his oath.

Eliezer made the long journey to Mesopotamia. No sooner had he arrived than, echoing his master's trust in the Lord, he prayed for direction. He was standing by a well where the daughters of the city came to fill their water jars; his prayer was that the girl who gave him a drink and offered to water his thirsty camels would be the one the Lord had appointed for Isaac. He prayed that in this way, he would know the Lord's choice.

The scriptures indicate that even before he finished his supplication, Rebekah appeared. Described as being "very fair to look upon, a virgin," she went down to the well and filled her pitcher.

Eliezer ran to meet her and said, "Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher."

She said, "Drink, my lord." When he had finished she spoke again: "I will draw water for thy camels also." She emptied her pitcher into the trough and ran again to the well to draw more water.

Eliezer "wondering at her, held his peace." This is not surprising. Seldom is a prayer answered so promptly with such point-by-point fulfillment.

When Rebekah finished watering the camels, the servant took a golden ring and two bracelets and gave them to her. He asked whose daughter she was and if there was room in her father's house to lodge him.

She said, "I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor [Abraham's brother]." She added that there was straw and feed and room enough.

Eliezer bowed his head and thanked the Lord.

Rebekah must have worked hard to refresh those ten camels after their long journey, yet she did it without hesitation. When she was presented with expensive gifts from a stranger, she didn't lose her composure; rather, she was deliberate and systematic. She named her parentage and assured him that his unexpected arrival would not embarrass the household.

Rebekah rises from the scriptures as a lively, intelligent, quick-witted young girl with an unfaltering grasp of the events around her. Rebekah's first thought was to give hospitality; this is also true of her family. Eliezer accepted their graciousness for his camels, but he was too full of his mission, too happy of its success, to eat anything. He begged to be allowed to speak before supper. Describing the wealth and condition of his master Abraham, he declared the purpose of his visit. He recounted all that had happened at the well, including his prayer and its immediate answer. Then he asked for Rebekah.

The men of her household were impressed. They said, "The thing proceedeth from the Lord."

There is some question as to whether the household of Abraham's kin believed in the one true God. A generation later, Laban was still a worshipper of images when Jacob came to live with him. Nevertheless, Bethuel and Laban acknowledged Eliezer's faith and admitted piously that "we cannot speak unto thee bad or good. Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her."

Not a word from Rebekah is recorded. If she was satisfied with what was happening, she had no reason to speak. The next morning, when they did ask her, she was decisive. Her mother and her brother wished to have her stay with them a few more days, while Eliezer was anxious to go. At an impasse they sent for Rebekah and asked her, "Wilt thou go with this man?"

She answered, "I will go."

Eliezer felt that once the Lord had made his wishes known, there was no time to delay. Rebekah clearly agreed. She left her home as a girl of good family should, the blessings of her relatives ringing in her ears, her nurse and her damsels riding with her.

Days later, in the cool of the evening, Isaac went out to meditate and, lifting his eyes, saw the camel train approaching. At the same time Rebekah turned to the servant and asked, "What man is this that walketh in the field to meet us?" The servant told her it was Isaac. With her graceful, unerring instinct for doing the right thing, she took a veil and covered herself as a bride.

The servant reported to Abraham, no doubt sharing with him the wondrous way the Lord had chosen his son's wife. The scriptures paint a poignant scene of their wedding night: "And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother's death."

Isaac was forty years old; Rebekah was a young girl. Isaac was heir to the blessing of Abraham, while Rebekah had arrived straight from the world of idol-worshippers. In those days, the wife was expected to adopt her husband's way of life. Yet this new religion Rebekah encountered must have seemed strange to her; it had to do with one God, the land of Canaan, and a chosen seed to whom that land had been given.

We read that shortly after the marriage of Isaac and Rebekah, Abraham took a wife. Keturah and Abraham had six sons: Zimran, Jokshan, Medan, Midian, Ishbak, and Shuah. Still, Abraham insisted on giving all he had to Isaac. One by one, he sent the sons of Keturah away from him into the east country, where they started many of the tribes of southern and eastern Palestine.

One of these tribes, the Midianites, would preserve the priesthood when Israel fell in apostasy. Much later, Moses would be ordained by his father-in-law, Jethro, a descendent of Keturah. (D&C 84:6.)

But the purpose of s eparating Israel and the eastern tribes was not obvious when it happened; Rebekah must have watched those successive expulsions and wondered: Would all but one of her sons be given to the desert? How she must have struggled with that question—and with her new religion, the spirit of which was so elusive and yet so all-important. Rebekah took all that upon herself by marrying the unknown kinsman from Canaan, and we are told nothing of how she resolved it.

The first twenty years of Isaac and Rebekah's marriage was barren. But then Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife, and Rebekah conceived.

But the pregnancy did not go well. Something was amiss and Rebekah knew it. As the two children struggled within her, she cried out, "Why am I thus?" and sought the Lord for an answer. Speaking directly to Rebekah, the Lord said, "Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; and the one people shall be stronger than the other people; and the elder shall serve the younger."

Whatever difficulty Rebekah may or may not have had adopting Isaac's God, it is clear that by the time she conceived, she was fully converted and conversant with the Lord. When she prayed, she received a specific, prophetic answer—that "the elder" should "serve the younger."

At this point, the scriptures compress twenty years into almost as many words. We are told that Isaac preferred Esau because he ate "his venison," while Rebekah preferred Jacob. That seems a strange commentary when we remember that Isaac was a rich man—rich enough to be envied by the Philistines. He had no need of meat brought home from the hunt; yet we are told he loved Esau 'because he did eat of his venison." Was he a gourmet, then? Hardly. Rebekah fooled him with a savory dish of goat's meat, an unlikely possibility unless Isaac was fairly indifferent to his food.

Whatever the reason, Isaac preferred Esau. Yet we are not led to believe that Rebekah despised her elder son. Quite the contrary; when she learned that he planned to kill Jacob, she cried out, 'Why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?"

Likewise there is no hint of deep dissension between Isaac and Rebekah because of their preferences. The scriptures suggest that they were in absolute agreement on one important issue: Esau's Hittite wives. When he was forty years old, Esau married Judith, the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath, the daughter of Elon the Hittite. Both were a grief to Isaac and Rebekah.

Perhaps Isaac's preference was that of the parent for the wayward child, the one that required the most love, long-suffering, and sacrifice. Perhaps the only difference between Isaac and Rebekah was that she, being more decisive, had come to consider Esau spiritually unworthy earlier than her husband. Whatever the case, the scriptures give unqualified verification to her judgment. It is written that "Esau despised his birthright."

One day, being old, nearly blind, and believing that he was dying, Isaac called Esau and asked him to take his bow and quiver, get some venison, and make a savory meat dish. Then he would give Esau his blessing.

Rebekah overheard and called Jacob, who at first objected to the plan she proposed. His brother was a hairy man, and he was a smooth man. He was afraid his father would feel him, know he was a deceiver, and curse him. His mother replied, "Upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my voice."

Isaac's five senses had to be fooled. God had taken care of his sight, and his sense of taste must not have been acute. Rebekah took some of Esau's clothes, which had his scent, and some hairy goatskins, and dressed Jacob in them, covering his arms and hands. It was Jacob's voice that nearly gave him away. When Isaac called his son near and felt him, he complained that his voice was the voice of Jacob; but he was satisfied that the hands were Esau's. Isaac then blessed Jacob, saying, "God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: let people serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed be every one that curseth thee, and blessed be he that blesseth thee."

Can a blessing be given to the wrong person? Isaac owned wells at Esak and Sitnah and Rehoboth. He had great flocks and fields and followers. He was respected by the Hittites and feared by the Philistines. Yet he had only one blessing of significance—the blessing of his father Abraham. That blessing could be given equally to two or ten or twenty sons. It derived no special virtue from the order of its bestowal, but depended upon a worthy recipient. Isaac knew that; therefore, the blessing he conferred upon Jacob, when he thought he was Esau, was not the blessing of Abraham. There was no mention of Abraham in it, or of the land that had been promised to Abraham's seed, or of a multitude of descendants, or of a Messiah through whom all the nations of the earth would be blessed.

Perhaps because he loved both his sons, Isaac hoped to give Esau the first but lesser blessing and Jacob the second but greater blessing. But Esau would not have perceived the difference, because to him the first was the only blessing. If Isaac had had his way, his kindness might have created a nation of pretenders. The Edomites for generations would have had a basis for claiming they had the birthright of Abraham. I believe that this was what Rebekah sought to circumvent. Decisive by nature, she could not let Isaac bless Esau first, even out of love.

When Isaac learned of the trickery, he "trembled very exceedingly." Yet there is no record of any remonstration, reproach, or curse as Jacob had feared. Isaac was pained, but tolerant. When Esau asked for a blessing it was given, and he was promised that his "dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above." Although Isaac has given Jacob power over his brother in the first blessing, he revoked that statement in Esau's blessing, promising him that he would shake off his brother's yoke. The two blessings are substantially the same. Isaac gave Esau what he had intended all along; it was only Esau, with his limited spiritual understanding, who felt cheated.

Nevertheless, the situation was highly charged with anger and resentment. Esau vowed to wait only until his father was dead before taking revenge on his brother. Rebekah had to do something. She could have had Esau expelled, now that the rightful lineage had been declared. That, after all, was how Abraham had protected his heir. Instead, she gave up her beloved son Jacob.

She went to her husband. He was not angry, and he listened as she complained again about Esau's Hittite wives. She said she would consider her life wasted if Jacob married similarly. Isaac agreed.

He summoned Jacob and commanded him not to marry a Canaanite woman, but to go to Padanaram, to the house of his mother's father, and find a wife there. Then Isaac blessed Jacob a second time, declaring, "And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people; and give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a stranger, which God gave Abraham."

This was the blessing of Abraham. Isaac gave it to Jacob knowingly. And Rebekah sent him back to her own people saying, "Flee thou to Laban my brother . . . and tarry with him a few days."

What Rebekah had hoped would be a short separation stretched out twenty years or more. She may not have been alive when he returned. Isaac greeted Jacob, home from Padanaram with his two wives, two concubines, many sons, and vast flocks. Esau, too, was reconciled and greeted his brother. Rebekah is not mentioned. We know nothing of her death.

Years later, after Jacob's return, the scriptures add one final note: "Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath Beth-el . . . and the name of it was called Allon-bachuth [the oak of weeping]."

How much of Rebekah's character did she owe to her faithful nurse? As little as we know about that and much more, it is hard not to admire Rebekah. She accepted a long journey and an unseen bridegroom. She made a place in Isaac's heart equal to his mother's love. She sought the Lord in prayer and received an answer. When she perceived the need, she seized her younger son's destiny and took bold steps to secure it forever. If that constituted deception, she atoned by sending her son far from her. Such courage begets a deep admiration.

Scripture references:

Rebekah Genesis 22-29; 35:8; 49:31; Romans 9:10

Keturah Genesis 25:1-4; 1 Chronicles 1:32-33

Esau's Wives Genesis 26:34; 28:9; 36:2-30
