No man binds himself for seven years and then, when he finds he has been cheated, labors another seven, unless he's madly in love. The fact that Rachel hardly deserved such devotion is only one of the many ironies in the strange mix of the heavenly and the earthly, the spiritual and the sensual woven through the history of Jacob and his wives.

The main characters form a dynamic trio. Leah, the vulnerable, unattractive victim of a lifelong frustration, clung desperately to the man she loved. Rachel, the beautiful, the charmed, felt life owed her happiness and became petulant when it didn't fulfill her expectations. Jacob, gentle and affectionate, became rich despite every obstacle placed in his way. Theirs is a tale complete with passion and unrequited love, a story complicated by their own jealousies and duplicities, a narrative that might be only entertainingly sentimental if not for the fact that Leah, Rachel, and their handmaids gave birth to the twelve tribes of Israel, forming a vital link in the lineage of the Savior. Petty as their motivations seem on the surface, their lives served a divine purpose.

Jacob traveled five hundred miles from Palestine to Padanaram. This was the same journey Eliezer had made to find Isaac's bride. But Eliezer had come with servants and camels and gifts; Jacob came with only his father's blessing, a dream of ladders and angels, and the Lord's promise to be with him. He had nothing to offer a bride but himself and the sweat of his labors.

Stopping at a well covered by a great stone, where three flocks of sheep were waiting to be watered, Jacob asked the shepherds if they knew Laban, his mother's brother. They pointed to Rachel, who was approaching with a flock of sheep, and said she was his daughter. Immediately Jacob rolled the stone from the well, watered her sheep, kissed her (a respectful salutation), and wept. Undoubtedly he had heard the story of how Eliezer had discovered Rebekah at a well, and because he was close to his mother in his heart and far from her in distance, he must have felt that Rachel was destined to be his wife. It was love at first sight.

Rachel ran to tell her father. He greeted Jacob and invited him to his home. A month later, they struck the marriage bargain. Laban was shrewd, hard, devoid of generosity. Jacob, too, drove a hard bargain and was not above being unscrupulous when it suited his purposes. Running through this love story is a subplot of the two men's craftiness; each of them seeming to have met his match in the other. Laban had two daughters. The older, Leah, was "tender eyed" or weak eyed; the younger, Rachel, was "beautiful and well favoured." Laban and Jacob agreed on seven years' service for the younger daughter.

Jacob's fulfillment of that contract stands as one of the unsurpassed expressions of romantic love to be found in the whole of literature: ". . . and they [the seven years] seemed unto him but a few days, for the love he had to her."

At last the wedding feast was celebrated. As was the custom, the bride was conducted to the bedchamber of her husband in silence and darkness. Not until morning did Jacob discover he had been deceived; Leah, not Rachel, lay at his side.

Rachel's reaction to the deception is not recorded. The victim of her father's selfishness (he not wanting an unmarried daughter to support), she was shunted aside, losing the position of Jacob's first, birthright wife. Never would she be the undivided head of her husband's household, but she would be obliged to share all with her older sister.

Fuming little, Jacob accepted the situation. He must have recognized the irony. Leah, led by her father's deceit, had stolen her sister's blessing—as Jacob, led by his mother, had stolen his brother's. And his wrath may have been mitigated by the fact that his veiled bride did not stand in the way of his heart's desire.

It was Leah who gambled the most. She loved Jacob. There is no indication that Rachel loved him more or even as much. Yet Leah must have known that the day after her wedding, the greatest of all humiliations might await her. Jacob might loathe her. Yet she took the risk to have him for one night. Hoping to prove herself the woman for him, she lay in the darkness embracing him.

The morning of her humiliation dawned, and Jacob struck a new bargain. Leah's father snatched one concession: she was to have a week's unrivaled attention from her husband. But the love that couldn't be won in a night could not be won in a week, and seven days later a second wedding was celebrated. The scriptures state unequivocally that Jacob loved Rachel more.

In the years that followed, a lively competition grew up between the two sisters, but no quarrel is recorded. Rachel never flaunted her triumph as Hagar flaunted hers before Sarah. She may have been in the habit of pitying her older, less attractive sister, and she may have continued with that superior attitude until Leah began to have children.

Leah conceived and gave birth to Reuben, saying, "Surely the Lord hath looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me." She then conceived and gave birth to Simeon, reasoning that "Because the Lord hath heard that I was hated, he hath therefore given me this son." When she gave birth to Levi, her hope was that "this time will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons." Upon the birth of her fourth son, Judah, she said, "Now I will praise the Lord."

Each of her sons raised Leah's status in her home and community. The piety with which she named her sons testifies to her faith in Jacob's one invisible God. Not only did she love the man, but she loved his God as well. Her genuine understanding of the true gospel surpasses any disadvantage she may have felt her new religion would give her. She must have had some vague religious notions before Jacob came, and no doubt she was a diligent student of that gospel after he arrived. Her reliance on the Lord may explain why Leah would be the more contented of the two sisters, despite her failure in the contest for Jacob's love.

Leah had only her children, and yet Rachel envied her. The only harsh words that passed between Rachel and Jacob concerned her unhappiness because of her sister. "Give me children, or else I die," she demanded of him, and Jacob retorted that he was not God. He had not the power to give or withhold the fruit of her womb.

So Rachel gave her handmaid, Bilhah, to Jacob, that like Sarah she might have a child vicariously. Bilhah conceived and gave birth to a son. Rachel, naming him as if he were her own child, called him Dan, saying, "God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath given me a son." When Bilhah gave birth to a second son, Rachel named him Naphtali, saying, "With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and I have prevailed."

Not to be outdone, Leah gave her maid, Zilpah, to Jacob. When Zilpah conceived and gave birth to a son, Leah noted with good humor, "A troop cometh," naming him Gad. She named Zilpah's second son Asher, exclaiming, "Happy am I."

When Leah's eldest son, Reuben, was old enough to wander by himself, Rachel still had no children of her own. One day Reuben returned to camp with some mandrakes. The mandrake was believed to aid a barren woman in conception; today it is known to have the effect of relaxing the womb. Rachel, seeing Reuben's treasure, begged her sister for the mandrakes. She promised that if Leah would give them to her, she would allow her to lie with Jacob that night. Implicit in that scene is the fact that Rachel was able to govern her husband's affections at will, and Leah was making do with the crumbs of Jacob's attention. Then Leah spoke her only bitter words in the entire recorded narrative: "Is it a small matter," she asked, "that thou has taken my husband? And wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also?"

She was entitled to believe that Jacob was her husband and that Rachel had somehow supplanted her. She was, after all, the first wife. She had given Jacob four sons of her own, and two by her maid. By law and tradition she had fulfilled all that could be required of a good wife, and yet she was unloved. With justifiable rancor, she accepted Rachel's offer, then went into the field to meet Jacob and tell him that she had won him for the night.

The mandrakes didn't work. It was Leah who conceived. She named her fifth son Issachar, saying, "God hath given me my hire." When she conceived again and bore her sixth son, Zebulun, she observed that "God hath endowed me with a good dowry." Finally she had a daughter, and named her Dinah.

Only then did God remember Rachel. She had a son and named him Joseph. Joseph, like his mother, was Jacob's favorite. He doted on the youngster.

During the years in which his sons were arriving, Jacob had been cheating Laban—and Laban, in turn, had been defrauding Jacob. As long as the two of them maintained a shrewd balance, the home life, while not elevated in moral tone, remained amiable; Jacob seems to have been contented counting sheep and cattle rather than remembering his vision of the angels and the promise of his birthright. Then two things happened. The balance tipped toward Jacob, and God, in a dream, called him back to Canaan. But his departure was complicated.

According to law, Laban could still claim Jacob's children and wives. Their escape, if they were to make it, must be carefully planned and orchestrated. Like Adam, Abraham, and all the patriarchs before him, Jacob consulted his wives. United in an absence of deep regard for their father, Leah and Rachel answered, "Whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do." While Laban was away shearing his sheep, they departed. Jacob took his wives, his sons, his daughter, his cattle, and his sheep. Rachel took her father's idols.

As with the mandrakes, Rachel was less willing to trust Jacob's God than to lean on tangible devices. She had hoped to ensure their safe journey by taking her father's images. In fact, she endangered them all.

When Laban returned and found the idols gone, he was furious. Arming his servants, he pursued the fugitives—not because of his daughters, his grandchildren, or his cattle, but because of his gods. He pretended to be offended that Jacob would leave without a farewell. Actually, he feared Jacob's God; in a dream, he had been warned not to speak ill of or to detain his son-in-law. So he complained most at the theft of his idols. Jacob, not knowing of Rachel's deceit, swore that whoever had taken the gods would not live.

Laban searched Jacob's tent, Leah's tent, and Bilhah and Zilpah's tents and found nothing. He then entered Rachel's tent. She had hidden the idols in her camel's trappings. With great effrontery she sat on them and feigned menstrual cramps, insisting that she not be disturbed. Deferring to her, Laban searched the rest of her tent, and, when he didn't find his gods, had to suffer the righteous indignation of Jacob, who then felt justified.

When the recriminations ended, Laban and Jacob reached a reconciliation. They built a pillar of stones between them. Laban then required a vow of his son-in-law that he must not afflict Leah or Rachel or take other wives. Finally, each man vowed not to pass over the heap of stones but to go their separate ways.

The next morning Laban kissed his grandchildren, blessed his daughters, and returned to his home. What that more amiable parting meant to Leah and Rachel can only be surmised. No woman ever relishes choosing between her husband and her father. To have a father's blessing when she picks up her husband's destiny fills the vacancy in her heart that his absence creates. So it must have been for Leah and Rachel, who were facing a new home in a strange land among people they had never met. And there were dangers yet to be faced.

The first was Esau, whom Jacob still feared. Jacob sent messengers ahead; they returned with the news that his brother was approaching with four hundred men. Jacob sent presents; in case that failed, he divided and arranged his ranks so as to minimize his losses if Esau meant to do battle. He placed Rachel and Joseph at the rear where they would be under his personal care. Leah and her sons were farther up. Zilpah and Bilhah and their sons were most exposed. No one could have missed the significance of that order, Leah most of all.

That night Jacob wrestled with a man. At daybreak he discovered that the man was a messenger of God. "I will not let thee go," Jacob exclaimed, "except thou bless me." God changed Jacob's name to Israel and renewed the promise given through Abraham and Isaac. Jacob would prevail and become mighty.

The next morning, the two brothers met. Jacob bowed seven times and Esau embraced him.

Jacob built an altar in Shechem and ordered his household to give up their idols, for he had seen the face of God and had been reconciled to his brother. Whether his instruction referred to the images Rachel took or to other private gods members of his large household may have treasured is not clear.

They continued on past the cities of Canaan and no one pursued them. At Beth-el, Jacob built another altar and received a second renewal of God's promise.

As they departed, Rachel started labor with her second child. It was a hard labor, but her nurse encouraged her, saying, "Fear not; thou shalt have this son also." Dying, Rachel looked on her son and named him Benoni, meaning "child of my sorrow," a name Jacob later changed to Benjamin. Rachel was buried at Bethlehem.

Rachel had ached for children, saying that she would die without them, and she died giving birth. Jacob had sworn to Laban that whoever had stolen his gods would not live, and his words proved prophetic. Yet even that circumstance failed to mar his romantic illusion of this woman. He went on to rise above counting sheep and cattle, overcoming the schemes of his youth to become a great man, a seer and a patriarch. Yet years later, when Pharaoh asked his age, he gave it as one hundred and thirty years, with the observation that, "few and evil have been the days of my life." He had prosperity, a large family, and a son who was eminent in Egypt; but Rachel's shadow touched all. For her alone he had labored, and he had lost her.

There is no indication that following Rachel's death Jacob transferred his affections to Leah. Quite the opposite was true; he doted on Rachel's sons to the point of creating divisions in the family. On his own deathbed, he recalled burying Rachel with a vivid poignancy that transcended the years. Yet he made Joseph promise to bury him in the tomb of Abraham and Sarah—in the tomb where he had buried Leah. So perhaps, although the flame had never burned hot, his heart had grown fond of her.

What Leah lacked in beauty, she made up in loyalty to Jacob. She was a good mother to their children. The scriptures state repeatedly that God heard and favored her. Through her son Levi passed the priesthood; through her son Judah came the Messiah. But Bilhah, Rachel's maid, wrested the birthright from Leah's firstborn in a strangely ironic fashion reminiscent of Jacob's history. Reuben, Leah's eldest son, lay with Bilhah, and their sin became known. Therefore the first son's birthright was given to Joseph.

Rachel was no intellect like Rebekah. She was not religious like Sarah. A great many of her recorded remarks are either petty or petulant. Yet despite such vacuity, she retained an absolute hold on her husband. We can only conclude that she must have possessed many endearing charms lost to the text. Perhaps some suggestion of her manners are echoed in the gentle virtues of Joseph, the child born of her and Jacob's great love. To her credit is the fact that her courtship was followed by complete fidelity. She, too, waited seven years for her marriage.

Beauty, more than once, has turned the course of history. But beauty alone doesn't produce the enduring adoration that Rachel inspired. Ten centuries after her death, the prophet Jeremiah spoke of Rachel weeping for her children. He was referring to the Ephraimites going into exile and prophesying the slaughter of the babes at Christ's birth. Seventeen centuries after Rachel's death, Matthew wrote of her weeping, comfortless, in fulfillment of that prophecy. In the book of Ruth, Rachel is honored (with Leah) as one who "did build the house of Israel." What better epitaph?

Scripture references:

Rachel Genesis 29-31; 33:1-7; 35:16-26; 44:20, 27; 46:19-25; 48:7; Ruth 4:11; 1 Samuel 10:2; Jeremiah 31:15; Matthew 2:18; 2 Nephi 3:1

Leah Genesis 29; 30; 31; 33:1-7, 34:1; 35:23-26; 46:15-18; 49:31; Ruth 4:11

Bilhah Genesis 29:29; 30:3-7, 35:22-25; 37:2; 46:25; 1 Chronicles 4:29; 7:13

Zilpah Genesis 29:24; 30:9-10; 35-26; 37:2; 46:18
