Behind every great man, the old saying goes, stand two great women—his wife and his mother. In Moses' case, there were at least five, possibly seven. There were Shiphrah and Puah, the midwives of Pharaoh; Jochebed, his mother; Miriam, his sister; Pharaoh's daughter; Zipporah, his wife; and the Ethiopian woman Moses married later. To these women Moses was indebted for his life, his education, and his final vindication as a prophet. From them he learned the need for a family-centered legal system and the power of nonviolent resistance.

Moses did not arm the Hebrews and fight his way out of Egypt, which was what Pharaoh feared. Instead, he went to Pharaoh and demanded that his people be freed. Then he made things difficult enough so that Pharaoh had no other choice. Pharaoh's midwives had been giving him similar options for years.

The Israelites had "increased until Egypt was filled with them." That description is supported by statistics. Joseph brought seventy of his family down to Egypt; six hundred thousand left in the Exodus. The Israelites had averaged a doubling of their numbers every fifteen years.

Then a king arose over Egypt who no longer remembered Joseph. He observed to his people that the Israelites outnumbered them and that they must "deal wisely with them" or they would continue to multiply and eventually rise up against their captors. "Dealing wisely" meant that the Egyptians worked the Israelites harder. Still the Israelites kept multiplying.

Excessive forced labor having failed, the king of Egypt called in his Hebrew midwives, Shiphrah and Puah, and gave instructions: 'When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women. . . ; if it be a son, ye shall kill him; but if it be a daughter, then she shall live."

The idea was good politics. The Israelites were no longer a free people. They wanted to leave Egypt and could not. Still they were "too mighty" for the Egyptians, and they were multiplying. The Pharaoh might have let them go before they became involved in a war, but that was not politically expedient. The Israelites were a valuable property. So he sought to reduce their population to female laborers—noncombatants.

How did Shiphrah and Puah respond to this request? They said nothing, and they did nothing. We are told that they "feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the men children alive."

Pharaoh must have considered Shiphrah and Puah cowardly, corrupt, or both to have entrusted the execution of his policy to relatives of its victims. Perhaps they had cultivated such a reputation among the Egyptians. But their deceptions could not go unnoticed indefinitely, for new male children among the Hebrews would not be overlooked.

In time, Pharaoh called for the midwives and asked them to account. What could they answer? In my opinion, Shiphrah and Puah gave Pharaoh one of the cheekiest excuses ever offered a baffled government leader by a pair of professional saboteurs. They explained that "the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women; for they are lively, and are delivered ere the midwives come in unto them." And Pharaoh believed them! He kept the midwives in their office, and we are told that "God dealt well with the midwives: and the people multiplied."

Pharaoh was forced to take more drastic measures. No longer attempting to disguise his policies, he hired reliable assassins and issued an edict: "Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive." Until then, the Shiphrahs and Puahs of the Hebrew nation had circumvented the worst of Pharaoh's plans. Now it would take more heroic resistance. Israel's deliverer had been born—and must be spared.

Moses' mother, Jochebed, was the daughter of a Levite and also the wife of a Levite. She was a worthy woman, steeped in the faith. Out of her home would come Miriam, the prophetess; Aaron, the priesthood founder; and Moses, the great lawgiver. But first she had to save the child. Aaron, older, had been saved by the midwives' stalling tactics. Moses, however, came under the death edict.

With a mother's faith that God had appointed some mission for her son, Jochebed hid him three months. She must have known from the start that her task would be ever more difficult. When the increasing age and size of the child rendered his concealment no longer possible, she undertook a more desperate plan.

Out of necessity, Jochebed coupled her faith with careful planning. She made a cradle of plaited reeds and waterproofed it with slime and pitch. Then, with a trembling but trusting spirit, she committed the little boat to the river at precisely the spot where she knew the daughter of Pharaoh bathed. I imagine that she herself dared not guard the basket, lest she draw the attention of cruel eyes. But little Miriam, about seven years old, playing among the tall reeds, could watch without attracting notice.

At her usual hour, Pharaoh's daughter came to the river to wash herself; seeing the ark, she sent her maid to fetch it. Awed at the beauty of the baby, she claimed him.

Miriam, perhaps having rehearsed the words, stepped forward and asked, "Shall I go and call a nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?" The compassionate, gentle character of the tyrant's daughter may have been known to the Hebrews, for surely Jochebed had some hope that her plan would succeed. Pharaoh's daughter said, "Go."

So it was that Jochebed came to care for her own son as a reward. But like Shiphrah and Puah, her duty lay in a higher authority. She, too, feared God more than she feared Pharaoh. And she faced a challenge greater than the Pharaoh's edict. Her son, she knew, must not only receive the necessary nourishment from her bosom, but must learn of God, that he might not be lost to the idolatry of the Egyptian court. The scriptures tell less of how Jochebed accomplished that task than of how she made the waterproof cradle, but certainly it was with the same deliberate care.

Of Moses' youth we know nothing except that he "was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians." (Acts 7:22.) We also know that by the time he reached manhood, he identified so closely and had such strong feelings of loyalty for his own people that he killed an Egyptian whom he saw beating an Israelite. He did not learn that from Pharaoh's daughter or in the schools at Heliopolis. His mother had succeeded in educating him as a loyal Israelite.

Yet we must give Pharaoh's daughter her due. She could not have looked upon the child as merely a delightful plaything. In saving him, she defied her father's decree. If she had had enemies at court, they would have used that against her. She may even have risked her own life. Time and time again, she must have shielded Moses from envy and hostility. The officers of Pharaoh's court would have had no love for an adopted "royal" Hebrew. Like Jochebed, she seems never to have lost faith in the child. The education she gave him proved provident in shaping the character of Israel's great lawgiver. Later, though Moses refused to be associated with Pharaoh's court or to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, he kept the name she gave him: "Moses"—drawn from the water.

After killing the Egyptian, Moses fled Egypt and went to Midian, where he met the seven daughters of Jethro. They were tending their father's sheep and attempted to bring them to the well where Moses had stopped to rest, but other shepherds kept chasing their animals away. Moses defended them. They told their father of the incident, and he offered Moses the hospitality of his home.

Zipporah was the oldest of Jethro's daughters. Her marriage to Moses took place shortly after the incident at the well. Missing is the romantic wooing that accompanied Isaac and Jacob's taking of their wives. The rest of Zipporah's story seems to bear out the fact that she was not the great soulmate and companion that Sarah, Rebekah, or Rachel were to their husbands. She bore Moses two sons, Gershom and Eliezer, but she seems not to have had a sense of his mission.

Forty years later, Moses started the journey back to Egypt. With his wife, his sons, an ass, and a walking stick, he headed out across the desert, a humble man traveling toward his destiny. The narrative is obscure and apparently incomplete, but Moses seems to have been troubled because his wife, a Midianite, had refused to allow the circumcision of their sons—or at least of their younger son. Now Moses, called by God to the leadership of his people, was anguished because he had neglected this sacred duty. They halted at an inn for the night and Moses became seriously ill.

Both he and Zipporah saw the illness as a sign of divine displeasure and became conscience-stricken over the fact that they had profaned God's covenant. Zipporah yielded. Moses was too weak to hold a knife, so she seized a piece of flint and circumcised her son. Taking the severed foreskin and throwing it down before Moses, she cried, "Surely a bloody husband art thou to me."

When Moses regained his health, he went on to Egypt, but he may have sent Zipporah and his sons back to his father-in-law, for she is next mentioned in an incident in the desert, after the Exodus, when Jethro came out to see Moses, bringing his wife and sons to him. Moses received them graciously, and Jethro gave his overburdened son-in-law some much-needed advice. Nothing more is said of Zipporah. A strong woman of some temper, her legacy to her sons and her husband does not seem to have been a spiritual one, though her sons and grandsons became great leaders.

Miriam had a stronger influence on Moses. From the time she first appears in scripture as the fearless, self-possessed little girl proposing to the Pharaoh's daughter that she get a wet nurse for the newly-discovered infant, her character is evident. We hear nothing of her while Moses is growing up in Pharaoh's house, though it seems probable that she shared some of the same patronage, for when she reappears in the text, she is well-educated.

We know nothing of her life during the forty years Moses was in Midian. Josephus records that Miriam became the wife of Hur, a man who was later closely associated with Moses. (Exodus 24:14.) That connection would identify her as the grandmother of Belzaleel, the artist who worked on the construction of the Tabernacle. (Exodus 31:2.) Likely she lived a full life, fully involved with her people during their long oppression, for while there is no mention of her during Moses' confrontation with the Pharaoh, she emerges immediately afterward as a leader of accepted stature.

After the Israelites escaped the Egyptians through the Red Sea, Moses led a celebration of thanksgiving. According to the scriptures, "Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel [a tambourine] in her hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and dances," singing one of the oldest and most splendid national anthems, which begins "Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea." (Exodus 15:21.) Miriam may have composed the words. "Prophetess" was sometimes used to indicate "poetess," a woman extolling God through ecstatic song. Whether she wrote the poem or not, that joining of Moses and Miriam in the great celebration was to be indicative of women's stature under the laws of the new Hebrew nation.

Besides unitedly leading the devotions on that festive occasion, Miriam supported her brother throughout the formation of the national code. Acknowledging her contribution, the prophet Micah wrote, "I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, . . . I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam." (Micah 6:4.)

Moses envisioned peaceful communities of landholding families and framed laws to foster that ideal, greatly benefiting the women of that day. Wives were no longer property to be bought or sold, and men could not hold women servants for gratification without assuming the obligations of a husband. The commandment "Honour thy father and thy mother" elevated motherhood, making matriarchs equally honored and obeyed with patriarchs.

Women stood equal before the law in other ways. Most notably, in contrast to Syrian and Mesopotamian laws, the Mosiac code assessed penalties based on the injury without regard to the sex of the injured party. While Moses is best known as the "eye for an eye" lawgiver, on more than one occasion he counseled husbands against actions that might turn their wives' love from them and often gave a sympathetic ear to women who sought judgments from him, as in the case of the daughters of Zelophehad.

When Moses divided the land of Canaan, he gave it to patriarchs within tribes. That caused consternation to the five orphaned daughters of Zelophehad: Mahlah, Noah, Haglah, Milcah and Tirzah. Their father, a member of the tribe of Manasseh, had died in the wilderness; therefore, they would have no inheritance unless they were allowed claim to their father's portion. They went to Moses pleading their case. Moses asked God, and God declared, "The daughters of Zelophehad speak right: thou shalt surely give them a possession." Moses gave the daughters of Zelophehad land with their brethren and adjusted the law to allow for such circumstances.

Miriam is thought to have had some influence in the framing of Israel's legal system. Israelite women were active in all aspects of their desert life, including the central and most sacred, the construction of the tabernacle. Women spun and dyed cloth for the tabernacle until they had to be restrained, for they had made more than could be used. (See Exodus 35:22, 25-26, 29; 36:6-7.) Significantly, Moses praised the women more for their attitude than their gift, describing them as "willing hearted." On another occasion they surrendered their most prized possessions, their polished brass mirrors, to adorn the tabernacle, and Moses credited them publicly for their sacrifice. (See Exodus 38:8.) Did Miriam lead the women in those activities?

Whatever Miriam's individual accomplishments may have been, two things are dear. First, the Israelites considered her a leader worthy of their greatest honor; and second, she was subject to human failings. As is so often the case, her spiritual fall came in an area that might have seemed the least likely: she spoke against her brother Moses. More than that, she twisted her great talent of leadership into a knot of jealousy and drew her brother Aaron after her.

The specifics are not entirely clear, but the text seems to indicate that Moses married a second time, or that Moses may have married several times (see Doctrine and Covenants 132:38). In either case, Miriam and Aaron objected to this particular marriage on patriotic grounds because Moses took a foreign woman, a dark-skinned Ethiopian. But the fault Miriam found in the Ethiopian woman was not as grievous as the bitterness rankling in her own soul until she found both the office and the marriage of her brother equally irksome. With Aaron she publicly called the leadership of Moses into question, saying, "Hath the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? hath he not spoken also by us?"

Miriam and Aaron aspired to joint usurpation of the state power. But the Lord heard them, descended in a pillar of cloud, and stood at the door of the tabernacle. Speaking out of the pillar, God called for Aaron and Miriam and declared: "Hear now my words: If there be a prophet among you, I the Lord will make myself known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream. My servant Moses . . . is faithful in all mine house. With him will I speak mouth to mouth."

When the cloud lifted, Miriam was leprous, white as snow. Aaron, seeing her condition, pleaded with Moses on her behalf and Moses entreated the Lord. The Lord commanded that she be shut out of the camp for seven days.

No greater evidence of the high position held by this woman can be found than in the fact that the whole camp of Israel stood still, halted in its march, for seven days while she suffered this terrible rebuke. The scriptures state that "the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again."

I wonder about Moses' new wife during that week. Did she feel some pang at the division her marriage had caused between her husband and his family? Did she worry that he might be required to assume the full responsibility of leadership alone? Did she pray for her sister-in-law?

And what did Miriam struggle with? The leprosy? Or did she tremble with the knowledge that her crowning virtues had become her own excesses? Whatever the struggle, her chastisement had good effect. Miriam overcame her haughty spirit, and cleansed of her leprosy, she was forgiven by God and touched by her brother's love. Eschewing the temptation to wield power, she was restored. Aaron remained in his priestly office, and Miriam is subsequently mentioned as a prophetess.

These women who aided Moses are a colorfully mixed lot. Unlike women in legends and folklore of the same period, they appear human and real. They have faults and virtues, they struggle with problems. Overcoming their failings is their greatest achievement. Such realities testify that sacred script contains actual biographies. I can't generate any genuine sympathy for an Aphrodite, or an Isis, but I can comprehend the women who aided Moses. I feel empathy for them and love them as sisters, even though centuries separate us.

Scripture references:

Shiphrah and Puah Exodus 1:15-21

Jochebed Exodus 2:1-11; 6:20; Numbers 26:59; Hebrews 11:23

Pharaoh's daughter Exodus 2:5-10; Acts 7:21; Hebrews 11:24

Zipporah Exodus 2:21-22; 4:24-25; 18:1-6

Miriam Exodus 2:4-8; 15:1-21; Numbers 12:1-15; 20:1; 26:59; Deuteronomy 24:9; 1 Chronicles 6:3; Micah 6:4

The Ethiopian woman Numbers 12:1

Daughters of Zelophehad Numbers 26:33; 27:1; 36:2, 6-11; Joshua 17:3

Mosiac laws specifically mentioning women Exodus 20:10, 12, 17; 21:3-5, 7, 9-10, 15, 17, 20, 22, 26, 28-29, 31; 22:16-18, 22-24; 23:12; Leviticus 10:14; 12 (childbirth laws); 13:29-46; 15:18-33 (menstruation laws); 18:6-23; 19:3, 20, 29; 20:9-21, 27; 21:2-3, 7, 9, 11, 13-14; 22:12-13; 24:10-16; 25:6; 27:1-8; Numbers 5:2-3, 6, 11-31 (jealous husband laws); 6:2-8; 18:11, 19; 30:3-16 (women making vows); 36:6-11 (daughter's property rights); Deuteronomy 3:18-19; 5:14, 16, 21; 7:3; 12:12, 8; 13:6-11; 15:12; 16:11, 4; 17:2-7, 7; 18:10; 20:7; 21:10-21; 22:5, 13-24 (proving virginity), 28-30; 23:17; 24:1-5, 17-22 (widows gleaning fields); 25:5-12 (widow to marry husband's brother); 26:12-15; 27:16, 19-20, 22-23
