Six women are presented in scripture as prophetesses. In addition to Miriam, the sister of Moses, discussed in the last chapter, Huldah, Anna, Isaiah's wife, Ezekiel's wife, and Deborah are all called by that title. In the cultures surrounding the Israelite nation—the Canaanites, the Egyptians, and the Greeks, for example—certain women were routinely dedicated to the religious vocation. What is unique about biblical prophetesses is that they were all wives and mothers. No vestal virgins removed from the fray of life, these sacred women sprang from the bosoms of their families, citing their domestic accomplishments as one of the credentials fitting them for religious life: "I, Deborah, arose a mother in Israel."

After Miriam, Huldah is the next prophetess named in scripture. Ironically, her time is best described in the Book of Mormon. (See I Nephi 1:4.) Nephi speaks of many prophets prophesying that the great city of Jerusalem would be destroyed. We know from his account that his father Lehi was one; Jeremiah was another. Jeremiah, in turn, names Uriah. But none of these prophets are mentioned in the historical accounts of that day (the books of Kings and Chronicles), with one exception: Huldah.

She was the wife of Shallem; her family were the keepers of the king's wardrobe. In addition to those responsibilities, Huldah regularly received petitioners and gave counsel to those desiring to inquire of Jehovah.

While renovating the temple, the high priest of King Josiah found a manuscript containing religious law. Wondering about its authenticity, he read parts of it to the king. Being disquieted by the message contained in the writings, the king sent both his high priest and his chief scribe to ask Huldah if the manuscript truly contained the word of God. (Note that he did not request that she appear before him, but that he respectfully went to her for advice.)

Questioned as a prophetess, Huldah answered as a prophetess. She attested to the authenticity of the scroll, part of which is found in Deuteronomy, and went on to prophesy, in the name of God, that Jerusalem would be destroyed because the people had forgotten and disobeyed the laws contained in that manuscript. Her personal message to the king was kinder. Because he had humbled himself in the sight of God, he was promised that he would be gathered to his fathers before her prophecy came to pass.

King Josiah was sufficiently impressed to act upon Huldah's message. He had the newly discovered book of law read publicly. He then destroyed the shrines of the heathen gods, reinstated the Levites, and made a personal covenant to keep the commandments. He had been a righteous observer of the ordinances before, but Huldah's prophecy impelled him to assume religious leadership of the nation. Shortly after King Josiah's death, the remainder of her prophecy was fulfilled.

Isaiah's wife and Ezekiel's wife are described as prophetesses, but the title may have been only honorary, distinguishing them as wives of prophets. Nevertheless, each was supportive, even essential to her husband's work.

Isaiah and his wife were not left to decide the names of their children, for God had determined that what he proposed for Israel should ring in their names. They were called "Hasten the Spoil" and "A Remnant Returns." Indeed, what a mother names her children is heard by many ears.

Ezekiel and his wife were particularly close. When she died suddenly, God forbade Ezekiel to mourn. Restraining his tears as a sign to Israel, he set out to warn the people of the coming destruction of Jerusalem, telling them that they would lose their loved ones and be forbidden to mourn by their conquerors.

The title of prophetess continues into the New Testament. In the temple at Jerusalem, Anna proclaimed Mary and Joseph's babe to be the Christ. An aged widow, Anna is described as never departing from the temple but serving God continually day and night. Though the scriptures state precisely her lineage and her age, it is the youthfulness of her spirituality that strikes me most profoundly. Prophets and prophetesses are privileged to know the future, and Anna was young and vital in her hope. She exuberantly confessed the Christ, recommending him to all who sought redemption. Her witness was added to that of Simeon, who had blessed the babe, of the angels who sang at Christ's birth, and of the shepherds who had come to see him.

By all accounts, the best known prophetess is Deborah. She assumed leadership of Israel's military, judicial, and religious institutions at a crucial time and literally saved the young nation from sinking into oblivion. The Israelites, under Joshua, had forced their way into Canaan but had not gained full control of the country, and many years following that initial conquest were marked by skirmishes and an ebbing of national identity. The scriptures point out that because the Israelites were in danger of merging with the surrounding heathen tribes, God allowed the king of Canaan to afflict them, to demand tribute and to scourge them with raids led by his great general Sisera. During this period of oppression, Deborah served as Israel's judge.

It is entirely in keeping with the character of Mosaic institutions that the nation's chief magistrate was a woman. Deborah's appointment is announced in scripture rather matter-of-factly, and she is portrayed as an inspired judge who is well respected. The palm tree in front of her house, where she sits to give counsel, is noted as a national landmark. When she sends for the leader of the armies, he comes, listens, and obeys.

Of her personal life, less is said. It is recorded that she is the wife of Lapidoth, and she identifies herself as a mother. Her accomplishments cover a wide spectrum. In addition to being a wife, a mother, a judge, and a prophetess, she wrote poetry. Her verse ranks today as some of the finest recorded, whether read in the original Hebrew or in translation. From her poetry we know she was gentle, introspective, and intellectual.

When her nation was disheartened, its leadership faltering, Deborah summoned Israel's most capable military leader from his home in Kedesh. She had come to know it was God's will that Israel be set free—not simply that the next battle be won that they might have a few months' respite from their oppressors. The nation was to be truly liberated. She believed it could be done, but it did not occur to her to actually lead the rebellion. Instead, she sent for the most likely man, Barak, and told him that if he would raise an army of ten thousand, she would promise him, as God's mouthpiece, that he would be victorious.

Barak answered, "If thou wilt go with me, then I go; but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go." Some interpret that answer to mean that he was afraid. I think not. Rather, I believe that Barak sensed the spiritual insight Deborah possessed and wanted her with him and his army. I think his answer shows him to be a man of supreme moral courage. Without a quibble, he would raise an army; but he knew what he lacked, and he knew that Deborah, a woman, possessed what was needed.

Deborah agreed to go but prophesied that if she went, the honor of the victory would not be Barak's. The Lord would deliver the great general Sisera "into the hand of a woman." Barak likely thought she was referring to herself but respected her enough to accept her prediction.

Envision the army Deborah and Barak faced. According to Josephus, the Canaanites had three hundred thousand foot soldiers, ten thousand horsemen, and three thousand iron chariots. The whole of that army would not be used against an Israelite rebellion, but we know that at least nine hundred chariots were engaged. Against such odds Barak had raised a small army of tribesmen, tired of paying taxes to a distant overlord, led by a woman.

Of the battle itself, the Bible says only that the Lord "discomfited Sisera and all his chariots . . . so that Sisera lighted down off his chariot and fled away on his feet." Josephus describes in more detail how a sudden storm of rain and hail swept down upon Sisera from Mount Tabor, the Israelite's rallying place, and broke over the Canaanite army. The aim of the archers was deflected, and the horses were terrified, breaking free of the iron chariots and running amok among the foot soldiers. All were routed. Deborah's specific role in the battle is not described in either source. Likely she remained at the rear, her army's inspiration, not their swordsman.

That role fell to another woman, Jael. When Sisera was forced to flee on foot, he made straight for a friendly tribe of nomads called the Kenites. They were itinerant metal-smiths who doubtless had a hand in fashioning the Canaanite chariots. A man named Heber was leader of the tribe, but he was not present when Sisera arrived. In his place his wife, Jael, went out to meet Sisera, offered a kind and reassuring welcome, brought him milk and food—"a lordly dish," the scriptures say—and made him a bed. When Sisera asked her to watch at the tent door so that no one would come upon him unawares, she agreed that she would.

Why Jael chose to side with the Israelites is never revealed. Neither is her nationality; she is simply called "the wife of Heber, the Kenite." She may have been an Israelite who had married outside her own race, or she might have been captured in a raid and given to Heber as a prize. She may simply have been tired of the bloodshed, the constant plundering by Sisera and his army. Whatever the reason, it was into her hands, a woman's, as Deborah had prophesied, that Sisera was delivered, and by her hand he died. In those days, everything connected with a tent was a woman's responsibility. Taking the instruments with which she was familiar, a tent peg in one hand and a hammer in the other, she stole toward Sisera. The skull of this great general was probably softer and less resistant than the dry soil where many, many times she had pitched her tent. She deftly pounded the nail through his temples into the ground.

How Jael explained her deed to her husband who had been Sisera's ally is not recounted. Likely having cast her lot with Barak's army, she fled with them. Unquestionably she broke the most honored of all nomadic obligations, the law of hospitality. The Kenites could not have tolerated such an infraction. But for the Israelites, her courage turned a temporary military victory into a stunning success. When Goliath fell, thirty thousand Philistines fell with him. So it was with Sisera's army.

Deborah returned to her home to extol Jael in one of the most beautiful poems ever written. Yet amid all the jubilant nationalism of Deborah's verse is a womanly introspection unknown in any other biblical literature. The woman who wrote those lines could no more have struck a fatal blow with a tent peg than Jael could have penned a sensitive poem. Yet together they had freed Israel.

In her poem, Deborah claims no glory for herself. She calls upon the princes, governors, and people of Israel to join with her in praising Jehovah. Her words describe how he poured down the rain and made the mountains tremble. The translators of the New English Bible render her poem as follows:

For the leaders, the leaders in Israel, for the people who answered the call, bless ye the Lord. Hear me, you kings; princes, give ear; I will sing, I will sing to the Lord. I will raise a psalm to the Lord the God of Israel. O Lord, at thy setting forth from Seir, when thou camest marching out of the plains of Edom, earth trembled; heaven quaked; the clouds streamed down in torrents. Mountains shook in fear before the Lord, the lord of Sinai, before the Lord, the God of Israel.

Reminding her people of their recent enslavement, Deborah recalls how they were compelled to travel in bypaths because the high roads were crowded with their foes. She then refers to herself as a mother in Israel.

In the days of Shamgar of Beth-anath, in the days of Jael, caravans plied no longer; men who had followed the high roads went round by devious paths. Champions there were none, none left in Israel, until I, Deborah, arose, arose, a mother in Israel.

With freer eloquence, she celebrates the deliverance of Israel, giving praise to patriots and casting arrows of satire on the cowardly. The tribe of Reuben, she asserts, never got around to more than talking.

They chose new gods, they consorted with demons. Not a shield, not a lance was to be seen in the forty thousand of Israel. Be proud at heart, you marshals of Israel; you among the people that answered the call, bless ye the Lord. You that ride your tawny she-asses, that sit on saddle-cloths, and you that take the road afoot, ponder this well. Hark, the sound of the players striking up in the places where the women draw water! It is the victories of the Lord that they commemorate there, his triumphs as the champion of Israel. Down to the gates came the Lord's people: 'Rouse, rouse yourself, Deborah, rouse yourself, lead out the host. Up, Barak! Take prisoners in plenty, son of Abinoam.' Then down marched the column and its chieftains, the people of the Lord marched down like warriors, The men of Ephraim showed a brave front in the vale, crying, With you, Benjamin! Your clansmen are here!' From Machir down came the marshals, from Zebulun the bearers of the musterer's staff. Issachar joined with Deborah in the uprising, Issachar stood by Barak; down into the valley they rushed. But Reuben, he was split into factions, great were their heart-searchings. What made you linger by the cattle-pens to listen to the shrill calling of the shepherds? Gilead stayed beyond Jordan; and Dan, why did he tarry by the ships? Asher lingered by the sea-shore, by its creeks he stayed. The people of Zebulun risked their very lives, so did Naphtali on the heights of the battlefield.

She describes the battle, ending with a solemn prophetic curse.

Kings came, they fought; then fought the kings of Canaan at Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; no plunder of silver did they take. The stars fought from heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera. The Torrent of Kishon swept him away, the Torrent barred his flight, the Torrent of Kishon; march on in might, my soul! Then hammered the hooves of his horses, his chargers galloped, galloped away. A curse on Meroz, said the angel of the Lord; a curse, a curse on its inhabitants, because they brought no help to the Lord, no help to the Lord and the fighting men.

For Jael, she reserves blessings. The outrages committed against wives, mothers, and little children during twenty years of military oppression give energy to her words.

Blest above women be Jael, the wife of Heber the Kenite; blest above all women in the tents. He asked for water: she gave him milk, she offered him curds in a bowl fit for a chieftain. She stretched out her hand for the tent-peg, her right hand to hammer the weary. With the hammer she struck Sisera, she crushed his head; she struck and his brains ebbed out. At her feet he sank down, he fell, he lay; at her feet he sank down and fell. Where he sank down, there he fell, done to death.

Then with great tenderness she touches on the mother of the dead general, Sisera, suggesting the grief that might have fallen to the women of Israel except for the nail of Jael.

The mother of Sisera peered through the lattice, through the window she peered and shrilly cried, 'Why are his chariots so long coming? Why is the clatter of his chariots so long delayed? The wisest of her princesses answered her, yes, she found her own answer: 'They must be finding spoil, taking their shares, a wench to each man, two wenches, booty of dyed stuffs for Sisera, booty of dyed stuffs, dyed stuff, and striped, two lengths of striped stuff— to grace the victor's neck.'

The song ends with a jubilant supplication to Jehovah.

So perish all thine enemies, O Lord; but let all who love thee be like the sun rising in strength.

When the song ends, so does all scriptural mention of Deborah. The efficacy of Israel's woman judge and prophetess is summarized in a single telling phrase: "The land was at rest for forty years."

But what of the title "prophetess"? In my studies, I have found it to be a term applied variously to wives of prophets, poetesses, and a few women who possessed the power to prophesy, who declared that they spoke God's message, and whose prophecies were fulfilled. Priesthood ordination is not a prerequisite for possessing this gift. Prophecies can be spoken by men and women, adults and children. Moses outlined in detail how a woman could take upon herself the vows of a Nazarite. (See Numbers 6:2-8.) Luke, in the book of Acts, tells of four young girls who prophesied. (See Acts 21:19.) And Jesus, visiting the Nephites, taught their children and opened their mouths. Babes spoke things too wondrous to be recorded. (See 3 Nephi 26:14.) The prophet Joel looked forward to a day when "your sons and your daughters shall prophesy" (Joel 2:28), a promise the angel Moroni repeated to Joseph Smith (see Joseph Smith 2:41 ). Again speaking to Joseph Smith, the Lord emphasized in his explanation of Malachi that things formerly hidden from the wise would be revealed to babes and sucklings in this dispensation. (See Doctrine and Covenants 128:18.)

Prophecy is more than simply foretelling the future. Prophets and prophetesses are more than mere mouthpieces. When God transmits his word, he endows his messengers with a high degree of independence. Prophets and prophetesses stamp their own personalities and perceptions on the messages they transmit. They are, first and foremost, individuals. The women in this chapter illustrate that concept amply. Miriam was a charismatic leader who supported and counseled her brother. Anna testified of Christ. Deborah received revelation in her leadership responsibilities. Huldah served as a spiritual guide, speaking God's will.

Two other women in scripture are associated with this title: Noadiah, a false prophetess, and Jezebel, who assumed the title unrighteously.

Prophecy is one of the spiritual gifts all worthy members of the Church have been repeatedly exhorted to seek. (See 1 Corinthians 12:10; 14:39; Doctrine and Covenants 46:22; Omni 1:25; Moroni 10:13.)

Scripture references:

Huldah 2 Kings 22:14-20; 2 Chronicles 34:22-28

Anna Luke 2:36-38

Isaiah's wife Isaiah 8:3

Ezekiel's wife Ezekiel 24:16-18

Deborah Judges 4:4-14; 5:1-31

Jael Judges 4:17-22; 5:6-24

Noadiah, the false prophetess Nehemiah 6:14

Four young girls who prophesied Acts 21:9

Scriptural poetry written by women Miriam's Anthem, Exodus 15:21 (and possibly Song of Moses, Exodus 15:1-19); Deborah's Hymn, Judges 5; Hannah's Song, 1 Samuel 2:2-10; Mary's Magnificat, Luke 1:46-55
