The romantic elements of the story come immediately to mind: a young widow marries a wealthy kinsman and lives happily ever after. The tale would indeed be trite, except that the story of Ruth and Naomi centers not on the marriage, but on the sincere affections shared by the two women. While that is a common enough relationship in everyday life, it is one that has been largely ignored in literature—an unfortunate oversight, since the complexities of a woman's character are determined not so much by how or who she marries as by how she comes to view herself and who she chooses as role models. In Ruth's case, the model was her mother-in-law, Naomi.

In a time of economic distress, Naomi and her family were forced to flee their home in Bethlehem and relocate in a foreign land, Moab. The distance between Moab and Israel is not great—a little more than thirty miles. Distance in the scriptures, however, is not always measured from one place to another but by one's state of conversion to one's god. Moab, a nation of idolaters, was, by that standard, a far country.

Naomi and her husband, Elimelech, must have agonized over their decision. They would be faced with the challenge of rearing their sons in a strange place, far from the good influence of friends and family. Surely they considered the possibility that their sons would marry women of Moab. In the end, however, they may have had no choice.

They went to Moab, Naomi's husband died, and her sons did marry Moabite women. Nevertheless, because of Naomi's influence, the family lived together happily for ten years. Likely the Moabite girls, married outside their tribes, looked to Naomi for a steady, reassuring model in circumstances where they felt unsure. Then tragedy struck again: both of Naomi's sons died.

It is to Naomi's credit that at this point she didn't expect anything from her daughters-in-law. She was a practical woman looking at a serious reduction in her prosperity and seems to have had no thought of inspiring further devotion in her daughters-in-law. Acknowledging the hand of the Lord in both the good and the bad, she grieved, not for herself, but because she had nothing more to give them. She determined to go home to her own people and suggested that they return to their own mothers' houses. Her daughters-inlaw were young; if they were not burdened with an old woman, they might find husbands again in their own land.

At this point, my heart goes out to Naomi. I can understand how she must have yearned for old friends, for the family she had left behind, for the familiar places of her childhood. Still, I think she made a mistake, the mistake many of us make in times of trouble. She failed to realize how badly her daughters-in-law needed to help her. Naomi, steadfast in the belief that everything depended on her, discouraged them until one turned back. Ruth, however, refused to abandon the older woman.

Ruth is never physically described in scripture. What we know about her are her inner qualities. I admire most her sensitivity. She had enough inner reserves to show Naomi great tenderness, even while she grieved for her own dead husband. She understood Naomi's need to return to her home, and she didn't beg Naomi to remain in Moab. Neither did she insist on caring for her, thereby making her dependent. It was not in her nature to say something like "Oh, well, if you have to go, take this blanket and extra bundle of food and don't forget to write," thereby burdening her mother-in-law with material things and obligations. More importantly, she didn't blame herself for the things she couldn't do, the things beyond her means or ability. Ruth did what she could. She walked beside Naomi.

That was difficult enough, and Naomi hardly made it any easier. Her mind set, she was doggedly stubborn. Even after Ruth declared that she would leave her home, her people, and her gods, Naomi "left speaking unto her." She may have resented Ruth's insistence. After all, now there were two of them—two useless widows seeking hospitality of Naomi's kin. An awkward situation had been made worse.

Naomi had one other fault. She describes herself as coming out of Israel "full, " meaning she had a husband and two sons, and going back "empty," suggesting that she counted Ruth as less. Ruth had to have noticed that, but overlooked those faults because of her mighty love for her mother-in-law and the fact that she had embraced the true god.

Ruth may have nominally accepted the God of Israel at her marriage, but her conversion had deepened. When it came time to decide, she cast herself forever on the side of her husband's country, his people, his mother, and his God. Her words have become immortal: "Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following after thee: for wither thou goest, I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God."

Traveling together, Ruth and Naomi journeyed to Bethlehem. Their thoughts may have been quite different—Naomi recalling her youth, Ruth noticing the novelty, the strangeness of the land with a mixture of wonder and apprehension. Arriving home, Naomi found many changes. People that she knew had moved, and the famine that had driven her family out had taken its toll on others. But some old friends remained, and they marked the difference in her, asking, "Is this Naomi?" She answered, "Call me not Naomi, call me Mara [meaning bitter]."

Poverty-stricken though she was, Naomi did not rush to her husband's wealthy kinsmen, introduce herself, and expect to be taken in. There were other ways to provide for themselves. She and Ruth arrived in the fall while the harvest was being gathered. Gleaning, according to the Mosaic law, was the privilege of the poor. (See Deuteronomy 24:17-22.) Landowners were forbidden to harvest the corners or to pick up what fell to the ground. But gleaning was hard work, not suited for an older woman. Ruth left Naomi and went to the fields by herself.

The people of Bethlehem noticed her. When she came to her rich kinsman's field, he expressed an interest in her, saying: "It hath fully been shewed me, all that thou hast done unto thy mother-in-law since the death of thine husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and art 'come unto a people which thou knewest not heretofore."

Then secretly he ordered his servants to let more barley fall, that Ruth might have more to glean. His charity was offered in a way that would not injure the pride of the two widows, who had chosen to remain independent. Expecting no thanks, he hoped Ruth would never know he was helping her. But Naomi wasn't fooled; when Ruth returned with more than her usual gleanings, she asked, "Where hast thou gleaned today?" Ruth explained her encounter with Boaz, and Naomi expressed her thanks, saying, "Blessed be he of the Lord, who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead.

Time passed, and the barley and wheat harvest ended. Everything had been gathered in from the fields and the threshing began. Boaz continued to show more than ordinary interest in Ruth, inviting her to glean only in his field and to share the drink and food of his regular workers. He also took care to protect her from men who might take advantage of her situation. With all that, Naomi finally decided there might be something she could do for her daughter-in-law after all.

Because we know so little about the customs of that day, it is hard to judge whether Naomi's plan was bold or conventional. Unquestionably there was some risk. Boaz was a kinsman, and in ancient Israel, kinsmen had particular responsibilities toward their brothers' widows. (See Deuteronomy 25:5-10.) Naomi knew that. She also knew that Boaz was not her nearest kinsman, but that since he had shown an interest, he might seek to assume that responsibility if he were encouraged. Weighing everything carefully, she decided to instruct Ruth on how a woman could properly approach such a man and seek his protection in marriage.

Relying on Ruth to follow her instructions explicitly, she told her to go to the threshingroom where Boaz would be sleeping to guard his grain from thieves. Washed and dressed in her finest, she was to wait until he was asleep; then she was to uncover his feet and lie down beside him. There was nothing in those actions intended to compromise or entrap him, but merely an attempt to let him know that if he sought to marry the widow of his next of kin, the woman herself would find such an arrangement acceptable.

Ruth obeyed. Boaz was at first surprised, then delighted. He acknowledged both his obligation and Naomi's hand in the affair. Taking care for Ruth's reputation, he sent her away before dawn but not before he had given her six measures of barley, saying, "Go not empty unto thy mother-in-law."

Naomi received the news with such pleasure that we can almost hear her confiding to Ruth, "The man will not rest until he has finished the thing this day."

She was right. Boaz went before the elders of Bethlehem and challenged the nearer kinsmen to redeem the property and assume his obligations toward Ruth and her mother or to relinquish forever his rights in the matter. The nearer kinsman, while interested in the land, was not willing to accept responsibility for the women. As a confirmation, he loosened his shoe and gave it to Boaz, who then publicly declared his intentions.

The story's happy ending includes the marriage of Ruth and greater blessings than six measures of barley for Naomi. She had lost a husband and two sons; that loss could never be replaced. But the Lord had other blessings in store. Ruth bore a son, and as was the custom in those days, she gave the child to Naomi to care for. Now the same women of Bethlehem who had mourned with her sang and shouted with her, praising the Lord. They declared Ruth was better to Naomi than seven sons.

The child was named Obed. He grew to manhood and became the father of Jesse, who was the father of David. Several generations later, the Savior of the world was born to the house of David in that same city, Bethlehem.

The scriptures repeatedly stress Ruth's Moabite origins. She is presented as both the model daughter-in-law and a member of a shunned idolatrous race. Mosaic law expressly forbade Israelite men from marrying "foreign" women, though Moses himself married an Ethiopian. The concern was that such women would introduce the worship of nature gods; that in fact happened time and again throughout the history of Israel. What made Ruth exceptional was her conversion and devotion to the true God of her husband's people.

Ruth must have been aware of the Israelite attitude toward foreign women. Her faith had already been tried by the triple tragedy that had befallen her good family, all of which Naomi clearly attributed to her God. Her resolve must have been further tested with the drawing back of her sister-in-law, Orpah. In the face of such trials, Ruth chose decisively and forever in favor of her mother-in-law, her way of life, and her God. Her reward was to receive what she did not seek—a husband, wealth, children, and an inheritance among the chosen of Israel.

In the end, there is something appropriate in a Moabite woman's place in the genealogy of Jesus, who was the savior of all the world—every nation, kindred, tongue, and people. I find it even more appropriate that Ruth won that honor by her own faith, and not because of where she was born.

Scripture references:

Ruth Ruth; Matthew 1:5

Naomi Ruth

Orpah Ruth 1:4, 14
