Then he was an old man, Hannah's son visited the grandson of Ruth, interviewed the young men in his household, and anointed the youngest, David, king of Israel. This presents an interesting connection between the two women, for both at one time despaired of having any children. Ruth had lost her husband and, in traveling to a foreign land, had no way of knowing what the future held. Hannah, like the other barren women portrayed in scripture—Sarah, Rebekah, Rachel, and later Elisabeth—had nearly given up hope of ever conceiving. But Hannah, more than the others, epitomizes the desire for a child.

Childlessness to the ancient Israelites was a tragedy of far-reaching proportions. Israel, as the chosen people, expected to fulfill God's promise, and that meant the bearing and rearing of progeny. Feelings of desperation consumed the pious woman who remained childless. Her lament was not her failure to provide an heir, but that the root of God's people had dried up in her household. It was a condition interpreted by many to be a "shame," a sign of God's displeasure. Isaiah touched on that fear in creating the image of a forsaken, childless woman as he reflected on the destroyed city of Jerusalem. (See Isaiah 54:1-8; also 3 Nephi 22:1-8.) He might have been talking about Hannah, except that her story is almost wholly domestic—an illustration of intimate relationships, including the one between a woman and her God.

A man of the lineage of Ephraim named Elkanah had two wives, Hannah and Peninnah. Peninnah had children; Hannah had none. Every year the family traveled to Shiloh to worship. As part of the ceremonies, Elkanah gave a portion of the offering to Peninnah and a portion to all her sons and daughters. He gave Hannah a "worthy" portion, implying more generosity than was required. Still, because she had no children, her portion was less; it was a painful reminder of her barren condition.

On top of that, Peninnah taunted her. Her husband, seeing her reduced to tears and without appetite, sought to console her, saying, "Why weepest thou? . . . Am I not better to thee than ten sons?"

The scriptures do not say that Hannah was beautiful or gifted, only that her husband loved her. From that I infer that he loved her for herself, her gentle virtues being sufficient, and that it mattered not to him that she was barren. I also imagine that whenever he tried to comfort her, he fanned Peninnah's envy, making her unkind reproaches increase with each year as Hannah's hope diminished.

Caught in that vicious cycle, where could she turn? Hers was no trial of a day, a month, or a year. Each visit to Shiloh must have added to her despair. The very sight of all her fellow countrymen flocking to the observances with their many sons and daughters must have been a cause of great anguish, and the fact that her husband asked why she wept indicates that even he did not fully understand her sorrow. It also suggests that though grieved in spirit, Hannah was not one to rail against Peninnah. Had she told Elkanah of the continued provocations, she might have obtained some relief, but at the expense of alienating Peninnah from her husband and causing domestic strife. Such was not Hannah's character. She sought relief in the one place where it might be found. Taking the words of Moses to heart ("What nation is there . . . who hath God so nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things that we call upon him for?" [Deuteronomy 4:7]), she brought her sorrows to her Heavenly Father.

After the feast, Hannah went alone to the temple. (The place where the ark was kept was called the temple.) There on the steps, she knelt and poured out her soul, fervently weeping.

Her prayer confirms the purity of her character. She spoke from her heart. Before the Lord as before her husband, she did not demand help against the mockery of her rival. She prayed not that Peninnah's joy might be less, but only that she might be considered. Humbly calling herself a handmaid, she placed herself wholly in God's care and with bold confidence made a covenant: "O Lord of hosts, if thou wilt. . . give unto thine handmaid a man child, then I will give him unto the Lord all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon his head."

In that manner she vowed to consecrate her child to God as Samson's mother had and as John the Baptist's mother would, his uncut hair being a sign that he was so consecrated.

Even in God's house, she did not find sympathy and understanding. Eli, the high priest, sat by the post of the temple; seeing Hannah praying continually with some agitation, he thought she was drunk and reproved her.

Hannah's defense under his tactless criticism is as ingenuous as her prayer. "No, my lord," she answered. "I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have poured out my soul before the Lord."

Eli, without knowing her request, added his own prayer to hers and seemingly promised her new hope. "Go in peace," he said, "and the God of Israel grant thee thy petition."

Hannah went her way, and the scriptures add that "her countenance was no more sad." She worshipped with her husband again the next morning, finished the yearly observances, and went home. When her prayer was answered and she gave birth to a son, she named him Samuel, meaning "asked of the Lord."

When the time came again for Elkanah and his family to make their yearly offerings in Shiloh, Hannah asked to be excused, saying, "I will not go up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he may appear before the Lord, and there abide for ever." Her husband answered that she might do what seemed good to her.

The next verse states that when the child was weaned (from two to three years old), Hannah took him up with her to Shiloh along with three bullocks, some flour, and a bottle of wine. Then "they," meaning Hannah and her husband, slew a bullock and brought the child to Eli. Hannah explained to the high priest that she was the woman he had seen praying and that because the Lord had heard her supplication and granted her the child, she had come to lend the Lord her boy for as long as the child lived.

She had prayed and promised, and when her prayer was answered she quietly redeemed the promise. While the occasion must have been solemn, it was not sad. Hannah, whose vow was at first known only to herself and God, showed no sign of regret, no second thoughts. Before she left Samuel with Eli, this woman, who had prayed with such fervor in her moment of sorrow, offered a prayer of pure poetry in her moment of gratitude.

Hannah's song of thanksgiving distinguishes her as one of the great poets of the Bible. Her ability to express her spirituality in solemnly beautiful phrases evinces constant practice and marks her as a woman of more than modest artistic achievements.

She sang for those who had stumbled but were strengthened; those who were hungry but were fed; those who were barren but now fruitful; those who were low but now lifted up. What Christ would promise his disciples in the Beatitudes, Hannah already knew under the influence of the Holy Spirit.

She affirmed her faith in God, who kept the feet of the righteous on the right road, and offered her testimony of his strength, power, and glory, fully expecting that when the ends of the earth were judged, he would exalt his anointed.

There is no self-exaltation in her song. She doesn't suggest that it was because of any individual merit that her reproach was removed, or that the fervor of her prayer earned God's favor.

She and Elkanah left and returned to their home. Being human, Hannah must have missed her child, his prattle, his clinging attentiveness. How young Samuel was cared for at the temple, the story doesn't say. Other passages in the Bible mention an order of women who devoted themselves to the ministries of the temple; one of these was Anna, who "departed not from the temple, but served God with fasting and prayer night and day."

Whatever the arrangements for his physical care, Hannah must have continued to pray for her son. Evil times prevailed in Israel. Even the tabernacle at Shiloh had questionable caretakers. Eli, though a good man himself, had sons who "lay with the women that assembled at the door of the tabernacle." Knowing that, Hannah must have been concerned as to the effect their example would have on her child. Yet being wise and prudent, she did not inconvenience her whole family by moving to Shiloh to be nearer him. She trusted the Lord, knowing that without his blessing her own means would hardly suffice.

Hannah's trust was rewarded. God revealed himself to the boy Samuel while he was still young, choosing him as a prophet and a judge. Eli, at first slow to perceive the significance of the mysterious voice calling the child by name, accepted God's choice and appointed Samuel to wear the simple linen vest worn by the priests, called an ephod. Hannah, the scriptures say, made with her own hands a long coat of blue fabric for him to wear under the ephod. She brought him a new one each year, at the time of their annual sacrifices, to replace the one he had outgrown.

God blessed Hannah, as well. After Samuel, she had three additional sons and two daughters. More than anything, Hannah had desired a son, and when God gave her one, she gave him back. She did not consider that a sacrifice but a privilege, and she glorified the Lord who had considered her condition and lifted her up. The Lord, in turn, paid her back fivefold.

The story of Hannah illustrates more than one woman's desire for a child. There emerges from between the lines an interesting picture of domestic life a thousand years prior to Christ. The condition of married women among the Israelites during the time of the judges was relatively free and unrestrained. Hannah, after participating in the religious activities at Shiloh, without imparting her intentions to her husband or asking his consent, went unattended to the temple of the Lord. Had that been uncommon, Eli would have rebuked her presumption or requested that she send for her husband rather than bidding her to "go in peace." Had she not perfect freedom or at least sufficient assurance of her husband's confidence in her decision, she could not have promised the Lord what she had not the power to perform concerning the deposition of her child. In fact, Mosaic law provided a prescribed means by which women could make religious bonds (see Numbers 30:3-16), and Hannah's prayer perfectly illustrates such a pledge. Elkanah's acquiescence throughout shows the high esteem in which he held her. Hannah is credited with bringing the offerings, the bullocks, flour, and wine. She addressed Eli. She sang the song of thanksgiving.

On the day following Hannah's fervent prayer, she went with her husband to worship, suggesting that women as well as men entered the house of the Lord and joined in the services. That the law to attend the observances was binding only on males, possibly because of circumstances that might prevent females, particularly young mothers, from doing so, can be inferred from Hannah's tarrying at home until her child was weaned.

The important point is that Hannah did not think herself unworthy to approach the Lord directly with her problem. The law and the whole history of her people had abounded in God's invitations to pray and in his promises to answer. She went to the Lord because she knew he loved her. Her actions, though based on the traditions of her people, sprang from a deep personal faith. That, too, can be read between the lines.

Scripture references:

Hannah 1 Samuel 1; 2:1-21

Peninnah 1 Samuel 1:2, 4

Children promised to barren women Genesis 17:16-17; 21:1-3; Judges 13; 1 Samuel 1; 2 Kings 4:14-17; Isaiah 54:1-8; 3 Nephi 22:1-8
