It is romantically appealing to think that women who marry kings have everything and live happily ever after. The truth is more sobering. The life of a queen is complicated by politics, ambition, and court intrigue. She and her children often become pawns in affairs over which they have no control, the outcome of which can mean life or death. Add to that the jealousies of a large harem and numerous sons, all of whom are potential successors to the throne, and the situation becomes even more precarious. David, the second king of Israel, had so many wives, so many of whom faced personal perplexities, that I can't help thinking it was a hazard to be connected to him. Yet these women loved him greatly.

Michal was the first. She met David when he came to play his harp for her father, King Saul, who was suffering from depression and found the music soothing. David is described as being "ruddy," having "beautiful eyes" and being "goodly to look upon." He was an immediate court favorite, not only with Michal, but with her brother, Jonathan, and the king himself, until his jealousy was aroused.

The reward for killing Goliath was supposed to have been Michal's older sister Merab, but David counted being the son-in-law of the king no small matter, and King Saul, considering David a major threat, reneged on his promise and married Merab to another. By that time David was a hero among the people, and Saul's jealousy prompted him to find a way to have David killed. He learned of Michal's love and proposed to use her as a snare, seemingly never doubting that his paternal influence would outweigh his daughter's feelings.

As David was a poor man and could not pay the dowry a king expected for a daughter, Saul proposed that he would give Michal in marriage for the foreskins of a hundred slain Philistines. He expected David to die attempting to satisfy the pledge, but David surprised him. He delivered two hundred bloody foreskins and claimed his bride. That hardly made for an auspicious beginning to a long and peaceful marriage, and, as might be expected, trouble quickly followed.

Jonathan, Michal's brother, tried to foster a truce between David and Saul. David began playing his harp for the king again. Then one day, without warning, Saul threw a javelin and barely missed his son-in-law. David escaped the palace and fled to his own house, but the king sent assassins to overtake him. For Michal it was a tense situation. As long as the truce held, she had managed to keep her father's confidence; now she was forced to choose between her father and her husband. Her decision was complicated by the fact that her own safety was involved.

Michal chose David. She let him down through a window, and he escaped into the darkness while she stalled for time. She had her father's guards take word back that David was sick. Saul ordered that he be brought to him on his bed, so Michal placed one of the household gods in David's bed and covered it with bedclothes. When her deception was discovered, her father railed against her. Confronted with a raving madman, she offered the only defense left her. She said David had threatened to kill her if she didn't help him. Her father, willing to believe any villainy of his son-in-law, accepted her explanation and let her go.

According to the scriptures, Michal "loved David," but she was not to see him again for many years. She would hear that he had sold himself and his sword to Achish, king of Gath, Israel's hereditary enemy. She would learn, too, that he had married again twice—once to Ahinoam, a woman of Jezreel, and again to Abigail. It must have seemed to Michal that he had renounced both his country and his wife. That left her in a curious predicament. She was neither a maid, a wife, nor a widow. She was abandoned.

When her father gave her to another, probably as part of his plot to persecute David any way he could, she seems not to have objected. She went to live east of Jordan with a man named Phalti. The union was illegal, for David was still alive and in no way legally separated from her; but the scriptures indicate that Phalti cared for Michal a great deal.

By the time Saul died, David had acquired what for a man of his circumstances was a large harem. He had six wives, each of whom had borne him a son. Nevertheless, when Abner, the captain of Saul's army, arranged to help David become king, David made the restoration of Michal one of the conditions of the league. Clearly, having Saul's daughter for his wife made David's claim to the throne stronger. That likely was his primary motive. Though Michal loved him and had saved his life, he made no attempt to contact her during all his years as an outlaw. More than once, Jonathan had visited him in secret. David's third wife, Abigail, left her comfortable home to join him and his band of marauders. But there is no word of Michal until he suddenly demands her back as part of the treaty.

She came to Bahurim accompanied by her weeping husband, who was rudely dismissed by Abner. She joined David in Hebron as his first wife, a position of importance. But everything had changed. When he left her window, fleeing for his life, he had been a shepherd boy without a place to call his own, and she had been the daughter of the reigning king. Now the house of Saul was disgraced, hunted, nearly destroyed. If anything, she needed his protection. Time and experience change people. Those who come together after many years' separation are never the same. It is certain that both Michal and David had changed considerably over the years.

With Michal by his side, David ruled from Hebron for seven years. Then he moved his capital to Jerusalem and had the Ark of the Covenant brought up to the city that would bear his name. As he marched into the city at the head of thirty thousand chosen men of Israel, David stripped himself of his royal robes. Wearing only an ephod, he leaped and danced before the newly restored ark. As a musician and a poet, he was immensely susceptible to the significance of the moment. But Michal could not understand his religious zeal. She was embarrassed at what she considered undignified behavior from a king and its possible reflection on her. From that moment, the scriptures say, she "despised him in her heart."

When he returned home, she scorned him. David curtly justified himself, reminding her that he was making merry before the Lord, who had chosen him above her father and all her family. Then follows the phrase, "Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child unto the day of her death." Such a final statement probably indicates that David lived apart from her after their encounter.

Josephus says Michal returned to Phalti and bore him five children, but that seems politically unlikely after David made a point of demanding her as part of his ruling pact.

Most Bible scholars feel that Michal adopted and raised the five orphaned children of her sister Merab. If that is true, she lived to see her five nephews killed.

A famine came upon Israel as a way of reminding David that the actions of Saul had not yet been atoned. A reparation to the Gibeonites was still to be made. The Gibeonites demanded seven of Saul's immediate descendants. David, guided by the Lord, gave them two of Saul's remaining sons and his five grandsons by Merab. They were all hanged.

Michal lived her entire life at the whim of kings during a time when women and their children were often treated as chattel, being bargained for and bought as political expediency dictated. No wonder she grew bitter.

She had taken the initiative in loving the shepherd boy who played the fine music and fought glorious battles. She loved him despite her father's fits of madness and the danger to both their lives. But she could not love the king he became. Through circumstances largely beyond her control, she ended life as a hard-mouthed woman devoid of kin.

Abigail fared better, but only because she kept her wits about her. The scriptures describe her as a woman of beautiful form and good understanding. Her first husband, Nabal, is described as churlish and evil, a drunken wretch, unmanageable, stubborn, and ill-tempered. How Abigail came to be married to him can only be guessed. He was a wealthy man, and likely Abigail's father, in arranging the marriage, gave more thought to his son-in-law's resources than to his personal qualities. How long Abigail had been married to him when David came on the scene is also a matter of conjecture, but it was long enough that she had learned how to manage him in spite of himself.

It was sheep-shearing time, and many guests had gathered at Abigail and Nabal's for the festivities associated with that season. David, who had a band of six hundred men in the wilderness of Paran, sent ten soldiers to ask Nabal for a tribute of food. The future king of Israel, hiding from Saul, lived by levying protection money from the sheep farmers of the fertile plateau, most of whom were happy to pay and would have welcomed David's emissaries, especially inasmuch as David's request was polite and not exorbitant. But Nabal refused; his reply was both contemptuous and insulting.

No sooner had David's men gone than one of the servants told Abigail what had happened. He reminded her that David's request was just and went on to speak rather frankly about the master. Obviously the household had come to rely on Abigail's better judgment.

She lost no time making amends. With the safety of her household at stake, she didn't pause to debate the matter or even to inform her husband. She ordered the baking and packing of two hundred loaves of bread, and she had five sheep dressed and five measures of grain packed. She packed two skins of wine, one hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs. She sent the foodstuffs ahead, then mounted an ass and followed.

When she met David, he was headed toward her house, armed and determined to raze Nabal's entire establishment. Unafraid, she hastened toward him, alighted from her ass, and humbly interceded for her husband and her household. She sought to lessen Nabal's offense by attributing it not to malice but to folly. She admitted that her husband was a fool and begged David to accept the food and forgive the foolishness. Such folly, she insisted, made him unaccountable and not worthy of David's regard.

Her speech reveals her as a diplomat of the highest order. She makes her case without ever resorting to flattery or forgetting her own dignity. David was impressed, accepted the gifts, and turned back.

When Abigail got home, Nabal was still celebrating. She waited until the next morning, when he was sober, to tell him how near he had come to being slain by David and his men.

The scriptures say that "his heart died within him." Nabal may have been angry at the loss of his goods, the presumption of his wife, or her meddling in his affairs. Or he may simply have been enraged to think that David had bested him after all. Whatever the case, he was dead within ten days.

When David heard of Nabal's death, he praised God for taking revenge in his behalf. Then, after allowing a period of mourning, he sent messengers to ask Abigail to become his wife. Evidently the proposal pleased her, for she "hasted, and arose, and rode upon an ass" straight for his camp.

In marrying David, Abigail exchanged a sedentary life of wealth for that of an anxious wandering band of outlaws. Evidently she considered David's love ample compensation, especially when compared to the wearying annoyances of Nabal's temper. Yet the dangers were real.

Shortly before or just after marrying Abigail, David also married Ahinoam of Jezreel. Then both of these women were captured by the Amalekites, an incident that caused David's followers to consider stoning him. But he inquired of the Lord and was encouraged to pursue his enemies. He recovered the women unharmed.

Abigail lived with David at Gath and was with him at Hebron when he was crowned king. She gave him a son named Chileab or Daniel. Nothing further is recorded concerning her or her son. One thing can perhaps be inferred from that omission. Although her son had a more viable claim to the throne than either Adonijah or Solomon, Abigail made no move to assert it. She was not a part of the palace conspiracy that complicated David's dying days. After her marriage to Nabal, she may have appreciated peace too much to become involved.

Abigail's story is refreshing because she ignored many of the inappropriate social codes of her day, behaving according to her own purposes. She was not about to let her house be razed because of her husband's lack of sense, and when the opportunity came to become the wife of the next king, she wasted no time mourning. Unlike Michal, she did not let her trials and adversities embitter her.

By contrast, Bathsheba seems more pliant. She took no hand in the events in which her life became entangled, apparently making no attempt to either provoke or prevent them. Michal knew David in his youth. Abigail won his heart while he was an outlaw. Bathsheba came into his life after all the winnowing was done. He was king. Jerusalem, which had defied his predecessors, had fallen to him. He had established his capital there and restored the ark. Virtually everything David ever desired came to him, which may explain his downfall. He had come to expect whatever he wanted—and, seeing Bathsheba bathing on her rooftop one day, he desired her.

There is no reason to think Bathsheba was indiscreet in her bathing habits or that she deliberately enticed the king. She came from a God-fearing family and was the wife of a God-fearing man. Indeed, throughout the narrative she maintains the friendship and good graces of Nathan, God's prophet. She was the little ewe with no choice, according to the parable Nathan told David when he exposed the king's guilt. She was simply bathing, performing the ritual ablutions following menstruation, when somehow, unknown to her, she was seen by the king and his passions were excited.

Following that opening scene, we are told, "David sent messengers, and took her." Sarah was twice claimed by a king for her beauty; a braver woman might have refused. Vashti refused King Ahasuerus, as we will see in the next chapter; but refusing a king is risky, as Vashti found out. Bathsheba went to the palace and lay with David.

Some time later, she sent the king a single terse message: "I am with child." At that point David could have arbitrarily claimed her as his wife—certainly a lesser crime than murder, and Bathsheba may even have expected it. She may not have anticipated the murder of her husband, but it is difficult to believe that the possibility of such a course never occurred to her. She simply abdicated her involvement. She saw the problem as David's responsibility and expected him to deal with it.

At first David attempted to cover up his adultery. He called Bathsheba's husband, Uriah, back from the Ammonitish war on a pretext, then insisted that he visit his wife. David sent a feast to his home to help with the festivities. Uriah, rigidly loyal to the law that forbade intercourse to warriors consecrated for battle, slept in the barracks with his men. David, still eager to pass off the child, tried a second time with strong drink. When that failed, he let Uriah carry his own death warrant to the front. David ordered his commander to place Uriah in the thick of the fighting and then to draw back from him.

When Uriah was listed as one of those who had died in battle, Bathsheba mourned. Hers was only the first sorrow, however, for the account is filled with David's remorse. He brought Bathsheba to the palace and made her his wife. Perhaps in his defense, the scriptures later add that "David did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord, and turned not aside from any thing that he commanded him all the days of his life, save only in the matter of Uriah." (1 Kings 15:5.) But that one heinous sin could never be fully erased. Called to repentance by Nathan's parable, David realized the enormity of his sin and flung himself on God's mercy.

Bathsheba's child sickened within a week of his birth. David, in sackcloth and ashes, throwing himself upon the ground, pleaded for the life of his son, but Nathan's prophecy was not to be mocked. The child died. Uttering the poignant phrase "I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me," David went in to comfort Bathsheba.

If Bathsheba didn't know at first, she must have come to know of David's role in her husband's death. How she received that information and reacted to it is not revealed. Did she feel partly responsible? Did she participate in David's repentance? The record doesn't say. We know only that what happened to Uriah and her child didn't paralyze her. She somehow recovered.

Eventually Nathan the prophet assured David that his repentance, as far as was possible, had been accepted. He predicted that Bathsheba's second child, Solomon, would become David's successor. (She also bore him three other sons: Shimea, Shobab, and Nathan.) But the prophet Nathan's earlier prophecy—that the sword would never depart from David's house because he had killed Uriah—was also fulfilled. David lived to see his daughter raped, one son murdered by another, the banishment of his favorite son, and the rebellion of yet another son; finally, he was not allowed to build the temple at Jerusalem.

When David was on his deathbed, Bathsheba intervened at Nathan's request and convinced him to declare Solomon king. She was not his first wife, nor the mother of his favorite son, but she retained enough influence to thwart the plans of her son's rival, Adonijah, who was already amassing support for his own attempt to capture the throne. Her plea in behalf of her own life and the life of Solomon shows wisdom, sophistication, and foresight.

Bathsheba's influence continued into her son's reign. Adonijah appealed to her to intercede for him; he wanted to marry David's concubine, Abishag. Thinking his desire was simply a matter of the heart, she agreed. As she approached Solomon, who was now king, he showed her great respect. He stood and had a chair brought for his mother, then asked her kindly what she wished, promising to deny her nothing. When he heard the request, however, he changed his mind.

Solomon discerned a plot behind Adonijah's petition; his mother was being used. According to Semitic custom, inheriting the women of a dead king was the mark of his successor. Adonijah was trying to solidify his own claim to the throne by marrying David's last concubine. Solomon had him killed.

Abishag, the object of that power play, was present when Bathsheba appealed to David in behalf of her son. She might have been manipulated into either confirming or denying that fact. That made her politically valuable in a double sense.

As David aged, he grew cold. Even covered with many blankets, he could not keep warm. His physicians recommended that a young maid be found to "cherish" him. A maid from Shunem was chosen for her virginity, youth, beauty, and ability to be a practical nurse. The scriptures state that David never knew Abishag in a sexual sense. From Abishag's point of view, that hardly mattered. She would be David's concubine the rest of her life, a prize to be carefully controlled, as Solomon demonstrated when he not only refused his half-brother's request but condemned him for it. We know nothing more about this young woman. Solomon probably incorporated her into his own harem.

David may have had from eighteen to twenty wives and concubines. Ahinoam, whom he married when he was still an outlaw, was carried off by the Amalekites with Abigail and later rescued. She also saw her son Amnon murdered by his half-brother Absalom for raping his sister, Tamar.

Maacah was the daughter of Talmai, king of Geshur. David took her in a battle, and she became the mother of David's beloved son Absalom. Besides seeing her daughter dishonored, she saw Absalom banished and eventually killed.

David's fifth wife, Haggith, was the mother of Adonijah, who won the support of the army in his bid for the throne but was killed by Solomon. Of Eglah and Abital we know only that they were the mothers of Ithream and Shephatiah. If their lives were typical, they knew neither ease nor peace.

One of the punishments Nathan pronounced upon David for his sin with Bathsheba was that what he had done in secret would be done to him before all of Israel. During one of his campaigns against his father, Absalom captured Jerusalem; included in the victory were ten of his father's concubines. He erected a tent on a rooftop and raped all ten in broad daylight, before "all Israel." David was disgraced, but the women suffered considerably more. We are told that when he recaptured the city, he placed his concubines in custody but never saw them again: "So they were shut up unto the day of their death, living in widowhood."

In the Book of Mormon, Nephi's brother Jacob referred to the tragic fate of David's wives in his powerful denunciation of polygamy. Insisting that both David's and Solomon's harems were abominations, he warned his own people against such practices. The Lord delights in the chastity of women, he wrote. The Lord has seen the sorrow and heard the mourning of the daughters of Jerusalem because of the wickedness of their husbands, and he will not suffer such practices to continue. Jacob was not referring to a new problem. Moses, when leading his people out of Egypt, forbade the taking of many wives (see Deuteronomy 17:17) and gave concubines the full protection of marriage.

On July 12, 1843, the Prophet Joseph Smith, concerned with this issue, asked the Lord why Abraham, Jacob, David, and Solomon, all righteous men, were justified in taking many wives and concubines. He received the revelation called the "new and everlasting marriage covenant." (D&C 132.) In that scripture, the Lord explained that though David had many wives and concubines, he did not sin except in the case of Uriah's wife, because his wives were given to him through the prophet Nathan. But because he sinned with Bathsheba, killing her husband, David fell from exaltation. We are told that he will not inherit his wives in the next world, "for I gave them to another, saith the Lord." In light of that declaration, it is interesting to note that in the genealogy of Jesus, Bathsheba is called Uriah's wife, not David's.

The women who intertwined their lives with David's were individually unique. None were passive acquisitions; in the larger sense, they were never acquisitions at all. Some chose David. Most, in one way or another, rose to the challenges they faced. For that reason, their loss must have been David's greatest sorrow.

Scripture references:

Michal 1 Samuel 14:49; 18:20-28; 19:11-17; 25:44; 2 Samuel 3:13-16; 6:16-23; 21:8; 1 Chronicles 15:29

Abigail 1 Samuel 25:3-42; 27:3; 30:5; 2 Samuel 2:2; 3:3; 1 Chronicles 3:1

Bathsheba 2 Samuel 11; 12:24; 1 Kings 1:11-31; 2:13-23; 1 Chronicles 3:5; Matthew 1:6

Abishag 1 Kings 1:3-4, 15; 2:13-25

Ahinoam 1 Samuel 25:43; 27:3; 30:5; 2 Samuel 2:2; 3:2; 1 Chronicles 3:1

Maacah 2 Samuel 3:3; 1 Chronicles 3:2 (This woman should not be confused with the name of a city in Syria, three or four men, and several other women of the same name.)

Haggith 2 Samuel 3:4-5; 1 Kings 1:5, 11; 2:13; 1 Chronicles 3:2

Eglah 2 Samuel 3:5; 1 Chronicles 3:3

Abital 2 Samuel 3:4; 1 Chronicles 3:3

David's concubines 2 Samuel 15:16; 16:20-22; 20:3

Marriage discussions in which David's wives are named Jacob 2:24-33; Doctrine and Covenants 132 (see especially verses 1, 38-39)
