The quality of Esther's courage is best appreciated in light of Vashti's. Vashti was the former queen, whom Esther replaced. With character equal to her beauty, Vashti made a stand for modesty. She refused to be viewed as a sex object, and was denounced, dethroned, and divorced. Into that atmosphere came the young girl Esther, probably not more than fourteen years old, concealing a potentially dangerous secret.

The events took place twenty-four centuries ago in the Persian court of King Ahasuerus. He ruled from India to Ethiopia over a kingdom which included the Babylonian territories where the Israelites had been dispersed after the fall of Jerusalem. He was a temperamental tyrant and a lover of finery, including beautiful women. In the third year of his reign, he orchestrated a six-month-long feast. For a hundred and eighty days, he endeavored to impress the nobles and princes of his empire with his glorious opulence. Historians speculate that he may have hoped to win their support for a campaign against Greece. Whatever his reason, the description of the banquet, as given in scripture, impresses us even today. There is mention of wall hangings; fine linen and purple cloth; silver rings; beds of gold; and pavements of red, blue, and black marble.

Immediately following this lengthy festival, the king provided a second feast, this one lasting seven days, for all inhabitants of Persia's capital. On the final day of the festivities, the king, merry with wine, sent seven eunuchs to fetch the queen. Having exhausted all the other splendors at his command, he wished to show off his beautiful wife.

Vashti refused. She would not degrade herself by being made a spectacle before the lascivious Ahasuerus and his drunken satraps, and legally she was within her rights. What the king asked was, by the customs of that time, as indecent as a modern husband proposing that his wife entertain his guests with her naked body. She must have known that given her husband's ego, it was dangerous to risk embarrassing him in front of his guests. And, considering the abject condition of even princes in that day, it seems amazing that Vashti dared to disobey even the drunken command of her monarch. But she did—and the king was enraged.

Amid the constant vying for power and influence surrounding political centers, there are always those ready to take advantage of any opportunity. Several of his princes capitalized on Ahasuerus's anger. Expressing fear that Vashti's refusal would have a disruptive effect on the behavior of women in harems from Persia to Media, they urged him to take action. If Vashti could defy her royal husband, they reasoned, what would happen when whispered news of her impertinence reached the ears of other women in the land? The fear known to all who exercise unrighteous dominion stalked the court of Persia that night, and King Ahasuerus succumbed. He sent out a decree to every province of his empire announcing that Vashti would come no more before him, that her royal estate would be given to another, and that this was done as an example so that every man might rule in his own house, whether great or small.

The next verse hints that in the sobering light of morning, Ahasuerus may have regretted his hasty action. His wife may have meant something to him after all, for the scriptures say that when his anger was appeased, he remembered Vashti. But she had been banished from him, and there was no way the decree could be revoked. So the servants that ministered to the king suggested an alternative as a way to cheer him up. The finest young virgins from all the provinces would be brought to the palace. Each girl in turn, ritually prepared, would spend the night in the king's apartment. The maiden who pleased him most would replace Vashti as queen. Ahasuerus liked the idea and sent out a decree to that effect.

The announcement undoubtedly interested many. In the minds of parents, guardians, generals, politicians, and kings who had been reduced to tributaries, it must have promised a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. Upon the shoulders of a single lovely girl, a family, a tribe, even a whole subjected nation might find favor. Mordecai must have hoped for such an advantage when he took his adopted daughter, Esther, to the king's chief eunuch and left her in the den of the Persian despot. Why else would he have allowed her to participate in such a beauty contest, knowing Ahasuerus' predilections, unless he felt it was somehow worth the risk?

Mordecai was a Jew, a race so despised that he warned young Esther not to reveal her origins. But perhaps, he reasoned, if Esther won favor, the next king would be half Jewish. So Mordecai took Esther to the king's harem; then each day, without acknowledging his connection to her, he walked outside the house keeping a watchful, loving eye on her.

It was a year before Esther's turn came. On her night, each girl was allowed whatever she wished in the way of perfume and clothing. Esther asked for nothing. She went to the king dressed modestly, unadorned, except with what enhancement her character lent her natural beauty.

The scriptures say that Esther obtained favor with all who looked upon her, and the king loved her above all women. He set the royal crown upon her head. Why the king preferred Esther is not specified. Perhaps he was satiated by mere beauty. Perhaps, too, she shared Vashti's intrepidity—the hint of a spirit unsubdued. Whatever the reason, Esther was chosen. Still, she did not reveal her nationality, though Mordecai sat at the king's gate and she saw him often.

Mordecai, in keeping an eye on his daughter, intercepted some information. Two of those who stood guard at the palace door were planning to kill the king. He passed the information to Queen Esther, who told King Ahasuerus in Mordecai's name. After an investigation, the culprits were hanged, and Mordecai's deed was recorded in the book of the king's chronicles.

Nine years passed. It seems that Esther did not bear a child to King Ahasuerus as Mordecai might have hoped. If a birth had occurred, Jewish historians would have noted the introduction of Jewish blood into the royal Persian line, but no mention is made. Nevertheless, despite rivals within the women's palace, Esther remained in favor until the struggle with Haman.

Haman, an Amalekite, rose to the position of second in the realm, becoming so powerful that the people bowed and reverenced him almost as if he were the king. All honored him except Mordecai, who still sat at the king's gate. The Amalekites were one of the tribes displaced by Joshua when the Israelites entered the Promised Land. Not only were they long-time enemies, but Jehovah had frequently uttered oaths against the sins of that nation. The other courtiers and princes, concealing their envy, did homage, waiting for Haman to make a false step. They encouraged Mordecai to assume the same attitude and bide his time, but Mordecai's conscience forbade him to bow to a man like Haman. And Haman, though he prospered, became obsessed with this Jew at the gate, who refused to do him homage. He brooded. It would not be enough to lay hands on Mordecai, he decided; he wanted to destroy the entire Jewish race.

Haman went to his soothsayers and cast purim (lots) to determine the most propitious day for his scheme. Then he went in and counseled the king. A subversive people scattered throughout the land was the cause of the empire's troubles, he told Ahasuerus, and he magnanimously offered to pay the king for the honor of removing this menace from the kingdom if he could claim the booty. So it was that the first recorded pogrom began.

It is fashionable to speak contemptuously of the disregard with which women were treated in the ancient oriental world. But the offhand manner in which the destruction of an entire race was negotiated by Haman and Ahasuerus shows that women were held no cheaper than men. Human life was expendable. The king answered Haman, "Do as seemeth thee good," and he gave Haman his ring. Using the king's ring to prove his authority, Haman sent notices to every province in the empire. On the thirteenth day of the first month, all Jews, young and old, women and children, were to be killed and their property confiscated.

When Mordecai heard the news, he rent his clothes, put on sackcloth, and entered the city crying loudly. The oriental monarch was accustomed to dwelling in perfect bliss with no sight or sound of human suffering, and for Mordecai to disturb the tranquility of Shushan, the king's royal city, was more than unseemly—it was dangerous. Esther had clothing sent out to him; he refused it. She called her most trusted servant and sent him to inquire why Mordecai was in public mourning. Mordecai returned a copy of Haman's decree and charged her to go before the king and beg for the lives of her people.

Esther sent her servant back to Mordecai with a message reminding him that no one, not even the queen, could go before the king unbidden; that was how assassins approached the throne. There was a law against it, and it was punishable by death. Only if the king held out his scepter would an uninvited supplicant be allowed to live. And the king had not come to her for thirty days. These were not excuses, but the first thoughts of a woman naturally humble, knowing herself to be of an outlawed race and fearing from the long absence of her husband that his heart had been turned against her by her enemies, perhaps by Haman himself.

Mordecai's answer was stern and to the point. He warned Esther that she must not think she was safe from destruction. In a purge, secrets such as hers had a way of leaking out and being used. Still, his most persuasive argument was not based on fear, but on his understanding of the way God worked—an understanding he expected Esther to share. He reminded her that the Jews would be saved—if not by her hand, by some other means. The privileges she had enjoyed for nine years were not hers because she had won them, but by the grace of God. If she held her peace now, she would lose her opportunity to serve and be swept aside. "Who knoweth," he asked, "whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this?"

Even after nine years of wealth, position, and good fortune, Esther was not too proud to remember her humble origins. She was not ashamed of the true God. Her answer embraced all. Gather the Jews living in Shushan, she told Mordecai; fast and pray for me, and I and my maids will do the same. "And so will I go in unto the king . . . and if I perish, I perish."

Would King Ahasuerus really have slain his favorite—his queen? The scriptures indicate that Esther considered her death a real possibility. There was, after all, the memory of what had happened to Vashti, together with a hint that Esther's romantic attraction had waned. Nine years was a long time to remain the preferred beauty in a court where all beautiful women of the land were at the king's command. This time she adorned herself. This time more than just her own fate hung in the balance.

On the third day, Esther entered the palace garden and approached the king. The scriptures say that "she obtained favor in his sight," and he held out his scepter. More than that, he offered her anything up to half the kingdom.

What did she do then? Did she fall to her knees in a muddled state of relief and pour out her request? No. In nine years, Esther had become skilled at court politics. If her confidence in her beauty had waned, her confidence in her wit had not. She proffered, with a lightness oddly incongruent with the danger she had faced, an invitation. She wished Ahasuerus and Haman to dine with her. In this way, she flattered her husband before all the court. Hadn't she risked her life just to see him?

The king and Haman came to her banquet, and again the king asked, "What is thy petition?" Again he offered to grant her any request, even to half his kingdom. She asked only that he return with Haman the following night.

The king agreed, and her flattery worked on Haman as well. He went home to boast to his wife, Zeresh, that no one but he and the king had come to Esther's banquet, and that he was invited again. Then with a bitter tone, he railed, "Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate." His wife offered a solution. Build a gallows, she said, and since you are in such good favor with the king, ask that Mordecai be hanged. Haman ordered a gallows made.

Meanwhile, the king, being restless, called for his book of chronicles. The passage read that night told of the time Mordecai had saved the king's life by exposing the plot of his doorkeepers. The king asked, "What honor hath been done to Mordecai for this?" His servants replied, "There is nothing done for him."

The king asked who was in court. Haman was there; he had returned that very night to ask the king for permission to hang Mordecai. But the king put a riddle to him instead: "What shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour?"

Haman, assuming the king meant to honor him, suggested a public display. The man should be dressed in royal attire and mounted on the king's horse; the crown should be placed on his head, and one of the king's nobles should go before him through the town, proclaiming him to the people. The king commanded Haman to take the apparel, the horse, and the crown and so honor Mordecai. Haman complied—with what grace, one can only imagine.

Now, was all that coincidence? Did the king just happen to read of Mordecai's service on the very night when Haman planned to hang him? Surely not. Believing she had risked her life to see him, wouldn't the king have stayed the night with Esther? And doesn't it seem likely that the queen herself picked the passage to be read? Why else would she have played the king along, biding her time, unless she hoped to put into motion events that would strengthen her cause?

The next evening at the second banquet, the king again offered to grant Esther any request to half his kingdom. With the trap so carefully set that Ahaseurus could hardly decide in Haman's favor, when only that day he had publicly honored a Jew, Esther was ready. Yet she remained diplomatic and tactful. She asked for her life and the lives of her people, reminding the king that they had been sold for destruction, and adding that she would not have asked if they had only been sold as slaves.

The king, having been annoyed, forgetful, or drunken when he signed the edict, could not even remember it. Esther explained the plot and who was behind it. Even then, the king hesitated; indecisive, he went out into the garden to consider the matter. Obviously the king liked Haman, but Esther had given him little choice. She had forced Haman to tip his hand, revealing his ambitions when he requested the robes, charger, and crown. By contrast, Ether herself had been offered half the kingdom three times and had requested very little.

Returning from the garden, the king found Haman on his knees next to Esther's bed, pleading for his life. Choosing to believe that he was trying to force himself on the queen, the king ordered him hung on his own gallows.

The king gave Haman's house to Esther; he gave his ring and the authority that went with it to Mordecai. Then Esther spoke again, falling at his feet and begging the king to undo the command Haman had sent to all the provinces. It was so ordered. In fact, the orders were completely reversed, allowing Jews on the thirteenth day of the first month to take revenge on those who had meant to kill them. The scriptures say that in the royal city of Shushan five hundred men were killed and the ten sons of Haman hanged, specifically at the queen's request.

Modern morality does not condone revenge, especially the kind of revenge Esther took on her enemies. But in the court of Ahasuerus, leniency would have been taken as a sign of weakness and would have undone all that Esther had accomplished. It is to her credit that she sought security for her people, not gain for herself. The scriptures state several times that the Jews took no spoils.

Mordecai, using the king's ring and authority, ordered an annual observance among the Jews—a feast to be called "Purim," because Haman had cast purim (lots) to destroy them. The Jews vowed to keep the feast every year from generation to generation. To this day, the festival of Purim is celebrated each March in Jewish synagogues throughout the world.

The story of Esther is so complete, so detailed, and so steeped in romantic drama that some biblical scholars argue that it is fiction. Yet it has held up to historical scrutiny.

There are also those who point out the absence of God's name in the Book of Esther. But the power and presence of Jehovah, the Jews' unseen God, is felt everywhere in the story. That may be precisely the point: providence must often be read backward. Blindly marching forward, we trust that God has some purpose for our lives, that if we listen to his promptings, relying on his strength, he will guide us. But only when we look backward, at where we've been, do we see he was there.

Mordecai suffered the humiliation of seeing Haman rise to power. Esther, at ease amid oriental splendor, found herself suddenly jarred into a new reality. She could choose her course of action; Mordecai pointed that out to her. But if she chose not to be God's instrument for the deliverance of his people, it would mean her own failure, not God's.

The humility in Esther's courage is most moving. She seized her opportunity, employing her intelligence and her honed political skills to cause events far-reaching and bloody. But she never sought to wield such power; rather, faced with the responsibility, she fasted and prayed.

The story of Esther comes from the dark period of bondage when the Jewish national institutions were nearly destroyed. Scattered through Babylon and Persia, the Jews were a nation of captives with no rights, no temple, no altar, and barely any priesthood. In this depressed state, they faced the first pogrom intended to exterminate their entire race. That terrible danger was averted by the beauty, courage, grace, and intelligence of one woman who was willing to acknowledge her talents and advantages as blessings from God, given to her that she might serve him. What is true of Esther is true of all God's daughters. Our gifts, used to serve the Lord, will benefit humankind for generations to come.

Scripture references:

Esther Esther

Vashti Esther 1:9-22; 2:1

Zeresh Esther 5:10-14; 6:13-14
