Jezebel is both a name and a label. The name applies to a woman whose character was hardly sterling. She was ruthless, politically ambitious, and a worshipper of idols—a description that might fit half of Israel's kings. Nevertheless, her name has become the byword, the standard English term for a woman who is shameless and wicked. How did she come to earn that reputation? Was she really as evil as her name has come to suggest?

To understand Jezebel, we must appreciate the ancient religious conflict between worshippers of Jehovah and worshippers of the goddess Ashtoreth and her husband Baal. Ashtoreth (variously spelled) was represented by a living tree or a tree-like pole displayed as a symbol of female fertility. Every Phoenician altar had a representation of Ashtoreth nearby. The worship of this idol included immoral sexual rites, thus giving rise to the phrase, "whoring after foreign gods."

When the Israelites first came into Canaan from the desert, they were firm in their faith. They had had forty years in which to solidify their beliefs. Yet many of the generation immediately following those who had invaded the land and settled down to an agricultural lifestyle began to worship the Canaanite nature gods, which were closely associated with farming. If rain didn't fall at the right time or crops failed, it was easy to assume that the local Baalim were angry. Every hilltop had its deities that demanded appeasement to ensure the harvest or the conception of offspring. Before bloodstained altars, the Canaanites and backsliding Israelites indulged in unspeakable rites. Every prophet of that dispensation warned against such idolatrous practices, and every Old Testament mention of Ashtoreth (forty or more times) condemns her. Simply stated, events in the Old Testament can be read as an uncompromising war against nature religion and idolatry in favor of the one true God, Jehovah.

Jezebel has come to epitomize that conflict. She was a worshipper of Ashtoreth, but she was more than just a follower; she espoused and promoted the religion. According to scripture, four hundred prophets of Ashtoreth and four hundred and fifty prophets of Baal ate at her table, indicating that she supported them. She was a powerful advocate of idolatry with a strong following whose very presence threatened the heart of Israel's religion. For twenty-seven years she zealously strove to overthrow the worship of the God of Israel, and she was successful enough to cause even the great prophet Elijah to fear her. This woman's striving against God was the basis for her condemnation—not some vagary or wantonness as the label "a painted Jezebel" has come to imply. Her threat to Israel was on the level of headstrong will, misdirected intellect, and perverted theology.

Jezebel was the daughter of Ethbaal, king of the Zidonians, a Phoenician kingdom. The Phoenicians were one of the remarkable maritime peoples of the ancient world. They were one of the world's oldest civilizations, controlling a small but immensely wealthy and influential strip of coastal land on the Mediterranean seaboard north of Palestine. By contrast, Israel was still considered an upstart nation. Although David and Solomon had expanded Israel's boundaries, consolidating and increasing its wealth, internal dissension had split the nation in two, reducing the power and influence of both Israel and Judah.

Jezebel's marriage to Israel's King Ahab, which was probably arranged as a political alliance, could not have been considered a worthy match. But Jezebel was not a royal princess who had been sheltered from the bitterness and evil of the world. Her father, who was both the king and high priest of Baal, had murdered his way to the throne. If Israel, a nation still unused to the rule of kings, proved at first disappointing, Jezebel didn't waste any time feeling sorry for herself. She set out to change things.

One of her first acts was to order the extermination of the prophets of Jehovah. These were the priests attached to various villages (see 2 Kings 2:3-5) or who traveled performing particular functions (see 1 Samuel 10:5-13). How many of these devotees of Jehovah she managed to kill, we do not know. We are told only that one hundred were saved. Obadiah, the governor of the royal household, feared the Lord more than his queen, and hid a group of prophets in a cave. One of those saved was Elijah.

In the midst of this religious persecution, Elijah appeared before King Ahab and predicted three years of drought to be followed by a great famine. Elijah made his prophecy, preempting the powers of Baal and Ashtoreth (who were believed to control the weather), and then disappeared. He could not be found, though King Ahab searched frantically throughout all of Israel and sent emissaries to neighboring nations asking for him. Not until at the end of the three years, when the famine had taken full effect, did Elijah appear again. This time he challenged the prophets of Baal to a test atop Mount Carmel—his God against theirs.

The Baal priests had likely performed their ritual, with its attendant magic, many times or they would not have accepted Elijah's challenge. Yet something went wrong and they failed. With taunts and language of unparalleled audacity, Elijah ridiculed the priests of Baal and the impotence of their deities. Then, when it was his turn to perform, he drew lightning from heaven in a triumphant vindication of Jehovah. Swept up in the fervor of the moment, the people, at Elijah's command, seized the failed priests of Baal and massacred all four hundred and fifty.

However, in his triumph, Elijah failed to reckon with Jezebel. She seems not to have been present during the contest, but when she heard of the slaughter of her priests she swore to destroy Elijah "by tomorrow this time." Elijah, who had stood up to the king and single-handedly faced hundreds of Baal priests, fled from this woman's fury. Though he was still under mandate from the Lord, he traveled a day's journey into the wilderness and there implored God to take his life rather than let him fall into the hands of the queen.

The significance of the contest escaped Jezebel. The fact that Elijah had predicted the famine, called fire from heaven, and foretold the return of the rain made no impression on her. She saw only her slain priests and swore revenge.

But she couldn't find Elijah. He had escaped again—this time to Damascus, where he anointed Hazael king of Syria. He also anointed a soldier, Jehu, to be both king of Israel and the destroyer of Ahab and Jezebel's family. Then he selected his own successor, Elisha.

Meanwhile Jezebel, unable to wreak her revenge, set about restoring her religion. She sent for new priests, built more sanctuaries, and, although she stopped murdering the prophets of Jehovah for a time, never ceased hunting for Elijah. Also during this time she sought to teach her husband a lesson on how to be a king.

Ahab's wickedness cannot be blamed entirely on his wife; he was an idolater before he married her. He had distinguished himself as a soldier, but as a ruler he was weak, which gave Jezebel, by her ruthlessness, an advantage over him.

A man named Naboth owned a vineyard next to the king's palace. The palace had been built by Ahab's father, but the vineyard was even older, having been passed down for generations in Naboth's family. From the time Moses first divided the land of Canaan among the tribes of Israel, the Israelites had developed a great respect for property, especially inherited property. Ahab sent for Naboth and asked if he might buy the vineyard, but Naboth made it clear that he intended to pass the vineyard to his son as he had received it from his father. Though bitterly disappointed, Ahab accepted Naboth's answer as being entirely within his rights.

When Jezebel heard of the incident, her view was entirely different. To a Phoenician princess, Naboth's behavior was more than ungracious; it was treasonable. In her country, and in almost every other country ruled by monarchs in that day, no one refused a king. She chided her husband; then, taking matters into her own hands, she promised him, like a spoiled child, that she would get the vineyard for him. Having lived in Israel a number of years by that time, she must have been aware of the people's ambivalent attitude toward their rulers. Perhaps she even chose this occasion to strike out against such seeming backwardness. She would not only teach her husband how to rule, but she would teach his people how to be ruled.

She called an assembly and falsely charged Naboth with blaspheming against God and the king. She had him arrested, tried, and condemned by false witnesses she had secured herself. Naboth was stoned and his property seized.

Such highhandedness prompted Elijah's return. As King Ahab strolled through his newly acquired vineyard, the prophet appeared before him. Condemning what Jezebel had done, he told King Ahab that the dogs would lick his blood in that field he had acquired from Naboth, that every male child of his family would be cut off, and that Jezebel would be eaten by dogs near the ramparts of the palace.

King Ahab, offering no argument or rebuttal, tore his clothes and donned sackcloth. The Lord accepted his repentance and delayed part of the retribution. King Ahab, unlike Jezebel, was still capable of remorse.

Three years after its pronouncement, Elijah's prophecy began to be fulfilled. War broke out between Syria and Israel; in the battle, Ahab received a mortal wound. He managed to "stay up" in his chariot until evening to keep the news of his injury from disheartening his forces. Nevertheless he died, knowing his army had been defeated. His bloodstained chariot was taken to a spring running through Naboth's vineyard. There, as it was being washed, a pack of dogs licked King Ahab's blood.

Jezebel survived, unrepentant for another decade. First she concentrated her energies on her son Ahaziah, but he was fatally injured by a fall from a window after he had been king only two years. Jezebel then turned her attention to her second son, Jehoram. He ruled seven years but must have seemed a disappointment to her, for the scriptures make the distinction that although he did evil, his wickedness was not like the wickedness of his mother. What that means is hard to guess, but during a campaign to retake Moab, Jehoram actually went to Elisha, Elijah's successor, to ask advice of Jehovah. Note that he did not send for Elisha, but went directly to him. Elisha spoke to the king with utmost insolence, insulting both his father and his mother. Jehoram did not strike him down or even expostulate. Rather, in the presence of two other kings, his allies in the war, he accepted a public insult to his living mother. Such a betrayal of a woman who prided herself on being queenly must have been crushing. Yet she remained undaunted, seemingly invincible to the end.

Adding further to the insult, Jehu, an army leader who had been commissioned years earlier by Elijah to overthrow the Ahab dynasty, announced to Jehoram that there would be no peace in Israel so long as the whoredoms of his mother continued. Shortly thereafter, Jehu killed the king and cast his body into the same vineyard that had once belonged to Naboth. Jezebel, hearing of the insurrection and knowing that her death was certain, painted her face and adorned herself as the queen she was. From the tower of the palace, she looked out and awaited the arrival of Jehu. There was no sign of repentance in her as she went out proudly to meet her prophesied doom. The destroyer of her family entered the palace gate, and she shouted down the most insulting taunt she could think of: "Had Zimri peace, who slew his master?"

She knew her words would fall cold and ominous on the ears of Jehu, flushed though he was with victory. Like Jehu, Zimri had been a soldier, a leader of the chariots. Zimri, too, had slain his king and exterminated a royal household. But Zimri's reign had lasted only seven days. Jezebel was insinuating that there would be no peace for Jehu. His time would come, too.

Jehu looked up, and seeing Jezebel's eunuchs on the balcony with her, ordered them to throw her down. Her blood splattered the wall of her ivory-covered palace, and a team of horses trod her underfoot.

Jehu entered the palace, where he ate and drank. Some time later, remembering that Jezebel was a king's daughter, he ordered that she be buried. When the servants went out to bury her, they found only her skull, her feet, and the palms of her hands. The dogs had eaten everything else, as Elijah had predicted.

But Jezebel's death did not put an end to her evil influence. Her daughter, Athaliah, carried her wicked ways into Judah, the southern kingdom of Israel. She was married to Jehoram, the son of King Jehoshaphat, a righteous man who, after many years of strife between the two Israelite nations, probably agreed to the marriage as a political expediency. It was a fatal alliance.

When he was thirty-two years old, Jehoram became king. Athaliah, as her mother had done in the north, promoted the worship of Ashtoreth and Baal among the people of the south. When Jehoram died of an incurable disease (also predicted by Elijah), Athaliah's son Ahaziah assumed the throne. As queen-mother, Athaliah was now more powerful than ever, but within a year, her son was dead. Jehu, the same soldier who had killed King Ahab, murdered Ahaziah. Athaliah, hearing of her son's death and fearing that her own power and influence were at an end, ordered the massacre of all Judah's royal heirs, including her own grandsons. Then she ascended the throne herself. Unbeknownst to Athaliah, however, one of her daughters-in-law had managed to conceal an infant son, Joash, and his life was spared.

Athaliah ruled six years. During her reign, she pulled down part of the temple and used the materials to build a sanctuary for Baal. The people rebelled and rallied around young Joash, proclaiming him the rightful king. Athaliah, hearing the people clapping and shouting, went into the temple and saw the young king. She screamed, "Treason, treason!" but no one came to her aid. Not wanting to defile the house of the Lord with her blood, a temple priest ordered the guards to remove her to a horse gate near the king's house, where she was slain.

The witch of En-dor represents evil of an entirely different ilk. She was a necromancer who wished only to be left alone to practice her art. Actually, the term witch is never used in the scriptural narrative describing her; that term has attached itself to her over the centuries. Similarly, it should be noted that she is never described as old, stooped, or haglike. She has no broomstick, caldron, or tame bird. If anything, the scriptures present her as being rather ordinary, despite the fact that she practiced one of the forbidden arts.

Moses made witchcraft a capital offense, and King Saul, in the early part of his reign, enforced that law by killing those that had "familiar spirits." Later in his life, he fell victim to sin and was afflicted with a deep depression. Faced with both domestic and foreign wars, and being cut off from spiritual counsel, he disguised himself and went to consult the woman of En-dor. He hoped she might induce the spirit of the dead prophet Samuel to revisit the world and submit to questioning.

Like the worship of Ashtoreth and Baal, this aspect of the dark arts was another of the perversions the Israelites had learned from the Canaanites. The prevalence of such practices can be determined by the variety of names in scripture: "sorceries," "consulters of the dead," "seducers," "seducing spirits," "unclean spirits working miracles," "enchantments," "observers of times," "dreamers of dreams," "familiar spirits," "wizards," "diviners," and "charmers," all of which were associated with Satan.

The woman of En-dor knew that what she practiced was punishable by death, and so she was wary of Saul. She listened to his request and made a guarded answer, neither claiming nor denying that she had the ability to call up the dead. Saul pressed her, and the seance began.

It is interesting that although the woman had no ability to see through Saul's disguise, both she and Saul recognized Samuel's shade. She was distressed, declaring that she had seen gods coming up out of the earth.

Samuel called Saul by name and condemned him, predicting that he and his sons would die in battle the next day. Hearing those harsh words, the woman of En-dor sought to comfort her guest. She helped him to her bed and offered him something to eat and drink. Though she was evil, dabbling in Satanic practices, she was not beyond human decency. She was willing to offer aid to one who could not return it.

Isaiah described a time in the last days when the world would be filled with despair, as Saul was. In that time, he says, many will seek the aid of familiar spirits, wizards, and those who "peep" and "mutter." (See Isaiah 8:19.) He warns that those who seek such comfort shall receive little help, remain hungry, and continue to fret.

Saul, when he left the woman of En-dor, though he had rested and eaten, was hardly consoled. She had no power to bless and comfort.

Evil need not always be grand in its proportions. Unlike the other women considered in this nefarious gallery, Herodias operated out of pure personal spite. She wanted John the Baptist killed because he had dared to name her sins.

Herodias was the granddaughter of Herod the Great, who killed the babes at Bethlehem. She married her half-uncle, Phillip I, by whom she had a daughter. (Josephus calls the daughter Salome, though she is not named in scripture.) Herodias then entered into a second, incestuous, and illicit union by marrying her husband's half-brother, Herod Antipas, the Tetrarch of Galilee. Such immorality was an offense to Jewish sensibilities, and it caused some unrest among the people for whom Herod Antipas had responsibility. John the Baptist went so far as to publicly speak out against the marriage. For such boldness Herod had him thrown into prison, but Herod stopped short of taking his life because John the Baptist was popular with the people.

Herodias had no such reservations. She may have felt the threat more keenly. If Herod ever listened to John and repented, her position and power would be imperiled. Her husband had already abandoned one wife, an Arabian princess. Knowing him and his weaknesses well, Herodias encouraged her daughter to dance at his birthday party. With drink flowing freely, Herod, in an expansive mood, promised to reward her with anything she wanted, up to half the kingdom. She consulted her mother; then in the presence of Herod's guests, she requested that the head of John the Baptist be brought to her on a platter.

The narrative states that Herod regretted his oath but could not refuse what he had given publicly. He therefore sent the executioner to the prison to behead the preacher whom he, himself, considered to be just and true. Herodias and her daughter demonstrated no remorse, but we are told that Herod was smitten with fear when he heard of Jesus. He was afraid that John the Baptist had risen from the dead to torment him.

As Jezebel used Ahab to slay the prophets of Jehovah, Herodias used her husband to kill John the Baptist. There the scriptures end her account. Josephus goes on to credit her with her husband's downfall. Jealous of the power of her brother Agrippa, Herodias prodded Herod to demand the title of king. When his request was refused, he was banished. At that time, Herodias could have had her freedom. She refused, choosing to be with the man she loved. In that act of loyalty she evidenced some of the same courage with which Jezebel faced her death.

The qualities of courage, loyalty, and endurance can be possessed by both good and evil women. Not the qualities themselves, but how they are used, make the difference. The verve and vitality of these women have caused some to regard them as sentimentally diabolic, as if the magnitude of their crimes somehow saved them from meaner judgments. Not many individuals can boast, as could the woman of En-dor, the distinction of having had a king for a client. Athaliah, in her wholesale massacre, nearly exterminated the lineage of David through which the promised Messiah was to come.

I have read a vindication of Jezebel in which she was portrayed as a woman of high character who zealously devoted her life to religious reform. It just happened that her god was Phoenician rather than Hebrew. It is true that Jezebel was not, as the dictionary says, a shameless or wanton woman. Her crimes were not of that order. Still, it seems impossible to justify her character, for her wickedness ran deeper than the mere practice of idolatry. Indeed, the scriptures identify many idol-worshippers who were highly ethical: Naomi was treated well by the Moabites. Pagan sailors aboard the ship carrying Jonah treated him decently. Pharaoh's daughter risked her father's wrath to save Moses. Naaman, the Syrian, took advice from his wife's Israelite maid. And a Zidonian widow, one of Jezebel's own people, fed Elijah during the long famine.

Any attempt to glamorize these women is a misrepresentation, as is reducing them to labels or attributing their actions to their environment. Dancing is not evil because Herodias used her daughter in that fashion; neither is wearing makeup sinful because Jezebel painted her face to meet Jehu. The wicked women in scripture are evil because of specific and willful acts, not by chance associations. If that were not true, the concept of personal accountability would be invalid.

Scripture references:

Jezebel 1 Kings 16:31-34; 18; 19; 21; 22:37; 2 Kings 9:7-37; see also Revelations 2:20

Ashtoreth (sometimes translated as "grove" or "green tree") Exodus 34:13; Deuteronomy 16:21; 23:18; Judges 2:11-13; 6:25-30; 10:6; 1 Samuel 7:3-4; 12:10; 31:10; 1 Kings 11:5, 33; 15:13; 16:33; 2 Kings 13:6; 17:16; 21:3-7; 23:4-7, 13-15; 2 Chronicles 15:16; Isaiah 17:8; 57:4-5; Jeremiah 7:18; 17:2; 44 (entire chapter); Ezekiel 13:18; 3 Nephi 21:18

Athaliah 2 Kings 8:26; 11:1-20; 2 Chronicles 22; 23:12-21; 24:7 (Athaliah should not be confused with two men of the same name; see 1 Chronicles 8:26; Ezra 8:7)

Woman of En-dor 1 Samuel 28:3-25. See also Leviticus 19:31; 20:27; Exodus 22:18; Isaiah 8:19

Familiar spirits, witches, witchcraft Exodus 22:18; Leviticus 19:31; 20:6, 27; Deuteronomy 18:10-11; 1 Samuel 15:23; 2 Kings 9:22; 21:6; 23:24; 1 Chronicles 10:13; 2 Chronicles 33:6; Isaiah 8:19; 19:3; Micah 5:12; Nahum 3:4; Acts 16:16; Galatians 5:20; 2 Nephi 18:19; 3 Nephi 21:16; Mormon 1:19; 2:10; Doctrine and Covenants 46:7

Herodias and her daughter Matthew 14:3-12; Mark 6:14-28; Luke 3:19-20
