The obvious difference between Delilah and Potiphar's wife is that one got her man and the other didn't. Beyond the obvious, there are other differences. Delilah was a Philistine living on the border of Canaan and working for money; Potiphar's wife was an upper-class Egyptian who enjoyed the privileges of her husband's station but wanted more pleasure.

Men and women alike have an acculturated notion of the "temptress." We expect her to be spoiled, sensual, and selfish. From the scriptures we can be sure of only one common trait: determination. The single-minded determination of both Delilah and Potiphar's wife may have as much to do with their enduring notoriety as did their sensuousness.

Potiphar's wife tempted Joseph "day by day." Her passion was not a sudden flare of lust; it grew slowly, gathering momentum as her insistence increased.

From the time Joseph first arrived in Egypt as a young boy, he served Potiphar. The scriptures indicate that God was with Joseph and prospered him, and through him blessed those he served. Potiphar noticed that the boy seemed favored; and he made him overseer of increasing portions of his affairs until Joseph could say with honesty that Potiphar kept nothing from him but his wife.

Being the favorite was a role Joseph understood and played well. He may have inherited his mother's comeliness; he most assuredly possessed his father's ability to turn adversity to advantage. Uprooted from his pastoral home and transplanted to a large household populated by women, eunuchs, slaves, and servants, where intrigue, chicanery, nepotism, and sycophancy were common, he not only survived but rose to the top. Joseph was a slave still, but a slave with authority. His good fortune, however, was not an unmixed blessing. It brought him to the attention of Potiphar's wife, and she had designs on him.

We know nothing of the woman's age or appearance, and we can only guess at her motive. Potiphar, as captain of Pharaoh's guard, may have been elderly or young, fat or thin, cruel or indifferent. None of that would have been considered when the marriage was arranged. A man of his position would have the wife of his choice; she would have less say in the matter. If she ever loved him, her love must have been less than complete if she was seeking daily to seduce Joseph.

Potiphar's wife saw a provocative body and a character that inspired respect, but she had no insight into Joseph's spirit. She knew nothing of the sacred covenant God had made with his race, or of the young man's own visionary dreams. How well Joseph had adapted to the Egyptian way of life is shown in the fact that he shaved. (See Genesis 41:14.) In the thousands of tomb and temple paintings extant from ancient times, Egyptian males are always clean-shaven, while barbarians and inferior races are bearded. The fact that Joseph had adopted that custom, together with the custom of wearing a white linen garment, must have made him appear Egyptian. Potiphar's wife may have expected him to be Egyptian in his morals, as well.

Potiphar's wife made the first advance. Joseph wasn't allowed the luxury of passion; a slave was expected to be as sexless as a eunuch. Such detachment, in such close and daily proximity, must have been a torment to the woman in love. She may have felt that nothing but their difference in station stood between them and that she had but to cast that barrier aside. One day, when they were alone, she, one of the most prominent women in all of Egypt, offered herself to her slave.

Joseph's prompt answer may betray how close she came to a correct assessment of his situation. Her offer was doubtless tantalizing to this young man cut off from normal female society; and, if he harbored any resentment for his servile position, the satisfaction might have been temptation enough. He could have cuckolded the man who owned him. But there was a side to Joseph less evident to Potiphar's wife than his sexuality. His response to her provocation, revealing that side of him, must have shattered her with its honesty. What she viewed as a romance, he termed a "great wickedness."

She chose not to hear. Within the conventions of her position, she was accustomed to having her own way. She persisted, wearing at him, deluding herself that she had only to overcome some shyness in him.

He continued to refuse her day by day. Then came the moment when all possible obstacles were removed. The husband was gone, as were the servants. When Joseph came into the house on business, she embraced him and held him fast. She may have hoped that her flesh touching his would at last overcome his hesitation. Not bothering with his usual excuses, Joseph wrenched himself free, leaving his outer garment behind.

That final demonstration of his self-mastery may have turned her lust to scorn, or it may simply have been fear that prompted her next action: "When she saw that he had left his garment in her hand. . . she called the men of her house." The garment would have been difficult to dispose of, impossible to explain. With no time for reflection or subtlety, she screamed. She told her story first to the other male servants of the household and then to Potiphar. Joseph, she insisted, had tried to rape her. She resisted and he fled, leaving his garment behind.

The story was believed—and why not? Graciously condescending, Potiphar's wife identified herself with her servants, speaking of the "Hebrew brought in to mock us." To her husband she spoke arrogantly of the "Hebrew servant" who had been presumptuous. Potiphar was a man of the world; he knew the weaknesses of men. Besides, the garment served as proof.

Potiphar had Joseph thrown into prison. Joseph submitted without offering any defense; there is no record of his speaking out against his accuser. Defense would have been futile, as he must have known. But he could have sown seeds of doubt in Potiphar's mind, if he had so desired.

Nothing more is said of Potiphar's wife. She serves more as a symbol of the faithless wife than as a fully rounded individual. The narrative sweeps on to Joseph's triumph. Within two years he rose to be second in power only to Pharaoh.

Delilah, on the other hand, was no frail sinner suffering from too much love. She was the artful manipulator of men's passions, who could achieve her ends without ever experiencing a throb of true emotion herself.

Samson was a judge in Israel at a time when his nation, because of its unrighteousness, had fallen under domination by the Philistines. Since before his conception, when an angel announced his birth to his mother, he had been consecrated to the Lord; his uncut hair was the symbol of that vow. He had also been endowed with enormous physical strength. Samson might have led his nation out of sin and bondage, but he never showed any inclination to undertake such a mission. Instead, he squandered his powers in ridiculous and dangerous adventures.

Samson desired a Philistine woman and instructed his parents to arrange the marriage. They objected, reminding him that she was a foreigner, but Samson's wishes prevailed because she pleased him. He married her and immediately through her became a victim of the Philistines.

Samson was a frolicsome giant and a great jokester. During the merriment of the wedding festivities, he proposed a riddle that he had himself invented, offering to pay his Philistine guests in linen garments if they came up with the right answer; otherwise, they must pay him. No one could guess it. After several days of wrong guesses, the young Philistines threatened Samson's new wife, who then wept until at last she wearied him. He had no sooner told her the riddle's solution than the Philistines knew it.

Angered, Samson waylaid other Philistines, took their robes, paid his debt, and returned to his parents' house. His new wife, abandoned, was given by her father to Samson's best man. At harvest time, Samson went to visit his bride, only to have her father explain that he had given her away because he thought Samson hated her. He hinted that her younger sister was fairer anyway, but Samson didn't warm to that idea.

Instead, he tied torches to the tails of three hundred foxes and set them loose in the Philistines' fields, burning their crops. A minor war ensued. In revenge, the Philistines burned Samson's wife and her father. Samson retaliated by slaying a thousand men with the jawbone of an ass. His enemies tried to bind him, but Samson could not be bound. One night when his enemies tried to capture him, he defied them by carrying off the gates of the city—doors, posts, bar, and all.

If the Philistines didn't know where Samson's strength lay, they knew his weakness. They offered Delilah eleven hundred pieces of silver to discover how he could be subdued. That was an enormous sum; Judas betrayed Jesus for only thirty pieces of silver.

The Bible describes Delilah as a woman living in the valley of Sorek, leaving her nationality and livelihood vague. Josephus states plainly that she was a Philistine harlot, and everything about her story suggests that she was a courtesan of unholy persistence who had personal charm, mental ability, self-confidence, and considerable nerve. It might be argued that from the Philistine point of view, she was a patriot who betrayed Samson for the sake of her people, but the evidence suggests otherwise. Delilah was consistent; she used her abilities for one purpose—money.

The chapter introducing Delilah begins, "Then went Samson to Gaza, and saw there a harlot, and went in unto her." That woman was not Delilah, but the mention of the harlot reveals the nature of Samson's habits. The experiences following his unfortunate marriage had not cured him of his love for Philistine women. He was not a welcome visitor in Philistine cities—his visits were made at some risk—yet he persisted. The scriptures go on to say that eventually Samson came to love a woman named Delilah. The rest of the story reads like an allegory, so exactly does it describe the downfall of a man enslaved by his own passions.

Samson could not possibly have cherished any illusions about Delilah. He had already been betrayed by a woman of her nationality, and many of her actions would have aroused suspicion in any lover. But unlike Joseph, who fled his temptress, Samson was confident. He didn't fear her. Instead, he dallied with temptation, trifling with sin, allowing himself to be brought ever nearer to destruction as Delilah plied him with her charms.

Delilah was skillful, to be sure. "Tell me, I pray thee, wherein thy great strength lieth," she cooed. He jokingly answered that if she were to bind him with seven undried withs (new cords), he would be weak like other men. When she tried it, he flexed his muscles and laughingly threw off his bonds. Try new ropes, he suggested. When they failed, he let her weave his long hair into her loom. For Delilah, with a fortune in silver at stake, the game was serious. But for Samson, the episodes were light, playful interludes in their more serious love-making.

At last, bored or simply not in a mood for sport, he told her the truth. He was a Nazarite. His hair had never been cut. That, he believed, was the source of his strength.

Perhaps his three victories over the Philistines, together with his threefold resistance to Delilah's wiles, had made him feel invincible. On the other hand, he enjoyed flirting with disaster. Perhaps he believed that even cutting his hair would not weaken him.

Now the tone of the narrative changes. Delilah didn't run for her scissors the way she had run for the withs, ropes, and loom. She knew her man, and she knew she had the truth. Not mentioning the secret again, she entertained him for the evening. When he left, she sent for the Philistine lords and demanded her money.

The next time Samson came, she enticed him to put his head in her lap. She soothed him to sleep, then sheared him. She gave those with whom she had bargained exactly what they had bargained for: she delivered Samson powerless into their hands. And, like Potiphar's wife, she escaped unpunished. Nothing in scripture indicates that she suffered any remorse, repentance, or retribution.

There is something heartrending in the spectacle of Samson, once the lighthearted giant, now blind and helpless, chained to a Philistine grindstone. Whatever pity he inspires may be the reason he is often portrayed as the victim of both his first wife and Delilah. I question that representation. Samson took pleasure in visiting brothels and in killing his enemies. He is nowhere presented as a man of integrity, and neither he nor Delilah evidence much virtue. They were essentially responsible for their own downfalls. That is as it should be, according to the doctrine of free agency.

Yet few dangers are more dramatized in scripture than the power of a seductive woman. Nearly always when idolatry was introduced among the Israelites, it was blamed on the arts and devices of heathen women. The image of a harlot is used to describe Israel's unrighteousness by Ezekiel, Hosea, Amos, Micah, Jeremiah, and Nahum. The verb "to play the harlot" is synonymous with apostasy in Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, Deuteronomy, Judges, 2 Kings, the Chronicles, Psalms, Proverbs, Isaiah, and the New Testament (particularly in Revelation). The Book of Mormon also picks up Isaiah's image of erring women and dubs the abominable church of the last days "the whore of all the earth."

One might think from these numerous references that in some periods of Israel's history most women were engaged in wanton practices. Such was never the case. Many of these references apply to specific sexual ceremonies incorporated into the worship of idols, Ashtoreth in particular. These practices were especially abhorred by the prophets of God and came to be used metaphorically to represent all evil.

God instituted sex when he created the male and the female, and he pronounced it good. He added that a woman's desire for her husband would be as great as his desire for her. Likewise, men can tempt women as sorely as women tempt men. The story of Potiphar's wife demonstrates that chastity is as important in males as in females; and Samson's debacle illustrates the fact that no man can be corrupted who isn't already corruptible.

Human sexuality is a potent force. Lust creates real problems, and unquestionably evil women of all ages have found their seductive powers useful. However, righteous women use their sexuality to add grace and charm to their lives. Fortunately, most women in every age have used their sexuality to procreate families and to please themselves and their spouses—the purposes for which God has created it. Every person must thus learn to recognize the power of his or her sexuality and decide to use it only for those righteous purposes.

Scripture references:

Potiphar's wife Genesis 39:8-19

Delilah Judges 16:4-21

References to harlotry Exodus 34:15-16; Leviticus 17:7; 20:5-6; Numbers 14:33; 15:39; 25:1; Deuteronomy 31:16; Judges 2:17; 8:27, 33; 2 Kings 9:22; 1 Chronicles 5:25; 2 Chronicles 21:13; Psalms 73:27; 106:39; Proverbs 6:26; 7:10, 27; 23:27; 29:3; Isaiah 1:21; 23:15-16; 57:3; Jeremiah 2:20; 3:1-9; 5:7; 13:27; Ezekiel 6:9; 16:15-41 (elaborate metaphor); 20:30; 23 (entire chapter is an elaborate metaphor); 43:7-9; Hosea (entire book is an elaborate metaphor); Amos 7:17; Micah 1:7; Nahum 3:4; Matthew 21:31-32; Luke 15:30; 1 Corinthians 6:15-16; Ephesians 5:5; 1 Timothy 1:10; Hebrews 13:4; Revelations 17:1-16 (elaborate metaphor); 19:2; 21:8; 22:15; 1 Nephi 13:7, 34; 14:10; 22:13; 2 Nephi 9:36; 10:16; 13:16-26; 26:32; 28:14, 18; Jacob 2:23, 28; 3:5; Mosiah 11:2, 6, 14; Alma 1:32; 30:18; Helaman 6:23; 3 Nephi 16:10; 21:19; 30:2; 4 Nephi 1:16; Mormon 8:31; Ether 10:11; Doctrine and Covenants 29:21; 63:17; 86:3
