When the season rolls around again and I find myself setting out the nativity figures under the Christmas tree, when I wipe the dust from the folds of her gown and place her in the center with the manger in front and Joseph to one side, I think about Mary. For a brief moment, she was the central figure in the greatest drama of all time, the giving of the Christ child. The angel Gabriel said of her, "Blessed art thou among women." Indeed, she was the long-awaited virgin who conceived miraculously and brought forth the Son of God—a divine promise of atonement for humankind. No woman had been more honored or revered, and rightly so. Yet Mary's glory flows not entirely from the events that happened to her, but from the way she responded to God.

From Nephi's vision (1 Nephi 11:13-15), we know that Mary was foreordained to the role she played. She must have been one of the most valiant of all spirits to have been entrusted with the nurturing, care, and cherishing of the Savior. But the real inspiration is her humanness—her natural reactions to the events that surrounded her.

While Mary was still very young, an angel appeared. Seeing him, she was troubled, wondering what this vision might be. Luke writes, "And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and shalt call his name JESUS. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?"

Undoubtedly Mary knew the traditions of her people. She knew that a Messiah was to be born, and she must have understood that to be the mother of the Savior would be the highest honor ever to come to a woman. Her lineage was correct; perhaps she had even contemplated the possibility of such a blessing coming to her. If so, at that moment when she talked to the angel, she brushed all speculation aside and went right to the heart of the matter—her purity. She was a virgin, and so with clear, uncluttered instincts she questioned the birth. How could this be?

Only after the angel explained did Mary submit her purity to the cause, declaring, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word." If she realized that her obedience might mean disgracing herself and her espoused husband, that it might mean being banished from her home or condemned as an unwed mother, she gave no indication of her fears. She was willing to serve God.

Shortly after the angel's visit, Mary traveled some distance to see her cousin Elisabeth, who was in her sixth month of pregnancy. The angel had told Mary of Elisabeth's great joy, but Elisabeth had no way of knowing Mary's except as it was revealed to her. Luke tells us that Elisabeth, on seeing Mary, felt the babe leap within her. Being filled with the Holy Ghost, she bore witness to the divine mission of Mary's child, repeating the angel's words "Blessed art thou among women."

Mary, too, was touched by the Holy Ghost. The young, ingenuous girl who had spoken so plainly to the angel exclaimed her joy and gratitude in poetry. Echoing the Psalm of Hannah, with which she must have been familiar, she expressed her depth of feeling at being chosen:

My soul doth magnify the Lord,

And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.

For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is his name.

And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation.

He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.

He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.

He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath sent empty away.

He hath holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy;

As he spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

Then the exalted moment passed. The visit ended, and Mary returned home to await the time for giving birth.

It soon became known that Mary was with child. We might well imagine the consternation such a report brought to those who loved her, and to Joseph especially. His love and respect were evident in his response. He could have openly shamed her; instead, he determined to put her away privately with a writ of divorcement.

While he grieved over this matter, an angel appeared and told him not to be afraid to take Mary as his wife. The angel explained that Marys pregnancy was the fulfillment of prophecy, that "a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us."

Joseph accepted the angel's message and took Mary as his wife. The days that followed, while Mary and Joseph waited for God's son to be born, must have been marvelous. This young couple understood God's purpose for their lives, and they knew of his great confidence in them.

On the night the child was born, heavenly choirs confirmed the glad tidings. Shepherds in the fields, hearing, came to see the babe whom Mary had wrapped in swaddling clothes and laid in a manger. Luke records the event: "And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger. And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying which was told them concerning this child. And all they that heard—it wondered at those things which were told them by the shepherds." Luke adds, "But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart."

Mary held in her heart the intimations of divine significance, pondering them. Seemingly, she, like most of us, struggled to comprehend. Yet she never faltered, and continued to display great wisdom and spiritual discernment in the events that followed.

As was the custom, she and Joseph brought the child to Jerusalem and presented him at the temple. There they found a man named Simeon. According to Luke, the Holy Ghost was upon this just and devout man, who had been promised that he would see the Messiah before his death. Taking Mary's child into his arms, he exclaimed, "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people; a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel."

Again Mary had received a confirmation, and yet "Joseph and his mother marveled at those things which were spoken of him."

Still filled with the Holy Ghost and perhaps perceiving the young couple's confusion, Simeon went on to bless Mary and Joseph saying, "Behold, this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign which shall be spoken against; (yea, a sword shall pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed."

Simeon's witness carried with it the foreshadowing of Mary's own anguish as he prophesied of events to come. Then his testimony was supported by yet another witness—Anna.

Anna was a widow who never left the temple "but served God with fastings and prayers night and day." She came up, gave thanks, and spoke of this babe as the one promised for redemption in Jerusalem.

With these testimonies ringing in their ears, Joseph and Mary left the temple with the child. Soon wise men from the East sought them out and bore yet another witness. Then, being warned by an angel, the young family fled to Egypt. Finally they returned to Nazareth, where in their care and company Jesus grew.

The scriptures record almost nothing about Christ's youth. But as a mother, I can imagine how it must have been for Mary. From the time they were born, I have watched my own children develop in delightfully unexpected ways. So it must have been with Jesus. Christ's wisdom and grace must have been a steady, daily unfolding to Mary.

We, on the other hand, are given only a glimpse of the boy some twelve years later in Jerusalem, where the family had gone to be taxed. Jesus was found to be missing, and after three days of searching was located in the temple. On finding the lad his mother scolded him saying, "Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee sorrowing."

Surely Mary must have understood that God would not allow anything to happen to his Son. He had an important mission yet to perform. But, like any mother, she worried.

Jesus' answer was revelatory: "How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?"

With those words, the magnitude of this young man's divine parentage was revealed. He was growing up; he was making known his feelings concerning God. And again Luke records that 'his mother kept all these sayings in her heart."

Mary had conversed with an angel. While still a virgin, she had miraculously conceived and given birth. She had received numerous witnesses testifying to the divinity of her child. She herself had prophesied under the Holy Ghost's influence. And yet, she continued to marvel and to ponder.

That, I think, is the significance of Mary's life: it manifests the workings of faith. She had been given to know a great deal, but she had to grow into an understanding of what she knew. It is to her credit that she had the initial humility to respond to her unusual call from the Lord, and it is noteworthy that through the years she continued to serve. But only gradually, as she fleshed out the skeleton of her own experience, did her understanding become complete.

By the time of the marriage at Cana, Mary knew that Jesus could change the water into wine, and she asked him to perform the miracle for her. She expected that he would grant her request and told the servants to do as he said.

No doubt Mary's increased faith and understanding became the "sword" of sorrow that would pierce her soul as Simeon had prophesied. Following the marriage at Cana, she was to watch her son take up and fulfill his divine mission. No mother ever hopes to have a son rejected, denied, and crucified; and certainly knowing that son to be the Savior of the world, the promised Messiah, the Son of God, could only have intensified Mary's pain.

One day Jesus sat in a house surrounded by his disciples. When someone came to inform him that his mother and brethren were outside seeking him, he replied, "Who is my mother? and who are my brethren? . . . Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother." (Matthew 12:48, 50.) Like all children, Jesus first learned love from the nurturance he received from his mother. For him to liken that bond to his love for all who serve God was a high tribute to Mary. And he was deeply concerned for her welfare. As he hung on the cross in his final hour, he looked down and commissioned the apostle John to care for her; and "from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home." (John 19:27.)

Mary was active in the early Christian church. The final mention of her is found in Acts 1:14, where we are told that she gathered with the apostles in the upper room in Jerusalem. I imagine that following the Resurrection Mary had new miracles to ponder and new work to do as a special witness of her son's divinity.

Yet when all is told, we still don't know many details about Mary. Did she have a fine voice? Did she enjoy sewing? Were there flowers in her garden? Perhaps, but what does that matter? We know the important things about her. We know Mary loved what was good; we know she was obedient; we know she raised her son to adulthood and then had the wisdom to relinquish her role and allow him to perform his mission under his Father's spiritual guidance. We know that she stood by him. She was nearby when he was teaching. She mourned him at the cross. She was always there, never attempting to draw attention to herself but quietly adding her witness.

Mary was a partner with God in a unique sense. But each of us, Mary included, has another kind of partnership with God—a partnership rooted in experience and the righteous use of agency. As a young girl, Mary gave herself to be "the handmaid of the Lord," but only after she had lived and loved and struggled did she begin to understand what the angel meant when he said, "Blessed art thou among women." Mary, for all her favor with God, still had to give herself to God to fulfill his purposes, as we do.

Scripture references:

Mary Matthew 1:16-23; 2:11; 13:55; Mark 3:31-35; 6:3; Luke 1:27-56; 2:16-48; John 19:26-27; Acts 1:14; Mosiah 3:8; Alma 7:10; 19:13

Anna Luke 2:36-38
