What mother hasn't dreamed great things for her child? And if the child is an only child, a long-awaited child, how much more does it become the center of ambitions, hopes, and dreams?

When the angel Gabriel announced the birth of John, he promised Zacharias that the son his wife conceived would be great, a leader, full of the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb. But he would not be the greatest of leaders; that honor belonged to the child of his wife's cousin. Knowing this, how did Elisabeth greet Mary? With envy? No. She welcomed her cousin with open arms, readily acknowledging Mary's great honor, glorying in the Lord and saying, 'Whence is this, . . . that the mother of my Lord should come to me?"

Elisabeth had prepared all her life for the role she was to play. As a descendant of Aaron and the wife of a priest, her activities centered around the temple. Though aged and childless, which may have lessened her esteem among her peers, she was blameless before God, having kept all the commandments and ordinances. Yet for many years her prayer for a child had remained unanswered.

Then the lot fell to Zacharias. During his week to officiate in the temple, each priest scrupulously maintained his worthiness; but inasmuch as over fourteen hundred men might participate, and the selection of a single priest who would enter the Holy Place to burn incense was determined by the drawing of a lot, that honor might never come, or might come only once in a lifetime. When the lot fell to Zacharias that day, it was honor enough. But a vision was opened to him, as well.

He beheld an angel standing on the right side of the golden altar. Zacharias was troubled, afraid. But the angel said, "Fear not, thy prayer is heard." Which prayer? It was obvious: the one Zacharias had uttered until his hope had turned to ashes, the one his wife still offered continually, even though to keep asking seemed a mockery. The angel stated it clearly: "Thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son." His promise went further: the child was to be a blessing to the people, a cause for rejoicing, the means of turning many souls to God. He would go before in the Spirit of Elias to make ready a people prepared to receive their Lord.

Doubtless Zacharias recognized in those words the great forerunner of whom the prophets had spoken, but it was more than he could believe. How, he asked, could he know that what was spoken was true? He was an old man, and his wife was well stricken with years. The angel (the prophet Elias, according to Doctrine and Covenants 27:7) reiterated the authority by which he had come to bring those good tidings. Then, for a sign, he struck Zacharias dumb, rendering him speechless until that day when all would be fulfilled.

Many people waited outside the Holy of Holies. As was the custom, they watched for the clouds of incense smoke to appear above the great partition that separated the general assembly from the Holy Place. Zacharias was a long time in the temple that day, and when he reappeared, he was unable to pronounce the benediction. He beckoned, and by signs he made it known that he had seen a vision.

When the days of his ministrations in the temple were completed, he returned to his home. There his wife conceived and hid herself for five months, saying, "Thus hath the Lord . . . looked on me, to take away my reproach."

In the sixth month, the same angel who spoke to Zacharias told Mary of Elisabeth's condition. With great joy, Mary hurried to the hill country of Judea, to the house of Zacharias, to be with her cousin, with whom she shared a most uncommon common bond. Elisabeth, hearing Mary's greeting, felt the babe leap in her womb, and being filled with the Holy Ghost, she exclaimed, "Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb."

These two women—one older and seasoned in life, a rock of faith; the other younger, barely betrothed, beautiful—enjoyed three months of companionship. There must have been joy, laughter, moments solemn and tender, some learning, some growing. In Jerusalem, Roman soldiers marched while the Pharisees busied themselves with ceremonial pieties. The world moved on, thoughtlessly unaware of the domestic drama tucked away in the peaceful hills of Judea.

Shortly after Mary and her cousin separated, Elisabeth gave birth to a son. As had been prophesied, her neighbors and relatives rejoiced with her, gathering on the eighth day to witness the circumcision and naming of the child. How much of the angel's message Zacharias was able to convey to Elisabeth in his incapacitated condition, we do not know—except that she knew her son was to be called John.

The family wanted the child to be named Zacharias as would be proper to honor his father. When Elisabeth insisted on the name of John, the matter was referred to her husband. He wrote with a stylus on a wax tablet, "His name is John." In that instant, the angel's words were fulfilled and Zacharias's tongue was loosened. He praised God.

Those who had come to witness a circumcision now had witnessed the miraculous restoration of Zacharias's speech as well. His sudden affliction in the temple, the birth itself, and now this miracle seemed portentous, to say the least. The people whispered among themselves, "What manner of child shall this be!"

Zacharias, filled with the Holy Ghost, prophesied. He touched on all the predictions of a Messiah from the beginning, concluding with a clear statement of exactly what manner of child this John would be: a prophet; one to go before the Lord, to prepare his ways; one to give knowledge of salvation to the people and light to those who sit in darkness.

The boyhood of John is summarized in a few words: the boy "grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel." Nothing more is said of Elisabeth. Being older when John was born, it is possible that she died before he began his mission. But her maternal influence is unmistakable.

When Jesus came to be baptized, John greeted his cousin with his mother's very words: "Comest thou to me?" No jealousy, no one-upmanship, no jockeying for position; only love, humility, and an ennobling pride in his own role.

Some time later, when John was questioned by a group of Jews intent on arousing his envy, he stated unequivocally, "I am not the Christ. I am sent before him." Then, calling himself the friend of the bridegroom, the one who has not the bride but rejoices in the bridegroom's voice, he added, "My joy is . . . fulfilled." Now, "he must increase, but I must decrease."

In the same spirit, Jesus honored both Elisabeth and her son when he said, "Among those that are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptist."

Elisabeth was promised that her son would perform a great mission. To help him, she instilled within him such love and humility that the usual stumbling blocks of hate and envy were swept aside, leaving him free to fulfill his own destiny. What mother could hope to do more?

Scripture references:

Elisabeth Luke 1:5-80; 7:28; Matthew 11:11; John 3:30; Doctrine and Covenants 84:27
