Mary Magdalene came to the Savior's tomb in the company of other women. Besides herself, there were Mary, the mother of James and Joseph; Joanna; Salome, a woman called simply the mother of Zebedee's children; and perhaps others. Two days earlier they had watched Jesus' hasty burial. In the final hours before the Sabbath, there had been little time to properly prepare the body; Jesus had been quickly wrapped in fresh linen and laid in a new sepulcher. Now, in the earliest dawn of the day following the Sabbath, Mary came with her sisters, bringing spices to more thoroughly anoint and embalm the body, the only loving service left to render the dead.

As they approached the tomb, they expressed concern. Who would roll the large stone from the door? Either as they arrived or shortly before, there was a great earthquake. An angel descended, rolled back the stone, and sat upon it. The keepers Pilate had sent to guard the tomb trembled and "became as dead men." But to the women, the angel said, "Fear not. . . . He is not here; for he is risen."

The angel invited them to see the place, now empty, where the Lord had lain, then commissioned them to go quickly and tell the disciples. Frightened, the women seem only to have understood that Jesus was gone.

Mary hurried to Peter and an unnamed disciple (thought to be John) and said, "They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him." Peter and John returned with Mary. As she stood outside weeping, they investigated. John peered into the tomb; Peter entered. They saw that the grave was empty; the linen garments that had been wrapped about Jesus were at one end of the place where he had lain. The napkin that was on his head was in a place by itself. Of that moment John wrote, "They knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead." Peter and John left.

Mary lingered. Alone, she entered the tomb. To her eyes it was not empty. She beheld two angels dressed in white, one sitting at the head and the other at the foot of where the body of Jesus had lain.

One of the angels spoke: "Woman, why weepest thou?" It was an odd question given the scene—a sepulcher and a woman bringing spices to anoint the dead. Women had been weeping at the graves of their loved ones since Eve buried her first son. "I will greatly multiply thy sorrow," God had said to Eve. Now, "Woman, why weepest thou?" asked the angel.

But the directness of the question didn't confound Mary. She was not overawed by the vision. With great simplicity, she stated her confusion: "Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him." Then, becoming aware of someone else standing nearby, and believing it to be the caretaker, she pleaded, "Sir, if thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away."

Jesus spoke her name, "Mary." She turned, instantly recognizing the Master's voice. "Rabboni," she said. So it was that the woman from Magdala, who came seeking the Christ, was found by him. Her own name, "Mary," broke through the darkness of her sorrow and instantly converted her tears to joy. "Mary—Rabboni!"

She fell at his feet, reaching out to embrace him. But she was to learn a second mystery: Jesus must first ascend to the Father. Later, she and many others would touch him, feeling the nail prints and the place where the sword pierced his side. They would sit with him and eat with him, but not yet. First there was a mandate from above to which he must give obedience.

Yet Jesus did not simply leave Mary to ponder the riddle of his new reality. He called her to be a messenger and commissioned her with a specific service: "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God."

Mary did not know how the disciples would react to her message. As a matter of fact, she was not well received; they refused to believe that Jesus was alive and that she had seen him.

Shortly after appearing to Mary, Jesus appeared to the other women, saying, "All hail." These women embraced his feet and worshipped him. He charged them also as messengers, saying, "Go tell my brethren." But even when they corroborated Mary's testimony, the disciples only shook their heads and said, "These are the tales of idle women.

Their reaction is not surprising, considering that Mary and her sisters had entered into a new world of understanding. It was an adventure as startling as the one their mother Eve undertook when she sought knowledge like unto God and partook of the forbidden fruit. As the first to behold the risen Christ, the first to witness the miracle with her own eyes and ears, the first to grasp the full significance of the empty tomb, Mary spoke fact in perplexity, giving her witness at the very threshold of the Resurrection.

Who was this Mary Magdalene that she should be honored with the first vision of the risen Christ? The account is brief, but we know that she was an influential woman from the town of Magdala, one of several women who gave her substance as well as her devotion to Jesus' mission. The scriptures tell us that she stood close by the cross when others, even the apostles, tarried afar off. When Jesus asked John to take his mother away, Mary Magdalene remained. The high regard in which the gospel writers held her is evidenced by the fact that she is mentioned by name fourteen times.

Mary seems to have been profoundly grateful to Jesus for having purged her of seven demons. What were those "seven devils"? They could have been evil spirits; or she might have been a victim of epilepsy. Whatever afflicted Mary, Jesus healed her. But Jesus healed many—including the ten lepers, nine of whom didn't even return to thank him. Healing alone did not make converts. Mary's faith must have been based on more than gratitude, for, while there is no account of how she came to the knowledge, she seems to have known exactly who Jesus was. Immediately after her healing, she appears in the scriptures as a fully poised, fully converted woman.

Unfortunately, since medieval times Mary has been much maligned. Her name, "Magdalene," has come to mean "reformed prostitute," and artists have repeatedly depicted her as an immoral woman driven to the Savior by her sins. All this has come about because Bible scholars, beginning in the fourth century, chose to identify her with the unnamed sinful woman of Luke 7:36-50 who washed Jesus' feet with her hair. The first mention of Mary Magdalene in Luke 8:2 follows closely the account of the sinful woman, but there is no reason to assume that the two women are the same. And what is more, the early Christians did not regard Mary as a reformed prostitute. In light of that fact, I think it is safe to assume that Mary Magdalene was never a harlot.

This is not to say that Jesus could not have extended his mercy to a prostitute and converted her into a disciple and close friend. On the other hand, nothing in scripture warrants impugning the chastity of Mary Magdalene.

Because Jesus interacted freely with Mary, Martha, Mary Magdalene, and many other women in a manner that the Jews of his day would have considered improper and highly unbecoming unless he were married, there are those who speculate that Mary Magdalene was his wife. Nothing in scripture refutes that idea, but neither is it supported. In the scriptures she is portrayed as a close friend of the Savior's, a woman of great fortitude. Her love never faltered, and her faith carried her through the dark hours of the Crucifixion. When others fled, she remained. When the two apostles left the tomb, she lingered. Where others' eyes saw emptiness, she saw angels, and it was she who first discerned the risen Christ. Her reward was not only a crown of glory but a closer knowledge of things divine and a sacred commission. She who had been carrying spices to a tomb now threw aside her useless ointments and carried the glorious news: "I have seen the Lord."

Scripture references:

Mary Magdalene Matthew 27:56-61; 28:1; Mark 15:40-47; 16:1-9; Luke 8:2; 24:10; John 19:25; 20:1-18
