When Mary Magdalene joined the followers of Jesus, she became one of a band of women closely associated with the Savior. The scriptures indicate that these women—Mary Magdalene; Mary, the mother of Christ; Peter's wife; Joanna; Susanna; Salome; Mary, the wife of Cleophas; Mary of Bethany; Martha; Mary, the mother of John Mark; and perhaps others—had access to Jesus. He seems to have sought out and enjoyed their company. They were close friends. He discussed his mission with them, taught them, trusted them, and commissioned them to take his message to others. They, in turn, understood and responded intelligently to his teachings and served vital functions in the work. Many of them ministered to Jesus and supported him with both their services and their means. (See Luke 8:3.)

Other women believers sought out Jesus from time to time during his ministry. With these women, the Savior interacted dynamically. If they needed to be healed, he healed them; if they repented, he forgave them. If they lacked enlightenment, he taught them. Significantly, nearly half of his earthly ministrations dealt primarily with women.

Who were the women closely associated with Jesus? Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of Christ, have already been discussed. Peter's wife (sometimes called Simon or Cephas's wife) opened her home to Jesus when he was in Capernaum. He headquartered there and one day healed her mother of a high fever, a miracle included in three of the four gospels. Paul tells us that Peter's wife traveled with Jesus and her husband when they carried the gospel to other parts of Galilee and Judea, as did wives of the other apostles. (See I Corinthians 9:5.)

Joanna was the wife of Chuza, the steward of Herod the Tetrarch. She is mentioned as one of several women Jesus healed of sickness or an evil spirit, and she subsequently gave of herself and her means to Jesus and his disciples. She is mentioned as one of the women who, with Mary Magdalene, brought spices to the tomb to embalm the body of Jesus, and she added her testimony to that of Mary Magdalene and the other women who first informed the apostles that Christ had risen. Though the account is brief and incomplete, Joanna appears as a woman of great faith, and the knowledge she gained as she accompanied Jesus and his disciples must have made her a strong member of his missionary group.

Less is known of Susanna. She is mentioned as having been healed by Jesus and as having given freely of her substance to the work. She, too, was one of the first witnesses to see the resurrected Christ.

Salome was the mother of James and John. She was likely prominent in her Galilean community; her husband, Zebedee, had servants who attended to his fishing boats—an indication that he was a man of means. She may also have been a sister to Christ's mother, thus making her Jesus' aunt, although the scriptures are not entirely clear on this point.

Salome is usually remembered as the ambitious mother who, on the Monday before his crucifixion, came to Jesus, worshipped him, and made a special request: Would he seat her two sons to his right and left in his coming kingdom? Such a petition, not surprisingly, caused indignation among the other ten apostles.

Jesus answered, "Ye know not what ye ask." Then, as he frequently did, he used the incident to teach a lesson. Positions of special privilege and prestige were not his to give, but his Father's. Those who wished to be great must be servants, he added, implying that true spiritual greatness was an attribute earned, not given.

Although Salome appeared shameless in her attempt to win favor for her sons, Jesus' rebuke was kindly and spoken with care so as to increase her understanding. She was not the first-nor would she be the last—to confuse worldly position with spiritual greatness. We all come to Christ in different ways, and seeking privilege may have been Salome's way of testifying to her understanding of Jesus' power and purpose, her acknowledgment of his divinity, for she remained faithful to Jesus to the end, never faltering in her service to him or her loyalty to his mission. Such a woman certainly deserves our admiration.

To Salome's credit is the rich spiritual legacy she gave her sons. John the Beloved seemingly comprehended the spirit of Christ's mission the most perfectly of all the apostles. It was John to whom the Savior entrusted the care of his own mother, and to John he granted the privilege of remaining on earth until his second coming. James, also a faithful apostle, became the first of the Twelve to seal his testimony with his blood; his life ended by the sword of Herod Agrippa. In a very real sense, the sons of Salome succeeded in the Lord's work. No matter where they were seated in the Kingdom, she could be proud of them. She was herself an example of unrivaled service.

Mary, the wife of Cleophas, was mother to the apostle James (the lesser, or the younger) and Joseph, both faithful followers of Jesus. Like the other women, she was healed, gave liberal support to Jesus' mission, and carried spices to the tomb. She was among the faithful to whom Jesus appeared, admonishing them to tell the apostles of his Resurrection.

Mary of Bethany and her sister Martha frequently entertained the Savior in their home. It was their brother, Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from the dead. Mary, the mother of John Mark, owned a house in Jerusalem with an upper room where Jesus and the apostles frequently met.

Together these individuals offer a picture of the kind of women Jesus gathered around him. Without exception, all of these women were converted, capable, and deeply aware of the great mission with which they were associated. Their knowledge of things divine may have been faulty at times or incomplete, but they learned and matured under the tutelage of the Savior, their testimonies never wavering.

Jesus acknowledged the faith of women and performed many miracles at their request. He healed Simon's mother-in-law and Jarius's daughter, and he raised the son of the widow of Nain. For his mother, he turned water into wine. The single time he refused such a request was when a Syrophenician woman begged him to heal her daughter of an evil spirit. At first Jesus made no answer at all. When she cried after him, calling him "thou Son of David" (which shows that she recognized him as the Messiah), his disciples asked him to send her away. To them he said, "I am not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel." Still the woman persisted, falling at his feet and pleading, "Lord, help me." Jesus answered, "It is not meet to take the children's bread, and to cast it unto the dogs." Jesus was not insulting this woman. He was referring to the small, much-loved household dogs of the time. But he was testing her faith and perseverance.

The Syrophenician woman fearlessly used his metaphor to express with absolute clarity her convictions: "Yes, Lord: yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs." Jesus was impressed: "O woman, great is thy faith." He granted her request.

In this and other incidents, Jesus took a personal risk to help the women who came to him. No class of people were more denigrated by the Jews than those of pagan birth, such as the Syrophenician woman, unless it was a woman who was menstruating or who had just given birth and was still hemorrhaging. According to Jewish law, such a woman was "unclean," and any man who touched or was touched by a woman during her menstrual period must undergo a ritual cleansing. (See Leviticus 15:27.)

Knowing that, consider the woman who had a continuous issue of blood. For twelve years she had been an outcast, considered unclean and unfit to attend religious services or even to associate in mixed company. Yet somehow she came to believe that if she could but touch the hem of the Savior's robe, she would be healed. Being unfit to touch any Jewish male, much less the Messiah, she hoped not to be noticed as she approached him.

Jesus, walking to the house of Jairus amid a great throng of people, suddenly turned and asked, "Who touched me?"

Peter expressed the obvious when he replied, "Master, the multitude throng thee . . . and thou sayest, who touched me?"

Jesus insisted, "Somebody hath touched me." He added that he had felt virtue, or healing power, go out of him.

The woman, not able to escape detection, came forward, knelt, and confessed that she had touched the Savior while in an unclean condition. At this point the crowd probably expected Jesus to react in the prescribed manner. But he didn't wash his clothes, bathe, and segregate himself until evening. Rather, he praised the woman: "Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith hath made thee whole." Remarkable about the incident is the fact that the woman was healed the moment she touched him. Jesus didn't have to risk being called "unclean" by the Jews in order to help this woman; he did it to recognize her great faith.

In a similar manner, Jesus risked his good name for the prostitute who washed his feet with her hair. Simon, a Pharisee, in whose house Jesus was being entertained, saw the woman enter with her alabaster box of ointment, weeping, and wash Jesus' feet. Simon said to himself, "This man, if he were a prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him."

Jesus, perceiving his thoughts, allowed the woman to anoint his feet while he related the parable of the creditor. One debtor owed him five hundred pence, the other fifty. Neither could pay, so the creditor forgave them both. Then Jesus asked Simon, "Which of them will love him most?"

"He, to whom he forgave most," Simon answered.

Jesus agreed, then pointed out that while Simon had not offered him water to wash his feet, this woman had bathed them with her tears. Only then did he speak directly to the woman, saying, "Thy sins are forgiven. . . . Thy faith hath saved thee."

"Who is this that forgiveth sins?" asked others at the feast. But the newly redeemed woman knew, and rejoiced.

Throughout Jesus' ministry, certain women seem to have understood him while others were blind to his identity and mission. On the American continent, women were among those who heard the voice testifying to his divinity following his crucifixion. Nephite women were among those who felt his pierced side and the prints of the nails in his hands and feet. In Galilee, faithful women ministered to him and were present at the Sermon on the Mount and at the miracle of the loaves and fishes. In Perea, they brought their children to him to be blessed. In Bethany, they sat at his feet and received instruction. Indeed the only redeeming notes in the nightmarish crucifixion episode were the warning of Pilate's wife and the wails of women who mourned for Jesus.

Little is recorded about the wife of Pilate. Historians give us her name, Claudia Procula, and note that she belonged to a distinguished and powerful Roman family. By birth and connection of higher rank than her husband, it was probably her influence at court that gained him his post in Judea. But it was a troubled post, and there is every reason to believe that she was fully aware of the difficult problems of government facing her husband, including the personal danger from Caesar's retribution if rebellion broke out in Jerusalem. That threat in itself would have been sufficient to make her nights sleepless. Yet, at a time when her husband was seemingly following the wisest course by attempting to placate the Jews, she spoke out. She had had a dream—one powerful enough to make her the only human being—male, female, heathen, Jew, or Gentile—to plead for Jesus' release on the day of his trial. "Have thou nothing to do with that just man," she warned her husband.

What she suggested was not politically expedient. Yet she was fearlessly true to whatever light she had—which at best could not have been more than a glimmer of understanding.

There are only thirty-eight words in the book of Matthew about Pilate's wife. But in that brief space, she leaves such an impression on the gospel story that she is known throughout the Christian world. Her few words caused Pilate to hesitate, and he offered Barabbas to the mob. But they only shouted louder to crucify Jesus.

Her action seemed to be the result of two convictions: first, that Jesus was innocent, and second, that her husband would invite disaster if he took action against Jesus. She was right on both counts. Her husband's final acquittal, "I find no fault in this man," confirms the first. The fact that his administration ended abruptly and that he was banished to the south of France, where he reportedly took his own life, confirms the second.

As Jesus walked to his crucifixion, the scriptures tell us that a great company of women wailed and lamented. Jesus was touched by their sympathy, and he who was silent before Herod, before Pilate, and before the mobs screaming for his blood was not silent before them. "Daughters of Jerusalem," he admonished, "weep not for me, but weep for yourselves, and for your children." He was on his way to his final triumph, but Jerusalem would soon be engulfed by a holocaust—a horror many of those weeping women would live to see.

One cannot help drawing a contrast between those weeping women and the lack of faith on the part of the Jews in general. True relationship to Jesus is by the Spirit, not by flesh and blood. Early in his mission, when a woman raised her voice and praised his mother's breasts and womb, Jesus replied, "Rather blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it." Mary, his mother, did not find perfection in maternity, but in spiritual obedience. And in his dealings with women, Jesus taught repeatedly that there was no superiority in being male or female, Jew or Gentile—only in one's ability to receive nourishment of the Spirit. The women who followed Jesus shared that common characteristic; they were receptive to the Spirit. This was a fact that their Savior acknowledged and honored.

Scripture references:

Women who followed Jesus Luke 8:3; 3 Nephi 17:25

Peter's wife Matthew 8:14-15; Mark 1:30-31; Luke 4:38-39; 1 Corinthians 9:5

Joanna Luke 8:3; 24:10

Susanna Luke 8:2-3

Salome Matthew 20:20-21; 27:56; Mark 16:1-8

Mary, the wife of Cleophas Matthew 27:56-61; 28:1; Mark 15:40-47; 16:1; Luke 24:10; John 19:25

Syrophenician woman Matthew 15:21-28; Mark 7:24-30

The woman with the twelve-year issue of blood Matthew 9:20-22; Mark 5:25-34; Luke 8:43-48 (See Mosaic laws governing menstruation: Leviticus 15:19-33; 18:19; 20:18; see also Ezekiel 22:10; 36:17.)

Pilate's wife Matthew 27:19

Women weeping at the Crucifixion Luke 23:28
