"The good servant" is a recurring image in Jesus' teachings. When Salome asked him to favor her two sons above the other ten apostles, he answered that those who wished to be great ought to be servants. At the passover feast, as he broke the bread and blessed the wine, Jesus asked his apostles whether it were greater to sit at the table or to wait upon it. They answered that it was greater to sit at the table. Not necessarily, was the reply; then, referring to himself as the one who served, Jesus admonished his apostles to follow his example. On yet another occasion, he girded himself with a towel and washed the feet of the apostles over the objections of Peter. In this manner Jesus fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, who centuries earlier had described the coming Messiah as a "righteous servant," a "prudent servant."

Jesus never practiced hierarchy. He related individually to friends, co-workers, harlots, tax collectors, fishermen, rulers of the synagogue—everyone. And he advocated the same behavior from those around him, healing Simon's mother-in-law that she might minister to him, praising the poor in spirit, the meek and the merciful. Yet on one occasion, while visiting in the home of Mary and Martha, he pointedly preferred the less dutiful Mary.

Mary and Martha lived in Bethany, a small village southeast of the Mount of Olives, beside the Jericho Road and not far from the temple at Jerusalem. They were sisters, perhaps widows, living together with their brother Lazarus in comfortable circumstances. They contributed to Jesus' ministry and entertained him often.

The incident for which these two women are best known occurred during the Feast of Tabernacles, a particularly busy time for Jewish women, who had banquets to prepare and arbors of green boughs to construct and decorate in observance of the holidays. Jesus was Mary and Martha's guest, along with many of his close followers and other believers in Bethany.

The scriptures portray an interesting scene. Martha is busy with the preparations, while Mary sits at the Master's feet, listening with great interest to his words. Martha, feeling more and more irritated, at last vents her feelings: "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve alone?"

We all know that woman. In every language, in every age, Marthas have broken into the discussion with, "How can you sit there doing nothing while I work my fingers to the bone?" In this case, Martha might have left the Savior out of the problem and simply asked Mary to come and help; but she was too angry. She drew Jesus into the argument by implying that he was amiss in allowing Mary to sit at his feet when he could see how hard she was working.

The Savior's reply was remarkably gentle: "Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things: But one thing is needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away from her."

There is no reproof of Martha's desire to provide well; repeating her name implies great kindness. Nor does Jesus sanction neglect on Mary's part. I must believe that she had willingly helped, doing her share and more, before the Master's arrival, or he would not have commended her. But Jesus likely had no desire for a banquet when a simple meal would do. What he wanted was the sisters' receptive attention. He had more to give them than they could give him.

No story in the scriptures speaks more directly to a woman's dilemma than the story of Mary and Martha. Women from the time of birth are trained to "serve" others—parents, children, husbands, even the needy. For many, it has become difficult to approach life from any other perspective. Yet clearly the Savior would not have his servants become distracted with everyday chores when more important things are at stake. The ideals in this story are fundamental to the Christian message—service, yes, but service rooted in spiritual motivation. For service is meaningful only when it is needed, and when we choose to serve, not when it is unnecessary and done out of a slavish sense of duty or by coercion. The Good Servant laid down his life for others; no one took it from him. Our service, if it is to be edifying to ourselves and others, must be of the same tenor.

So, at the Feast of Tabernacles in Bethany that year, Mary chose "the good part." Does that mean she was more devoted to the Savior than was her sister Martha? Unquestionably, the two sisters were of differing temperaments. Martha was the practical, efficient, eagerhearted hostess. Mary was the impulsive, attentive student. Yet they were one in the Spirit, and Jesus understood and loved both of them.

It was to Martha that Jesus first declared, "I am the resurrection, and the life: he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live." Mary and Martha's brother Lazarus had been dead four days; he was buried in a tomb. When Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she ran out to meet him, lamenting "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died." How many times had the sisters said that to one another during those four days, struggling to deal with their grief?

But that wasn't all Martha had to say to the Savior. She added, "I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will give it thee." She acknowledged the power of him who stood before her, knowing that Jesus was one with the will of the Father.

Jesus said, "Thy brother shall rise."

Failing to see more than an assurance that her brother would rise with the rest of the dead, Martha replied, "I know that he will rise again in the resurrection."

It was then that Jesus declared himself to be the resurrection and the life, adding "whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die. Believest thou this?"

Martha did not have her reawakened brother before her; she saw only Jesus, and he had come too late. Yet she agreed without reservation: "Yea, Lord: I believe that thou are the Christ, the Son of God, which should come into the world."

And where was Mary? She was still in the house mourning. Jesus asked for her, and Martha went to her, saying, "The Master is come, and calleth for thee." Unlike Martha, who went dry-eyed, Mary ran weeping to fall at his feet, echoing her sister's words: "Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died." Jesus, recognizing the sisters' differing temperaments, asked the weeping Mary, "Where have ye laid him?" And when he was shown, he wept with her. He grieved for a departed friend, for the sorrow of the two sisters, and for the unbelief of many who had come to comfort Mary and Martha.

Jesus' return to Judea at this time was viewed by some of his apostles as dangerous. They had reminded him of the recent attempts on his life and sought to dissuade him. Some even thought their own lives were in danger. Among those at Mary and Martha's house who had come to console the sisters were many prominent people from Jerusalem. A few were impressed by Jesus' concern, saying, "Behold how he loved him!" Others murmured, "Could not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man should not have died?" They were similar to and perhaps some of the same who, only days later, were to murmur, "Let him come down from the cross, and we will believe."

Jesus ordered the stone removed. Martha, ever practical, objected, protesting that "by this time he stinketh: for he hath been dead four days."

The Savior quieted her, and the stone was removed. He offered a prayer giving thanks and acknowledging the Father. Then, with a loud voice, Jesus cried for Lazarus to come forth—and he did.

Disbelief does not resist the miracle. If anything, it seeks signs and proofs; but it resists the one who performs the miracle. With their brother restored to them, Mary and Martha now became more believing, more loyal, more devoted than ever, while the jealous-hearted who witnessed the event began immediately to plot against Jesus. The scriptures indicate that from that moment on, they counseled to put him to death.

Six days later, just before the Crucifixion, Jesus and his apostles dined in Bethany. Martha was again in charge of the preparations; Lazarus sat at the table, and many others were present. Mary, impelled to adoration, took a pound of costly ointment, poured it on Jesus' feet, and wiped his feet with her hair, filling the room with fragrance.

Jesus may have told her of his impending death, or she may have inferred it from his remarks. Even so, she did not try to dissuade him from going to Jerusalem. Perhaps she sensed his mission, realizing that some things were worth dying for, and so, following the custom of the time, refreshed and anointed her guest as only kings were honored. This time her sister made no objection, but others, including Judas, did.

Mary spent between sixty and one hundred dollars on the precious ointment. Judas would accept less than a third of that amount for betraying the Savior. The gift was lavish; yet Jesus accepted it graciously, saying, "Let her alone: against the day of my burying hath she kept this." He further prophesied that the great honor Mary did him would be told wherever his gospel was preached throughout the world. Mary, as well as her gift had been accepted. And wherever we hear of Mary, we hear of Martha. Their testimonies stand together.

Scripture references:

Mary and Martha Mark 14:3-9; Luke 10:38-42; John 11; 12:1-9
