Jesus treated women with his kindest attention even when they didn't seek him out or were not numbered among his followers. One Sabbath as he passed through a synagogue, he saw a woman bent with an infirmity that for eighteen years had kept her from standing erect. Without waiting for a request from her or a petition from a male member of her family (which would have been proper for the times), he called her to him. Laying his hands upon her, he spoke directly to her, saying, "Thou art loosed from thine infirmity." Immediately she stood erect, glorified God, and gave thanks in a fervent prayer.

Contrast that with the attitude of the priest at the synagogue, who attacked the woman. "There are six days in which men ought to work," he said; "in them therefore come and be healed, and not on the sabbath day" —as if it was her fault that the Savior had noticed and healed her!

Jesus answered the priest as directly as he had addressed the woman: "Thou hypocrite, doth not each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall, and lead him away to watering? And ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham, . . . be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day?"

An animal was a source of income. The woman, in the eyes of the priest, was merely something to be pitied, nothing more. Jesus shamed him with that bare truth.

Jesus engaged women individually, a fact best illustrated by the way he handled an adulterous woman. She was brought to him by a party of Scribes and Pharisees as part of a prearranged attempt by them to find cause against him. The case was not difficult. The woman was guilty; she had been taken in the very act. While it was true that the law of Moses decreed death by stoning for this sin, the practice of such extreme punishment had lapsed, even prior to Roman rule. Yet if Jesus pronounced the old Mosaic law obsolete, the Pharisees could denounce him, and if he admonished them to stone the woman, they could report him for rebellion against Rome. It is obvious that the Pharisees had no concern for the woman, but were preoccupied with their own devices.

Jesus saw the situation differently. It was the Scribes and Pharisees to whom he gave little heed. Stooping down, he traced with his finger on the ground as if he had not heard them. They continued to question him, but when at last he answered, it was with a single terse sentence: "He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at her." Having thus spoken, he went back to writing on the ground. When he looked up again, the Scribes and Pharisees had gone; only the woman remained, still awaiting his decision.

Both Jesus and the woman were aware of her guilt. Nevertheless, he spoke respectfully to her, neither condemning nor condoning. "Where are those thine accusers? hath no man condemned thee?"

"No man, Lord."

"Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more."

Some of the most moving features of Jesus' teachings are reflected in the conversations he had with simple people. The Savior delivered his deepest truths to fishermen, farmers, beggars, and widows, who, for the most part, simply received gratefully what the more learned Scribes and Pharisees wearied with debate. So it was with the Samaritan woman at the well.

Returning to Galilee from Jerusalem, Jesus took the unpopular road through Samaria. Animosity between Jews and the Samaritans dated back to the Exile, when the Israelites who were left behind intermarried with the Assyrian invaders. Half a century later, when those who had been carried to Babylon returned and began to rebuild the temple, they contemptuously refused the help of those Samaritans because they were crossbred. The Samaritans, stung by the rebuff, built their own rival temple on Mount Gerizim, and from that day forth Jews and Samaritans had no dealings with one another. In Jesus' time the Samaritans were known to waylay Jewish pilgrims, while the Jews, regarding Samaritans as Levitically unclean, took elaborate pains to avoid any contact with them. But Jesus crossed Samaria on his way to Galilee, and, coming to the ancient well of Jacob, he rested while his disciples went to purchase food in the nearby village.

A woman came to the well with her pitcher, and Jesus asked a drink of her. She was a woman who had been passed from man to man, which may be the reason she came alone to that well rather than drawing water nearer the village where local women gathered. When Jesus spoke, she was immediately filled with suspicion and inquired, "How is it that thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria?" He replied, "If thou knewest . . . who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked of him . . . living water."

These were surprising words, but a woman who had held her own with six men was not inclined to be bested in conversation. She retorted, "Thou hast nothing to draw with, and the well is deep: from whence then hast thou that living water?"

Jesus pointed to the well and replied, "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst."

The woman, still failing to understand, replied mockingly, "Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not, nor come hither to draw."

Jesus cut her short. "Go, call thy husband, and come hither."

Why that particular command? Was Jesus resorting to proper protocol? He had never resorted to it in the past. Yet it seems unworthy to suppose that he asked solely to embarrass and shame her, knowing what he knew. I prefer to think that he discerned something worthwhile behind the woman's hardened, haughty attitude, and therefore asked the one question sure to open her heart.

I have no husband," said the woman of Samaria; and, having confessed, she became a different woman, her hardness and raillery gone.

"Thou hast said well," Jesus replied. "For thou hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband."

With her past, her innermost heartaches now revealed, what could she answer? "Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet."

Then, in that marvelous way in which Jesus dealt with the humble and simple in heart, Jesus spoke as freely as water filling a jar. To her question regarding the proper place to worship, he answered, "God is a Spirit: . . . worship him in spirit and in truth."

"I know that Messias cometh, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things," she reflected.

I . . . am he," said Jesus, making the first recorded declaration of his mission.

When Jesus' disciples returned, they marveled that he was talking with this Samaritan woman. But she had heard enough to be convinced. She ran back to the village and said to the men there, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" Perhaps something in the woman's voice, her manner, her eyes, prompted them to listen, and they came from the city to see who it was that knew all.

Jesus and his disciples tarried in the village for two days. At the end of that time, many of the villagers believed—not because of the woman alone but because they had heard for themselves and knew that Jesus was the Christ, the Savior of the world.

Jesus, no respecter of persons, had quickened the spirit of a worldly woman who then drank of his "living water" and was spiritually refreshed. Having partaken, the power she carried with her from the Master's presence was enough to inspire an entire village. Likewise, the adulterous woman and the woman loosed from her eighteen-year infirmity were changed—as is every woman who truly encounters her Savior.

Scripture references:

Woman healed on Sabbath Luke 13:11-16

Adulterous woman John 8:3-11; see also Deuteronomy 17:5-6

Woman at the well John 4:7-42
