Perhaps because of our similarity of purpose in spreading the gospel, or because I sense their deep spiritual strength, I feel closer to the women in the early Christian church than to any other of my sisters in the scriptures. Twenty-three individuals, they represent the largest gallery of women named in any period recorded by sacred script. Although many of the references are brief, even cryptic, most of the women emerge as individuals.

What also emerges is the vital role they played in the spread of Christianity. Unquestionably, the early Christian church could not have survived without the nurturance of its female converts, a fact attested to by the homage paid them by the apostles, particularly Peter and Paul. The early Church leaders were indebted to these women for lodging and succor, meetingrooms and places of refuge. When the apostles moved on to carry the gospel to new lands, they charged the women with specific responsibilities to further the work. Women in the early Church filled missions, acted as emissaries, preached, taught, aided the poor, and, in a surprising number of cases, provided the financial wherewithal and stability to organize new congregations.

Lydia was such a woman. The first European convert to Christianity, Paul referred to her and other members of the Church in Philippi (nearly all women in the beginning) as his "joy and crown."

Lydia was probably born in the city of Thyatira and later moved to Philippi, an important Macedonian city. There she imported and sold the much-sought-after "purple cloth" for which her native region was famed and from which she took her own name. As a businesswoman, she was a success; more importantly, she was a deeply spiritual person. Business didn't fill her life; the scriptures tell us that she met regularly with a group of women to pray.

Perhaps observations from her business enabled Lydia to distinguish substance from appearance. The "purple" for her cloth was made from the juices of a certain shellfish. While still in the veins of the animal, the juice was white; when removed and exposed to the sun, it took on hues from deepest purple to crimson—a true transformation. But why was the purple-dyed cloth so sought after? Among Lydia's customers were Babylonian merchants who bought it for their temple curtains and for costumes for their idols. Members of the Roman imperial family, pretenders to divinity, wore the cloth on state occasions. Whatever the source of her understanding, Lydia and her prayer group, though small in number, were large in spirit. Undoubtedly it was as a result of their earnest search for the truth that one day Paul and Silas were directed to find them on the banks of a river and preach to them. Their conversion was clearly aided by the Spirit; we are told that the Lord opened Lydia's heart.

Lydia won her whole household to Christianity, and they were baptized together. Then she "constrained" Paul to stay with her, pleading, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there." Her desire to know the gospel was strong at a time when the only way to learn was to sit at the feet of teachers like Paul and Silas, for the gospels had not yet been written. Paul stayed, teaching Lydia and many others in her home. Later Timothy and Luke were her guests, as well as Silas and perhaps others.

Her hospitality drew Paul and Silas to seek refuge in her home after they were delivered from prison—an adventure that draws another contrast between substance and appearance. A young girl who was possessed of a spirit of divination and who had earned her masters a good deal of money by soothsaying began to follow Paul and Silas. For many days she declared them to be servants of the most high God and testified that their message was to show the way to salvation. Paul grieved, for he knew the source of her inspiration. At last he turned and commanded the evil spirit to depart from her. But when her masters saw the means of their income eliminated, they went before the magistrate and had Paul and Silas beaten and cast into prison. At midnight, an earthquake opened the prison doors. After converting the terrified jailer, Paul and Silas came to Lydia, who had also declared them men of God, teachers of the way of salvation. But her knowledge had come from the true Spirit.

Did their adherence to truth make the women of Philippi homogeneous? Hardly. Euodias and Syntyche disagreed with each other. They were sisters in the faith who had labored with Paul; he describes them as having earned places in the Book of Life. Yet their disagreement was serious enough that Paul wrote and admonished them "to be of one mind." He would later give similar counsel to the women of Chloe's household in Corinth when it became the center of religious strife, suggesting that differences were not uncommon among the faithful.

Paul went on to entreat others in Philippi to help with the reconciliation of Euodias and Syntyche. He added that truth and excellence should be sought wherever such qualities were to be found, suggesting (in words that Joseph Smith paraphrased for the thirteenth Article of Faith) an unlimited spectrum of worthy endeavors, giving the widest possible latitude to individual personalities, talents, and preferences: "Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. . . . And the God of peace shall be with you."

As in Philippi, a great many remarkable women made up the congregation, and some of the leadership, of the Church in Rome. In his letter to Timothy, Paul sends greetings from Claudia, probably a highly placed Roman matriarch who had joined the Christians. When he wrote to the Church in Rome, he commended Julia as a Saint, Mary for the help she had given him, Tryphena and Tryphosa for their work for the Lord, and Persis, whom he called "beloved." The bearer of his letter was a woman named Phebe, a Christian matron living in the eastern part of Corinth. She was probably a widow, inasmuch as she was able to travel alone and conduct business in her own name. Many, if not most, of the women named in connection with the early Church are thought to have been widows because of the fact that they acted for themselves—a privilege allowed only widows in that day. Many of those upon whom the survival of the early Church depended were likely older women, seasoned in life's school.

Paul must have known Phebe well. In asking her to carry his letter, he conferred a great honor on her. In his letter he introduces her to the Saints in Rome as "our sister," "a servant of the church," "a succorer of many," and, he adds, "of myself also." Likely Paul was as welcome and comfortable in Phebe's home in Cenchrea as he was in Lydia's home in Philippi.

Phebe carried Paul's letter to Rome. Possibly she lost her life there, as did Paul and Apphia, a woman martyr mentioned in a letter Paul wrote from his Roman prison cell to Philemon. Many of the Christians in Rome suffered death at the hands of their persecutors.

Among the Roman persecutors were two sisters, Drusilla and Bernice, whose roles in the affairs of the early Church mark a striking contrast to the faithful. They are mentioned in Acts as being present when Paul appeared in the judgment hall at Caesarea to answer charges of sedition and profanation of the temple, but the main part of their story is found in the writings of Josephus.

They were the daughters of Herod Agrippa I, who attained the distinction of being the first royal persecutor of the Church. They were also great-granddaughters of Herod the Great, who ordered the young male babes of Bethlehem murdered at Christ's birth and caused Mary and Joseph to flee to Egypt with their child. And they were nieces of Herod Antipas, who had John the Baptist beheaded at the request of his wife Herodias and her daughter by another marriage.

Drusilla was married to King Aziz of Emesa, but in defiance of the law she left her husband to marry Felix, procurator of Judea. At the time of Paul's trial she had come to Caesarea to live with Felix. Undoubtedly she knew of Paul; he was famed as the greatest living Christian. When Paul appeared to answer the charges against him, he delivered a memorable discourse touching on righteousness, temperance, and judgment—a sermon that caused her husband to tremble and dismiss the apostle, hoping not to be troubled by him further. Drusilla's reaction to Paul's speech is not recorded, but certainly it differed from that of Lydia or Phebe, for the persecutions continued.

When Paul came a second time to plead his case, Bernice was in attendance. She had been the subject of much gossip because of her incestuous affair with her own brother. Bernice had been married to Herod of Chalcis, but after his death she made no attempt to conceal the fact that she was the official consort of her brother, Agrippa II. She, too, heard a powerful sermon from Paul, at which her brother was heard to remark, "Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian."

Agrippa II, the Governor, Bernice, and others who heard Paul that day talked among themselves, agreeing that Paul had done nothing worthy of death or prison. Yet they did nothing to release him.

Paul went back to prison to write letters that would reach more people through the ages than would any Roman edict. Bernice, her sister Drusilla, and the rest of their family, whose lives were strangely intertwined with the rise of Christianity, experienced a few worldly pleasures and then disappeared into the obscurity of history.

Being born to a high position is not in itself a spiritual stumbling block, for other women of privilege accepted the Church. When Paul spoke on Mars Hill in Athens, arguing against the Epicureans and Stoics, Damaris listened. Of the Greeks in Thessalonica and Berea, Luke writes that a number of honorable upper-class woman believed. But Damaris is named specifically.

She may have been one of the Hetairai, a group of highly intellectual women in Athens who were associated with philosophers and statesmen, for few others of her sex would have enjoyed the freedom to act as she did.

But more important than her class or education was her spiritual receptiveness. When Paul preached that the God who made the world and everything in it did not live in a shrine, some mocked; others, feeling no urgency, said they would consider the matter. Damaris and two men, Dionysius and Areopagite, believed and clung to him as he departed.

The Candace of Ethiopia ("candace" meaning "queen") may also have been receptive to Christianity. She is mentioned in connection with the eunuch in charge of her treasury, who traveled to Jerusalem to worship. There he met Phillip, who expounded the scriptures for him. He believed Jesus Christ to be the Son of God and asked to be baptized. After baptizing him, Phillip was caught away by the Spirit; the eunuch saw him no more but went on his way rejoicing. The Candace of Ethiopia must have been partial to the eunuch or she would not have allowed him to travel such a distance to worship; it is likely that he reported his conversion to her. Whether she believed or not, she would have been one of the first in the high circles of Ethiopia to hear the message of Jesus Christ.

Other women not only heard but spread the gospel message. One who was particularly active as a teacher and missionary was Priscilla. Leaving Rome with her husband Aquila at the time when Claudius expelled all Jews, she traveled first to Corinth, then to Ephesus. The couple were tentmakers. Paul, also a tentmaker by trade, lived and worked with them in Corinth, going to the synagogue on the Sabbath to persuade the Jews and the Greeks. It is known that the Church members assembled in Priscilla's home in Rome and later in Ephesus. In Corinth, her home, located in the weaving section of the city, was a rendezvous for those wanting to know more about the new faith.

When Paul left Corinth, he took Priscilla and Aquila with him to Ephesus, where Paul credits them with saving his life during the anti-Christian riots. Forced to leave, he committed the work to their supervision, returning more than a year later to find an organized functioning congregation. Some time later, after the death of Claudius ended the worst of the persecutions, Priscilla and her husband returned to Rome.

Priscilla was probably one of the most influential women in the early Church. Unquestionably, she was known throughout the Christian world of her day and was close enough to Paul that he referred to her using the familiar diminutive of her name, "Prisca." Though she and her husband labored together, in three out of five instances where their names appear, hers is mentioned first—an unprecedented breaking of convention, leading many Bible scholars to believe that she played the more important role.

Priscilla is best known as the teacher of the eloquent and learned Apollos, a Jew from Alexandria who had first learned of the gospel from John the Baptist but whose understanding was incomplete. Although Apollos taught baptism by immersion, he did not understand the significance of the death and resurrection of Jesus Christ. Nevertheless, he had earned a name for himself as a persuasive speaker for the new faith. His popularity at times rivaled Paul's. Realizing the damage that someone of his talents might do to the true Christian cause, Priscilla undertook to teach him the ways of God more perfectly. No superficial convert herself, she invited Apollos into her home and expounded the scriptures to him. She must have been a woman of some scholarly attainments, for Apollos is described as being "mighty in the scripture." Still, she prevailed, and Apollos became a truly great missionary for the Church.

Priscilla's fame is of such magnitude that she is mentioned in records other than the Bible. She is probably the best known of all the women named in Acts or in the epistles. She managed a household, worked at her trade, studied the gospel (probably as Paul's most competent and inspired pupil), preached with her husband, taught, fellowshipped, and, though no mention is made of children, probably reared a family. She juggled the same demands as those placed on women in the Church today, and she managed well enough that her home, no matter where it happened to be—Rome, Corinth, or Ephesus—was always open to Paul and the other brethren.

Yet no home was better known or more consecrated than that of Mary, the mother of John (surnamed Mark). Hers was the house in Jerusalem with an upper room where Jesus and his followers often met, and which remained a meetingplace for the early Christians as long as she lived. It was here that the Pentecost took place, when the Holy Spirit descended upon the apostles and they spoke in tongues, prophesied, and were imbued with the desire to go to all the world with the Master's message.

It was to Mary's home that Peter came directly from prison. Mary's maid, Rhoda, was keeping guard at the door of the upper room while a group of the disciples prayed for Peter. A knock came.

"Who is it?" she asked, perhaps fearing that members of the Sanhedrin had come to trap the Christians.

"Peter," was the answer.

She knew his voice and ran to tell the others. They refused to believe her until they came to the door themselves, let Peter in, and heard him tell of his miraculous deliverance.

Mary and her servant Rhoda were fortunate, for they knew Jesus personally. Most of the other women who embraced the early Church belonged to that group Jesus described as "blessed, [for they] have not seen, and yet have believed." (See John 20:29.) The witness of truth, whether it comes from personal knowledge or by the Spirit, is such an individual, personal experience that it is natural to wonder and rejoice in the discovery that the same testimony burns within the heart of a loved one. Mary was fortunate in this regard, too; her son John Mark wrote one of the gospels (Mark). He was the friend and companion that Peter referred to as "Marcus my son." He, along with Barnabas, Mary's close relative, perhaps her nephew, accompanied Paul on his first mission.

Mothers in the early Church, like mothers today, prepared their sons for missions. Paul credits Eunice and Lois for the fine upbringing of Timothy: "The . . . faith that is in thee . . . dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice," he wrote. Paul converted Timothy on his first missionary journey; Timothy then accompanied Paul on his second mission, becoming like a son to him. Though nothing more is said of his mother and grandmother, that one reference is reason enough to honor them as worthy women.

One cannot feign faith and still hope to receive its rewards. Yet Sapphira tried to do just that; she wanted credit for having given all to the Church without actually doing so.

Sapphira and her husband Ananias were among the wealthier Christians. They joined the Saints at a time when outpourings of the Holy Ghost were particularly strong; they witnessed miracles, the gift of tongues, and other manifestations. Undoubtedly, they were aware that Barnabas had sold all his goods and given the money to the Church. Indeed, the common order among Christians in Jerusalem was successful that there were no needy among them. Yet there was no coercion to join the common community; it was not required. Nevertheless, Ananias and Sapphira agreed voluntarily to share all they had. Their pledge, though sacred, could have been withdrawn; even after they sold their land, the proceeds belonged to them, to keep or share as they chose. In the end, Ananias and Sapphira conspired to hold back a part of their money but pretended to give all. First Ananias and later Sapphira lied to Peter, making a hypocrisy of their generosity. For their deception they were both instantly struck dead. A harsh punishment? Perhaps, if the sin had been holding back money. But their sin lay in bearing false witness when they had knowledge of the Holy Ghost—more knowledge than most.

Dorcas, on the other hand, regained her life because of her generosity. She lived in Joppa, a port city thirty-four miles northwest of Jerusalem, in what became an important Christian center. Her home, like those of many of her sisters, became a gathering spot for those of the new faith. More than that, it was a place of refuge and help for the poor. Dorcas, a woman of means, could have given the poor money and sent them on their way, but she chose to give of her time and her service as well. She sewed for those who needed clothes.

There are always the poor—and never an end to hardship and misfortune. Dorcas may have had moments when she grew weary, despaired, or thought her example had little impact. But when she died, it was the widows and orphans she had helped who sent for Peter.

The apostle was preaching in a nearby town. He came at once, and when he entered the room where Dorcas lay, the widows who wept there showed him the coats and garments she had sewn for them. They might have wished to impress Peter with the goodness of this woman, or perhaps they feared what would become of them with their benefactor gone. Peter cleared the room, knelt, and prayed. Using the Aramaic form of her name, Tabitha, he called Dorcas, and she arose from the dead. Giving her his hand, he lifted her up and presented her to the widows—alive. The miracle became known throughout all Joppa. Because of it, we are told, many believed.

Nothing more is recorded of Dorcas. She probably continued serving, "full of good works and almsdeeds," with renewed vigor and purpose. All of the accounts of women in the early Church are sketchy, barely highlighting the essentials of their faith and good works. Yet we can be impressed with the number of women who won recognition from the writers of scripture.

We can be even more impressed at the way they stand out as real women, doing real things for real reasons. These are not idealized, superficial women filling stylized roles as outlined for them by the customs of their times. These are women we can learn from and emulate, for the world will always have need of more Dorcases and Lydias, Phebes and Priscillas.

Scripture references:

Lydia Acts 16:14-40

Eurodias and Syntyche Phillippians 4:2-9

Chloe 1 Corinthians 1:11

Roman women Romans 16:6-15; 2 Timothy 4:21; Philemon 1:2

Phebe Romans (entire epistle, but especially 16:1-2)

Drusilla and Bernice Acts 24:24-25; 25:13-24; 26:18-31

Damaris Acts 17

Candace of Ethiopia Acts 8:27-39

Priscilla Acts 18:2-28; Romans 16:3-5; 1 Corinthians 16:19; 2 Timothy 4:19

Mary, the mother of John Mark Acts 12:12-13; Romans 16:6; 1 Peter 5:13; Acts 1:13; 2:1

Rhoda Acts 12:12-17

Eunice and Lois 2 Timothy 1:5-7

Sapphira Acts 5:1-11; see also Acts 2:44-45; 4:32-37

Dorcas Acts 9:36-42
