Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter One

Righteous Self-Government

You are alone. You can do anything you want. No family, no church, no authority figure will monitor or judge you. No one will stop you no matter what you do. No one will ever know. No one will even care. You are completely on your own. What kind of person are you? Kind and thoughtful? Demanding and selfish? Fearful and inhibited? Pleasure seeking and corrupt? If your behavior were a natural extension of who you are deep down inside, would you behave in the same way you do now? How different is this real, unfettered you from the one you typically let those around you see?

What we are and what we appear to be represent our "private" and our "public" selves. Each of us has both. The public self is socially appropriate. It gauges how we think we are perceived by others and adjusts itself accordingly. It can cover pain, hide fear, mask disagreement, and represent us in ways that may not truly reflect what we think or feel. It can be proper and impressive, yet fickle and fake.

The private self, on the other hand, is our essential self. It is our true character. It is the fountain of our intent, whether good or bad. It is how we would be understood if others could open us up like a book and read without the distraction of a pleasing cover designed to enhance sales—just a truthful, straightforward text defining the quality of our motives, the nature of our heart, and the intent of our soul.

It is incredibly important to accurately discern our own motives, largely because society emphasizes positive impressions and appearances regardless of whether they are real. In the words of a recent television ad, "Image is everything." Looking good seems more important than being good. And looking good is all too often just another way of saying we've gained the attention and approval of others.

Whether we are at home, on the job, or in church, why we do what we do tells us more about the person we really are than does our behavior alone. Anyone can look good. We can do favors for each other, agree with one another, and do what we are asked to do, and if appearances counted for everything, we would be heaven-bound. But what if our motives could be as easily discerned as our actions? What would we see then? Would tranquility at home be merely silence spawned from fear of being hurt or rejected? Would agreeing with the boss be simply a way to avoid conflict? Would home teaching or visiting teaching be done out of grudging obligation rather than a true love and concern for one another?

The epitome of spiritual strength and psychological health is the point at which our actions are godlike because our motives are godlike. Or, as Nephi said, "Follow the Son, with full purpose of heart, acting no hypocrisy and no deception before God, but with real intent, repenting of your sins, witnessing unto the Father that ye are willing to take upon you the name of Christ" (2 Nephi 31:13).

Behaving with such sincerity is no small task. It requires moving away from managing outward appearances to cultivating inward substance. It means keeping our integrity intact by refraining from avoiding conflict, by expressing tender feelings that may leave us feeling vulnerable. It may mean, for example, telling our priesthood or Relief Society leader that we won't participate in a service project because we don't feel charitable, instead of saying we're busy, and then, even more important, acknowledging to the Lord our lack of charity and asking for forgiveness and help in overcoming that fault. It may mean likening ourselves to the Nephites called by King Benjamin to repent and experience a "mighty change" of heart—a call that would be echoed in these latter days, nearly two millennia later, by other living prophets (Mosiah 5:2).

Such profound change usually comes only after deeply questioning ourselves and then eliminating what stops us from reaching our mortal and eternal potential. We simply must understand the truth about ourselves now before we can hope to become something better later. Acknowledging the truth about ourselves means we must become aware of both our weaknesses and our strengths. When performed honestly, such personal scrutiny can produce great discontent, but it is exactly that discontent that fuels our desire to change.

Regrettably, however, many of us are far too eager to hide our weaknesses. We fail to understand that the problem is not that we have weaknesses but that we refuse to acknowledge them. The truth is, unless we acknowledge them, we cannot overcome them. Instead, we try to avoid the pain of recognizing our weaknesses by hiding them. We run the risk of being, in the words of President Spencer W. Kimball, "a people who are pure in appearance, rather [than] a people who are pure in heart" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft Inc., 1982], 363).

A term that describes purity of both motive and behavior, a term that captures the sum and substance of doing the right things for the right reasons, is righteous self-government. It is the moral exercise of agency in the face of psychological conflict and potential spiritual compromise. It is the ability to face personal weaknesses with humility and resolve to make them strengths. It is spiritual and psychological character in action. In this sense, the "mighty change" must come from the inside out, so that our outward behavior becomes a natural expression of our righteous inward desires. Mere conformity to commandments, obligations, and duties is not enough. Righteous self-government requires authentic love for Christ and personal integrity that naturally produce sincere Christian works.

Such authenticity also enables us to confront opposition without avoidance and self-deception. Those who close their eyes to their weaknesses remain weak. And to the weak, running from conflict and opposition only reinforces their weakness. But the Lord has promised those who choose to face their failings, "Because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong" (Ether 12:37).

Interestingly, a large body of evidence from the behavioral sciences arrives at the same conclusion: individual agency and a deeply ingrained willingness to face problems are essential ingredients of emotional well-being. Many prominent researchers have demonstrated that although everyone unavoidably experiences psychological stress, the best way to weather emotional difficulties is to face them rather than to deny that they exist.

The connection between spiritual development and psychological health is one reason that righteous self-government can play a crucial role in our mortal happiness. By doing the right things for the right reasons, particularly when we would just as soon avoid the discomfort those actions might bring, we become emotionally stronger because we are becoming more Christlike.

The ultimate goal of righteous self-government is to live in such a way that we have nothing to hide, that if everyone knew us for what we really are, there would be no shame. Such self-confidence epitomizes spiritual and psychological strength. And, in actuality, when the earth is in its "sanctified and immortal state," that is exactly how things will be. All creation will be known as it really is. "This earth . . . will be made like unto crystal and will be a Urim and Thummim to the inhabitants who dwell thereon" (D&C 130:9). We know that the Urim and Thummim give revelatory powers to the righteous; thus, the inhabitants of the earth will know each other for what they are. Nothing will be hidden, and there will be nothing to hide. Imagine what life would be like if we did not fear others' knowing who we truly are because we ourselves approve of who we are. What liberating power such congruence has. We become free of pretense, free of the need to avoid what we fear about ourselves because there is nothing to fear. Attaining that congruence is part of our psychological and spiritual development, and it requires resolve and commitment to change things for the better. The process is an intensely personal one. Others can tell us or show us what to do, but ultimately we each have to do it for ourselves, by ourselves—but with the potential companionship of the Spirit—and in our own time and way.
