Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter Two

A Leap of Faith

It was a strange time to be discontent. Certainly nobody else was. And why should they be? They were all busy enjoying an exquisite clam chowder and sipping white wine in what could safely be called one of the most pleasing settings in New Hampshire. It was a fall day, but the warmth of the sun blunted the chill in the air. Nature was at her best. The fall colors were unusually radiant, even by New England standards. The sky over the yacht harbor was bright blue, and puffy white clouds floated about, casting their shadows on the brilliant fall colors below. And the clam chowder—well, it was just terrific, even without the white wine.

Actually, I didn't want to be thinking about spiritual discontent any more than those around me did. It all started when a very elegant and sophisticated woman caught my eye. She was wearing suede shoes that matched her sweater and cap. Very stylish. Even chic. It's remarkable how money and a carefully cultivated air of dignity can transform a perfectly harmless sixty-year-old woman into such a stately creature. But imposing she was. Everybody noticed. The waiters moved a little faster than usual. The hostess behaved with more deference than necessary. The prospect of a big tip was clearly on their minds. The other patrons seemed to notice her, too. If you watched carefully, you could catch them stealing a curious glance in her direction whenever it seemed safe to do so.

Regrettably for me, her party was seated at the table right next to mine. She spoke rather loudly, and I soon found myself listening. I shouldn't have, because that's when the trouble began. The first thing I noticed was how she dominated the conversation with comments about her recent trip to Europe to shop for Belgian linens and Bavarian cut glass just for a weekend party. Those at her table appeared enthusiastically attentive, nodding frequently with the same politeness as the waiters. But the thin veil of interest did not conceal the genuine boredom lurking beneath the surface. It was so obvious, yet she never noticed.

As I listened, I began to understand. Everything was not as it had first appeared. It gradually became apparent that this woman of such obvious wealth and distinction found it necessary to advertise her status to impress her luncheon friends. But why? They already knew of her high social and financial status. (Everybody in the room already knew!) Yet she boasted on. I was fascinated.

It occurred to me that this woman, who, on the outside, seemed to have so much, really had very little on the inside. Placing so much importance on appearance was her way of hiding the emptiness just behind the impressive front. Regardless of wealth, talent, or vivacious personality, in the absence of internal substance, the soul is bound to remain impoverished. And that which feeds the soul—true friends, self-acceptance, and spiritual depth—are not usually found in an environment that favors shallow appearances.

As I listened, I wondered if I dared find a way to introduce myself and simply tell this friendless person in disguise what I understood about Jesus. Preposterous, I thought. She would dismiss me with the same reflexive indifference as she would an annoying fly on her croissant. Worse yet, she might indignantly have me removed. We were truly strangers, and talking over clam chowder wouldn't help bridge the real gap that separated us. There is a curious irony in this story. Had I been fashionably dressed and selling costly yachts, I could have easily arranged to dine with this woman and her companions. A similar invitation could have been arranged if I had been selling stocks, bonds, jewels, or imported wines. And the irony? She already had all of those things. She would gladly have talked with me about what she already had and didn't need; but what she needed most and didn't have couldn't be talked about at all.

Maybe she just didn't know any other way to act. Behavioral scientists would say she was a product of social conditioning. Theologians would probably call her prideful, maybe even sinful. The poor would envy her security. Other striving socialites would say anything just to gain her favor. But it doesn't really matter what you call it because it all boils down to the same thing: she was motivated by worldly desires, which, when satisfied, would bring no satisfaction.

Many of us, like the elegant woman from New Hampshire, have unwittingly been conditioned socially to value things that are pleasing to the body but unsatisfying to the soul. This conditioning occurs so naturally that most of us hardly even notice it—which is what makes it so dangerous. Such subtle influences make it no small task to learn to do the right things for the right reasons, to remember that "man looketh on the outward appearance, but the Lord looketh on the heart" (1 Samuel 16:7).

Social conditioning teaches us to parade our accomplishments and hide our personal struggles. Virtually all of us do it. This tendency is evident even in some of the most benign human rituals. Consider, for example, the traditional Christmas letters many of us receive from family members and friends:

"Dear Folks,

"This holiday season we are getting an earlier start on our Christmas cards and hope that you are still on speaking terms with us.

"George was promoted to Associate Dean at the college, and his new assignment keeps him very busy. Before the change was made official, however, he was able to complete his latest book, which will be published in about four months. He is very happy to have it finished. He is now in his third year of service as stake president and continues to consult with several large corporations nationally and internationally. Last year, his consulting work took him to the Orient and Europe on two different occasions. They were very enjoyable trips. The highlight of the year was a family trip to Europe while George consulted with one of his companies. We visited all of Germany and Austria, and it was a wonderful experience for all of us to share.

"Jerry is now fourteen and is quarterback on the football team and guard on the basketball team. He was ordained a teacher last month. He received state recognition for his SAT math score as a participant in Duke University's talent searches. He also won second place at his school in the American Junior High Math exam . . . "

Nothing is said about gratitude for family blessings or about the significance of the birth of Christ and his mission, even though this is a Christmas letter from active Latter-day Saints. Success, status, and not-so-subtle boasting prevail in this example of cultural conditioning negatively influencing spiritual sensitivity.

The members of this family are not evildoers or hypocrites. They have most certainly given long hours of service to others as well as made every effort to be active and worthy Church members—which is exactly the point. Everyone needs some form of approval. The struggle is to keep that need from interfering when our motives should be spiritual. Another typical example is a testimony meeting in which someone stands and expresses his or her feelings simply to get attention. The meeting then becomes a forum for self-expression and attention getting rather than an opportunity for testimony building, yet the person speaking is unable to tell the difference.

Our Bothersome Human Nature

Our susceptibility to the allure of worldly wealth and recognition is nothing new. With his usual incisiveness and candor, Hugh Nibley said: "We know what Zion is, we know what Babylon is, we know that the two can never mix, and we know that Latter-day Saints, against the admonition of their leaders, have always tried to mix them. How is that done? By the use of rhetoric—'The art of making true things seem false and false things seem true by the use of words.' The trick is to appear rich as the result of being good." He described man's obsession with wealth as "no mere red thread running through the scriptures but the broad highway of history" (Approaching Zion, vol. 9 of The Collected Works of Hugh Nibley, ed. Don E. Norton [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book and F.A.R.M.S., 1989], xv-xvi, 59).

The scriptures are equally clear in their warnings. For example, Moroni tells us: "Behold, I speak unto you as if ye were present, and yet ye are not. But behold, Jesus Christ hath shown you unto me, and I know your doing. And I know that ye do walk in the pride of your hearts.Â .Â .Â .Â For behold, ye do love money, and your substance, and your fine apparel, and the adorning of your churches, more than ye love the poor and the needy, the sick and the afflicted" (Mormon 8:35-37).

Our bothersome human nature has always put us at risk of compromising our spiritual values for secular gain. But wealth isn't the real problem. It is only the most obvious symptom and symbol of a preoccupation with immediate pleasure, recognition, and status that are so typical of the natural man. Where material blessings were once thankfully acknowledged as the by-products of obeying the Lord, they have now become an end in themselves. Mankind now seems to bypass obedience and head straight for the material blessing. No longer is it obedience but wealth that is valued. We seem to have forgotten that the earth's abundance was created to sustain and edify man. It appears that the function of mortal abundance has been altered from saving edification to mere gratification.

Material things can gratify in two different ways. The use of such possessions as boats or other recreational vehicles brings immediate pleasure. There is nothing wrong with that kind of gratification when it is balanced with gratitude and giving and when it is not perceived as the most important activity in our lives. The second form of gratification is more problematic: when we derive gratification from what we think such possessions represent—success, status, or superiority. When we turn material blessings into symbols of pride, the edifying benefit of those blessings is lost.

This pride is not limited to material things. It manifests itself in every behavior that is motivated by a need to impress others, gain their approval, or appear better than those around us. When we represent ourselves as something we are not in order to gain attention or social acceptance, our motives are outwardly grounded, prompted by attempts to seek gratification that is neither psychologically nor spiritually edifying.

Disrupting this tendency to be motivated by outward things requires us to discriminate between what we do for others' acceptance and what we do for the Lord's. That level of introspection can be frightening. In our practice as therapists, it is not uncommon, particularly in groups, to hear patients acknowledge their fear and reluctance to take the therapeutic step of looking at themselves as they really are. Many have likened themselves to the film character Indiana Jones, who, in one of his adventures, must find the Holy Grail in order to save his father's life. But before the hero can possess the grail, he must traverse a deep chasm with no apparent bridge upon which to cross, only a clue that speaks of a leap—in the words of Indiana, a leap of faith. With one foot on the edge of the chasm, he pauses, unable to move. But hearing his father's groans of pain, he fights his fear and steps out into the void to what appears to be his death. Miraculously, he lands on a narrow bridge of rock that was obscured by the cliffs behind it. He crosses the chasm, wins the grail, and saves his father. Many of our patients are not so lucky, however. They stand frozen with one foot extended, unable to go any further. What they cannot see, they cannot believe exists.

Scrutinizing ourselves and evaluating our motives require a similar leap of faith. We must believe that looking at ourselves with complete candor is worth the risk of the unpleasant things we may well learn. The only way we can improve is to confront in ourselves what needs to be improved. Thus, the first step toward becoming righteously self-governing is to scrutinize our own actions and motives: what are our real reasons for doing the things we do?
