Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter Three

Becoming Righteously Self-Governing

Becoming righteously self-governing means doing the right thing for the right reason, particularly when faced with opposition. The person who is righteously self-governing is motivated by neither duty nor "shoulds" nor compliance with the will or wishes of others. Rather, the spiritual self responds to the challenges of mortality as a righteous child of God.

Righteous self-government is based on acknowledging to ourselves and the Lord any unrighteousness and then striving to overcome it. Making that acknowledgment is an act of choosing that allows us to break free from our mortal foibles instead of denying their existence while we painfully suppress them. We can grit our teeth and by sheer willpower restrain ourselves from un-Christlike actions, but that is a far cry from the change of heart that roots out all evil and makes us like Christ (see Alma 5:14). One is a mental process that behavioral conditioning may accomplish. The other is a spiritual transformation that only the Spirit can inspire. Both may outwardly appear the same, but the difference between them is vast. Much as painting over a crack in the wall differs from repairing and then painting it, righteous self-government goes beyond the cosmetic appeal of mere restraint to demand that what is inside be just as pleasing. Elder Dean L. Larsen described the need to focus on inner qualities rather than on outward indicators:

"The real power in the kingdom of God is not represented in outwardly observable things. Its strength is in the quality of the lives of its members. It is in the depth of their purity, their charity, their faith, their integrity, and their devotion to truth. . . .

" . . . In God's kingdom, power is not equated with body count nor with outward routine compliance with prescribed performances. It is found in those quiet uncharted acts of love, obedience, and Christian service which may never come to the attention of official leadership, but which emulate the ministry of the Lord himself" ("The Strength of the Kingdom Is Within," Ensign, Nov. 1981, 25-27).

Righteous self-government suggests that a person's goodness is defined by something more than behavior alone. Good conduct is important, but good conduct that is a genuine expression of spiritual substance is infinitely more important. The scriptures regularly instruct us to seek the Spirit, and then good works will follow naturally. For example, Alma states, "And see that ye have faith, hope, and charity, and then ye will always abound in good works" (Alma 7:24). Similarly, Paul's sermon on charity leaves little doubt about the importance of motives in Christian conduct: "And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing" (1 Corinthians 13:3). Medieval author Thomas `a Kempis said, "Without love, the outward work is of no value; but whatever is done out of love, be it never so little, is wholly fruitful. For God regards the greatness of the love that prompts a man, rather than the greatness of his achievement" (in John S. Tanner, "Not a Mind without a Soul," BYU Today, Mar. 1991, 27).

The role of motives in Christian service is illustrated by the following experiences of two dedicated Relief Society presidents. One filled her calling out of love; the other, by a need for acceptance. Despite the similarity in their outward behavior, the difference in their motives affected these two women.

Martha's hesitation at the church door was scarcely noticeable, but it was there nonetheless. Was it only six months ago that she used to go bounding into the meetinghouse, hardly able to wait for her long Sunday to begin? It seemed more like a million years since the ward members had raised their hands to thank her for her three years of service as Relief Society president. Three years of visiting the sick, filling out food orders, consoling the bereaved, and fighting with the Primary for women to staff her organization.

She had tried hard to do a good job. She had tended to the needs of others carefully. She had made time for others when there really wasn't any time. She thought she'd done the job she was supposed to do, but then she was released. A month went by, then two, then three. Where were the eager hands that she shook on Sundays? Where were the compassionate when she was ill?

Martha had tried hard to meet everyone's expectations. Didn't she deserve the same attention she had given? What was the use of knocking herself out for three years when it was evident nobody cared? With each passing Sunday, the questions grew greater and greater as her exuberance to attend church grew less and less.

Helen sighed as she closed the door to the bishop's office behind her. After three years as the ward Relief Society president, she wasn't sure whether she should laugh or cry. It seemed a burden had been lifted from her, but she also felt a heaviness of heart, knowing that there were still so many others to serve. A silent resolve filled her as she stepped outside into the cool evening air; one calling was no longer hers, but the desire to serve still was.

The weeks went by, and she was once again absorbed into the bustle of an active, busy ward. It came as no surprise that the hellos and inquiring smiles decreased in direct proportion to the time that had passed since her release. She was a sister in a ward full of sisters.

Though she didn't want to admit it, she found it more difficult to tap into the spiritual strength that had once been so accessible to her. And though she couldn't say she felt hurt, it somehow disappointed her to realize that much of the way people had treated her was more in response to her calling than it was to the woman who filled it. But those weren't serious problems. She had learned much. The spiritual initiative was now hers, and when she took it, the results were satisfying. Service didn't stop when a calling did. Relationships with the sick and elderly grew stronger and more meaningful as simple love became the sole motivation for her visits. In the absence of requirement, personal desire to serve flourished. There were times when an undeniable feeling that she could only describe as "rightness" crept over her. When it was there, she felt an overwhelming sense of gratitude; when it wasn't, somehow that seemed all right, too.

Both presidents filled their callings in much the same way. They were conscientious in their duties, sensitive to the needs of others, and highly motivated to serve. Yet when they were released, one became withdrawn and disappointed, the other more loving and demonstrative. What made the difference? Motives.

Although observable behavior provides many good clues to the quality of a person, it is the intent of the behavior that counts the most. Helen was primarily motivated by the love she had for those she served. Martha required external approval and reinforcement for her efforts. Equally important, Helen found her efforts intrinsically satisfying, whereas Martha was satisfied only when others noticed what she did. Good deeds are important, but in themselves they are insufficient. Good works born of a good heart matter the most.

A Three-Legged Stool

Righteous self-government, like a three-legged stool, has three supporting elements. Each must be sturdy in its own right and balance with the other two for maximum strength. The three supports of righteous self-government are identity, congruence, and autonomy. The sturdiness of the three is never more important than when they are burdened with the weight of temptation and opposition. If they waver and break, righteous self-government fails. But if the three supports bear the weight and remain standing, then doing the right things for the right reasons is possible, even in the face of conflict and difficulty.

The Savior's life exemplified the three supporting elements of righteous self-government. The events of the Savior's return to his home in Galilee help us define those three terms: identity, congruence, and autonomy. On the Sabbath, he entered the synagogue and, while reading from the scriptures, undeniably declared his godhood. That must have been a lonely moment. To risk being known as we truly are without the assurance of being accepted can be frightening. But the Savior went one step further. He revealed his divine nature, knowing full well that the response would be hostile. Yet could he have done anything else? He never denied his divine origins. Regardless of time, place, or audience, his identity was constant and consistent. Individual identity, then, is the first element of righteous self-government.

Elder James E. Talmage tells us that the passages of scripture the Savior read were viewed as specifically referring to the Messiah. There was no misunderstanding, only mistrust and incredulity. "And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's son?" (Luke 4:22). His magnificent pronouncement was too difficult for his countrymen to equate with the son of Joseph, someone they had known as no different from themselves. Recognizing their skepticism, the Savior reminded them that no prophet is accepted in his own country. He also discerned their curiosity and their desire for him to replicate the miracles which had been reported from Capernaum. Once again using the scriptures, he challenged their need for him to prove himself, recounting ancient times when Gentiles and others the Jews considered beneath them had been blessed by God while the chosen people were ignored. According to Talmage, "Then great was their wrath. Did He dare to class them with Gentiles and lepers? Were they to be likened unto despised unbelievers, and that too by the son of the village carpenter, who had grown from childhood in their community? Victims of diabolical rage, they seized the Lord and took Him to the brow of the hill on the slopes of which the town was built, determined to avenge their wounded feelings by hurling Him from the rocky cliffs" (Jesus the Christ [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1949], 180).

The unpretentious power of the Lord's words that day extended into his behavior as well. The crowd's vicious desire to murder him was met by a quiet but unstoppable retreat from their midst. Certainly, in his omniscience, the Lord knew that he would not be welcomed by his former neighbors in Nazareth. Yet he returned there to do his Father's bidding. Furthermore, according to Matthew's account of the rejection in Nazareth, all outward appearances indicate that Jesus' attempts to preach in his home failed. "And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief" (Matthew 13:58).

We see another characteristic of righteous self-government in the Savior's willingness to return to his boyhood home with full foreknowledge of the crowd's hostility and his own peril: righteous behavior is never motivated by assurances of a positive outcome. Righteous behavior is inherently motivating notwithstanding outcome. Righteously self-governed individuals act to maintain harmony between personal goodness within and good works without. That is enough reward. No public success can ever eclipse the personal contentment of harmony between self and God. Consequently, like Christ, the righteously self-governed present themselves on the outside in a way that simply and consistently reflects what they are on the inside. Deep personal congruence, then, is the second element of righteous self-government.

The Savior's candor and honesty with which he presented himself to everyone gives us additional insight into righteous self-government. Many times we are willing to adjust ourselves to current conditions in a bid to reduce our own discomfort. By acting, talking, and even dressing a certain way, we hope to increase our chances of winning acceptance or at least to reduce our chances of drawing negative attention to ourselves. The Lord never compromised principle and therefore never compromised himself in order to be found more acceptable to others. He never acted out of fear. On the contrary, in Nazareth, as later in Pilate's palace and in Gethsemane and on Calvary, during the most difficult and trying moments when all were against him, he demonstrated his godly ability to be self-directing and motivated by principle rather than by pressure. By removing himself from the religious, social, and political influences of those around him, he showed in his independence the depth of his dependence on one, and only one, other: God the Father. The third element of righteous self-government, then, is personal autonomy, with dependence on God through our Savior, Jesus Christ.

Imitators of Righteous Self-Government

Even the most convincing imitators of righteous self-government all have the same fatal flaw: their motives and rewards come from external sources, not internal ones. As a consequence, their outward behavior is seldom an autonomous, congruent expression of their internal/eternal identity. Two common manifestations of this deception are The Dependent and The True Believer.

The Dependent is not easy to recognize. Outwardly such a person may have a pleasing and conforming personality, but just beneath the surface lurks a nagging insecurity that drives the conformity. Consequently, dependency may look pleasing, but it is seldom healthy. In fact, it is at the core of some common emotional and spiritual problems.

The term dependency refers to being in a position in which a person's behavior is overly influenced or even determined by another. Though we are all influenced by those around us, dependent people constantly adjust their behavior to increase their chances of gaining the approval and acceptance of others. Dependent people try to be what others want them to be. That is what makes this personality style so dangerous: it is guided almost exclusively by external influences, whereas the principal components of spiritual and psychological strength are internal.

The price of this personality style is high. Dependent people do not learn to behave in ways that will allow them to feel self-respect and self-approval because they are so busy catering to the expectations of others. They forsake countless opportunities for emotional and spiritual growth by denying the reality of their own thoughts and feelings so as not to upset those whose favor they are constantly courting. The following story illustrates how this behavior pattern that appears so pleasing to others can in reality be individually destructive.

"Ask Stella. She'll do it," was a comment made frequently in bishopric meetings, PTA meetings, and in family reunion committees. If you asked anybody in Stella's ward to pick out a person who was humble, helpful, and happy, few would fail to name Stella—if not first, then surely within three tries. Stella was a consistent beneficiary of the adage: "If you want something done, get a busy person to do it." Not only did she serve as Primary in-service leader but she was on the ward activities committee, and every time there was a wedding, funeral, or birth in the ward, someone called on Stella to help with a shower, a meal, or baby-sitting. Every assignment was accepted, and every request granted.

Stella's family was also very active. There were the children's music lessons, baseball games, Scouts, Mutual, and who could forget the clogging? Certainly not Stella. She attended each child's every recital, game, and program. Few other parents showed as much support for their children. Bart, Stella's husband, always had clean, pressed shirts, lunch packed in the morning, and dinner on time at night. When he had to work late, Stella understood. When the elders quorum had a steak fry or welfare assignment, Stella always helped Bart with his responsibilities as quorum president.

Yes, Stella was reliable. She was supportive. She was helpful. And she was dependent. In rendering charity at church, support in the family, and service in the community, Stella's dependency was almost impossible to detect. Trying to please others took the guise of charitable acts. Avoiding the disappointment of her children masqueraded as parental support. Bids for acceptance were camouflaged by volunteering for neighborhood projects. At church meetings and social gatherings, Stella laughed at jokes she didn't like, nodded her head in approval of opinions she didn't agree with, and when asked to voice her own thoughts, simply parroted the prevailing attitude. At home, she quietly tolerated Bart's periodic outbursts of anger and verbal abuse, cleaned up after the kids when they ignored her requests to clean up after themselves, and rarely called up a friend to do something with her out of fear that she might not be home if somebody needed her.

Stella was also miserable. It was a quiet sort of misery, though, one difficult to detect because Stella was so good at hiding it. She had also perfected her ability to cover what she truly thought and to stifle what she truly wanted. As a matter of fact, she had denied her own thoughts and feelings for so long that it had become almost impossible for Stella to discern the difference between her own desires and the wishes of others.

Where along the line Stella had lost herself in the needs and wants of others is difficult to know. Somewhere, early in life, she had learned that doing what she was asked to do minimized conflict with others and maximized acceptance from them. People like people who do things for them. Leaders like people who accept assignments and follow through with them. There is so much less awkwardness and embarrassment in saying yes than in saying no. But there are many hazards in relying on such approval and acceptance. Limited identity, congruity, and autonomy result in our personal wishes being constantly sacrificed for those of others. Consequently, how important and influential can our identity be? When we are unwilling or incapable of expressing what we are, our identities go unexercised and, as a result, atrophy.

Stella wanted to say no to the last request (at ten o'clock at night) for three dozen muffins for the Scout breakfast fund-raiser the next morning. But what she felt inside was shoved aside by her need for external approval. She was thinking and feeling one thing while saying and doing another. On a very fundamental level, Stella knew she was doing what appeared to be the right thing but for the wrong reason. And that incongruity generated shame, shame that she hid from herself and others by continually doing over and over again the very thing that produced the shame in the first place: saying yes when she meant no. As long as she did that, she had no self-approval, no internally generated praise. She therefore had to seek it on the outside from others—the very action that caused her feelings of shame.

Autonomy? Stella was like a mirror. Her behavior reflected the behavior of those around her. Her own desires were swallowed up in the desires of others. Stella responded as she thought others wanted her to. She was tethered to her ward, her family, her friends. Autonomy could not influence her life while the influence of others exceeded the influence she exerted on herself. As long as she was a prisoner of others' approval, she would never gain approval of herself. Righteous self-government cannot exist in the presence of the nagging need for approval from others.

The True Believer is a prime example of the automatic and often mindless conformity that develops when people seek personal security through their activities in important organizations instead of through meaningful personal development (see Eric Hoffer, The True Believer [New York: Perennial Library, 1989]). Generally speaking, True Believers tend to be disaffected, discontented, and frustrated. They have a sense of hopelessness about the present, feel unable to do anything to change their future, and experience continual feelings of worthlessness and helplessness. They lack a sense of spiritual or psychological identity and tend to be governed more by external circumstances than by their own internal thoughts and feelings.

Because of their deep sense of powerlessness, True Believers routinely affiliate with groups that have a cause, whether social movements, religious organizations, or political parties. The goal of joining any of them is usually to add meaning and purpose to the True Believers' lives, meaning and purpose that they have failed to acquire on their own. Though the groups vary, some common characteristics of affiliation are easily identifiable. The group gives its members a sense of importance and power, generally because it is based on a potent idea or it has an infallible or charismatic leader or some other unique claim to fame. True Believers come to believe that through their affiliation with their new cause there is hope for them; their newfound sense of importance depends entirely on the importance of the group. Their loyalty to the group and its teachings becomes complete and unwavering. With time, their sense of identity and personal value comes exclusively from their affiliation with and conformity to the cause. Their conformity is, in the truest sense, mindless.

Ed was rock-solid. His devotion to the Church and his family seemed unwavering and undeniable. He proudly displayed his "R U LDS" bumper stickers on both family cars. Church meetings were never missed, family home evenings were always held, and ward social activities were faithfully attended. There was no question that Ed was loyal, dutiful, and obedient.

To the casual observer, he appeared to be an active member of the Church with a strong testimony, if just a little rigid in the way he expressed himself. On closer examination, however, Ed's participation seemed more a cookie cutter replica of something someone else had said than actions motivated by a genuine testimony that could stand by itself. Hearing him bear his testimony was almost like listening to a broken record. He relied on trite phrases and cliches rather than using his own words to express his knowledge and faith.

Luckily, Ed had a hidden asset. It was a little unusual, to be sure, but it was an asset nevertheless. Discontent deep within warned him that something was wrong. He used outward activities, programs, and publications to satisfy his discontent. But it wouldn't go away until his cravings for power and belonging were satisfied by his own emotional and spiritual adequacy.

The sad irony of the True Believers' situation is that in their efforts to improve their own spiritual status, they turn their attention completely outward and abandon the inner self, which is the only instrument there is for achieving lasting spiritual and psychological health and happiness. With the abandonment of identity, autonomy also disappears, because True Believers' beliefs and behaviors are based on what they think others want them to think and feel. And unless their inner discontent becomes stronger than the need to conform, there can be no congruence.

Although both The Dependent and The True Believer appear to be actively and righteously self-governing, there is little similarity between their lives and the life of the Savior. Further examination of the concepts of identity, congruence, and autonomy will show that doing the right things for the right reasons is the only way to become truly Christlike.
