Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter Four

Who Am I?

Our search for identity is as old as Adam and Eve's first communications with the Lord after they were driven out of the Garden of Eden. Through prayer they maintained their relationship with Heavenly Father, reinforcing their identities as his son and daughter (see Moses 5:4-5).

The knowledge of our divine origins has waxed and waned over the several millennia that people have inhabited the earth. The more that modern thinking replaces the spiritual foundation of our identity with a secular view, the greater our need to understand who we really are. That understanding is often difficult to come by because each of us is composed of many different parts, some of which may appear contradictory.

A paramount task of mortality is to order and regulate correctly the different facets of the self. The more complicated life is, the more likely we are to fall into the trap of perceiving our identity less in relationship to God and more in relationship to the transient aspects of mortality: how much we produce, how much we have, or our position on the social and professional ladders of the society that surrounds us. Without a clear sense of self, it is impossible for us to become righteously self-governing.

Self-Inventory of Personal Identity

Identity is knowing ourselves as only we are capable of knowing. Gaining that knowledge requires an honest assessment and understanding of ourselves. The following questions will help you assess your own self-knowledge.

Scale

1 = This statement is true of me MOST of the time.

2 = This statement is true of me MUCH of the time.

3 = This statement is true of me SOME of the time.

4 = This statement is true of me ALMOST NONE of the time.

Questions

____ 1. I am emancipated from my parents and have become my own person.

____ 2. At this time in my life, I have a deep sense of meaning and purpose that gives me direction.

____ 3. My behavior is usually an expression of my most important values.

____ 4. I seldom let others influence me more than I like to admit.

____ 5. Most of the time I am the kind of person I always wanted to be.

____ 6. I am aware of the times when my actions do not reflect what I truly think and feel.

____ 7. My behavior is directed more by my internal compass than by the opinions of those around me.

____ 8. My spiritual self is alive and dependable; I rely regularly on its influence.

____ 9. I have a deep sense of right and wrong, upon which I base important decisions.

____ 10. My religious conviction is more a product of my own private searching than it is of social conditioning, conformity, or family pressure.

Your score may be as low as ten or as high as forty. The lower the score, the more likely you are to have a clear sense of individual identity.

Spiritual Identity

A number of scriptures attest that we existed before mortality. Abraham tells us:

"Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among all these there were many of the noble and great ones;

"And God saw these souls that they were good, and he stood in the midst of them, and he said: These I will make my rulers; for he stood among those that were spirits, and he saw that they were good; and he said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born" (Abraham 3:22-23).

Other scriptures make the same point. In Doctrine and Covenants the Lord discusses our "creation before the world was made" (D&C 49:17). The Lord tells us that "man was also in the beginning with God" (D&C 93:29). The Prophet Joseph Smith commented on the eternal nature of our spirits when he said, "There never was a time when there were not spirits; for they are co-equal [co-eternal] with our Father in heaven" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1976], 353).

Our eternal identity consists of intelligence that was never created, combined with a part that was spiritually created by our Heavenly Father. These two parts compose our eternal identity, which existed before we were born and accompanied us into mortality. Each individual's eternal identity is different from any other eternal identity. It contributes to our earthly personality, and it is influenced by earthly experiences. It is also the enduring, fundamental self that can transcend circumstance, culture, race, genetics, or other temporal and temporary influences. It is the essence of who we are and of what we may become.

Psychological Identity

One distinct attribute that separates human beings from all other forms of life is our ability to reflect on our own existence and, out of that self-awareness, make individual choices that define the purpose and direction our lives will follow. This capacity for self-awareness and choice makes psychological identity possible. Our values, which motivate what we think and feel, give our identities substance.

Ironically, our capacity for self-awareness and individual identity can create as much personal distress as it can happiness. If we truly believe that our happiness is largely the result of our choices, it follows that our unhappiness is the result of our failure to choose wisely. Our awareness of our own influence in creating the life we experience can be a source of considerable distress, particularly for those who struggle to find meaning in lifestyles that have no eternal meaning.

Identity Is the Source of Meaning

Our spiritual and psychological identities are fed by strikingly similar nutrients: interest and concern for the well-being of something or someone other than ourselves. Extending ourselves beyond our own self-interests appears to play a crucial role in our finding meaning and purpose in what we do and who we are. One way to see the breadth and depth of this influence is to study people who have either a distinct or a vague sense of meaning in their lives. Factual information on this topic is limited, but what is available is revealing. For example, renowned psychiatrist Viktor Frankl interviewed sixty university students after they attempted suicide. The reason given by 85 percent of the students for their suicide attempt was that life seemed meaningless. Ironically, nearly all of them were socially active, were doing well in school, and had good relationships with their families. Their suicide attempts were driven not by chronic failure, crisis, alcoholism, or isolation but by an impoverished sense of personal meaning and purpose (see The Unheard Cry for Meaning: Psychotherapy and Humanism [New York: Simon & Schuster, 1978]).

Similarly, a professor of psychiatry at Stanford University, Irvin Yalom, offered the following conclusions about the role that a sense of meaning plays in our lives: first, a lack of personal meaning and purpose is related to emotional and behavioral problems of all types and varieties. Generally speaking, the less clear the sense of personal meaning and identity, the greater the personal and social problems. Second, having religious beliefs and values seems to be related to having a positive sense of meaning and purpose. Third, having values that include an interest in the welfare of others is related to a positive sense of meaning and purpose. And fourth, having a clear sense of life goals is associated with a positive sense of self and purpose (see Existential Human Psychotherapy [New York: Basic Books, 1980]).

Frankl made similar observations much earlier and in an entirely different setting—in the Nazi death camp at Auschwitz. The circumstances couldn't have been more dire or despicable, which is what makes Frankl's observations so striking. He found that those who were willing to help others or had a vision of some future purpose had a better chance of surviving their ordeal in the concentration camp than did those who had no sense of mission or meaning in life. Frankl spent the better part of his professional life deeply immersed in the problem of understanding how we acquire meaning in our personal lives. He created a unique theory for enhancing human development called logotherapy, which means, literally, "healing through meaning." Frankl suggests that a sense of meaning and purpose is usually the result of being engaged in activities that transcend our own personal interests. Accordingly, he notes, our search for meaning is a primary human motive from which our values and ideals are formulated and for which we live, and, if necessary, for which we are willing to die (see Viktor E. Frankl, Man's Search for Meaning [New York: Washington Square Press, 1984]).

There is a strong similarity between such conclusions and the essential message of the scriptures that service to others is a source of personal meaning. The truth is, much of the way we view ourselves is determined by the way we treat others. Ironically, most of us have been taught just the opposite, that the way others treat us will determine how we feel about ourselves. Psychologist Rollo May suggested that being overly sensitive to external influence creates "hollow people" who have little understanding of who they are or what they actually feel. He reported one person who described himself as a collection of mirrors, reflecting only what everyone expected of him (see Man's Search for Himself [New York: Dell, 1953]).

Similarly, others have suggested that alienation from self is the result of developing a life determined by others rather than a life based on one's own inner experiences. Latter-day prophets have expressed the same view in stronger terms. For example, President David O. McKay said: "Mere compliance with the word of the Lord, without a corresponding inward desire, will avail but little. Indeed, such outward actions and pretending phrases may disclose hypocrisy, a sin that Jesus most vehemently condemned" (Gospel Ideals [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1953], 382).

The underlying point of these prophetic and scientific observations is the same: it is spiritually and psychologically hazardous for our outward behavior to be anything other than a natural expression of our internal identity. That congruence requires us to have a reasonably clear and accurate sense of our spiritual and psychological self.

The discovery of personal meaning coincides with the discovery of our identity. Attending to our internal/eternal identity is best understood as a process rather than an objective we eventually reach. Furthermore, the development of identity is not only a process but an evolving process. What we do today will influence what we do tomorrow, and what we do tomorrow will influence what we think is possible the day after. Each step along the way can alter the next day's path, allowing only fleeting glimpses of the final destination because our understanding of what is possible for us keeps changing even as we change.

Enhancing Individual Identity

The following is a variation of an exercise we use at professional workshops. We have found that doing the activity feels much different from just reading about it. And we have learned that it is quite helpful to do this exercise with someone with whom we can talk openly and honestly when we are finished.

First, you should find a place that is comfortable and where you can be free of interruptions. With eyes closed, take five minutes to relax. One way of doing that is to breathe deeply and focus on the sensations and rhythm of breathing.

Next, silently identify an actual problem situation or a conflict you have had to deal with. It can involve anger, intimacy, fear, loneliness, authority figures, recurring temptations, or any personal weakness. Anything will do as long as the situation was difficult at the time. Then, with the situation clearly in mind, recall it in as much detail as possible. Observe your own behavior, speech, pressures, fears, and other emotions. Once you are satisfied that the recollection is reasonably complete, replay the incident in your mind three times as though it were a movie, studying yourself carefully each time. With the images clearly in mind, write down as specifically as possible three things you saw yourself do that you wish you hadn't.

Now close your eyes again, and reenter the problem situation. Take yourself right up to the point of the behavior you wish you hadn't engaged in and then stop and ask yourself: "What do I need to do in this situation now so that I will approve of myself later?" Please notice that the question is not how desirable, feasible, practical, difficult, or popular the behavior might be. Neither is it whether the behavior will solve or even ease the existing difficulty. Focus only on what you would have to do so you can approve of yourself later, no matter what happens.

Then insert this new, ideal behavior in place of the behavior you originally found objectionable. Replay this new scenario three times, allowing it to change if your thoughts or feelings about it change. Study yourself carefully in each replay.

Conclude the exercise by opening your eyes. Ask yourself the following questions and discuss them with the trustworthy person who did the exercise with you. These questions are intended to help you discern the difference between the voice of your real internal self and the voices of external social influences. The questions will also help you understand why we may have trouble recognizing our internal voice.

Here is Greg's experience. It all started about three years after Greg returned from his mission. Nothing remarkable had happened up to that time. He had elected to live at home. He quickly became financially independent of his parents and bought his own car. All things considered, he pretty much lived his life as he wanted. That was fine with his parents. They were happy he was home and even happier to see him living his own life.

As Greg started thinking about marrying his girlfriend, Fay, he found it perfectly natural to talk with both his parents about his deepest feelings and concerns. There was nothing unusual about these talks because the family had a long history of openness about the things that mattered most to them. The family's ability to talk candidly had always been an important problem-solving tool for everyone, but gradually these conversations changed. Tensions increased between Greg and the rest of the family when they asked him important questions about his plans to marry Fay—questions that included the usual assortment of concerns for newlyweds, such as finances, education, and employment. But Greg found the questions annoying and expressed his disdain by avoiding answering. Though everyone was motivated by concern for Greg and Fay, Greg was not appreciative and became increasingly frustrated in his attempts to talk with his family. Finally, he stopped talking and began to withdraw. Everybody immediately noticed.

Things turned ugly when he was asked about it over dinner one evening. With resounding anger, he announced that he was tired of others trying to run his life, that if he wanted anyone's advice he would ask for it, and that he was upset and disappointed with his entire family. Everybody was stunned. A new and more serious problem emerged. The family stopped trying to talk to Greg about things that mattered. When they did try, they were met with angry outbursts. Superficial politeness replaced honesty. Something very important had changed, and nobody quite understood why.

Tensions between Greg and his family accelerated at an alarming rate. Without any explanation, Fay stopped coming over to the house. A wedding was planned with no family dialogue whatsoever, and Greg moved out a month before the wedding. The whole family was not together until the wedding day, when they met as emotional strangers, with detached awkwardness replacing feelings of tenderness.

When Greg went through the exercise we previously described, he was amazed at how he consistently had betrayed the deepest feelings that came from his real identity. In brief, Greg came to see that not only had he failed to look inward to find a sense of personal direction, but he had actually ignored and opposed his deepest feelings. He identified the three most important things he did in this problem situation that he wished he hadn't done:

As you recall, the second part of the exercise required Greg to replace the behavior he objected to with actions he could take in order to approve of himself later, no matter what the result. Greg's response was very perceptive. Without any prompting, he said that he would have looked at his own feelings more honestly and been more open about them with his family. In other words, he would have let his real identity play a more influential role in directing his responses. If he had, he felt that most of the problem would have been avoided. And he was probably right. The family was not opposed to his marrying Fay; they were only opposed to his defensiveness. And Greg learned an important lesson in this exercise because of his courage in facing himself honestly. He saw that he had played a major role in creating the very problem he had originally blamed on others and resented them for. His ability to see that truth was a much more accurate reflection of the qualities of his internal/eternal identity than anything that had happened while he was alienated from it.

Our willingness to honestly examine our own thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and then evaluate them according to what we want to be will greatly enhance our ability to alter and strengthen our sense of who we are. The capacity for honest introspection, for experiencing ourselves as we really are, undergirds all our efforts to cultivate a hardy identity. Following are some additional suggestions for enhancing our identity:

"A few years back, during that rare year when the Chicago Cubs succeeded in winning their division championship, there was a time when one of the leading hitters was in a slump. Jim Frey, the manager of the team, spotted this hitter in the clubhouse one day. The hitter, with hopes of improving his performance, was watching films of himself up at bat. Now, you can probably guess what films he chose to watch. Right! He chose films of the times when he was in the slump, when he was striking out and generally doing everything but what he wanted. He, of course, was trying to find out what he was doing wrong so he could correct his mistake. He probably subscribed to the 'What is the cause of the problem?' question. However, you can imagine what he was learning by watching films of slump batting; he was learning in greater and greater detail how to be a slump batter.

"In watching the Winter Olympics a couple of years ago, . . . we noticed the East German women as they were preparing for their run down the hill. As they were sitting in the sled waiting their turn, their eyes were closed. We thought this was rather strange. Then we noticed that with their eyes still closed, they were making strange weaving motions forward, backward, and side to side. We thought this really strange—until the commentator explained that these women were going through a mental preparation of the run. With their eyes closed, they were visualizing going through the run; their body movements were their body responses as they imagined banking off turns and experiencing the acceleration of the run" (John Walter and Jane Peller, Becoming Solution-Focused in Brief Therapy [New York: Brunner/Mazel, 1992], 5).

Many of us dwell on our defeats or on the way we do something wrong and exclude what we do right. How we define ourselves to ourselves can be greatly influenced by the proportion of time we spend examining our failures versus successes. A simple way of strengthening our identity is to scan our memory banks periodically for those moments when our self-approval is strong. How would we describe ourselves under those circumstances? How can we direct the same strength, the same understanding, the same positive behavior, in directions where our self-approval is not as great?

One of our clients described herself as unassertive and easily manipulated. She labored over incident after incident in which she felt she had been taken advantage of. After she reported several similar stories, therapy shifted to having her identify times when she felt she had been appropriately assertive. These times, naturally, were fewer and farther between. It was undeniable, however, that she had demonstrated an inner strength that, until then, she had refused to acknowledge in herself. Treatment helped her identify ways that she could transfer those positive characteristics to other situations. She rehearsed in her mind how she would react to threatening situations, replacing her typically unassertive behavior with the assertive actions she had taken at other times. Bringing to the forefront her more admirable traits required her to reassess her self-perception to accommodate her positive characteristics and then to act on them instead.

No one is perfect. By avoiding the tendency to define ourselves according to the negative things that we all do occasionally, we will be able to maintain a stronger sense of our identity based on the good things we do. That, in turn, increases the likelihood that we will continue to do good things. Invariably, the weaker or more negative our self-perceptions, the more severe the problems we can experience. On the other hand, the more secure we are in our identity, the greater our ability to cope with problems as they arise. How we choose to define our identity should include an understanding of what it means to be a whole person. Many emotionally troubled people are severe, black-and-white thinkers. If they demonstrate a weakness or behave in self-disapproving ways, they immediately conclude that they are bad. There is little, if any, provision for mistakes. It's all or nothing, black or white. Such individuals have great difficulty understanding that being whole, complete, and real means to contain both positive and negative attributes. In other words, they need to recognize that we have the seeds of perfection planted in us while we are yet imperfect. Our identity must accommodate this mortal phenomenon. The disparity between our real and our ideal self should motivate us to take action to improve rather than overwhelm us into immobility.

To begin the process of cultivating a healthy identity, we must ask ourselves to what degree we should allow our lives to be directed by influences other than our own sense of right and wrong, which emanates from our internal/eternal self. The following story shows that beginning the process of becoming internally directed is the primary step toward establishing a solid identity.

Cindy had been in therapy for several months. Depression, guilt, and anxiety were her chief complaints. They all seemed to be the inevitable consequence of a lifestyle that focused on gaining the approval of others by appearing to be whatever others expected her to be. In a series of particularly difficult sessions, therapy seemed to grind to a halt. She was considering pursuing a career as a means of self-development, but she felt guilty about leaving her children during the day. That her husband didn't approve just made matters worse. She talked endlessly about how she could manage the responsibilities of being both a professional and a homemaker. But no matter how she mentally arranged things, it appeared that she would disappoint someone.

Halfway through one session, the therapist asked her to close her eyes and stop talking. He directed her to eject the influence of all the important people in her life and concentrate on becoming more aware of her own thoughts and feelings. She was to find and listen to her internal voice and answer two questions. First, what did she want to do? Second, did she approve of what she wanted to do? Her answers were to be as free from the influence of guilt or fear as possible.

A surprising thing happened when she turned inward: she did not find the answers she was seeking. Instead, she found only confusion. It was frightening. She had become accustomed, in similar difficult situations, to following the rules and instructions of others. In their absence, she was lost. The sessions that followed focused exclusively on Cindy's increasing her awareness of her own thoughts and feelings about the meaning and direction of her life—the first steps toward learning about her own identity.

Recognizing our own thoughts and feelings is a critical first step in knowing who we are. And knowing who we are helps us define what we truly want out of life. In Cindy's case, as she evaluated her own thoughts and feelings, she realized that she had never really wanted a career. It was an idea she got from a friend who had read a magazine article about working mothers. When external influences exceed the strength of our own internal/eternal identity, we run a much greater risk of getting off the course our lives should follow.

Enhancing Spiritual Identity

Enhancing our spiritual identity is an internal process primarily involving only ourselves and the Lord. There is no such thing as a spiritual recipe, only general guidelines that may precipitate our desire to create the conditions in which our spiritual identity can grow. These conditions include faith, a change of heart, and charity.

Faith. Faith is not so much having something as it is being something. Erich Fromm aptly differentiates between what he calls "having faith" and "being in faith":

"Faith, in the having mode, is the possession of an answer for which one has no rational proof. It consists of formulations created by others, which one accepts because one submits to those others.

"Faith, in the having mode, is a crutch for those who want to be certain, those who want an answer to life without daring to search for it themselves.

"Faith, in the being mode, is . . . an inner orientation, an attitude.

"It is a continuous active process . . . of Christ's eternally being born within ourselves" (To Have or to Be [New York: Bantam New Age Books, 1976], 30-31).

Such faith requires us to act from our own understanding and testimony of the Savior and his redeeming grace. In Lectures on Faith, the question "What testimony had the immediate descendants of Adam, in proof of the existence of God?" is answered: "The testimony of their father. And after they were made acquainted with his existence, by the testimony of their father, they were dependent upon the exercise of their own faith, for a knowledge of his character, perfections, and attributes" (Joseph Smith, Lectures on Faith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1985], 27).

There is simply no substitute for individual faith when it comes to knowing the Savior. If and when we are asked whether we recognize the Lord, we assume there will be no one around from whom to seek advice, opinion, or direction. We will have to stand alone, independent of external influence, in our faith, to whatever degree it exists.

The faith to be able to know the Savior is the same faith that will help us know ourselves. The more we seek him out, the greater our sensitivity will be to the inner inklings that accompany our spiritual self. We must literally lose ourselves for Christ's sake in order to find ourselves. When we focus on a power purer and higher than ourselves, we are more capable of transcending the imperfect mortal ego that collects psychological hang-ups and deters us from heeding our healthier spiritual identity.

The faith that motivates us to seek Christ first also motivates us to cultivate our own spiritual identity. We must have sufficient faith to believe that we are capable of discerning promptings from our spiritual self. If we doubt our ability to rely on what we feel, that self-doubt will deter us from undertaking the introspection necessary to seek out our spiritual identity and then attend to it.

To develop the faith to enhance our spiritual identity, we must first ask ourselves, "Do I truly believe that I am innately equipped to discern what is good and bad, right and wrong, by thoughtful and honest introspection?" The key words are thoughtful and honest. Our introspection must be free from emotional or mental game-playing of any kind before it can be effective. No rationalizations or self-serving emotions are allowed. We must discern the truth regardless of how difficult it may be. Such thoughtful and honest introspection is a way of temporarily suspending selfish preoccupations and preferences in order to turn inward to see how we genuinely feel about something.

We must also recognize that faith is not simply accepting as true that which we have been taught is true. Without individual, rigorous inquiry into the spiritual validity of what has been learned, even the most ardent follower of religious doctrine risks being nothing more than the product of social conditioning. Because faith leaves little room for doubt, many erroneously assume that having faith means never questioning what they believe or take for granted. In reality, true faith does not require us to hide from our own thoughts, doubts, fears, or feelings—all of which we must acknowledge in order to cut to our essential spiritual core. In fact, developing faith requires an honest and heartfelt search for answers to meaningful doubts. This view was aptly summarized in Emerson's belief that honest doubt contained more faith than most creeds found in religion. (see Ralph Waldo Emerson, Essays [Boston: Houghton Mifflin & Co., 1865]).

Faith requires us to study, ponder, pray, and seek understanding from our own efforts and experience, both temporal and spiritual. Certainly doubts must be overcome to gain the spiritual power that resides in faith, but faith itself does not mean being solely compliant or having an accepting state of mind. Neither does faith mean avoiding the difficult and searching questions that naturally spring from a desire to learn. And most of all, faith is not a form of mind control we can exercise in an attempt to minimize the influence of some of our thoughts and feelings that are not in harmony with God's will.

Faith is engaging in that experiment described by Alma (Alma 32:27) in which we awaken and arouse our faculties to apply personally the teachings of the Savior. All experiments begin with questioning, with a desire to inquire and search out truth. Then with questions in mind, even with a doubting mind, we put to the test the promises made in the scriptures that if we seek, we shall find. Such spiritual experimentation must be attended by an acknowledgment of our weaknesses, a critical element that cannot be ignored if the experiment is to be successful.

Faith begets faith. It is strengthened by our own experimentation with principles of righteousness. As the value of each principle is tested, refined, and confirmed by our own experiences with it, our faith gradually becomes stronger, which in turn strengthens our spiritual identity. We, through experience, are then more inclined to define ourselves in spiritual terms, which increases our willingness to behave like spiritual beings, which bolsters our identity even more.

Some may mistakenly assume that introspection, listening to ourselves, and relying on what we hear is a sign not of faith but of willfulness and perhaps even rebelliousness. In fact, the contrary is true. If we are righteously self-governing, we always place the principle first, never ourselves. In so doing, both the principle and the individual are served. Putting the principle first requires a teachable attitude, a willingness to be open and honest with ourselves and others, and an acceptance of responsibility for our own thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. That openness places us in a very vulnerable position, one in which others have greater opportunity to know us as we really are, thus increasing the likelihood of our being accepted or rejected. Is it not an act of faith to be so open to judgment and criticism? Righteous self-government is risk based on faith, faith in our spiritual self and faith in the Lord regardless of what others think.

A change of heart. As our faith in the Lord and our ability to discern right from wrong increase, a change takes place within us. That fundamental and enduring change is essential to authentic spirituality. Alma the Younger recorded: "Did not my father Alma believe in the words which were delivered by the mouth of Abinadi? And was he not a holy prophet? Did he not speak the words of God, and my father Alma believe them?

"And according to his faith there was a mighty change wrought in his heart. Behold I say unto you that this is all true.

"And behold, he preached the word unto your fathers, and a mighty change was also wrought in their hearts, and they humbled themselves and put their trust in the true and living God. And behold, they were faithful until the end; therefore they were saved.

"And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received his image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts?" (Alma 5:11-14).

This change of heart is the initial influence of our spiritual identity taking a more assertive place in our lives. It is not unlike repentance. The fourth article of faith tells us that repentance follows faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. According to Elder James E. Talmage, repentance "embodies (1) a conviction of guilt; (2) a desire to be relieved from the hurtful effects of sin; and (3) an earnest determination to forsake sin and to accomplish good. Repentance is a result of contrition of soul, which springs from a deep sense of humility, and this in turn is dependent upon the exercise of an abiding faith in God" (The Articles of Faith [Salt Lake City: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, 1982], 109).

With an "abiding faith in God," we submit ourselves to a standard of accountability higher than our own. The contrition and humility that follow compel us to confess and forsake those things that we and the Lord find unacceptable. That demonstration of faith increases our personal worthiness, which makes us more sensitive to our spiritual identity, which then increases our intolerance for those times when we heed external voices rather than our own internal sense of right and wrong. Repentance follows, and the cycle begins again. Faith and repentance intertwine and complement each other in this refining process. But this is not merely one massive step, and we have arrived. We must repent continually and, in the process, attend ever more closely to our spiritual identity, which is the fundamental receptor of the influence of the Holy Ghost. Exercising our spiritual identity causes it to grow stronger and stronger.

Charity. In 1 Corinthians 13:1-4 we read the Apostle Paul's stirring description of charity: "Though I speak with the tongues of men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. . . .

"And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity, it profiteth me nothing.

"Charity suffereth long, and is kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up."

After we have begun to develop faith and we experience a change of heart, the next step is to make our behavior truly an extension of who we are inside. Charity is the link that connects motives to behavior and allows our spiritual identity to be made known to others. The Book of Mormon defines charity as "the pure love of Christ, and it endureth forever; and whoso is found possessed of it at the last day, it shall be well with him" (Moroni 7:47). Christlike love compels us to alleviate the suffering of others when we are aware of it. If a brother or sister is going without, charity impels us to feel compassion and then do something about it.

Charity is both what we do to help others and the underlying motive or feeling for doing it. Charity is crucial to our spiritual identity because it is the means whereby we can physically manifest that identity. We cannot grow or progress alone. Without others, we are unable to prove our worthiness by the way we act toward them. Without those who could benefit from our charity-motivated help, our spiritual identity would remain static and nonfunctioning. With charity, we can "assist in this work" (D&C 12:8), which is all the good works our Father wants us to be engaged in during mortality. The following story illustrates how faith, change of heart, and charity combine to cultivate spiritual identity.

Calvin grew up in a lower-middle-class family. Things were always scarce, and generosity from others was not one of the hallmarks of his childhood. It was quite natural, then, that he learned to fight for everything that he got and to share nothing for fear that there would never be enough. Consequently, he grew up to be quite selfish and defensive.

Later he joined the Church. He was a bright young man, and the fundamental meaning and purpose of such crucial Christian concepts as charity, service, and compassion were not lost on him. Yet he knew he was not the least bit charitable, compassionate, or interested in serving others. His life had been too cold and hard for those qualities to have been instilled in him.

Calvin could have participated in any number of Church activities that would have made him appear much more charitable than he really felt. But he had read the scriptures carefully and was fully aware of the significance of charitable motives and compassionate intent. He saw little point in simply trying to pretend to be better than he knew he was.

He didn't know exactly what to do, but he knew something very deep inside him would have to change before any charitable acts he performed would be congruent with what he felt. Out of sheer desperation, he took his problem to the Lord. The intensity of his prayers was powered by fundamental discontent with a part of himself, as well as a growing concern that he would never be able to overcome such a basic defect in himself. So, he prayed in earnest, he prayed with humility, and he prayed because he understood that nothing else would really help him.

Eventually, Calvin was touched by the Spirit of the Lord. He felt that he had been forgiven of his sins, though he had no explanation for that belief. He just knew the feeling was new, different, and as powerful as it was peaceful. But he felt more than that. He experienced what he had never experienced before—the Lord's love for him. He learned what charity was by being treated charitably. He would never be the same again, inside or out. His internal deficit was gone. He cherished the way he had been treated by the Lord, and it seemed entirely natural to him to treat others in a similar way—not because he was supposed to, but because he wanted to.

He could have chosen to minimize his internal conflict about being selfish rather than openly acknowledge and face his feelings. Had he done so, however, he would have failed to make the preparations necessary for the Lord to make his redeeming power known in such an intimate way. Clearly, then, Calvin's willingness to recognize his problem for exactly what it was may well have been the first step he could take in overcoming it. But the deeper sense of charity he acquired was not entirely the result of his own efforts. It was a gift. And the gift was given by God in the way Calvin could most easily understand. When he experienced the Lord's benevolence, he also experienced a small part of his own capacity for godliness. He was so touched and moved by the kindness and generosity of deity that his heart was softened and changed. The result of that change was that Calvin now wanted to serve others because of his own enriched sense of spiritual identity.

We live in a society that continually invites us to betray the guiding influence that emanates from our internal/eternal identity by emphasizing such external values as superficial appearances, wealth, status, achievement, and power. Enhancing our identity involves paying attention to our own thoughts and feelings and responding to them instead of to socially mediated ones. This process enhances our effectiveness, however, only when we own up to our deepest thoughts and feelings without denying or distorting them. Enhancing our identity involves a process that is not just the result of hard work or one hundred percent attendance at meetings. It is the result of humbly acknowledging our weaknesses and directly experiencing the Lord's benevolent care and regard for us. Our individual experiences with deity create charitable hearts and enhance our awareness of our spiritual identity. Those experiences are gifts given in grace as we attempt to overcome our weaknesses. Once we experience the Lord's charity toward us, it is natural for us to extend to others the warmth and regard we have received from him.

The essential spiritual and psychological processes involved in the development of our internal/eternal identity primarily involve ourselves and the Lord. The development of our identity is enhanced by an attitude of daily repentance rather than self-aggrandizement because that is the only attitude that allows us to learn from our spiritual and psychological weaknesses.

Once we begin to develop our spiritual sense of who we are, the requirement of righteous self-government that we do the right things for the right reasons becomes infinitely easier to meet. With faith in the Lord and faith in ourselves, we face adversity and opposition knowing that regardless of the outcome, we can approve of ourselves and be approved of by the Lord. With a change of heart, we become more receptive to the promptings of the Spirit through our spiritual self when temptation beckons and the lines between right and wrong blur. With charity, we become the conduit through which Christ's love is manifested through our love for others. Being becomes doing. We become righteously self-governed in thoughts, feelings, and actions.
