Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter Five

We Can't Give What We Haven't Got

An ancient poet wrote, "There are many that pass for holy men who keep foulness in their hearts and go through the external ablutions of saints in order to hide their sins" (Kural, the Great Book of Tiru-Valluvar, trans. C. Rajagopalachari [Bombay: Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, 1965], 48). Such people were typified by the scribes and Pharisees of the New Testament and the lawyers in the Book of Mormon (Mark 7:5-6; Alma 10:17). They outwardly professed righteousness, but their motives were not pure. There was little harmony between who they represented themselves to be and who they really were. They lacked congruence, which is the degree to which people's actions reflect what they truly think and feel.

Self-Inventory of Personal Congruence

Congruence is another word for harmony between how you act on the outside and what you think and feel on the inside. The more congruent you are, the more harmony there is between the inner and the outer you. The following exercise will help you measure your own congruence:

Scale

1 = This statement is true of me MOST of the time.

2 = This statement is true of me MUCH of the time.

3 = This statement is true of me SOME of the time.

4 = This statement is true of me ALMOST NONE of the time.

Questions

____ 1. I stay in unsatisfactory relationships just to avoid being lonely.

____ 2. I laugh at jokes even though I don't think they are funny.

____ 3. It is easy for me to express my opinion of my boss to my co-workers without ever telling my boss what I think of him or her.

____ 4. I avoid discussing certain subjects with people who are close to me in order to avoid hurting their feelings.

____ 5. Although I willingly help others, it is very difficult for me to let others know I need their help.

____ 6. I am extremely sensitive to criticism regardless of how accurate it is.

____ 7. It just isn't worth the hassle of having the waiter take my order back when it is not prepared the way I requested.

____ 8. After I've argued with someone, I spend quite a bit of time thinking about what I wish I had said but didn't.

____ 9. I have my current job more out of financial necessity than interest or career planning.

____ 10. If church attendance weren't a commandment, I'd go to my meetings less frequently.

Your score may be as low as ten or as high as forty. The higher the score, the more likely you are to have a clear sense of spiritual and psychological congruence.

What Is Congruence?

Congruence, the second leg of our three-legged stool of righteous self-government, is the unification of what we are on the inside with what we appear to be on the outside. Ideally, it means that our actions are in harmony with our internal/eternal identity.

Congruence is a powerful part of our human effectiveness. It is the way our identity fully expresses what we really feel and think and, therefore, what we really are. We must be aware, however, that the road to congruence is filled with such dead-ends and chuckholes as anger, selfishness, impatience, and greed. These are as much a part of our human nature as virtuous qualities. So, how are we to deal congruently with those less-attractive qualities and impulses as well?

Again, the answer involves the process of self-evaluation in light of our internal/eternal identity. When we evaluate ourselves, not only do we recognize and respond to our true thoughts and feelings but we also respond to the thoughts and feelings we have about our original thoughts and feelings. The following story will help explain this important concept.

Tim feels angry. His anger and resentment are understandable, considering what others did to him. He wants to get even. If he were to act congruently with his feelings, he would show his anger and get even. Congruence requires it. But if we add self-evaluation to this story, we get an entirely different outcome. Tim must now look at his thoughts and feelings and decide what he thinks and feels about them. As we said, his anger and resentment are understandable, considering what others did to him, and he wants to get even. But there is far more to Tim than just the anger and resentment. So he asks himself not only what he is thinking and feeling but also how he feels about what he is thinking and feeling. Does he approve? Does he disapprove? Is he happy with himself? Is he disappointed in himself?

Self-evaluation in light of our internal/eternal identity is no minor addition to our description of congruence. It changes the whole standard of being congruent. Because self-evaluation is completely independent of the original event and the feelings it created, it adds a new dimension. Tim can now feel the anger and resentment that was already there, but in addition he must acknowledge and accommodate the feelings of self-approval or disapproval created by his own self-evaluation.

Being congruent requires far more than merely expressing our first thoughts and feelings; it involves being congruent with our own deeper self-evaluation as well. We simply cannot act in ways we disapprove of and still be congruent. When we are congruent, we evaluate our thoughts and feelings based on our inherent sense of right and wrong and then act accordingly. The prophet Nephi exemplified this concept in prayer, in which he evaluated his own thoughts and feelings:

"And why should I yield to sin, because of my flesh? Yea, why should I give way to temptations, that the evil one have place in my heart to destroy my peace and afflict my soul? Why am I angry because of mine enemy?

"Awake, my soul! No longer droop in sin. Rejoice, O my heart, and give place no more for the enemy of my soul.

"Do not anger again because of mine enemies. Do not slacken my strength because of mine afflictions" (2 Nephi 4:27-29).

Nephi was angry with his enemies. Yet, instead of acting out this anger, he examined how he felt about being angry, and he was not pleased. Based on his self-evaluation, he vowed no longer to "droop in sin" but to elevate his thoughts and feelings from anger to a desire to trust the Lord in all things.

Congruence is a skill. It is acquired and strengthened over time by consciously being honest with self and others. It involves the risk of first knowing ourselves and then allowing ourselves to be truly known by others. It adds to our spiritual and psychological strength, but only after we face and acknowledge our weaknesses.

Psychologist Carl Rogers referred to honest self-expression as being unafraid to present ourselves as we really are. There is no need to be defensive, to deny deficiencies, or to hide mistakes. All of us at one time or another are ignorant when we should be knowledgeable, prejudiced when we should be open-minded. If we can come out wearing no defensive armor, making no effort to be something other than who we really are, we can learn more, get closer to people, and ultimately enjoy life much more (see Freedom to Learn, 2d ed. [New York: Merrill, 1985]).

Congruent with the Truth

Being congruent with the truth is central to our theology. President Harold B. Lee summarized spiritual congruence as true conversion, evidenced by our outward behavior reflecting an internal acceptance of eternal truth: "One is converted when he sees with his eyes what he ought to see; when he hears with his ears what he ought to hear; and when he understands with his heart what he ought to understand. And what he ought to see, hear, and understand is truth—eternal truth—and then practice it. That is conversion" (Stand Ye in Holy Places [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1974], 92).

The apostle James definitively explained the importance of knowing and then acting congruently with eternal truth: "But be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves.

"For if any be a hearer of the word, and not a doer, he is like unto a man beholding his natural face in a glass:

"For he beholdeth himself, and goeth his way, and straightway forgetteth what manner of man he was.

"But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty, and continueth therein, he being not a forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed" (James 1:22-25).

Congruence and Conformity

It is sometimes easy to confuse personal congruence with giving in to feelings of guilt or self-consciousness, a misplaced sense of duty, or any other unhealthy perception of how we think we are supposed to act. This unfortunate tendency is not even remotely related to the congruence that leads to a durable sense of self-approval. For example, a friend has been sick for several days. We are busy and haven't yet found the time to visit him. We think we should, but things keep coming up. After a long day at work, we finally arrive home hungry and tired. Suddenly, we remember that we still haven't visited our friend. After a short debate with ourselves, we drag ourselves out of the house and back into the car to go visit our friend. Our motive is a sense of guilt mixed with duty, not interest and affection. We go mostly because we think we should. After the visit, we are glad we went, but we are also relieved that we have satisfied our sense of duty to a friend and won't have to worry about it any more.

This situation is one in which acting without congruence might be considered the right thing to do. It is, after all, only a small act of incongruence, one that appears to benefit someone in need. It is very common to find situations like this in which a small act of incongruence takes the form of doing something good but for the wrong reason. What is the problem with handling such a situation without congruence? Consider the following points:

The spiritual and psychological cancer of incongruity is dangerous to the development of our internal/eternal self. For example, when we lack truly charitable motives but behave in ways that appear to be charitable, we excuse ourselves from the important task of facing and overcoming our lack of charity. Even little acts of incongruence conceal parts of ourselves that need improvement. In our example of visiting a sick friend, the most important issue is not whether we make the visit. Rather, it is examining why we don't want to go in the first place. Facing that issue would bring us face to face with the spiritual cancer cells in our own character. Grudgingly visiting the sick without self-evaluation only masks the selfishness that lurks inside.

Congruence combined with humility increases our awareness of personal weaknesses, which is the first step in improving ourselves. Furthermore, such congruence is essential in developing positive regard for self and others. The following story illustrates these points.

The divorce was final. No more yelling. No more pleading. No more wondering when he was going to leave again. But Sharon had no idea that with the sense of relief would come a new kind of pain—that of an empty house, a cold bed, and meals eaten alone.

Still, she refused to believe that all hope was entirely gone. Miracles do happen. But when Brad remarried just seventeen days after the divorce, all hope ceased. The world fell in on her. There was no place to hide the horrible, ugly truth. Her temple marriage had failed. She had failed. Everything that had ever mattered was in ruins. And so was she. Why should she even bother getting out of bed in the mornings?

At first she tried to be big about it. Of course, it was all a lie, but she tried anyhow. That's just the way she was. She sent a gift to Brad and his new wife, wishing them well. She went to work to provide for herself. At night she lay in bed and cried. She made it a point not to complain, particularly when her children were home. She wanted to be a forgiving Christian in the face of real adversity. To others, she appeared strong and forgiving, but to herself she was a pathetic failure. Eventually, the burden of maintaining a solid front to hide her broken heart became more than she could bear. As her depression worsened, family, friends, and church leaders finally convinced her to seek professional help.

At first it was difficult for Sharon to talk as openly as she needed to. But the more she did, the better she felt. Her therapist noticed, however, that she seemed to be avoiding many of her most intense feelings. Given her extreme circumstances, her hurt, anger, and disappointment seemed perfectly natural to him. So he kept asking her why she wanted to hide her most important feelings from herself and from others.

No matter how many different times and ways he asked the question, she always seemed stunned by it. He finally asked her to identify all the feelings that she wanted to conceal because they seemed inappropriate and unchristian. The implications of that question greatly upset her. But it was an important question, and she knew it. She thought about it all week.

Her next session was one she will not easily forget. Sharon walked in, sat down, and without the slightest hesitation began talking. She was in charge. She spoke precisely and with conviction. Her therapist was amazed at the transformation. Sharon was no longer a helpless victim, though she didn't seem to be aware of it herself.

"I have taken a good look at myself this week, and I don't like what I have seen," was the first thing she said. She then reported in exquisite detail everything about herself she had so meticulously tried to avoid the week before. She had found the courage to look inward and acknowledge her real thoughts and feelings, and now she had the resolve to deal with them. She was being congruent at a time when it was the most difficult for her to be so.

She didn't wish Brad and his new wife well—she deeply resented them both. Brad had had no business abandoning her. She was angry. She was hurt because of the divorce. But her most negative feelings had nothing to do with him. She was mostly upset with herself. Why? Because she wanted to do everything in her power to see that Brad would not be happy in his second marriage. She wanted him to fail. Acknowledging that about herself hurt deeply, but it felt good to say it because it was the truth.

As they talked, Sharon became aware of two inescapable facts. First, she had faced the truth about herself and her feelings. She didn't like what she saw, but she liked her willingness to face the truth. That felt hopeful and reassuring to her. Second, although a part of her felt angry, petty, and vindictive, another part of her did not approve of those hostile feelings. Therein lay the value of her self-evaluation: she was able to recognize her negative feelings, which then allowed her to disapprove of them.

In trying to overcome her anger and vindictiveness, she no longer presented herself as long-suffering and charitable. Rather, she acted as she truly was: someone who was trying to become long-suffering and charitable and in the process was asking the Lord, her family, and ecclesiastical leaders to assist her along the way. Her behavior was now congruent with what she truly thought and felt.

Obstacles to Congruence

If being congruent is so desirable, why is it so difficult? Think about it for a moment. As children, we probably all had the experience of being chastised or reprimanded for telling the truth about our feelings. Back then, that behavior was probably called being rude or disrespectful. Similarly, as adults we may have noticed that we can stop a good group discussion by simply expressing our deeply held views on what is being discussed. Personal relevance or intensity just seems to make others uncomfortable.

Our difficulty in being congruent results from our simply having become accustomed to its opposite. For instance, how often have we told someone we liked their sacrament meeting talk when we really didn't—or didn't even listen—or said our feelings were not hurt when they were, or greeted someone with a handshake and a smile while having ill feelings toward that person. We all do it to one degree or another. Ironically, our attempts to fool everyone rarely fool anyone. Everyone understands the game of incongruence: look good, fit in, and don't rock the boat. In exchange, we will act as if we like and accept each other at face value, but we will still harbor disbelief, skepticism, and maybe even some resentment.

As incongruence for the sake of acceptance and social comfort increases, personal credibility decreases. It is a strange trap to be caught in. The more we convey agreement with others when it differs from what we actually feel, the more we compromise the quality of our own character. Usually we call it being supportive or tactful, but we hardly ever call it what it is: fear of being ourselves.

We all have our own good reasons for being incongruent. It could be something as simple as shyness or as crippling as shame. Incongruence is a way of controlling our feeling self-conscious and minimizing the risk of rejection by being what others want us to be. But such psychological elasticity can be dangerous. At one point or another we may become confused about which is the real us and which is the one we present to others for their approval.

Enhancing Personal Congruence

Increasing our capacity for personal congruence and honest self-evaluation involves taking the risk of knowing ourselves, of being known by others, and of behaving intentionally.

Knowing Ourselves

Truly knowing ourselves means increasing our awareness of our primary thoughts and feelings, particularly those that may be unpleasant or frightening. Accurately understanding ourselves can be risky because it creates the possibility of finding out that our greatest fears might be true—for example, we really are selfish, unlovable, lazy, mean, and so on. Though it does not always feel good to know the truth about ourselves, it always feels good to know that we are willing to face that truth. The following case study illustrates how this principle works.

Clint was in therapy because of deeply conflicting feelings about his father. He was twenty-six, married, and without children. He had reported many favorable experiences with his father. All of them seemed to show his father as being genuinely concerned with his family's well-being: he was a good provider but one who valued family more than professional opportunity and who was always available to help when needed.

In this particular session, Clint spoke of his conflicting feelings about spending Labor Day weekend on a family picnic his father had arranged rather than getting away with his wife for two days. It was clear this young man preferred to go away with his wife but felt that would be disloyal to his family in general and his father in particular.

After carefully listening, the therapist said, "You seem to have difficulty accepting your feelings of resentment toward your father for smothering you." Clint recoiled. The comment was obviously on target. The therapist then asked Clint to close his eyes for five minutes, turn inward, and, without saying anything, try to identify his feelings toward his father at that moment. Finally, Clint opened his eyes and announced, "I really do resent him. I didn't realize how much." Though he found those feelings unacceptable, they were now his. He then was able to explore openly what it was about himself that made it so difficult to become emancipated from his somewhat overbearing father. The idea of resenting his father still does not sit well with Clint, but he makes no attempt to deny the reality of it to himself.

Being Known by Others

Learning to know ourselves involves acquiring knowledge about ourselves, but being known involves letting others know who we really are—what we value, think, and believe. This process is both natural and reasonable, but it usually feels difficult and uncomfortable. The biggest problem with making ourselves known is that when we openly declare who we are, we also open ourselves to criticism and rejection by those who may not share our views and values. Nevertheless, making ourselves truly known to others does have its unique rewards: it is the basis for building authentic and enduring relationships, feeling genuinely understood by others, and strengthening our personal integrity. The following story illustrates these rewards.

At the end of two days of interviews, the candidate for employment met with the president and his two vice-presidents for lunch. During the meal, the president indicated that they all had been favorably impressed and wanted to offer him a position. The candidate replied that he appreciated the thoughtful and courteous way he had been treated during the visit, but he felt he must decline the offer. Puzzled, the chief officials pressed him for the reasons for his refusal. The candidate asked how honest they wanted him to be in clarifying his reservations. They insisted on absolute candor.

For the next six hours, they discussed the company's deficits in professional integrity, work habits, and simple honesty. The candidate stated that he would find it personally embarrassing to be affiliated with the company irrespective of salary or prestige. The company officials appreciated his candid views so much that they offered him a consultantship to focus exclusively on developing integrity in the organization.

Their offer was undoubtedly the result of the candidate's presenting himself in a way that truly reflected his own views and values. The administrators could just as easily have been insulted and thrown him out. Regardless of the outcome, however, the candidate would have left with his personal integrity intact because he had acted congruently with his internal/eternal identity.

Behaving Intentionally

By nature, we humans seem inclined to prefer the known over the unknown and comfort over discomfort. That inclination can hinder personal growth because trying something new almost always involves the unknown and thus discomfort.

Learning to be congruent is certainly no exception. Because there is discomfort involved, the choice to increase personal congruence is almost always the result of a deeply felt desire to become more honest with ourselves and others. Unless we have that desire, it is just about impossible to increase our congruence, particularly when society values simple appearances as much as or more than behavior that is an expression of our real character. This is why intentional behavior is necessary to foster congruence. Behaving intentionally is a deliberate expression of our choice to become different. We choose to improve ourselves, and we know where to start because we acknowledge our weaknesses. Behaving intentionally not only leads to increased congruence but is itself an act of congruence.

Personal Development Exercise

The following exercise can help you enhance your personal congruence:

On a sheet of paper, list three situations in which you feel you have been incongruent, situations in which you spoke or acted differently from the way you really think or feel.

Next, list the words that most accurately describe how you think and feel about yourself for having behaved incongruently.

Now, imagine that you have the chance to relive those three situations. Write down how you would behave if you were to act with congruence.

List the words that most accurately describe how you would think and feel about yourself when you have behaved congruently in those situations.

Share with someone important to you the results of this exercise. Discuss with that person the steps you would like to take to improve your congruence.

Congruence is synonymous with righteous self-government. When we do the right thing for the right reason, our behavior matches our motives—what we do is simply a reflection of what we are. Consider, for example, a person with religious doubts and little faith. He may wish it were not so, but the fact of the matter is, he's a chronic doubter. He could pray for assurance. He could act as if he believed more than he really does. Many might even commend him for those approaches, saying that such actions will increase faith. But congruence asks more of us. It requires us to openly acknowledge our limited faith to ourselves first and then to our Heavenly Father in candid prayer. It requires us to say on bended knees, "Lord, I am a person of limited faith. Please 'help thou my unbelief.' Bless me that I may come to know thee."

Ironically, many of us fail to realize that openly facing our weaknesses and deepest concerns creates the humility that makes us most receptive to divine assistance. Congruence means acknowledging all of our weaknesses squarely as a way of becoming strong. And when it comes to dealing with other people, congruence means refraining from putting up fronts or roadblocks and acting in ways that are congruent with our best self, our internal/eternal self, and thus having nothing to hide. This level of congruence builds relationships and character.

With congruence between our actions and our internal/eternal self comes a strength that influences all facets of our lives. Because pretense no longer exists, energies that we once spent on maintaining facades and fooling others can now be directed toward more efficacious activities. We experience a sense of relief when we openly acknowledge fears that we have kept hidden from ourselves and others. In that moment of honesty, congruence abounds.
