Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter Six

On Our Own but Never Alone

A basic task of adulthood is to be truly self-directing, to achieve a healthy emotional and psychological independence that allows us to find the balance between the unique factors that differentiate us from others and the common characteristics that we share with them. If we simply choose to echo those around us, we have little chance of making a meaningful contribution. Being self-directing requires us to be more than just a reflection of those around us. Thoughts, feelings, and behaviors should converge to create a person who is free and willing to be righteously self-governing. Mortality is the time and the place to learn how to live independently according to principles that lead to enduring spiritual well-being. That is autonomy.

Self-Inventory of Personal Autonomy

Autonomy means our ability to independently follow our righteous thoughts and feelings. The following exercise will help you measure your personal autonomy:

Scale

1 = This statement is true of me MOST of the time.

2 = This statement is true of me MUCH of the time.

3 = This statement is true of me SOME of the time.

4 = This statement is true of me ALMOST NONE of the time.

Questions

____ 1. At one time or another I have questioned my beliefs to determine whether they are truly my own.

____ 2. I arrange for time alone, so I can reflect on the way my life is going.

____ 3. When I am alone, I seldom have trouble knowing what to do with myself or my time.

____ 4. I allow those I love to know me as I truly am.

____ 5. I share my thoughts and feelings with others as they occur.

____ 6. I am open to taking some emotional risks with those I love the most.

____ 7. I know when to trust my own judgment and when to rely on the counsel of others.

____ 8. I am willing to take responsibility for my own decisions, even when they are wrong.

____ 9. I am as much a leader as a follower in my circle of family and friends.

____ 10. I am willing to ask questions of those in authority over me when I do not understand or agree with what they say.

Your score may be as high as forty or as low as ten. The lower your score, the more likely you have a clear sense of autonomy.

Spiritual Autonomy

If we describe identity as the storehouse for our values and attitudes, and congruence as the bridge that joins our identities to our behavior, then autonomy is the sense of independence necessary to cross that bridge. The scriptures leave no doubt about the important role of autonomy in our spiritual development. A very dramatic illustration is found in Moses:

"And I, the Lord God, commanded the man, saying: Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat,

"But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it, nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee; but, remember that I forbid it, for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Moses 3:16-17; emphasis added).

Choice, agency, and accountability—the key ingredients of autonomy—are paramount in this dialogue between God and Adam and Eve. The Lord clearly advised and instructed but then added, "Thou mayest choose for thyself, for it is given unto thee." The important role of agency in the face of opposition could not be illustrated any more clearly nor at a more crucial time.

The degree to which the views and values of the parent (God) were openly declared but not imposed is also important. Even though God clearly acknowledged and reminded his children of their agency, he did not remain neutral or even vague about what constituted appropriate and inappropriate conduct. Also, notice the clarity and directness of his language and instructions: "Of every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it . . . ; remember that I forbid it."

There is no ambiguity or uncertainty here. God is exhorting, persuading, and instructing, but he is making no attempt to control. God was as clear and emphatic in reminding his children of their agency to disregard him as he was in expressing his own views and values. What an intriguing application this passage of scripture could have in our dealing with our own children: exhort, persuade, instruct, but don't control.

Autonomy is the final basic ingredient of righteous self- government. The following story illustrates what autonomy is and how it influences our lives.

It was a warm summer evening. The mountain breezes were pleasant and seemed to hold the promise of erasing the gnawing tensions of a long and unpleasant day. The bishop was not eager to start his evening interviews with ward members. He was tired. No, he was worn out. Just appearing interested in the problems he was about to face was going to be difficult. But he would try. What else could he do? He decided to take some lawn chairs to the most private corner of the backyard. He would have the evening interviews in the cool night air. Maybe that would help. He also prayed silently for spiritual strength and guidance for those he would try to serve.

He looked at his schedule. The first two appointments were minor matters. The third was a temple recommend interview, and the fourth was a marital problem. After that it would be time for the problem he had dreaded all day: Dale and Lori.

Eventually the time came. Dale and Lori sat down and started talking. Lori was the kind of person who needed to spend at least an hour a week with her bishop. Life had not been good to her. Although she was young, she knew a lot about loneliness, rejection, and sorrow. She worked hard at being a good Christian, partly because it was the only thing she truly trusted and partly as a way of desperately clinging to a source of help with personal problems that could overpower her at times. She and Dale had recently started dating. Even though his family was active, he had not been interested in religion since he was about eighteen, and he didn't see any need to pretend that he was. His honesty and candor spoke well of him.

They were meeting with the bishop at Lori's insistence. During the last two weeks their good-night kisses had become petting. Lori found herself completely unable to stop the advances of somebody who seemed to really care for her. She was desperately hoping the bishop could help them.

They talked a long time. It gradually became clear to the bishop that years of unmet needs for attention and affection were pushing Lori into activities she didn't approve of but couldn't resist. It was equally obvious that Dale was not spiritually grounded and simply did not have any abiding reasons to refrain from expressing himself sexually.

As they talked, the bishop gradually became aware of a growing feeling most bishops experience from time to time. The Comforter was present. The bishop discerned it was for Dale's benefit, so he asked Dale if he could feel it. Dale was confused by the question. Eventually he said no. The bishop asked Dale to pause and turn inward and see if he could notice a feeling he may have never noticed or felt before. Dale paused a long time before he said yes. The bishop explained the meaning and origin of the subtle but poignant feelings that were present and their significance in this conversation. For the first time in his life, Dale was exposed to the spiritual source for valuing personal morality. It was not overwhelming, but it was real. It was a beginning.

When the conversation ended, the bishop offered to meet with Dale the next week, if he wished. The bishop emphasized that spiritual development required constant work. He also told Dale that the spiritual feelings he had experienced this evening were not common, and similar experiences in the future would require much more of him. It was clear that Dale had some important choices to make.

Dale had been introduced to the still, small voice of the Spirit, and his experience was sufficient to cause him to pause, reflect, and investigate—if he wanted to. And he now had reason to want to. The meaning of the moment spoke for itself. It may not have been a loud, ringing voice, but it was clear and distinct from all others. He had been carefully taught a small but important lesson of the Spirit.

Personal choice, agency, and accountability were now operative in Dale's life. His future depended entirely on what choices he made in light of his new but limited knowledge. That knowledge had been given without coercion, manipulation, condition, or expectation. It could be cultivated or disregarded, pondered or forgotten. But because this experience was his alone, it was equally clear that no one else was responsible for what he did with it.

Psychological Autonomy

The closest psychological relative of spiritual autonomy is locus of control. The similarity between this important psychological term and its theological counterpart is considerable: they both deal with issues of choice, self-direction, and motive.

Locus of control refers to the degree to which individuals believe that their choices and actions influence what happens to them. Those with an internal locus of control believe that their choices and actions matter. These people tend to believe that wise choices and hard work are much more important to success than such external considerations as luck or fate. Those with a more external locus of control perceive many events to be beyond their influence or control. These people are more inclined to view themselves as helpless victims of outside, arbitrary forces and capricious circumstances.

Quite naturally, then, individuals with an external locus of control generally shrink from important life choices because they believe that their efforts make little difference. A good illustration of this point of view can be found in the way many individuals passively accept such hard economic realities as inflation, unemployment, and corrupt business practices.

Individuals with an internal locus of control respond to situations much differently. These people believe that their decisions and actions matter. They gather information before making decisions and consider alternatives before acting. They are not inclined to see themselves as passive victims of the world that surrounds them. They choose what they will allow to affect them, they decide what goals they will pursue and when, and they accept more responsibility for what happens to them. So when problems arise, they seek information and create alternatives that allow them to make important choices about how they will respond to difficulties in their lives.

The ability of such individuals—"internals"—to influence what happens to them is illustrated in James Fenimore Cooper's novel The Deerslayer. At one point in the story, a prisoner (who has an internal locus of control) is brutally tortured by Indians. Yet, by controlling his mind, he never lets his would-be assassins see his fear. Although physically restrained by being strapped to a tree, he still has control of the situation. The baffled Indians stop their abuse, and the prisoner obtains his freedom.

Though this example may appear dramatic, the underlying pattern that differentiates "internals" from "externals" is always the same: internals believe that what they do makes a difference, and because they believe their choices and efforts make a difference, they do more to direct their own lives. Externals believe that what others do makes the difference, and so they wait to see what will happen to them.

Decades of research are showing that internals and externals have qualitatively different life experiences. And the scope of these differences is sweeping, including such diverse considerations as mental health, physical health, education and income, political activity, and personal values. And the emerging pattern is equally clear. Internals tend to be happier, healthier, and more productive, and they live with less stress.

Characteristics of Internals and Externals

Mental Health

InternalsExternalsOptimistic High Morale Copes with conflict Persists in completing tasks Is a leader Is usually happy Is calm Seeks intrinsic rewards Is creative and alert Values choicesPessimistic Low morale Avoids conflict Prematurely ceases efforts Is a follower Is usually depressed Is anxious Seeks extrinsic rewards Is inatentive and blindly traditional Is burdened by choices

Physical Health

InternalsExternalsValues preventive care Accident free Is healthier Recovers rapidly Values self-careValues medical advice Accident prone Is less Healthy Recovers slowly Values expert-care

Social Considerations

InternalsExternalsPlans for future Is socially involved Persuades others Is proactive Uses little stereotypingLives day-to-day Is socially isolated Attempts to coerce others Is reactive Tends to use stereotypes

Education

InternalsExternalsEarns higher grades Goal oriented Is creative in thinking Self-motivatedEarns lower grades Needs outside direction Is rigid in thinking Motivated by approval

Individuals who are more adept at exercising their God-given right to personal autonomy, individual choice, and agency experience life quite differently from their less fortunate and more easily controlled counterparts. Individuals who have taken it upon themselves to "choose for thyself," as instructed by the Lord in the Garden of Eden, seem to prosper for their efforts.

At first glance, a high level of autonomy could appear spiritually dangerous, particularly when obedience to spiritual authority is also important to our salvation. That concern quickly fades, however, when we realize that God granted us agency to aid our spiritual and personal development. Choice and agency work only in our favor when we exercise them with righteous intent—when we do the right things for the right reasons. When we understand more completely God's values and principles and what he expects of us, it is clear that without autonomy, obedience is nothing more than compliance in the absence of choice, a state that completely precludes spiritual or personal development. The following story illustrates how and why individual autonomy enhances our spiritual and psychological development.

Steve didn't know if he wanted to go to college, so he asked his dad what he thought. But his father wanted to know what Steve thought. So Steve told him. He was worried about failing, he was worried about money, he was worried about stress, but he was also worried about the consequences of not going to college.

Steve wanted reassurance. Steve's father wanted him to make an independent decision. So they talked. Yes, money would be a serious problem. The family would help as they could, but Steve would have to invest heavily and consistently in his own future. Yes, failing was a real possibility. Though Steve was a capable student, he was not the best. Yes, stress could become a big problem. Competition would be keen, and success was not assured. And yes, the consequences of not going to college were significant: less income, less fulfilling employment, and fewer opportunities. After reviewing and clarifying the facts, Steve wanted to know what his dad thought, but his dad still wanted to know what Steve thought. So they talked some more.

Eventually Steve decided. His reasoning went like this: "I am going to college, but I understand it is a big risk and sacrifice for me. I will have to really get it together and keep it together if I am going to succeed; however, not going to college exposes me to even bigger risks, over which I can have no control. I think I can make it if I work hard, and I would think more of myself for trying."

So Steve went to college, worked hard, and graduated. He was a good student, though not the best. Other students with more "brains" and more money failed, but he succeeded. Why? Because he decided to go, because he paid the bills, and because he decided to face the difficulties. When he came face-to-face with these difficulties, Steve felt responsible for handling them, and he did. And his father was very proud.

The old adage "He who gathers his own firewood is twice warmed" explains what Steve experienced. Because Steve made his own decisions and paid for his own education, success in school was more meaningful to him. But the importance of this concept extends well beyond self-satisfaction. Exercising autonomy creates the condition for maintaining or enhancing intrinsic motivation. Choosing his own path provided the very impulses for him to succeed.

This point is lost on parents who insist on subsidizing every activity for their children and then wonder why nothing comes of it. At the other end of the spectrum, parents who dictate, demand, and demean will have little luck in sustaining their children's compliant behavior when they are not there to enforce their parental will. In the absence of choice, the absence of motivation is sure to follow. The converse is equally true: with choice, motivation flourishes.

Enhancing Autonomy

Autonomy and internal self-direction are crucial to effective living. We can always expect to find ourselves in situations where doing the right thing is not the popular thing. But for the authentic internal, such a situation is an opportunity to show their thoughtfulness, their fairness of mind, and their resolve to live by principles. Enhancing autonomy requires us first to look at a factor that stifles it: shame. "Like a wound made from the inside by an unseen hand, shame disrupts the natural functioning of the self.

"Because shame is central to the conscience, indignity, identity, and disturbances in self-functioning, [shame] is the source of low self-esteem, poor self-concept or body image, self-doubt and insecurity, and diminished self-confidence. Shame is . . . the source of feelings of inferiority. The inner experience of shame is like a sickness within the self, a sickness of the soul. If we are to understand and eventually heal what ails the self, then we must begin with shame" (Gershen Kaufman, The Psychology of Shame [New York: Springer, 1989], 5).

As long as we harbor unrealistic shame and the resulting self-doubts, the chances of our achieving autonomous thinking and behavior are remote. The fear of being shamed often prevents us from acting on our own feelings and perceptions. This response creates in us a reliance on others to tell us what to do to gain approval and acceptance. And as long as that disturbed dependence exists, achieving autonomy is next to impossible.

Shame is restricting. It stops us from venturing out of psychological comfort zones and taking the risks necessary to develop independence, which comes from exercising the unique qualities each of us has. In many respects we then become psychologically isolated, harboring past moments of shame and embarrassment like little secrets that, if discovered by others, will only contribute to our ever-mounting sense of shame. The secrets can be large or small, recent or as old as our first memory. The important point is whether we perceive our shameful moments as something we feel or as something we are.

A healthy sense of shame can contribute to our understanding of our own imperfection, help us cultivate a healthy conscience, and motivate us to improve ourselves. On the other hand, if we become overwhelmed with shame, we think of ourselves as flawed or defective. This type of shame has deep, strong roots, and it usually requires professional assistance to overcome. When our identity becomes excessively influenced by shame, doubts interfere with our ability to assert our own opinions. We are unable to act from our personal convictions, because we are unwilling to risk them by sharing them with others. Ultimately, this inability stops us from behaving in ways that are congruent with our inner self—and that is paramount in developing autonomy.

Steps for overcoming shame suggested by many prominent psychologists include the following:

a. Honestly share feelings with significant others.

b. Talk about what we feel shames us. Write in our journals or diaries about past events that make us feel ashamed now.

c. Learn to recognize when we talk negatively about ourselves to ourselves. There are negative and positive "voices" in our heads. The negative voices sabotage success and predict nothing but failure. Stop them by questioning the truth of what they are saying. Are we always failures? If we make one mistake, does that mean we are completely bad?

d. Learn how to handle mistakes, and have the courage to be imperfect. Shame can drive us to try to be perfect, something we cannot be on our own. Consequently, when we do make mistakes, shame causes us to degrade ourselves even further.

e. Learn through prayer and meditation to create an inner place of silence wherein we ground ourselves in what we would call our internal/eternal selves.

First, if we do not risk knowing ourselves as we truly are, we harbor weaknesses that can never become strengths because we ignore them in the hope that they never existed in the first place or that by some magical process they will eventually go away. Holding on to our weaknesses, of course, deters us from growing, sharing ourselves fully with others, and striving to emulate the Savior.

Second, keeping secrets locked away inside of us causes them to become the filters through which much of our behavior and perceptions are processed. Things appear worse than they really are. New experiences become tainted with old shame. Eventually, even the most positive things are distorted, minimized, and dismissed. That process is incredibly effective in stopping our progress. Who can find the energy or a reason to change when everything appears so bleak?

Finally, keeping secrets allows the negative aspects of ourselves that are true to grow way out of proportion. Bad things become horrible things as they thrive on our silence. And because there is no way to test our secrets against a more objective standard that sharing with others provides, we find it increasingly difficult to discern just exactly what is real about us and what isn't. In extreme cases, our minds fabricate negative images about ourselves that have no basis in reality at all.

Until we allow others to share our burden and extend to us a compassionate hand, shame can eat at us until we feel totally consumed by it. We must depend on one another when our own ability is lacking. There is no shame in that, only the risk of increasing shame if we don't.

If past events in our lives have contributed to our sense of shame now, it may be worthwhile to seek the help of our families, friends, and ecclesiastical leaders and to obtain professional counseling, if necessary. We should not underestimate the power of shame. It binds and limits us, for it decreases autonomy and deters us from being self-directed.

Freedom

As doubt and shame dissipate, the heaviness of depression that accompanies toxic shame lifts. We feel ourselves free from the bonds of perceived past failures. We see more options for thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Where once our automatic response to threatening and shame-inducing situations was to run, withdraw, and numb out, we now recognize our fear and then exercise our ability to choose an appropriate response. This freedom is a function of our internal/eternal selves, not of our circumstances or surroundings.

In the absence of debilitating shame and doubt, freedom increases. Exercising that freedom produces psychological hardiness and strength: the ability to influence others, determine our own direction, and retain our sense of identity when social influence and pressure threaten to swallow it up in a sea of conformity. Our psychological hands are no longer tied. We are free to pursue areas that show promise for growth and positive development. Such strength allows us to learn from others, gleaning from them whatever is uplifting without sacrificing our own sense of self. It allows us to follow a worthy leader without being deterred from our own life course and opportunities to lead. It enables us to acknowledge our own weaknesses and mistakes without defensiveness and with a desire to do better. In other words, such strength promotes our autonomy.

Operating from strength means we can be ourselves and allow others to be themselves. Strength provides a degree of composure that those who are weak cannot have. Feeling constantly threatened, they remain defensive and ever on guard. Afraid of not having their own needs met, they perceive life as a win-lose proposition. "I can only win if you lose" is their mentality. They deal with others in an emotionally hoarding way because they think, "The only way I can get what I want is if you do not get what you want."

On the other hand, psychologically strong individuals perceive life as a win-win arrangement. They understand that helping others meet their needs will actually help them meet their own needs. Service to others becomes spontaneous and genuine.

Autonomy is epitomized by charity without compulsion. We do not wait to be asked to serve. We serve independently and with gratitude for the opportunity. The more acts of kindness we perform, contributing to the strength of others, the stronger we become.

Mark was a young high priest who had been assigned to home teach a retired couple in the ward, the Durrants. Sister Durrant had been bedridden for three years. Her husband had cared for her with a devotion and love that were undeniable. But as time passed, Brother Durrant's health began to fail. Slowly, almost imperceptibly to their neighbors, things worsened for the Durrants. But apart from a yard that could have used a good weeding, there was little anyone could see that truly reflected the problems this couple was having.

After two or three months of perfunctory visits to the Durrants, Mark began noticing signs that this couple's life was not running smoothly. Brother Durrant wore the same shirt regardless of its stains. A few letters scattered here and there had turned into piles of unopened correspondence. Mark avoided staying long because of the musty, sickly smell that the Durrants' home had acquired.

When Mark returned from his last visit to the Durrants, he shut off the engine of his car and just sat in the driveway. A vague but undeniable discomfort overcame him. He felt just plain overwhelmed. Things were a mess on all levels of the Durrants' lives: they needed help with finances, help with upkeep on the house, personal hygiene, meals, not to mention their need for visitors and friends and things to keep them occupied.

Mark's mind raced. He didn't want to be bothered by someone else's problems. He liked the Durrants, but he didn't like them enough to get so intimately involved in their lives. Shouldn't their family take care of them first? Why should he have to take the responsibility that the Durrants' children were evidently not taking? He felt like calling the high priest group leader and asking for a change of assignment. Give the Durrants to another home teacher who was closer in age, had the same interests, lived closer to them, could spend more time with them. Mark found himself compiling a fairly impressive list of reasons why he shouldn't home teach the Durrants anymore. And with each excuse, they sounded more and more like just that—excuses.

The discomfort he felt got worse as it became clear to him that he was really feeling guilt and shame. He had recognized right from the first moment he stepped into their house that things were not going well. But he remained appropriately detached and fulfilled his home teaching in a timely, albeit superficial, manner. And now, more than ever, Mark didn't want to go back. The discomfort of being overwhelmed by a potentially large task had grown into the searing pain of self-realization: recognizing, understanding, and acknowledging his unchristian feelings when what was needed more than anything else was a willingness to be Christlike.

In one excruciating moment, Mark was faced with a monumental decision: would he run from his own disapproval and allow shame to dictate how he would behave toward the Durrants, or would he do what was necessary to feel good about himself and what he understood on a very fundamental level to be worthy of his priesthood? Closing his eyes, he uttered a silent prayer. He didn't ask for inspiration. He didn't need it. Things were painfully clear. He didn't ask for strength to face a difficult duty. He still wasn't willing to face it. He didn't ask for help at all. He asked for forgiveness—forgiveness for thoughts and feelings that were selfish, forgiveness for trying to justify his selfishness. He then asked for a softening of his heart so that his compassion for the Durrants would exceed his natural aversion to helping them.

Mark first demonstrated his autonomy by recognizing the true source of his discomfort as he sat in the car and thought over the Durrants' situation. He was ashamed of himself for trying to justify his desire to avoid behaving charitably. He was sufficiently self-aware to understand how he was trying to fool himself, and he was psychologically strong enough to acknowledge his rationalizations and call them what they were. He then went one step further and evaluated his thoughts and feelings. He didn't like what he came up with. He then openly acknowledged to the Lord what he had experienced and prayed for forgiveness. That was the essential first step in forgiving himself and setting aside the shame that could compel him to simply remove himself from a difficult situation.

The entire process up to this point was done privately, internally, autonomously. Furthermore, Mark recognized his own weakness—that of not feeling sufficiently charitable toward the Durrants—and sought the Lord on that count before he could go any further. This he had to do alone. No one could do it for him.

Mark could have maintained his superficial relationship with the Durrants. He could still have reported 100 percent home teaching, and no one would have been the wiser. By forcing the issue in his own heart and mind, without the intervention of an ecclesiastical leader, a request from the Durrants themselves, or any other external influence, Mark acted autonomously. In addition, he knew that what he was capable of giving toward the solution of the problem that evening was simply a commitment to be more prayerful. He autonomously and honestly assessed his abilities and acted on them, not beyond them. Many shame-based individuals try to respond as something either more or less than what they truly are. Mark, on the other hand, was accurate in assessing what he could give, and he acted upon that ability.

Mark's service to the Durrants waxed and waned again and again. With every new crisis, Mark had to decide just exactly how he was going to respond. His autonomy was by no means a static state that, once achieved, never faltered. On the contrary, it was a process that constantly demanded attention and cultivation. It was no small task some months for Mark to make more than the required single visit, which he knew would be enough to satisfy external demands. Few people really knew the extent of the Durrants' needs or of Mark's help to them, and so there was little praise. To maintain the level of commitment needed to help the aging couple required an ability to behave in ways that were independent of praise and recognition.

Cultivating autonomy is a fundamental task of mortality. The degree to which we are able to express ourselves congruently determines just how independent we are of the desire to simply please and placate others. Furthermore, autonomy is closely related to locus of control: do we feel that what we do matters? Are we in control of our own lives, or do we give up that control to external factors, reducing ourselves to the role of victim? Autonomy means we understand who we are, and are willing to risk being ourselves regardless of circumstance. That requires us to look at ourselves in a way that we alone are capable of. Do we like what we see? Are we ashamed? Is the shame warranted, or does it extend to past experiences that must be acknowledged and reckoned with before we can be free of our own disapproval and the unrighteous disapproval of others?

Spiritual autonomy goes well beyond psychological well-being. It requires much more of us. Spiritual autonomy demands that we abandon the temporary, imperfect ego and recognize our divine origins. Through our ability to discern between our spiritual selves and our psychological selves, we are able to love God first, which frees us to love our fellow beings. Autonomy can be frightening because we risk doing away with what is familiar and under our control in order to allow the Spirit to direct us. Spiritual autonomy is the ultimate level of personal responsibility: to be worthy to receive inspiration directly from the Lord and then have the courage to act upon it righteously. In that sense, autonomy is an active, vibrant process. President Spencer W. Kimball described the need for righteous activity this way: "People tend often to measure their righteousness by the absence of wrong acts in their lives, as if passivity were the end of being. But God has created 'things to act and things to be acted upon' (2 Nephi 2:14), and man is in the former category. He does not fill the measure of his creation unless he acts, and that in righteousness. 'Therefore to him that knoweth to do good, and doeth it not,' warns James, 'to him it is sin' (James 4:17).

"To be passive is deadening; to stop doing is to die" (The Teachings of Spencer W. Kimball, ed. Edward L. Kimball [Salt Lake City: Bookcraft, 1982], 148).
