Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter Seven

Stopping Self-Deception

Some individuals sincerely believe they are completely innocent in moments of conflict and that the other person is to blame. These are not shallow convictions that are subject to change with discussion and reason. They genuinely trust their own perceptions, and what they usually perceive is that conflict is someone else's fault, not theirs.

No one is excused from this most human tendency. We all do it to one degree or another. The truth of the matter is that most of us are quite adept at seeing the fault in others while remaining comfortably oblivious to our own. C. S. Lewis describes this lack of self-understanding as a classic tool of the devil to keep us from "discovering any of those facts about [ourselves] which are perfectly clear to anyone who has ever lived in the same house with [us] or worked in the same office" (The Screwtape Letters [New York: Macmillan, 1982], 16).

The scriptures teach us that our ability to see our own faults is crucial to our own progression and to the progression of those with whom we associate as well. In Luke we read: "And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Either how canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is in thy brother's eye" (Luke 6:41-42).

This scripture is often used in discussions about hypocrisy to make the point that we must not criticize others because none of us is free of shortcomings. Nevertheless, these verses do not command us to refrain from pointing out their weaknesses to others. That is part of the responsibility we have to contribute to the growth of our brothers and sisters. Rather, these verses make the important point that we can remove the mote from their eyes only if we have removed the beam from our own eye first. As with the Savior's admonition in Luke 22, "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren" (v. 32), our priority in dealing with imperfection is to help ourselves and then to help those around us.

The implications of this concept are compelling. At the bottom of most inadequate human behavior is the capacity to see things in ways that are inaccurate and self-serving even if they are ultimately self-defeating. This problem is made worse by the fact that even in the very midst of distorting things, many of us truly believe that we are not deceiving ourselves at all. That happens most often when we stand to benefit in some way, particularly if that benefit is excusing us for our own faults.

Psychological beams are as small as blaming traffic for your habit of being late for appointments or as large as being abusive to family members because "that's how I was raised." The process can be seen in the recovering alcoholic who minimizes the hazard of taking a route home that will lead him past the bar he used to frequent or in the person struggling with a weight problem as he attempts to downplay the harm of a second dessert. In both cases, however, such small details are usually the first steps in a sequence of events that leads to serious and potentially dangerous behavior. When it comes to our own vulnerabilities, there is no such thing as a small or insignificant decision.

Other beams are larger and more long-standing. They may cause great discomfort to us and distort the way we see things. But because they have been with us so long, it is difficult for us to name them or recognize how deceiving they can be. These beams can be self-made or made with the help of others. They can be as wide as the fundamental way you view yourself and the world or as slim as a little quirk that shows up only on specific occasions. Regardless of a beam's shape or size, it can stop us from doing the right things for the right reasons or even from doing the right things at all.

The Essentials of Self-Deception

When we are sick and go to the doctor, we report our symptoms, the doctor asks a few questions and orders a blood test, an X-ray, or some other diagnostic procedure. Then he says, "This should tell us what's really going on in here." He can make such a statement because of his training in normal and abnormal biological functions. When he finds out what's wrong, he usually knows what can be done to fix it. All of what he does is based on the assumption that when abnormal processes are identified and corrected, normal health will be restored.

With respect to spiritual and psychological health, things are a bit more complicated. What constitutes normal development is never as obvious, and what can be done to fix abnormal development varies greatly from one individual to another. Despite the complexities, however, some types of problems are readily recognizable, as are their effects. Two common beams that interfere with our seeing clearly are irrational thinking and life scripts. We may possess these beams with varying degrees of awareness. They stop us from facing what is embarrassing, frightening, or otherwise upsetting. This in turn produces motives that are designed to keep us away from such discomfort. And as long as we avoid discomfort, we lose opportunity to grow. We must be willing to question ourselves, and evaluate our perceptions. Until we do, we will never know what beams are there.

Irrational Thinking

As young children, we learned to accept what others told us as being accurate interpretations of reality. How and what we felt about ourselves was largely contingent upon the feedback of others. Such feedback usually came from our parents, but the influence of teachers, friends, and other people at school and church all contributed to our ultimate views about life and our place in it. That is all very natural when we are young, but as we grow older, the irrational nature of many such beliefs can cause trouble. Most of our feelings of depression, anxiety, and rejection can be the result of beliefs that originate in childhood and remain essentially unexamined in adulthood.

Dr. Albert Ellis proposes that the way we think about life events determines how we feel about them (see Humanistic Psychotherapy: Rational/Emotive Applications [New York: Julian Press, 1973]). This beam appears as faulty and irrational thinking, which creates negative self-evaluations and emotional distress. That is a fairly radical idea for those who tend to attribute their unhappiness to bad circumstances and uncontrollable events, something that could have been learned very early. The alternative is that life events in themselves do not create our unhappiness but that the irrational way we think about these events is the real cause of our unhappiness. For instance, Sister Jackson has spent the past month preparing her Spiritual Living lesson for Relief Society. She gives an excellent lesson, but few sisters give her a positive response. Sister Jackson is disappointed and saddened, wondering what she did wrong. She even begins to question her ability to teach. The more she thinks about it, the worse she feels.

Three basic components are involved in Sister Jackson's distress. The first is the reception she received from the Relief Society. The second is Sister Jackson's beliefs about what happened, including such negative thoughts about herself as "I did something wrong" and "I shouldn't teach another lesson." Third is the emotions she felt: hurt, loss of self-confidence, and sadness.

It may appear that the reception Sister Jackson received is the cause of her distress. On the other hand, it could be her beliefs about what happened (the beam of irrational thinking) that are the real cause of her problem. If we could read what is engraved on her irrational beam, we would likely see such sentences as "It's my fault that nobody liked my lesson. I should have prepared more and made my visual aids just a bit nicer. I'm a really inadequate teacher. What a disaster!"

Sister Jackson's thinking is saturated with self-criticism. Anyone who thinks this way would be upset, but such self-punitive thoughts are unwarranted and irrational. Those negative thoughts have caused Sister Jackson's distress, not the fact that she didn't receive the compliments she had hoped for.

If Sister Jackson had learned to recognize her beam of irrational thinking, she would have been able to remove it with more rational ways of looking at things. Examples of clearer thinking might include, "It hurt when no one commented on how well the lesson went. I wonder what was different in the way I gave this lesson compared to others I have given. I'm sorry that very few sisters seemed inspired by what I said. Oh well, I did my best. I can't expect rave reviews every time I teach."

There are three primary kinds of irrational thinking:

Many of us automatically resort to two powerful irrational thoughts when any of our life assumptions are not satisfied. First, "This is horrible." Second, "There must be something wrong with me." Whose feelings would not be profoundly influenced by such irrational and self-punitive thoughts as these? Learning to examine carefully and then replace our own irrational thoughts with more rational ones is an important first step in reducing the needless frustration of unwarranted negative self-evaluations.

The beam of irrational thinking can stop us from doing the right things for the right reasons and being righteously self-governed. As long as we are prone to think negatively of ourselves or catastrophize even small disappointments, we will avoid engaging in activities that could cause us to feel bad. In Sister Jackson's case, she was considering giving up teaching. A closer look shows that her intense preparation was not to pre-sent a lesson that would contribute to the knowledge and testimonies of her sisters but rather to avoid something she greatly feared: failing to receive praise. As long as she was blinded by the beam of irrational thinking, she would continue to do the right thing for the wrong reason.

Self-Evaluation Exercise

Life Scripts

Just as a movie or a play unfolds according to its script, so, in large measure, do our lives. Regrettably, many of us may not be fully aware of the script our lives are following. More importantly, our life script may not be the one we would consciously choose.

Life scripts are made up of the beliefs and assumptions we have accepted about ourselves, usually as youngsters—beliefs and assumptions we may not even remember acquiring. Some common life scripts include being a loner because we have been taught that others can't be trusted; being dominant and aggressive because we have been taught that to be otherwise is a sign of weakness; being underachieving and mediocre because we have been taught that others will resent our success.

Our life script can become the core of our identity. It may consist of such unfavorable assumptions as "I am an unlovable person" or "I will never succeed at anything." It can also be made up of such favorable and positive assumptions as "I can count on myself to do the right thing in difficult situations" or "My personal feelings are a good guide for successful living." Life scripts continue to influence our feelings and behavior long after we have forgotten how or when we learned them, as is the case in the following story.

Henry started making provisions for his approaching retirement and eventual death. Throughout his entire life he had been a loner. To many he seemed unreasonable and demanding, with little capacity for insight or change. He worked hard to provide for his family but was not particularly appreciated because of his unpleasant personality. He frequently fought with those he loved, felt lonely and hurt most of the time, and seriously doubted that anyone could really love him. As he thought about his remaining years, his first concern was to provide for his wife. He had always loved her and tried to gain her approval by taking good care of her. That was all he felt he had to offer. It had never really worked, however. There had been a few good months now and then, but on the whole, the marriage was filled with conflict and hostility.

Henry's instructions to his family were quite revealing. He was to be placed in a "home where old men go to die" once he became too much trouble for his children to take care of. Money from his estate was to be set aside to cover expenses for himself and his wife, and the remaining money was to be divided among the children equally. He said more than once that "people could visit me if they wanted," but he didn't expect them to. When his wishes were discussed, the family objected to his "poor me story," just as they always did, and expressed their affection and desire to take care of him. Of course, Henry disregarded their tender comments.

This is the true story of a man who was preparing to die in exactly the same way he had lived. He attended to the needs of others as a way of gaining their approval and then acted like a martyr, so alienating others that they hardly knew how to respond to him. Then he would feel lonely, hurt, and uncared for, even though he cared for others.

The underlying theme of Henry's life script is fairly obvious: the world is cold and uncaring, and a good man must suffer while serving those he loves. Henry had learned this unhealthy script as a child in a home that was essentially cold and uncaring. Henry created all the necessary emotional deprivation so he could suffer throughout his adult life just as he had as a child.

Such illustrations are sad, but the consistency of some peoples' self-defeating behavior across their entire lives is most easily understood as a reflection of their life scripts. Henry's script called for him to suffer, so he did; but his suffering was pointless. He neither understood nor abandoned the life role he had adopted, not even in preparing to die.

Negative life scripts create the most distorting kinds of beams because they have been with us for so long. To understand how life scripts can become so powerful, we need to understand the messages we receive, beginning early in life, that tell us what we are, what we are good for, how the world works, and what our place is in it. These messages can be conveyed in a variety of ways, some subtle and some obvious, such as the way we are treated, how often we are ignored, how and when we get love, and how and when we get punishment. We start receiving these messages, usually from our parents, at such an early age that we accept them as absolutely true. It is not unusual for us never to fully recognize or examine them. They can simply become the organizing basis of our personalities, directing what we think and feel. Robert and Mary Goulding identify what they consider the most common messages taught to children and how they affect their development (see Changing Lives through Redecision Therapy [New York: Grove Press, 1979]):

Such messages may run throughout our lives. Naturally, it can be difficult to be aware of just how destructive some messages are if they are all we have ever experienced. It can be equally difficult to unlearn them and replace them with new and more constructive ones, but it is important to become aware of the silent forces that often direct our lives without our permission. The following questions may help us do that.

Self-Evaluation Exercise

Some of us may find it helpful to consciously rewrite our life scripts to give ourselves a new pattern to follow. Patriarchal blessings may serve a similar purpose in changing the direction of our lives.

Mortality often provides the circumstances for us to acquire beams. Some may be deeply embedded psychological flaws; others, nagging spiritual imperfections. Regardless of their origin, however, they impair our ability to do the right things for the right reasons. They manifest themselves to us in challenges with pride, a lack of charity, or vanity, or, as the following story illustrates, they can be totally imperceptible until their effects are felt profoundly.

If appearances counted for anything, Mike had to be solid gold. Good-looking, athletic, and infectiously enthusiastic, he exuded confidence and class. He had tailor-made suits and a wife and three children that fit him just as well. Mike was the sort of guy that you automatically gravitated to at church or at neighborhood functions. It was a gift, his ability to make you feel comfortable and accepted even if you'd known him for only five minutes.

And Mike's friendliness went beyond mere social pleasantries. Having been called as the Sunday School teacher for the fifteen- and sixteen-year-olds, it was obvious from his well-prepared lessons and the extra time he spent with his students that he was conscientious and ever willing to go the extra mile. Whether at church or in the community, you could count on Mike to be there when help was needed.

Within a year's time, the ward Young Men president was transferred by his company, and no one was surprised when Mike was called to replace him. Mike was a natural with the youth in the ward. He tackled his new calling with the same energy and drive that attended everything he did. Not even the most recalcitrant youths could stay away from the activities he organized. He offered jobs to three priests who were notorious for being irresponsible troublemakers. His small manufacturing business was an ideal spot for the young men to work a couple of hours after school cleaning up and doing odd jobs.

Mike had become someone you could trust. If he didn't volunteer first, you could bet that he would accept an assignment and carry through with it. Temple excursions, ward dinners, Explorer campouts, youth conferences—Mike was there. So when Mike approached the bishop about investing in his business, there was little hesitation. Other ward members also heard Mike's investment proposition, which seemed well conceived and involved only minimal risk. His neighbors were interested in investing with someone as reliable and competent as Mike.

Six months later, the bishop, ward members, and neighbors were horrified when Mike's business was closed by the Securities Exchange Commission. Mike was eventually found guilty of fraud and sentenced to five years in prison.

We could easily dismiss this as a story of a wolf in sheep's clothing—a person who looked like a good guy but was really a deceitful con man. The truth is, Mike's intentions were never malicious, and he was certainly not interested in consciously hurting people who trusted and respected him.

Mike worked hard and accomplished much, but if we were to get inside his head for a moment, we would see that Mike's good works were a product of his need for acceptance and approval. He met the needs of others only as a way to meet his own needs. In the process, he rationalized his dishonesty by reminding himself of all the good things he did. That is the point where behavior and motive diverge, where the difference between righteous self-government and unrighteous facsimiles becomes apparent. Because righteous and unrighteous behavior can appear identical, it behooves us to continually evaluate our own actions and determine the goodness of our intent. Mike never did. He found that the more he volunteered, said yes, and gave to others, the more credible his internal argument became that if he did good things, he was a good person, despite his dishonest business dealings. His motives for doing good works became an effective way of denying his dishonest actions.

Mike was completely aware that his business was failing. How could he ask for the money of good, trusting people, knowing there was little chance that they would get their money back, let alone any kind of profit? Beams. Spiritual and psychological flaws allowed him to deny the gravity of his situation, to deny that his actions were deceitful and illegal. He had learned through his life that approval depended on pleasing others. His life script dictated that he present a positive front, even if it was false, because if he showed anything that even appeared negative, others would reject him. The beam in his eye was inscribed "People require what looks good." As long as they didn't know the bad things that were going on, everything would be all right. He went to his business every day and worked hard. At church on Sunday he took the sacrament. The beam in his eye grew so large that it blinded him from even thinking of the dishonesty of his behavior. In fact, he prayed for strength to work harder.

"It's not stealing," he thought. "They're investing in me. I can make things work. Besides, I've done a lot for this community. They can keep me floating until I get my feet back on the ground, and then I'll pay them back." Such thinking gave his conscience just enough room to slink away. And as long as he remained unaware of the beam in his eye, he continued his behavior until he was caught.

Irrational thinking and life scripts typically occur without our conscious choice, but we expend large amounts of energy in using them, energy that could be used for far more constructive thoughts and behaviors. When we spend our effort to cover up our weaknesses, we sap our own spiritual and psychological strength. Each time we avoid facing our weaknesses, we have less and less energy to face them. And as long as we remain blind to the beams in our own eyes, we have little chance of doing the right things for the right reasons.
