Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter Eight

Making Weak Things Become Strong

One great challenge of righteous self-government is to acknowledge our failings instead of ignoring them. Acknowledging weakness is the first step in the process of making weak things become strong. In the October 1951 general conference, Spencer W. Kimball, then a member of the Quorum of the Twelve, said, "I believe it was from this very pulpit that my grandfather presented a sermon in which he said, 'The test, the test, the TEST is coming.' Well, the test is here. The test has always been here. We came into the world as a test. All the way down the line there are adjustments to make. There are sins to overcome. There is much to learn. There are weaknesses above which we must rise. We must gain self-mastery, become righteous, and attain unto perfection" (in Conference Report, Oct. 1951, 84; emphasis in original).

A critical activity of our mortal existence is to make adjustments, overcome sins, learn much, and rise above our weaknesses—all of which leads to self-mastery, righteousness, and, ultimately, perfection. In fact, there would be no righteousness in the absence of our having weaknesses and sins to overcome. That principle was made evident in Lehi's admonition to Jacob: "It must needs be, that there is an opposition in all things" (2 Nephi 2:11). But because of our natural tendency to look upon our personal weaknesses with disdain, we instinctively want to hide them—from ourselves, from others, and from our Heavenly Father. What a remarkable blueprint we have followed since our first earthly mother and father hid themselves from the Lord because they realized they were naked. The only way Adam and Eve could reestablish their relationship with God was to confess their wrongdoings and suffer the consequence of their disobedience by being expelled from the garden. But that is only the first part. The second and more important part is that a world that groans under sin and darkness (see D&C 84:49) now provided the environment in which their mortal weaknesses could be manifested and overcome so that they could ultimately return to the Father.

Imperfection always precedes perfection. We can't skip imperfection—it is a necessary part of mortality. If we ignore that fact, we risk keeping our weaknesses, doubts, and nagging bad habits hidden. Not only does hiding our weaknesses stop us from overcoming them but usually makes them worse.

Kurt was unpretentious and easygoing. In his midthirties, he had a wife and four children. They were a family that anyone would have liked to have live next door. Friendly, well- mannered, and always willing to help, they appeared to be living a typical middle-class life. Kurt often got backaches so severe that they interfered with work. But his wife still baked cookies and took them to the widow across the street, Kurt still coached the priests' basketball team, and when the home teachers came over, everything appeared just fine.

Kurt went from doctor to doctor trying to find the cause of his debilitating pain. Each doctor gave him a new prescription for pain; each prescription was for something stronger and more habit forming. When one pill didn't work, Kurt would take a second and then a third. His wife would gingerly ask him if he was taking too much. In his usual quiet manner, Kurt would tell her that everything was okay.

As time went by, Kurt's latest doctor grew reluctant to write more prescriptions for him. He wanted to admit him to a pain hospital where they could control his treatment, but Kurt said he could handle things on his own. The doctor said he couldn't keep giving Kurt prescriptions without new tests and a possible hospital stay. Kurt refused, even though he was now missing two or three days of work a week, but whenever his mother called to see how the family was doing, he said everything was just fine.

Then his last prescription ran out three weeks before it should have because he was taking three times the amount he was supposed to take. Withdrawal set in. He would leave home in the morning, but instead of going to work, he would drive up a canyon and sit in his car and shake. Finally, he did make it to work only to find his boss waiting for him: they could no longer keep him employed, and what was going on? Kurt just looked down at his feet and mumbled something as he walked out.

The police came at seven-thirty in the morning. With neighbors leaving for work and children standing at the bus stop, the two officers handcuffed him and hauled him off to jail. After forging prescriptions for two months, he had finally been caught.

When asked why he never let anyone know of the severity of his problem, Kurt answered that he was ashamed: ashamed of being so weak, ashamed of being unable to handle the problem on his own. He feared what his family, friends, and church leaders would think if he told them he had become addicted to prescription drugs. In retrospect, Kurt says he knows now that his silence only worsened the problem and the consequences he ultimately had to suffer.

If we are not meant to ignore, deny, or hide our weaknesses, then, what are we meant to do with them? We are to use them for our benefit. That requires us to identify and acknowledge them, face them with humility, and then, with the Lord's assistance, overcome them.

We must remember that in this process it is our direct experience with the Lord that changes us, not simply overcoming the weakness. Facing and understanding our weaknesses is merely a way of preparing us to intimately experience the Lord's benevolent care for us. That truth may be difficult to grasp, especially when self-reliance and self-control are highly valued characteristics. We know that working toward perfection includes controlling the baser instincts that accompany a mortal body, but we may mistakenly believe that is in our own ability to control, to overcome, and to subdue our weaknesses that perfection is acquired. Such efforts are important, but they are not the changing agents. Rather, it is the Lord's intervention and our experiencing his love that changes us. Control in and of itself not only is insufficient but can actually deter us from the communion with the Lord that will ultimately work the mighty change of heart.

There are at least two reasons why mere control is insufficient. First, when people with bad habits simply vow "never to do them again," after a short period of abstinence, they tend to repeat the self-defeating behavior with even greater intensity. This process is called "white knuckling it": trying to stop doing something without changing the underlying reasons that motivate the behavior in the first place. In this instance, self-control is only a way of denying that negative impulses exist. Second, if we perceive our own will and effort as being the source of positive change, more than likely we will also accept the credit for that change. In purely psychological terms, that may very well be true: bad habits can be extinguished through therapy. But that change of behavior is far from the mighty change of heart that is worked when we find our way to the source of grace—the Lord—and are touched by his benevolence. His grace transcends all psychological processes and all efforts of our own. No psychological process can replace any essential spiritual process, such as repentance. The former can be the precursor to the latter, but it will never replace it. Self-control stops us from engaging in unrighteous works. The Lord's grace frees us to do good works.

Weaknesses: Divine Origins, Divine Purposes

Two important scriptures reflect the importance of acknowledging weaknesses as a way of soliciting the Lord's help in overcoming them. In Mark, we read about a father's asking Jesus to help his son. In this case, the weakness is doubt. Then "Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that believeth. And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief" (Mark 9:23-24).

In this scripture, belief is paradoxically coupled with doubt in a poignant act of faith. It is not an isolated incident. Similarly, in Alma 22:18 we read: "O God, Aaron hath told me that there is a God; and if there is a God, and if thou art God, wilt thou make thyself known unto me." Again, we see the expression of faith in the very expression of doubt.

Although most of us tend to avoid facing our doubts or weaknesses because of shame or embarrassment, we need to consider the possibility that our weaknesses have divine origins that serve divine purposes. Weaknesses were given to us to foster humility. That humility helps prepare us to receive the Lord's gracious help in becoming stronger.

Weaknesses are not necessarily defects or deviations to be corrected by single exertions of priesthood power or special blessings. Neither are they to be covered up by psychological defenses that hide their true meaning and function. Weaknesses are to be faced with candor and integrity and overcome with humility and the Lord's gracious assistance.

Avoidance: Keeping Weak Things Weak

Few qualities contribute more to maintaining weaknesses than avoiding what we fear or find uncomfortable. Avoidance means denying, distorting, and rationalizing the negative things we don't care to face about ourselves or others. It is an attempt to escape from conflict and opposition because of the pain and distress they create. Avoidance compels us to distort reality as a way of making things look better than they really are.

Spiritually, we believe that conflict and opposition play an absolutely essential role in our eternal development. Avoiding those hurdles because of our fear of them limits our potential for spiritual growth. It is at these most difficult times that our weaknesses are most likely to appear. Furthermore, these moments of opposition also reveal us as we really are. Elder Neal A. Maxwell said, "Trials and tribulations tend to squeeze the artificiality out of us, leaving the essence of what we really are and clarifying what we really yearn for" (Things as They Really Are [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1980], p. 89). If we avoid difficulty, we shun the opportunity to identify our weaknesses and overcome them. We also miss the chance to experience ourselves in our truest form—stripped of all pretense with the true desires of our heart uncovered. What a wonderful occasion to clearly evaluate ourselves and make the necessary adjustments that can bring us closer to the Lord.

The following story illustrates how deadly avoidance can be. Avoidance has many different forms and varieties, only one of which is illustrated in this example. Regardless of its forms, however, avoidance is always distinguished by an attempt to escape from unwanted or unwelcome thoughts, feelings, or events because of the fear or shame associated with them. The following story, taken from a letter, helps clarify the role of avoidance in the development of emotional problems.

"For the past several years, I have felt that my life was meaningless. This was an ironic state of affairs considering all that I had accomplished. Friends and relatives were always lauding me for my good looks and intelligence. I was the first person on either side of my family to graduate from college, doing so with honors. I had a good job with an important accounting firm. I had plenty of dates. By all outward appearances, my life was very fulfilling. Yet I was miserable and felt increasingly depressed.

"Six months of psychotherapy had helped me catch an occasional glimpse of the underlying cause of my unhappiness. It always seemed to involve low self-esteem or my disapproval of myself. Somehow, it seemed I really did have a low opinion of myself, but I found that idea confusing because of all the success in my life. Finally, I was able to put my finger on the problem. Because I had such a low opinion of myself, I believed others would think of me in the same way if they really got to know me. And then, because of that, I was unwilling to expose myself to others as the person I really was. I took great pains to sidestep high-pressure situations, to gain the approval of others, and to avoid making decisions that might reveal things about me that I didn't want others to know. I can see countless examples of this pattern in my life now that I have caught on to my style.

"My unwillingness to let myself be known probably caused me the greatest difficulty in my relationships with the women I found the most attractive. My most recent relationship is a good example. After weeks of building up courage, I finally asked her out on a date. It was quickly obvious that she liked me as much as I liked her. I should have been elated, but instead I got scared about really making myself known to this woman. I put up a fake front designed to impress her. I was petrified of becoming too vulnerable. This led to behavior that was both hot and cold as I kept testing her to see if I could let down my guard, be myself, and still be liked by her. When we broke up after eight months, I was terribly lonely. I realize now that the relationship might have had a chance to be meaningful on a long-term basis if I had had the courage to risk presenting an honest picture of myself.

"I am now amazed at how often I have chosen to avoid facing situations that would expose my true self to others—all because I don't want others to know me and dislike me the way I dislike myself."

Another deadly form of psychological avoidance is called disconfirmation. It grows out of comparing ourselves to others, and it occurs when we see and accept as true something about ourselves that we wish wasn't so. Examples could include believing we are dull, lazy, or unlikable. The particular belief doesn't matter very much, and it doesn't matter if it's true. The crucial point is that we believe it, and we wish we didn't.

The next step in the process of disconfirmation is to collect evidence to prove to ourselves that what we have already glimpsed and accepted to be true about ourselves isn't true at all. The problem with our attempts to disconfirm what we believe is that not only does it never work but it usually makes things worse. For example, if we believe we are not very bright, we may go about trying to disprove our belief by doing well in school. Grades become paramount. But no matter how well we do, someone always does better. Can improved grades eventually lead us to think of ourselves as more intelligent than we already believe we are? Not likely. We explain our success by saying "I just work harder in school than the others" and then take another, harder class to see if the first good grades were just luck.

The cycle, once started, can be endless. How much proof is enough to convince us to stop believing we aren't good enough? There is never enough! Thinking of ourselves as not very bright, for example, is a feeling of being inadequate—it's an emotion, not a fact. Just as a fear of flying is hardly ever influenced by a factual understanding of the safety performance of the airlines, so the fear of being not very bright is hardly ever influenced by good academic performance. The treadmill rolls on. We attempt to change deeply held feelings about ourselves that simply become more immune to the "proof" that we constantly strive for and yet never possess.

Jill is a typical representative of how disconfirmation works. Jill is in her twenties, attractive, sociable, and bright, yet she doubts that anybody who gets to know her would really love her. To authentically open herself up to such a relationship feels very risky. If the relationship failed, it would confirm Jill's deepest fears about her lack of attractiveness to others, particularly to men she finds attractive. So she doesn't get involved in meaningful relationships. Instead, she maximizes her superficial assets and makes herself attractive to as many men as possible. She thus appears popular and fun and is in high social demand. That provides her with constant, albeit shallow, reassurance about her attractiveness. All these relationships are orchestrated by Jill to be short-term while still providing her a daily dose of reassurance via social popularity. Nevertheless, the end of each relationship confirms Jill's deepest fears about herself: men are interested in her for only a short time and only for superficial reasons.

Essentially, then, disconfirmation is a way of trying to prove what we are not. It tells us very little about what we are. It interferes with both spiritual and psychological development because it requires us to deny feelings that frighten us. We then structure our lives to gather proof that what we already believe to be true about ourselves really is not true. But because deeply felt emotions about ourselves are seldom influenced by proof of any kind, our continuous attempts to gather evidence can go on endlessly, just as a dog chasing its own tail never catches it because the faster the dog runs, the faster its tail moves.

Careful introspection can produce insights into how this mechanism may operate in our own lives. The following exercise may increase our awareness of the most important things about ourselves we wish were not true.

Self-Evaluation Exercise

How Weaknesses Become Strengths

The first recorded incident of avoiding conflict took place as a result of Satan's influence in the Garden of Eden. The purpose of that avoidance was to deny or to hide from God something that Adam and Eve were ashamed of—a purpose that is entirely consistent with Satan's character and intent. So, if God and Satan represent opposites in character and purpose, then their preferred methods of responding to opposition and conflict are probably also opposite. If Satan advocates personal deception and dishonesty, then God must favor honesty and facing unpleasant realities just as they really are.

In scripture we read: "The Lord spake unto me, saying: Fools mock, but they shall mourn; and my grace is sufficient for the meek, that they shall take no advantage of your weakness;

"And if men come unto me I will show unto them their weakness. I give unto men weakness that they may be humble; and my grace is sufficient for all men that humble themselves before me; for if they humble themselves before me, and have faith in me, then will I make weak things become strong unto them" (Ether 12:26-27).

What an utterly profound contrast! Whereas Satan would have us avoid facing our faults so that we may appear better than we really are, the Lord requires us to acknowledge our faults so that we may actually become better.

In psychological terms, the Lord's way of responding to opposition and conflict is called coping. Coping is acknowledging the truth about ourselves or the world in which we live instead of falsifying either to make things appear better or more pleasant than they really are. Coping is facing problems and, in so doing, attempting to make things better. It is the essence of righteous self-government.

The concept of coping has been discussed in psychological literature for decades. Generally speaking, coping is an enduring willingness to forthrightly face the very things you have a tendency to fear. It means that you are willing to face personal imperfection and that you don't have to hide from the painful things that deep down you know are true about yourself.

Coping in the Face of Conflict and Opposition

The following story illustrates the underlying motives, problems, and behaviors involved in the exercise of righteous self-government.

Colin had been deeply moved by the power of the scriptures after years of searching for the truths he had always been told they contained. His commitment to Christ had not come easily. His academic background had taught him to question, evaluate, and criticize everything he heard and read. It had proved a successful way of conducting his professional life but had not produced the sense of rightness that he sought as he pondered the words of the Lord and his prophets.

He concluded that the confirmation he sought could be experienced only if it did not come from something he was able to create on his own—logical reasoning and the satisfaction of accurately assessing the validity of something he read. As he began the fearful process of abandoning himself, a new, undeniable sensation crept into his soul. The taste of truth had never been more satisfying. Because he was a thoughtful man, it was only natural that Colin spend a lot of energy trying to determine just how someone with his spiritual understanding should live. He believed it was essential that his lifestyle be consistent with the spiritual knowledge he had acquired. Paradoxically, his desire to live more righteously quickly introduced him to a new set of real and unexpected problems.

Colin was puzzled when he first started noticing that he found participation in ward meetings spiritually unfulfilling. Gradually, it became clear why. He found fast meetings unsatisfying because of the number of dutiful parents who whispered appropriate phrases to their parroting children, members who used the time to express personal opinions rather than to share their spiritual convictions, and the congregation who seemed uninterested in what was going on and equally uninterested in doing something about it.

Similarly, he became frustrated in his elders quorum meetings. The primary preoccupations seemed to be improving home teaching statistics, instead of service, and delving into doctrinal mysteries that could never be solved and didn't need solving in the first place. He didn't have a problem with the home teaching program or with religious speculation, but he thought his priesthood meetings should be concerned with much more than that.

He had other problems as well, but they all seemed to have one thing in common: tradition, ritual, and repetition seemed to dominate at times when he wanted the Spirit to prevail. He wanted spiritual strength—the kind he had read about so carefully in the scriptures—but he was unable to find it except when he was alone in prayerful meditation. Naturally, he was aware of the critical attitude he was developing and worried that he was the problem.

Colin found his feelings confusing and upsetting until he realized the mistake he was making. He was looking to others for the spiritual development and strength he was seeking. He was responsible for his own spiritual development; those around him were not, even those who presided over him. They could help, but it was his problem, not theirs. The help he needed had to come from his own efforts and his personal relationship with God.

Once Colin understood the problem more clearly, he began to correct it. He started by turning inward to look for the spiritual guidance he needed for his own spiritual development. As a result, he quietly and privately started helping a single parent who was really in desperate need. The family he adopted was deeply appreciative because they knew his service was motivated by something other than filling an assignment. Gradually he attained a more complete understanding of service and Christian charity. As his insights grew, so did his willingness to enhance the lives of others as the Lord had already enhanced his. Church meetings were less frustrating to him, and he became willing to serve rather than wait to be served by others.

In this story, just as in much of life, the outcome was a product of three elements. The first was the dominance of righteous intent instead of social approval and comfort. The second was the strong disposition to cope with conflict and opposition with unfeigned personal honesty and integrity instead of avoidance. The third and final element was personal responsibility. When Colin started finding his ward meetings spiritually unsatisfying, he was faced with a rather unique problem. Just who do we blame for spiritually unsatisfying meetings? Ourselves? Others? The bishopric? It is a tough question that is difficult for most of us even to think about fairly, let alone discuss openly. Ultimately, however, Colin didn't blame anyone. Instead, he asked himself and God what his spiritual needs were. But before he could ask this question, he had to face an unpleasant internal reality about himself that he probably would have preferred to avoid. That is, "What does it say about me that I find so many of my meetings spiritually unsatisfying?" Some of the potential answers to that question could have been devastating, but he asked himself anyhow. And because he was willing to cope with that internal reality in humility rather than avoid it, he was able to move on to the next step of his spiritual development.

Although Colin's is a story of a personal search for spiritual truth and understanding, it is also a story of righteous self-government. At each important decision point, what he chose to do was based on his inner spiritual promptings, which allowed him to be congruent; he became more self-directing as he abandoned his criticism of those around him; he exercised his autonomy to become self-motivated in righteous works; and he acknowledged his own failings with the intent to overcome any part of the problem of spiritual opposition that he had created himself. All of these steps are fundamental to righteous self-government. The absence of any one of them would have altered not only the outcome of Colin's story but also his path of spiritual growth.
