Scott R. Peterson, Richard L. Bednar, Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons ( 1995)

Chapter Nine

Doing the Right Things for the Right Reasons

Doing the right things for the right reasons grows out of individual identity, congruence, and autonomy. Those characteristics provide the balance and support necessary to be righteously self-governing. Without righteous self-government, our life would be much like a ship at sea with no rudder to guide it. We can be certain we will eventually end up somewhere, but it may not be where we intended to go. Because of that truth, we consider these three inner forces to be the central elements of spiritual development and psychological well-being. They interact with each other continually and are vital in helping us achieve our life goals. We will briefly review their essential characteristics.

Identity. Identity is our personal sense of individuality and self-understanding that gives purpose and direction to our life. It is our answer to the question "Who am I?" both spiritually and psychologically. To enhance our identity requires clarifying our personal values and deeply held beliefs about the meaning of our existence. Generally, the clearer we are about our own values and attitudes toward life, the more likely we are to steer our life in a direction that is both satisfying and meaningful to us.

Congruence. Identity answers the question, "Who am I?" and congruence asks, "How true am I to myself?" Congruence is the compatibility between what we appear to be on the outside and what we really are on the inside. Congruent behavior is a natural expression of our inward feelings and motives at the time we actually experience them. Because of this, congruence is synonymous with integrity. Congruence involves honesty not only with ourselves but with others as well. We are willing to openly declare and share with others our problems, concerns, motives, hopes, and wishes. Congruence is just the opposite of impression management. Enhancing congruence requires facing the risk of truly knowing ourselves and then facing the added risk of making ourselves truly known to others. Congruence is the most direct pathway from our internal/eternal identity to our outward behavior.

Autonomy. Autonomy asks of us, "What do I do with who I am?" Autonomy is inseparably linked to moral agency and the freedom to choose. Autonomy is a reflection of our capacity both to choose for ourselves freely and independently and also to immunize ourselves against the tyranny of social pressure. Enduring autonomy is a reflection of our ability to direct our life according to our own will and values in harmony with the Lord's.

Jesus, the Epitome of Righteous Self-Government

The Savior was the only perfect man. According to the Prophet Joseph Smith, "None ever were perfect but Jesus; and why was He perfect? Because He was the Son of God, and had the fullness of the Spirit, and greater power than any man" (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, sel. Joseph Fielding Smith [Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1973], 187-88). The easiest way for us to strive for a similar fulness of spirit is to study and then emulate our Savior's earthly behavior. That includes his perfect ability to be righteously self-governing. His demonstration of identity, congruence, and autonomy was unflawed. His supreme knowledge of who he was required him to confirm his identity even to those who would condemn and kill him. His honesty manifested itself in a constant congruence of thought, feeling, and behavior, even when corrupt priests and Pharisees tried to ensnare him with their deceptive questions and accusations. Even when his closest disciple denied him and his Father in Heaven left him to suffer alone, the Savior chose, with full autonomy, to accept his godly calling. Perfect righteousness could demand no less.

Conclusion

The essence of righteous self-government is Christlike behavior born of Christlike thoughts and feelings. In the process of achieving this spiritual ideal, righteous self-government demands congruence between what we truly are and what we present ourselves to be. It asks us to strip away pretense and acknowledge the reality of our nature, whether good or bad, acceptable or unacceptable. We must be willing to pluck out the beam in our own eye. Our ability to do that is enhanced by the precision and clarity with which we comprehend our own unique internal/eternal identity, exercise our capacity to act congruently with the dictates of that identity in good times and bad, and cultivate our ability to freely and autonomously make decisions based on righteous intent, particularly in the face of conflict and opposition. Then, and only then, in facing what we are, can we become what we can be.

There is spiritual and psychological power in doing the right things for the right reasons. By combining good works with worthy intent, we maintain personal integrity, which allows us to be open with the Lord, ourselves, and others. And is there anything more compelling than the individual who has nothing to hide and speaks without deception or guile? Integrity makes us more sensitive to our weaknesses and sins, but it also gives us the desire and strength to overcome them.

Exercising our identities with congruence and autonomy can leave us vulnerable to the rejection and ridicule of those who place social acceptance above the acceptance of the Savior. But when the clamoring of such individuals fades away, we will be left with an enduring sense of peace if we remain true to our internal/eternal selves.

We suggest that doing the right things for the right reasons is evidenced in the following situations to the degree they reflect who and what we really are:

When we look around and see the poverty and pain among God's children, and because we have seen the needless reality of so much suffering we actually hurt for others, and because we hurt for others we work to help them only because we care.

When we stand trembling over a spouse or child in the administration of the priesthood waiting endlessly to speak until the Spirit gives utterance rather than offering appropriate and traditional words.

When we stand over the coffin of a loved one and at the moment of our greatest grief, simultaneously feel the spiritual assurance that mortality is but a small moment of eternity.

When we have a lesson or talk to give in Church and really collaborate with the Lord in our preparation rather than just being competently prepared to fill our assignment.

When we kneel in family prayer each night, not out of habit, duty, or obligation but out of love and gratitude for the blessings in our family and the craving for God's spirit to grace our home.

When we bring a truly broken heart and a contrite spirit to our partaking of the sacrament on Sunday so that accepting the emblems of the body and blood of Christ is a spiritual event rather than just a ritual.

When we believe deep within ourselves that we are in need of greater humility, and with fear and trembling ask the Lord to teach us humility realizing that we are also in need of courage to face the lessons we may be about to face.

Even though these events are the kind that bring us closer to God, they seldom bring us the admiration of others. They are more powerful and enduring, but they are also more modest, internal, and are rarely known by others. It is in these moments of spiritual privacy, where real and humble intent prevails over pleasing appearances, that righteous self-government is acquired.

As we strive to do the right things for the right reasons, we can look to such great men as Nephi, who never faltered in the face of persecution by his own family; to Captain Moroni, who refused to accept the social evils of his time; to Joseph Smith, who faced martyrdom rather than deny what he knew was true; and to the Savior, who in all moments of his life, regardless of situation or consequence, was real—real in the sense that what he was on earth was the same as he would be throughout eternity: pure in thought, feeling, and behavior. He is the epitome of righteous self-government, the Exemplar, providing an example that can lead us to peace if we are willing to be honest with ourselves and with him.
