Shirley S. Ricks, senior editor, provided expert editorial suggestions and was always collaborative and thoughtful in talking through different issues, making my editing a source of enjoyment rather than an onerous task. I am also grateful to the intern, Sarah Whitney Johnson, who was so careful in working through the initial manuscript and giving me very helpful suggestions, which were essential in helping to polish the draft. Emily V. Strong’s creative work with the design of the book transcended what I could have ever imagined the final product to be.

I celebrate the influence of my mother, M. Roxanne Watkins Clark, in several places throughout this volume; the role of my father, Nolan Ezra Clark, is less heralded but is no less significant. I learned the value of biblical word studies as he explained the Hebrew term for honor in Exodus 20:12 from his well-used Strong’s Exhaustive Concordance of the Bible; I wanted to live to bring “weight” to the name of my parents from his teaching. His consistent pattern of early morning scripture study and early Saturday morning temple attendance modeled a life of serious discipleship. The faithfulness and devotion to God I experienced in my home rooted and grounded me in spiritual reality from my earliest memories.

My brother, Jonathan Clark, and one of my mission companions were among the earliest readers, and I am so grateful for their support and encouragement, both with the book and in my life. My sister, Elizabeth Clark, and my cousin, Rebecca Clark Carey, were careful readers and editors through the writing process, and without their suggestions, feedback, and encouragement, I would not have had the courage to keep going.

I am grateful to Brigham Young University–Hawaii for granting me a sabbatical during Fall Semester 2018 to be able to write this book. I am grateful to the library staff at the Harold B. Lee Library for helping me find a research room as a writing home during that time. I am also grateful to all my colleagues in Religious Education at BYU–Hawaii who covered classes during that semester.

For many years, maybe decades, my husband, Keith Lane, along with my sister and a dear friend, Lisa Rosenbaum Ishikuro, have all urged me to write my research insights on redemption for a larger audience. I am grateful for their encouragement and support. I am particularly grateful to Keith who, from the earliest days of our married life through today, has graciously shared his life and time with me and my research and writing. Since we first met we have shared a love of both religious studies and gospel study. Having our path together include a shared professional life has been a great blessing. His love and support have both kept me grounded and given me space to explore and learn.