SELLING A LOAD OF CARROTS TO AN EX-MISSIONARY, WHOSE PARSIMONY IS EXHIBITED—SOME REFLECTIONS THEREON.

Some years after Father Parkin migrated to Utah he rode to Salt Lake City one day with his son William, who was bringing a load of carrots to sell. As they rode along the street they met M.... T...., a man who had served as a missionary in England when they were new converts, and been entertained many times at their house, and to whom Father Parkin had been unusually generous when he was released to return to his home in Utah.

Brother T...., who had the reputation of being among the wealthiest citizens of Salt Lake, and as stingy as he was thrifty, hailed them (recognizing them of course) and inquired what they wanted for their carrots, and was told "25 cents per bushel."

On further inquiry he learned that they had forty bushels in the wagon, and after some parleying decided to buy the load. The wagon was driven into his yard, and Brother T.... procured a bushel basket to have them measured with, evidently not caring to buy them according to the measurement of Brother Parkin.

Brother Parkin offered no objection to having them measured, knowing that he had been rather generous in his measurement of the carrots, but regretted the delay that it would cause, as he and his father both had some purchases to make before they could leave town, and they were anxious to get home.

When the wagon was not more than half unloaded Brother T.... was called by his wife to come to dinner, and he asked his old acquaintances, father and son, to excuse him for a few minutes, and take a rest while he ate his dinner (leaving them to understand, of course, that he wanted to see the rest of the carrots measured.)

Work was suspended and father and son cogitated a few moments while each munched at a carrot, for their appetites were keen enough to enable them to enjoy a good dinner too if the dinner had been forth-coming, and soon the father broke the silence.

"My son," said he, "can you imagine Elder M.... T.... when he was a missionary in England eating a carrot in a barn while I indulged in a warm meal in the house."

The son responded that he could not imagine such a situation. "On the contrary," he said, "I remember distinctly that he never called at our house without being invited to eat, whether it was meal time or not, and that the choicest cuts of meat were bought to provide him the best meal possible, and that you paid thirty-six shillings for silk with which to make a pair of stockings to present him with to bring home for his wife when he was released from his mission, and that when those stockings were made they were admired by everyone who saw them and declared to be fit for any queen or princess to wear."

"Well, my son," the father added, "I don't regret anything I ever did for a missionary. When I embraced "Mormonism" I did it because I was sure it was the truth, and I afterwards tried to serve the Lord just as thoroughly as I had ever served the devil before. The truth is not affected by men's actions, and men's actions are not always affected by their knowledge of the truth. Brother T.. probably knows that the Gospel is true, but it has apparently not changed his nature. I don't envy him his nature or his possessions. Better live on raw carrots and retain our love for the truth and our respect for those who have served with us in its promulgation, than have the wealth of this world and forget or cease to respect our former friends and associates in the ministry."

The son was impressed with the change the Gospel had wrought in his father, for he could easily recall the time when he would not have looked charitably upon any action that savored of meanness or parsimony in one of his fellows, and when the more pretentious the person was (be he preacher or layman) who displayed any such characteristic, the more bold and ready he would have been to denounce him to his face.

The rumination was ended. Brother T.... returned from the house and the unloading of the carrots was resumed, Brother T.... keeping tally with a pencil on a board as the baskets were emptied. When only a few bushels remained to be measured he exclaimed: "Never mind measuring any more, I see you have forty bushels, allright."

Then the son decided that it was his turn to speak right out in meeting. "But, Brother T——, I do mind! It was you that wanted these carrots measured. I would have sold them to you for forty bushels if you had been satisfied to take them without measuring. Now we will finish measuring, and if there are more than forty bushels, we will take the overplus home, if you do not want to pay 25 cents a bushel for them."

The measurement of the balance disclosed the fact that there were forty-two bushels in the load, and Brother T.... rather shamefacedly handed over $10.50 in payment therefor.
