EMBARKS AS ORDINARY SEAMAN—CAPTAIN'S PREMONITION AND SAILORS' FEAR—AMAZONE WRECKED—DYING SAILOR'S VISION—GREWSOME SEAT—A TYPHOON—SHIP SEIZED BY FRENCH—TRAVEL IN RUSSIA—FINDS A WIFE—CONVERTED TO "MORMONISM."

In April, 1867, he found employment as an ordinary seaman on a German mail boat, sailing between Bremer Haven and New York, his compensation being $6.00 per month. He fared so much better on that vessel that he quite enjoyed his berth, but was ambitious to learn more of seamanship than he could on the steamer, and after one year's service quit that and joined the Hamburg barque "Amazone," bound for Cardiff to load up with coal for Hong Kong, China. As the vessel was leaving the Geestemunde dock, her owner stood on the quay side, and, as the last rope was cast off, he placed his hand on the ship's side and said, "Good by Amazone; I will never see you again!"

Ernest heard the remark, and repeated it to two of his comrades. Sailors are notoriously superstitious, and the effect was that they felt sure the vessel was not going to reach her destination. They laid their plans to desert the ship at Cardiff, and would have succeeded if some one had not overheard their talk, and reported to an officer. They had each two suits of clothes on, prepared to make their escape, when they were apprehended by a policeman and compelled to return. Ernest plead with the captain to let him go, saying he could keep all his belongings and wages due if he would only grant him his liberty, but didn't dare tell why he wanted to escape. The captain however, refused, saying he had never had a man desert him, and he wouldn't allow him to.

With the exception of alternate head winds and calms, which greatly retarded the vessel, nothing serious occurred until the Cape of Good Hope was rounded, when heavy storms and high seas were encountered. The bulwarks were swept away, the main batch burst in, and six casks of fresh water were swept overboard. Ernest and a companion were standing at the steering wheel when the second mate warned them to hold on, as a heavy sea was about to break over the ship. They both gripped the wheel with all their strength, but, as the wave passed over, Ernest saw, to his horror, his companion go with it; then, marvelous to relate, as the ship bent down under the weight of the second huge wave, the sailor grasped a mizzen chain and clung on, and shouted until others of the crew came to his relief and hauled him back to safety.

With nine feet of water in the hold, the ship was unmanageable, and the captain told the crew they would either have to pump or sink. By some working the pumps for dear life, and others nailing canvas over the hatchway, and stanchion holes, and by throwing eighty tons of cargo overboard to lighten the ship, they managed to weather the storm; but five nights and four days had passed before they dared cease pumping.

This danger had not long passed when a new horror presented itself—a scarcity of fresh water. For six long weeks they were dependent upon the steam from a saucepan or the dew that could be mopped up in the early morning from the ship's railing to quench their thirst, and the suffering they endured as a result in that hot, dry climate is indescribable. At the end of that time the English barque "Virginia" was sighted, and a casque of water obtained, and also another from the "Fair Leader" of Plymouth, England, which relieved them until an uncharted reef was struck in the China Sea, and the vessel, after hanging amidships for about ten hours, broke in two and foundered. The officers and crew were saved by taking to the life boats in the night, but without being able to secure any provisions or stores, as the sea was high and broke constantly over the vessel as it hung upon the reef. The breaking asunder and sinking of the vessel was witnessed from a distance after day had dawned.

The bark "Fair Leader" already mentioned as having furnished a cask of fresh water, was in the vicinity and saw the signals of distress after the "Amazone" had struck the reef, and steered in the direction indicated. When it was light enough to see, the two boats were sighted and the men picked up. Then it was learned that a member of the crew of the "Fair Leader," who was dying of dropsy, had evidently seen in vision the destruction of the "Amazone," and the peril of the crew afterwards, afloat in the life boats. He told his mates of the very time of the boats leaving the fated ship, that they were in two white life boats, and that one had a flag and the other a blanket for a sail; also that they would come on board the "Fair Leader" and remain there a long time. Perhaps what he said, even more than the signals of distress, influenced the officers of the "Fair Leader" in deciding to remain in the vicinity until morning.

The "Amazone" crew were picked up about nine o'clock in the morning, and one of the first things Ernest did after getting on board, was to sit down upon what he supposed to be a roll of sail or blankets, that he saw on the deck, but which proved to be the body of the sailor who had seen in vision and told of their wreck and subsequent peril. He had died soon after telling it, and was buried during the afternoon of the same day.

A few days later the "Fair Leader" encountered a genuine typhoon, and the ship sprang a leak and would probably have foundered had it not been for the extra crew on board, who, by helping man the pumps, kept her afloat. Ernest, while working at the pumps, was washed away by a wave and struck with such force against the bulwark that his knee was severely injured, and he had to be taken to a hospital for treatment on reaching Shanghai, a month later.

He remained in Shanghai about five weeks, when he shipped on a German bark "Catherine Jorgensen"—engaged in the China trade. He sailed first to Nimpo, where a valuable cargo was taken on board and then set sail for Hong Kong. He had the thrilling experience of being chased by Chinese pirates, but escaped by a favorable wind propelling the barque too fast for the pirate boat, with its more limited sailing capacity, to overtake her.

Ernest sailed the China sea for three years. His last voyage there was with a cargo of 900 coolies, bound for Singapore, where he quit the ship and was transferred to a German ship called "Caroline," sailing for Akiab, India. Four days later the ship was seized by the French frigate "Dassas," and the crew taken prisoners, as the Franco-Prussian war was then raging. Ernest and his companion sailors were taken to a point just outside the Singapore harbor on the man-of-war, their captors not daring to enter, as that would be considered an act of hostility against Great Britain. There it was learned for the first time by the ship's officers that the war was ended, the Germans having conquered the French, and that the capture of the German ship while the armistice was pending would subject the French government to a heavy indemnity. On the arrival at Singapore of the "Caroline" the officers and crew were liberated with apologies, and allowed to proceed with their ship to Akiab.

Ernest contracted a virulent fever at Akiab, and would have been left there by the ship had not the shore doctor forbidden it, declaring that he never would recover if left there, but that he probably would if taken to a colder clime. The fever left him when the ship rounded the Cape of Good Hope. Landing at Falmouth, he proceeded to his old home at Bremer Haven. As the ship entered the Bremer Haven dock, Ernest saw his mother on the quay, watching for him, as she had been warned by inspiration the night previous that he would arrive on that ship, that day. She had not heard from him for more than two years, and had no reason other than that mentioned for expecting that he was anywhere in that region.

He remained home about nine days and then shipped on a Bremen ship bound for Savannah, Georgia. He remained on that ship until it made a subsequent voyage to Reval, Russia, where he left it and traveled for awhile overland, going as far as Cronstadt. He was under suspicion because of having no passport, and narrowly escaped being transported to Siberia.

After following the sea for about twelve years, Ernest took up his residence in England, locating first at Hull and afterwards in South Shields, but continued to make voyages to various parts of the world, generally serving as boatswain or steward. On one voyage to his native land the ship "Thetis" in a violent storm had her bulk-head stove in and was filled up with water to such an extent that the table was floating around in the cabin, and, Ernest, with the companion way and skylight battened down, was shut up like a rat in a trap, and busied himself at baling the water out. To the surprise of all on board, they succeeded in floating the ship into Hamburg. There Ernest secured for a wife one whom he had known as a young girl.

They arranged to be married in England the following April, and, after the cargo was discharged, he returned to England, where the ship was thoroughly repaired. The following March, while entering the port of Blyth, to load coal for Hamburg the "Thetis" was, through error of judgment on the part of the captain, run on to the rocks and became a total wreck. Of course, no lives were lost, but this wreck had the effect of deferring Ernest's marriage. Instead of it occurring in April, it was postponed till the following November. It took place in Shields, England, where he established a home and lived for many years, his six children being born there.

In 1888, while sailing on the ship "Breton," commanded by Captain Ole Peterson, who was a Latter-day Saint, he first learned of "Mormonism." He had been investigating Spiritualism, but abandoned it on learning that the Spiritualists repudiated Christ as a Savior. He had heard of the "Mormons" as being a bad people, but was anxious to learn from the captain really what his belief was. He opened up a conversation by asking the captain his opinion of Spiritualism. The captain replied: "You are not a spiritualist. You belong to the Church of England, and have now found what you have been looking for so many years—the true Gospel. And you will soon become a Latter-day Saint." He then explained the Gospel to him, and told how it had been restored to the earth through the ministration of angels.

On hearing this Ernest's heart beat with joy, and he felt certain the captain was telling the truth. He, being steward, one part of his duty was to keep the captain's stateroom tidy, and while doing so a copy of the Millennial Star came into his hands, which he read with avidity, and learned still more of "Mormon" doctrine.

Adverse winds were encountered on that voyage, and they were twenty-one days in making the round trip, whereas it should only have taken six days. Ernest heard the captain make a remark that there must be some reason for the weather being so against him, and said he wondered if his wife had neglected to pay the money for tithing he had left with her for that purpose. Ernest inquired what he meant by that, and had the law of tithing explained to him, and he felt in his heart then that it was a correct doctrine. On the captain's arrival in England he found out that his wife had not paid the tithing.

One year from the time he first had the Gospel explained to him, Ernest was baptized by Captain Peterson (September 18, 1889) in the North Sea. Immediately after his confirmation he inquired of the captain where he should send his tithing to, as he wanted to pay it. He commenced paying it then, and has been faithful in doing so ever since.

On embracing the Gospel he remarked to Captain Peterson that he supposed now his troubles were ended, but was told that he was wrong in that supposition, for his troubles were only commencing; that he should have the finger of scorn pointed at him, and find opposition even in his own household; but to be comforted, for the day would come when his wife would accept "Mormonism" and become a faithful Saint.

He found the captain's prediction to be verily true. While his wife was at first very much wrought up over his conversion, she afterwards investigated and embraced the Gospel, and has been faithful ever since.

From the time Ernest was baptized he advocated its doctrines and was ridiculed and persecuted as a consequence, but the stronger the opposition the more zeal he manifested. He received the nickname of "Harry, the Mormon," and was better known by that soubriquet than any other.

He was ordained an Elder April 5, 1891, and the next day baptized his wife and her sister.

Ernest continued to follow the sea, and still met with adventures that satisfied him that the devil had not ceased trying to encompass his destruction.
