CONVERTED—START FOR MISSOURI—CALLED TO PREACH "MORMONISM" WITHOUT BEING BAPTIZED—JOIN THE CHURCH—VOYAGE TO PITTSBURG—PREACH THE GOSPEL AND ESTABLISH A BRANCH—EXPERIENCE AS A TRUNKMAKER—MISSION TO NEW YORK—SPEAK IN TONGUES EFFECTS OF PREACHING COUNTERACTED BY LIES—SECOND VOYAGE DOWN THE OHIO—PROVIDENTIAL DELAY.

In the spring of 1831 there was a two-days meeting of the Saints, about six miles from where I lived, in the State of Pennsylvania. I attended it, and became fully convinced of the divine origin of the latter-day work.

In the summer of 1831, I settled up my business and started for the latter-day Zion, in the State of Missouri. On my way out of the State of New York, I visited Elder J. P. Green, in the town of Avon.

As I arrived there on Saturday, he said, "Brother Lorenzo, I am very glad you have come. I have an appointment to preach at 10 o'clock, eight miles from here, but I am very unwell and not able to fill it. I want you to do it for me."

I rather ridiculed the idea, saying, "You want me to preach as a Mormon Elder, when I have not even joined the Church?"

He still desired me to go, and said, "it will be all right."

E. M. Green, the son of J. P. Green, accompanied me, with a revelation on the organization of the Church, which his father directed him to read to the congregation.

Arriving at the place appointed, I found the house full, and a Baptist preacher in the stand. I introduced myself to the minister; he invited the congregation to sing, and I prayed, and E. M. Green read the revelation. I arose and commenced to speak. The good Spirit was with me, and I had much freedom. I talked about one hour and a quarter. At the close I gave any one the privilege of speaking who wished to. The Baptist minister arose and bore his testimony, that what they had heard was true Bible doctrine, and could not be questioned.

After meeting, several persons gathered around me and wished to be baptized. Knowing that I had not received authority to administer the ordinance, I put them off, telling them that when Elder Green came to fill the next appointment that had been made for him, he would baptize them. Among those who requested baptism, at that time, were the brothers Joseph and Chandler Holbrook, and Mary Ann Angell, now the relict of President Brigham Young.

On the following morning I told Elder Green that, inasmuch as I had believed in the gospel for some time, and had preached as a "Mormon" Elder, I thought it was time that I was baptized. He administered the ordinance, and ordained me an Elder. I then went on my way rejoicing.

In due time I reached Olean Point, on the Alleghany river, one of the streams that form the head waters of the Ohio. Several families had gathered there with the view of descending the river in boats. Among them were my brother Phineas and his family. The company built two boats, and started down the Alleghany river, in the month of November.

The river was low and falling. It was my lot, with others, nearly every morning to get into the water and work the boats off the sand bars upon which we anchored at night. The water was always cold, and at times the ice was half an inch thick. I had the whooping cough, and this work was very severe on me.

We journeyed in this way for three weeks, to Pittsburg, at the head of the Ohio river. Three days before arriving there my wife was taken sick, and did not feel that she could travel any farther.

Brother Phineas and I concluded to stop awhile in Pittsburg. We were destitute of money, having only fifty cents left between us. Soon after tying up our boat, a report got noised about that we were a party of "Mormons," on our way to Zion. Some of the ideas of the Saints in regard to gathering, although often stated erroneously, had obtained quite an extensive circulation in the country. Many of the people came to see us, and at first, stared as though beholding some great curiosity. My brother Phineas and I hired one room and moved into it. We retained one boat and the remainder of the company went on in the other.

The way we traveled would now be thought a novel and hard way for the Saints to gather in these days of railroads. Fifty years have made many changes, The world is progressing.

Some respectable-looking men inquired if there were any "Mormon" preachers in the company. We informed them that we were Elders. They expressed a wish that we would hold a meeting.

We soon learned that Mr. Wm. Harris, of whom we had rented our room, had somewhere met one of our Elders, learned something of the gospel, and had been baptized. Up to that time he had made no open profession of having joined the Saints.

There was a large room in the same house we had moved into. This Brother Harris offered us for holding meetings in. The first evening quite a goodly number gathered into it, and my brother Phineas and I talked to them. Before closing, we gave the privilege for any one to speak who wished to.

An elderly lady arose and said she had been seeking for the truth many years, and that she had read the Bible through from Genesis to Revelations fourteen times, with a prayerful heart, that she might come to a knowledge of the truth. She testified that what she had just heard was the first gospel discourse she had ever heard in her life. Almost in the words of the eunuch to Phillip, she said: "Here is water, what hinders me from being baptized?"

The house stood on the bank of the Alleghany river. The night was dark, and we thought it dangerous to try to baptize her.

She called to our minds the case of the jailor, who was baptized in the self-same hour in which he believed.

We obtained a lantern and went to the bank of the river, the people following us. We found the bank steep and the water somewhat deep; but my brother, Phineas held on to me while I baptized the woman.

We continued to hold meetings and baptize until over thirty persons had united with the Church.

We had authority to preach, baptize and confirm, but we had no knowledge of the organization of the Church, and knew not how to organize a branch. In the following winter, of 1831-32, Elder Sidney Rigdon passed through Pittsburg, and gave us instructions concerning the organization of the Church. We then organized a branch, and continued our meetings.

After events have passed, we often see in them a providence leading to important results. We left our homes in the State of New York for Missouri, the only objective point in which we felt any interest. A seeming chance of sickness induced us to stop for a season in Pittsburg. There we found a people ready to receive the truth. We preached the gospel, and built up a branch of the Church. We were evidently led there for the accomplishment of this important work.

As will be seen, we subsequently went to Kirtland, instead of going on west. But before going to Kirtland, there was yet another place where we were to preach the gospel.

As before stated, on our arrival in Pittsburg our finances were low. Brother Phineas soon obtained labor. I was not so successful, I walked the streets of the town day after day, in search of a job, willing to accept of anything I could possibly do. Finally I met a man who gave me some encouragement. Said he, "Are you a mechanic?"

I felt constrained to answer "yes," although I could not really lay much claim to the profession.

"Well, said he, I want twelve dozen steamboat trunks made."

I replied, "I am your man, but I am traveling. I have stopped here on account of sickness in my family, and have no tools with me, and no place to work." He assured me that he had shop, tools and everything necessary to work with. We went at once to his shop.

I really did not know what a steamboat trunk was. I told him that I was from the Eastern States, where probably they worked different to what they did in that country, and I should feel much obliged if he would lay out a trunk for me, that I might make no mistake. He picked up a wide board, laid it on a bench, and with square and compass soon laid out a trunk. "There," said he, "that is the way I do it; but if it don't suit you, do it as you have a mind to," and he walked out of the shop. Food and comforts for my family were at stake. I knelt down and asked the Lord to enable me to do the work in an acceptable manner, and I arose and went to work with a light heart. I got the bodies of several trunks together that day. Towards evening my employer came in, examined my work carefully, and said, "That is good enough. If you will do them all as well as that, it will do." I put together the twelve dozen trunks, covered and finished them off to my employer's satisfaction, and he paid me the money.

For that kindly providence I felt thankful. From that time I found labor and soon made my family quite comfortable.

In the spring of 1832, it was thought best that I should go on a mission to the State of New York. I spent the summer in preaching the gospel. I had joy in my labors, being instrumental in bringing many into the Church.

I visited the town of Hector, where, by my preaching, as before stated, a Campbellite church had been organized. I preached in the same house that I had occupied on the previous occasion. Soon after I commenced to talk, such a spirit of darkness and opposition prevailed in the house, that for the first and only time in my life, I was entirely bound. I stood speechless. The congregation looked at me as if wondering what could be the matter. A sensation such as I had never felt before came over me. My tongue seemed numb or paralyzed. In a short time I commenced to speak in an unknown tongue. I probably spoke about fifteen minutes. Soon after ceasing to talk, the interpretation came clear and distinct to my mind. I at once gave it to the congregation.

I had no further difficulty. I talked about an hour. My old friend, Squire Chase, arose and testified that what he had heard was the truth, and that the power of God had been made manifest. He and several others shed tears. Their hearts were softened by the influence of the good Spirit.

I had some prior engagements to meet at a considerable distance from Hector. These would keep me away about two weeks. I regretted the necessity of going away, and left an appointment for another meeting on my return. I indulged in the hope of establishing a branch of the Church there.

While I was absent, the Elder Brown, who had organized a Campbellite Church from converts made by my preaching, heard that I was preaching "Mormonism." He came there, held meetings and visited from house to house. He repeated to the people all the extravagant stories and falsehoods about the Prophet Joseph and the Book of Mormon, which were so extensively circulated in those early times. When I returned, I found the minds of the people filled with prejudice and bitterness. The Spirit manifested to me that more preaching to them would be in vain, and I went away sorrowing. I have not heard since that any of that people have ever joined the Church.

I went to Avon, Genesee County, to see my father, John Young. He desired to go west and see the Prophet. His wife, my stepmother, preferred to remain with her children.

He had previously sold out his property in the town of Mendon for several hundred dollars, and had used it to supply the wants of the Elders. He had served as a soldier during three campaigns of the revolutionary war. About this time, he received a pension from the government. This furnished him the means of accompanying me to Pittsburg. On arriving there, my brother Phineas and I bought a family boat, in which we went twenty-five miles down the Ohio River. My wife was again so sick that we felt compelled to stop at Beardstown.

The people came to see us, and soon learned that we were "Mormons." They expressed a wish that we would preach to them. The following day being Sunday, we consented to do so if they would furnish a house. Mr. Isaac Hill, since Bishop for several years of the 2nd Ward of Salt Lake City, was then a citizen of that place. Through his kindly offices the school house was opened for us.

After the first meeting, the people desired more. In a few days we baptized five persons, among them Mr. Hill and Peter Shirts. The latter is well known to many of the people of Utah.

In a short time, my brother Phineas went to Kirtland with our father. The Saints desired that I should remain at Beardstown, and I concluded to spend the winter there. Some of my friends, thinking that I might get work easier at West Union, five miles from Beardstown, I removed then. There, although my way at first seemed hedged up, I succeeded in making my family comfortable through the winter. Again we had been providentially directed to where there were a few ready to receive the truth.
