REMOVAL TO KIRTLAND—WORK UPON THE TEMPLE—A LESSON—SICKNESS—PRONOUNCED INCURABLE BY DOCTORS—HEALED IN ANSWER TO PRAYER—CURED OF LAMENESS—REMOVAL TO MISSOURI—COMMENCEMENT OF HOSTILITIES—SURROUNDED BY A MOB—FACE DEATH—RESCUED.

In March, 1833, I removed to Kirtland. The Kirtland Temple committee was appointed June 6th, 1833. About that time, I took with my team Brothers Hyrum and Joseph Smith, Reynolds Cahoon and my brother Brigham, to look at a stone quarry, and see if the rock was suitable for the walls of the temple. It was decided that it would do, and a part of a load was put on the wagon. We all returned to town, and the rock was unloaded on the temple ground. As near as I recollect, this was the first rock hauled for that building.

From that time I worked with the brethren, as occasion required, until the temple was completed. On the 17th of February, 1834, those holding the Priesthood were called together to organize a High Council. I was one of the number. On that occasion I committed a great error. That it may be a lesson for others, is my reason for relating it here. The Prophet requested me to take a seat with other brethren who had been selected for this Council.

Instead of doing as requested, I arose and plead my inability to fill so responsible a position, manifesting, I think, considerable earnestness in the matter. The Prophet then said that he really desired that I should take the place.

Still excusing myself, he appointed another to fill it. I think this was the reason the Prophet never again called me to fill any important position in the Priesthood during his life.

I have since learned to go where I am called, and not set up my judgment against that of those who are called to lead in this kingdom.

When the temple was enclosed, in a meeting of the brethren, called to consult about its completion, the Prophet desired that a hard finish be put on its outside walls. None of the masons who had worked on the building knew how to do it. Looking around on the brethren, his eyes rested upon me; he said, "Brother Lorenzo. I want you to take hold and get this finish on the walls. Will you do it?"

"Yes;" I replied; "I will try." The following day, with horse and buggy I went to Cleveland, twenty-two miles, determined, if possible, to find a man who understood the business of putting a hard finish on the walls. I had been there but a short time, inquiring after such a man, when I met a young man who said he understood the business, had just completed a job, and wanted another. I employed him at once, put him and his tools into the buggy, and returned to Kirtland.

We soon had the materials and fixtures on hand to make the mortar. In a short time the finish was being put upon the walls.

I made a suitable tool and, before the mortar was dry, I marked off the walls into blocks in imitation of regular stone work. When the finish was on I commenced penciling.

It was then the last of November, and the weather daily grew colder. A Brother Stillman assisted me a day or two, but said that he could not stand the cold, and quit the work.

I continued, day after day, determined, if possible, to complete the job. When I got badly chilled I went into my house, warmed myself and returned again to the work.

I completed the task in the fore part of December, but was sick the last two days. I had caught a bad cold, had a very severe cough, and, in a few days was confined to my bed.

My disease was pronounced to be the quick consumption. I sank rapidly for six or seven weeks. For two weeks I was unable to talk. Dr. Williams, one of the brethren, came to see me, and, considering my case a bad one, came the next day and brought with him Dr. Seely, an old practicing physician, and another doctor whose name I have forgotten. They passed me through an examination. Dr. Seely asserted that I had not as much lungs left as would fill a tea saucer. He appeared a somewhat rough, irreligious man. Probably, with what he considered a good-natured fling at our belief in miracles, he said to my father, as he left the house:

"Mr. Young, unless the Lord makes your son a new pair of lungs, there is no hope for him!"

At this time I was so low and nervous that I could scarcely bear any noise in the room. The next morning after the visit of the doctors, my father came to the door of the room to see how I was. I recollect his gazing earnestly at me with tears in his eyes. As I afterwards learned, he went from there to the Prophet Joseph, and said to him: "My son Lorenzo is dying; can there not be something done for him?"

The Prophet studied a little while, and replied, "Yes! Of necessity, I must go away to fill an appointment, which I cannot put off. But you go and get my brother Hyrum, and, with him, get together twelve or fifteen good faithful brethren; go to the house of Brother Lorenzo, and all join in prayer. One be mouth and the others repeat after him in unison. After prayer, divide into quorums of three. Let the first quorum who administer, anoint Brother Young with oil; then lay hands on him, one being mouth and the other two repeating in unison after him. When all the quorums have, in succession, laid their hands on Brother Young and prayed for him, begin again with the first quorum, by anointing with oil as before, continuing the administration in this way until you receive a testimony that he will be restored."

My father came with the brethren, and these instructions were strictly followed. The administrations were continued until it came the turn of the first quorum the third time. Brother Hyrum Smith led. The Spirit rested mightily upon him. He was full of blessing and prophecy. Among other things, he said that I should live to go with the Saints into the bosom of the Rocky Mountains, to build up a place there, and that my cellar should overflow with wine and fatness.

At that time, I had not heard about the Saints going to the Rocky Mountains; possibly Brother Smith had. After he had finished he seemed surprised at some things he had said, and wondered at the manifestations of the Spirit. I coughed no more after that administration, and rapidly recovered.

I had been pronounced by the best physicians in the country past all human aid, and I am a living witness of the power of God manifested in my behalf through the administration of the Elders.

I continued to live in Kirtland, labored for the support of my family and went on missions until September, 1837. At that time there was considerable persecution, and many Saints left for Missouri. In company with Brother Isaac Decker and family, I started for that place.

On account of sickness in my family, I laid by at Dublin, Indiana. I remained there until January, 1838.

I went to Cincinnati. While absent, my brother Brigham, and Brothers Joseph and Samuel Smith, with their families, came along on their way to Missouri. They were accompanied by Brother Daniel Holman and Brother Miles. I returned to Dublin, and, in February, we continued our journey together.

On the way, in jumping from a wagon, I fell and split my knee pan on a sharp stone. The injury was both painful and dangerous.

Riding over rough roads in a loaded wagon was very painful to me. At Terre Haute, Indiana, my leg was examined by a surgeon. He said even if I got well, my leg would always be stiff. However, my faith was that I should again have the use of it. It was still over four hundred miles to our destination. I suffered much, but got the use of my leg the following summer. I attribute this result to the blessing of the Lord through the administration of the Elders.

On our way, we crossed the Mississippi river at Quincy, Illinois, on the ice. We were the last to cross in that way that season. When near the west side, on account of the weakness of the ice, we took the horses from the wagons and laid down planks to run the latter to the shore.

In March, Brother Isaac Decker and I arrived in Davis County, Missouri. I purchased a quarter section of land and went to work to make me a home. Brother Decker rented a farm. The remainder of the company went on to Far West, twenty-two miles farther.

We labored diligently at our business during the summer, usually having meetings on the Sabbath. Matters remained quiet until election day, August 6th, 1838, when the Missourians determined that the "Mormons" should not vote. On the other hand, the brethren asserted their rights, and a fight took place at Gallatin, as related in Church history. I did not feel like attending election, and did not go. This was the beginning of our troubles in Davis County.

I lived eighteen miles from Adam Ondi-Ahman. About this time, I left my family on my place and went there and stood guard some two weeks. Brother Decker accompanied me. After completing our term of military service, Brother Decker and I started for home. We had but one horse, and we alternately rode and walked. As we passed through the town of Gallatin, about eight miles from home, it was my turn to walk, and Brother Decker was ahead of me on the horse. There was a company of Missourians stationed about twenty rods from the road, near a whisky saloon. As I was passing nearly opposite them, a party of men stepped in front of me and the leader ordered me to stop. He was armed with a sword. There were twenty-two of the party, mostly armed with rifles.

Nothing was said to Brother Decker, although he halted and sat on his horse a short distance off and watched the proceedings.

The captain of the party asked me where I had been, where I was going, and if I was a "Mormon," with many other questions which I answered truthfully.

After answering one of his questions, with a profane epithet he called me a liar. After this, I kept my mouth closed and answered no more of his questions. He was about half drunk, as were probably some of his men. He became much irritated at my silence, and used very profane and abusive language. Said he: "You have probably been robbing and burning in this section, and ought to be killed. Anyhow, I will make you open your mouth." He then ordered his men to form in a half circle a little distance from me, evidently to concentrate their fire. He then ordered them to "Make ready! Aim!"

Every rifle was drawn on me. I prayed in my heart, and felt considerable assurance that they would not be permitted to kill me. My life trembled in the balance awaiting the leader's order to fire, or recover arms. The latter order came. He then said excitedly: "Now will you talk?" But I remained silent.

This performance was repeated. He became filled with wrath, and commanded his men, the third time, "Make ready! Aim!" It looked surely as though my time had come. At this moment, a man in military garb, and armed with a sword, came running from the camp near the grocery. When near enough to to be heard, he cried out, "Hold on!"

The men dropped their pieces, and there was respite for me again. As he approached he demanded, "What are you doing?"

The officer who had been abusing me, replied with a profane epithet, "I am going to kill this Mormon!"

The other officer ordered him to take his men to the camp.

As he did not move readily, his superior drew his sword, stepped in front of him, and declared with an oath, if he did not move at once he would take his head from his shoulders. His tone and manner indicated that he meant business, and the captain moved off with his men at once.

The officer who released me, declared that the other was drunk and did not know what he was doing. He asked me many questions similar to what the other had done, but in a gentlemanly manner, and I answered them frankly and truly. His heart was softened towards me. He bade me go on my way, and added, "Mr. Young if you are ever in trouble in this war, and can do so, send for me, and you shall not be hurt, unless it is over my dead body." I made a memorandum of his name, military title, etc., but regret to say that in my many moves since have lost it.

Again was the prophetic promise of my mother fulfilled, and my life lengthened out for some wise purpose. Brother Decker and I went on home. He immediately removed to Far West, Caldwell County.
