BY ELDER WILLIAM BUDGE.

VISIT TO SCOTLAND—MEET OLD FRIENDS—RETURN TO LIVERPOOL—ABOUT TO GO BY STEAMER TO BRISTOL—A VOICE WARNS ME NOT TO GO—TURN BACK—SHORT OF MONEY—MEANS PROVIDENTIALLY PROVIDED—JOURNEY TO PORTSMOUTH—SEQUEL TO THE WARNING—THE STEAMER WRECKED.

I had been laboring in the Southampton Conference, England, as a missionary for about two years, when I obtained permission to visit my relatives in Scotland. It was in the latter part of the summer of 1853.

Accompanied by an Elder named Armstrong, who was going to Liverpool, I embarked at Portsmouth, on the steamship Duke of Cornwall, bound for that port, on the morning of the 8th of August.

Shortly after starting, we passed the British fleet, lying off Spithead, preparing for a grand review, to take place on the following Thursday, which Queen Victoria was expected to attend. The scene was both novel and interesting, as we passed near the assembled and decorated ships.

Passing the Isle of Wight, of which we had a good view, we called at Plymouth, Falmouth, and Penzance, before reaching Liverpool, passing also the celebrated Eddystone Lighthouse.

We reached Liverpool at two p. m., on the 10th, and I sailed for Glasgow within two hours afterwards. On board the Scotch steamer, I was pleased to find an old acquaintance, named George Turnbull, who was at that time a clerk in the Church office at Liverpool, and on his way, like myself, to visit his home and friends.

Brother Turnbull and I heard the gospel about the same time, in the same city, (Glasgow) and became members of the same branch of the Church; he being baptized first. This young man was a scholar, and possessed of much natural ability, and for some time, was a good Saint, but he would not run the race; he eventually fell into transgression, denied the faith, and was lost.

There were also on board the vessel, Elder Fullmer, pastor of the Liverpool Conference, and wife, and Elder John O. Angus, President of the Shropshire Conference. I was well acquainted with the latter; he was a faithful missionary, and a quiet, humble, and inoffensive man. He labored for a long time in the St. George Temple, and died some time ago.

Such company was very agreeable, but the night was somewhat stormy, and we did not reach Glasgow until two p. m. next day.

During this trip, I visited my relatives in Glasgow, Lanark, and elsewhere, and also the Saints in a district of the conference where I had formerly labored. I felt truly grateful to the Lord for all His goodness unto me, in preserving me while struggling hard in several new fields of labor to which I had been allotted, since I first left home and beg an my labors as a missionary.

On the first day of September, taking leave of my friends, I embarked on a steam vessel for Liverpool. Elder John O. Angus was also a passenger, and I, therefore, had good company during a very stormy passage. Arriving at Liverpool, we called at the Church office, Wilton Street, and lodged at the house of Elder A. F. Macdonald, president of the conference.

I intended to go by sea from Liverpool to Bristol, and by land to Salisbury, on my way back to Portsmouth, as I had not means enough to go through by railroad conveyance. I had explained this to Brother Angus, and on the morning after our arrival in Liverpool, I bade him good by, and walked down to the docks, carrying my carpet sack and a number of books, which I had brought with me from home. This was on the third day of September, 1853.

A number of people were waiting to go on board the same steam vessel I intended to take. The steamer at the time was taking in freight at the opposite side of the dock, and would call for us, so we were informed, in a short time.

While standing looking at the vessel, a voice, loud and distinct, said: "Do not go on board." I was startled, and looked around, but there was no one near. Although I turned hastily, I did not really expect to see any one who might have spoken. It was, I felt, a revelation; I was impressed with the divine force, and I lifted my satchel preparatory to leaving, but suddenly I thought of my want of means, and began to wonder whether I had not been deceived by my imagination. I put down my satchel again, just as the ship was nearing that part of the dock where the passengers were waiting. My condition tempted me. I was in doubt for a moment. I began to reason; but faith triumphed. I felt sure that it was a warning, and, lifting my baggage, left the dock for the Lime Street Station, as the people who had been waiting passed into the steamer.

Once decided, there was no further trouble, and I began to consider how I could reach Portsmouth. When I entered the station, I had concluded to take the first third-class train to Birmingham. At that time, I had no acquaintances there, and wished to hurry on, trusting that the way would be opened up as my necessities required; such having been the case many times before. The Lord had prepared the way in times past, and I had faith that He would help me then sufficiently.

I was one of those young and very inexperienced Elders, sent into the missionary field literally without purse or scrip. Elder George B. Wallace, at that time one of the presidency of the Church in Europe, sent me with several others into Cumberland County, in the North of England, where there were no Saints until we were instrumental in the hands of the Lord in bringing some to a knowledge of the truth.

It was a hard country, and we had a rough experience. In less than three months, three Elders out of five returned home; but Elder Thomas Wallace, now of Weber County, and I remained until the Lord called us somewhere else.

I have been in many new fields of labor since, without money and without friends until the Lord raised them up, but never among a people so ignorant, and unimpressionable as the people we could obtain access to in the North of England. In comparison, my prospects, as I walked into the Lime Street Station, were not at all discouraging, but as I entered, there stood Brother Angus, who was waiting for a train to take him to Shrewsbury.

He was surprised to see me, and I was a little abashed, as I felt somewhat delicate about giving him an explanation. Although satisfied myself, I had some misgivings about satisfying him. I told him, however, what had happened, and, to my relief, he said, putting his hand on my shoulder, "You have done just right, and you will see the hand of God in this."

A third-class train, I learned, would not leave until next morning, so I lodged with Brother Turnbull, who had returned to Liverpool.

The next day I went to Birmingham, and there learned that a cheap excursion train would leave for Bristol at five p. m. Bristol—going by land—was not directly on my way, but the fare being low, and going from there to Warminster and Salisbury, I was likely to reach Portsmouth sooner than any other way.

In the cars, I made the acquaintance of a lady and gentleman also going to Bristol, to visit some relatives they had in that town. After an interesting conversation they invited me to take lunch with them, which was very acceptable, and on our arrival at Bristol, they pressed me to accompany them to their friend's house, where I remained all night, being warmly received and well treated.

I had not quite a dollar in my possession, and I acknowledge the hand of the Lord in thus opening up the way for me.

On reaching Warminster next day at six p. m., I had only twelve cents left, and a heavy carpet sack, which I took to a carrier who made occasional trips with freight to Salisbury, and I started at once to walk to the latter place, distant twenty-two miles.

It was evening and the weather pleasant, and the distance nothing unusual for a missionary, but I made a mistake by starting out too fast, perspired, got tired, and was obliged to take lodging at a small way-side inn, which cost me eight cents. I slept without supper and resumed my journey without breakfast the next morning, but thanking the Lord for good health and spirits.

On reaching Salisbury, where I was a perfect stranger, I walked into the town with the intention of inquiring for Latter-day Saints, a few of whom I understood lived there. My first inquiry was of a little boy, who quickly answered "Yes, my mother is one," and at once offered to conduct me to his home, which we soon reached, and to which I was warmly welcomed.

On passing through the streets, I saw, posted upon the walls, announcements of an excursion trip to Southampton and Portsmouth, fare two shillings and six pence, or sixty-two cents in our money. Reflecting upon the means of obtaining such a sum without being obliged to write and wait for it, we reached the house of my guide's mother.

From the boy's statement that his mother was a "Mormon," I got the impression that his father, if he had one, was not, which I found to be correct. His father was not very friendly, but his mother was a very earnest Saint, and a very thoughtful and kind one, as while I sat taking some refreshments which she had hastily prepared, she brought and gave me a piece of money, the exact amount necessary to procure my ticket to Portsmouth. I again thanked the Lord, and explained to my kind sister what her gift would enable me to do. The boy had in the meantime, by her instructions, brought my carpet sack, and I was ready to continue my journey.

I reached Portsmouth on the 7th day of September, and while there on the 9th, I read in the newspaper of the total wreck of the steam vessel, on which I was about to sail from Liverpool, when I was warned by the Lord not to go on board the ship.
