AN INCIDENT OF MISSIONARY EXPERIENCE.

BY B. F. JOHNSON.

CALLED ON A MISSION TO THE SANDWICH ISLANDS—JOURNEY BY THE SOUTHERN ROUTE—A PROPHECY—FEAR AFTER UTTERING IT—RESIDENCE IN HONOLULU—POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS CONFLICT—THE KINGDOM IN JEOPARDY—DISSATISFACTION AMONG THE PEOPLE—LETTER TO THE KING FAVORABLY CONSIDERED—A DREAM—A PRINCE SENT BY THE KING TO ASK COUNSEL OF LATTER-DAY SAINT ELDERS—ADVICE ACCEPTED, AND THE KINGDOM SAVED—THE DREAM AND PROPHECY FULFILED TOGETHER.

With eight other Elders I was called by the General October Conference of 1852, on a mission to the Sandwich Islands. We went by what was then known as the Southern route to California, in order to sail from San Francisco.

In passing through the southern settlements of Utah, we were everywhere treated with kindness and respect. We were often invited to preach where we stopped for the night, or to spend the Sabbath. We were in company with many other Elders who were called to go on missions to China, Australia, Hindostan, Ceylon, and other places.

We all, alike, took part in the meetings, and shared the hospitality of the Saints. At Parowan we had an unusually good time, in a meeting of the Saints. The Spirit of the Lord rested greatly upon both hearers and speakers.

I was the last Elder called upon to speak, and only a few minutes were left for me to occupy. Being full of the good feeling and spirit of the meeting, I commenced, not only to bear my testimony to the truth, but to prophesy of the future of some of the sons of Zion who were then going forth as her ministers.

I predicted that, through faithfulness, the wisdom of heaven would increase with us; that while the wicked became weaker, the Elders of Israel would grow wiser; that the nations of the earth would begin to look towards Zion for counselors and statesmen, and that, if the Elders now going forth to the ends of the earth were true to their calling, they would not all fill their missions until some of them would be called upon to give counsel to some of the rulers of the lands to which they were sent.

After closing my prophecy and remarks, and I had time to ponder on what I had said, I began to doubt the possibility of my predictions being fulfilled, and began to be troubled in mind.

For a time I could not divest myself of the feeling, that my prediction was ill-timed and not by the spirit of the gospel. I would sometimes query if the brethren did not regard me as a false prophet, or, at least, as an enthusiast.

When we arrived on the Sandwich Islands, we found the work of the Lord progressing. The Elders who had been laboring there were greatly rejoiced to see us.

After a general mission conference, most of the brethren left Honolulu for their fields of labor on the different islands. I was left at this capital city, in charge of the foreign interests of the mission, to preside over a small branch of Saints, which had been gathered from the foreign residents on the islands, and to preach to the people as I might find opportunity. I also assisted Elders Lewis and Cannon, in raising funds for publishing the Book of Mormon in the native language.

Owing to the conflicting interests of political and religious parties in the Hawaiian kingdom, it was in a weak condition. The various missionary interests had nearly changed into political ones. Dr. Judd, one of the missionaries sent out by the American Board of Foreign Missions, had long been the king's prime minister. Another missionary, by the name of Armstrong, was Minister of Public Instruction, and other Americans filled the offices of Minister of Foreign Relations, Chief Justice, Attorney General, etc.

This missionary-political power began to cause great jealousy, especially in the case of Dr. Judd. Through his political advantages he had acquired much wealth, and, apparently by its use, raised himself up to be a power behind the throne, greater than the throne itself.

King Kamehameha III., like George the III., of England, had not reached a high standard of virtue, or political economy. It was said that, for money borrowed of Dr. Judd, he had given a mortgage on the royal palace.

As he had no children of his own he had adopted as next in succession, two sons of his sister, who were princes of the realm. About this time two projects were deeply agitating the public mind. One was the annexation of the islands to the United States, the other, a British protectorate over them. Neither of these projects suited the interests of the young princes, or pleased the majority of the people.

There appeared to be but one thing upon which nearly all the natives could agree, that was opposition to Dr. Judd as the king's prime minister. He was, of course, sustained by some of his fellow missionaries, but appeared to be detested by the majority of those around him. Petition after petition was sent to the king, asking for, and even demanding, his removal. The court house and other large halls were crowded with indignation meetings, to protest against his being retained in office.

It seemed, at times, as though the people would break out in tumult and insurrection, yet the king made no move to give them satisfaction, and, for many days, no answer was given to their petitions.

All this time I had been a careful observer, and had attended their meetings. I had previously written a lengthy letter to the king, explaining the gospel as now revealed and the object of our mission to the islands.

This letter he had caused to be published in the government journal, both in the English and Hawaiian languages. Such was the impression the reading of it made on his mind, that he sent, through the Minister of Foreign Relations, to say that he would give us an audience at his earliest convenience. Up to the time of which I am writing, he had not found the convenient opportunity.

In the midst of this political commotion, I, one night, dreamed that I stood upon an eminence near a large mountain. I saw below me upon the bank of a small, but rapid stream, a large and rudely constructed frame building, apparently designed for machinery. It was not yet fully enclosed.

As I looked, I saw a dense smoke arise from the building, and heard the cry of fire from a large number of people.

It seemed that the wind blew strong from the mountain towards the building. The people came up on the opposite side of the building, to put out the fire, and they were blinded by the smoke which blew in their faces. I thought how foolish they were, to thus stay on the opposite side from the wind, to be blinded with the smoke.

Looking, I saw a bucket with a rope attached on a flume through which the water ran. I quickly took it up, drew it full of water, looked for the center of the fire, dashed it in, and, all at once, the flame was extinguished.

I thought a multitude of people came crowding into the building, wondering by whom the fire had been extinguished. Although I was with them, they appeared to comprehend nothing of my agency in the matter. I thought they were almost wild with joy, that the building, although somewhat charred and damaged, had been saved. They calculated that the damage the building had sustained was about fifty thousand dollars.

I awoke in the morning, strangely impressed with the dream. I related it to Brother Nathan Tanner, who was then with me. I told him I thought we should see its interpretation.

That morning, Brother Tanner called on one of the native Saints, who was living with Halalea, one of the highest native chiefs. He was a special friend of, and a counselor to, the king, and the man who carried him my letter.

He told Brother Tanner that the king had appointed him to come with Prince Rehoreho, to meet us that night at our rooms, lay before us the king's great political trouble, and get our counsel.

It came plainly to me, then, that therein would be the fulfillment of my dream. About ten o'clock the same evening, they called on us. They said the king was greatly exercised in his mind over the troubled condition of his government, and that he was not decided as to what was best to do.

He said that he could not trust to the counsel of his ministers, nor to the advice of the ministers of other nations then at his court, for all had some point to gain. Dr. Judd, in his past troubles, had been his adviser, and, in times of need, had supplied him with money.

It pained him, then, to turn out of office one who had so long been his friend, and, upon this subject, he wished us to give him our wisest counsel.

While Halalea and the prince were delivering their message, I was continually praying in my heart that the Lord would give us wisdom to say such things as would do honor to His cause, for I felt very small for such an important occasion.

After they delivered the king's message in full, I arose and told them that we were not sent to meddle with governments, nor to teach political science, but to preach the gospel of Christ as now revealed. But, inasmuch as the king was our friend, and desired counsel of us, we would give him such as the Lord would put in our hearts.

I told them the Bible said, that "when the wicked rule the people mourn;" that if Dr. Judd was really a good man and a true friend to the king, as the king had believed him to be, he would not now allow the king to be in such great trouble on his account, but, like a true friend, would resign his office for the sake of peace between the king and his subjects.

The fact that he was disposed to hold on to his office, at the expense of peace to the king's realm, showed, conclusively, that he was influenced by other motives than the peace and welfare of the kingdom. "We feel," said I, "that the present great political trouble and mourning is owing to Dr. Judd not being a good man, but wickedly holding a grasp upon the government office against the wishes of the people, for which there is no necessity, as the king has many true subjects of more than equal ability, any one of whom he could appoint as Dr. Judd's successor."

When I ceased speaking, the king's messengers clasped my hands and said: "The things you have told us we had not thought of, and they are true. The king will be glad when we tell him what you have said, for we can see it plainly, now. We will assure you that, at ten o'clock to-morrow, you will hear the king's herald proclaiming through the streets of the city that Dr. Judd is removed from office."

They left us with the warmest feelings of gratitude and friendship.

The next morning at ten o'clock, the heralds were heard proclaiming the dismissal of Dr. Judd. The news created wonder and astonishment among the people, and they hurried together with public demonstrations of joy. They greatly marveled and queried by what agency, or through whose influence this long delayed, though most desirable object had been attained.

As I had dreamed, so I saw the people greatly rejoicing, and, although I was daily among them, they had no thought that a Latter-day Saint could have had any agency in so important a matter.

At night the city was brilliantly illuminated. There were few windows in it that did not have, at least, one candle to each pane of glass.

In a settlement with Dr. Judd, as I had dreamed, the government found that it had lost fifty thousand dollars.

Thus my prophecy and my dream were fulfilled together, and peace returned to the people. Joy came to our hearts that the Lord, through the inspiration of His Holy Spirit, had made us, His humble Elders, the means of giving saving counsel to princes.
