ARMY SENT TO UTAH—MISSIONARIES CALLED HOME—LARGE NUMBER ASSEMBLE AT FLORENCE—DANGERS OF THE TRIP—COUNCIL TO DECIDE UPON COURSE OF ACTION—FORTUNATE FOG—PROVIDENTIAL STORM.

IN 1857, James Buchanan, who was then President of the United States, sent an army to this Territory, for the purpose, it was said, of punishing the "Mormons" for breaking the laws and doing violence to the Judges who had been sent here.

This was the excuse given for the army being sent; but the people of the Territory had not violated the laws nor done any injury to any of the officers of the Government; they were then, as they ever have been, peaceable and law abiding.

The real object for sending the troops here, was to crush out what the world called "Mormonism."

The principal men who urged the sending of troops here, were traitors in their hearts against the Government, and they hoped by taking these steps to divert the attention of the country from their own wicked schemes; and also to get the army of the United States out of the way by having it sent to this distant region. By accomplishing this, they thought they could operate to advantage in bringing about their own designs.

The army was kept out at Fort Bridger all that winter and many of the officers and soldiers were very angry because they could not come into our cities and enjoy themselves at our expense.

When it was found that the army was marching here, and there was likely to be trouble, the Elders in Europe and in the United States were re-called; but feelings ran so high in the United States against our people that it was somewhat dangerous for a man to travel and be known as a Mormon. On the plains there were men on the watch for every one bearing the name of Latter-day Saint.

It was under these circumstances that the Elders assembled at the frontiers to return home. One hundred and ten of them crossed the Missouri river in the beginning of May, 1858, at the point formerly known as Winter Quarters; at present it is called Florence.

They were anxious to get home, some of them having been absent a year and others for three or four years.

There were, in reality, two companies; one composed of Elders returning from the United States and Canada, Elder David Brinton being their captain, and the Elders returning from Europe, who had Elder John W. Berry as their captain. It was deemed advisable, however, in view of the troubled and uncertain state of affairs, for both companies to travel together.

The writer was in the company of Elders returning from the United States, where he had been on a mission for upwards of three years.

We had heard of several of our brethren being taken by the army and held under threats, and we knew not what our fate would be were the soldiers to get us in their power; for they accused every Latter-day Saint of treachery to the Government while they themselves were in reality the traitors as the subsequent careers of many of them fully proved.

Many thought that, as the roads were all blocked, and carefully watched by the troops, when we came in the vicinity of the army we would be under the necessity of burning or abandoning our wagons and everything that we could not pack on our animals.

Among the brethren was a man whose name was Pope; he had a wife and two or three small children. They were very anxious to accompany us, and, although the perils we were about to encounter were of a serious nature, they could not be induced by anything that could be said to them to remain behind. A council of the Elders was held upon their case, and it was agreed to permit Brother Pope to accompany us, as well as four brethren who proposed walking the entire distance to the Valley.

It was a time that required faith to be exercised, for the affairs of the Saints were in a critical condition. We knew, however, that God had delivered us when we had relied upon Him, and we united with great zeal in imploring His blessing, that He might overrule everything in such a manner that we could return in safety to the society of our families and friends.

After leaving Winter Quarters we traveled on without interruption until we drew near to Fort Kearny. Our road was on the north side of the Platte, and Fort Kearney was on the south side. There were troops at the Fort and they were on the alert to prevent companies of men or any kind of aid passing over the road to help the "Mormons" in Utah; for they pretended to look upon our people as public enemies.

It was our custom at such times to hold a council, and take into consideration the best course to pursue. The Elders all came together and we prayed to the Lord, and asked Him to bestow upon us His Holy Spirit and to lead and guide us in our operations. When we unitedly decided in council upon pursuing a certain course we always felt that that was the mind and will of the Lord unto us.

It was decided at this council that we should avoid attracting the attention of the people of the Fort by passing it in the night.

Unfortunately, as it seemed at the time, it rained heavily that evening and we were only able to travel until a little past midnight. By that time ourselves and our animals were so thoroughly fatigued and the night was so dark that we were compelled to stop and tie up for the night.

Our reflections were not very pleasant, because we felt sure that when morning dawned upon us we would be in full sight of the fort, and undoubtedly would receive a visit from the officers and troops.

We awoke with the dawn of day, and instead of being able to see the fort, or its occupants being able to see us, we found our camp enveloped in a fog, the mist being so dense that it was with difficulty we could see each other. We traveled on in the fog until afternoon, by which time we were out of sight of the fort.

After leaving this point we had plenty of game, buffalo, antelope, etc., and we were able to obtain an abundance of fresh meat, which made this part of the journey exceedingly pleasant; for though in an Indian country, we had not the fear of the wild and savage red men that we had of those of our own color, who professed to be the loyal citizens of our government.

As we approached the junction of the North and South Platte, a herd of mules passed us. They were being driven in the direction of Fort Laramie and were traveling at a much faster gait than we were going. The men who were driving them saw us, and we fully expected they would carry the intelligence to the fort of our being close by. It was known that "Mormon" Elders were returning to the Valley, and the military were prepared to stop them, or to otherwise interfere with them.

When within half a day's travel of Fort Laramie, another council was called to take into consideration the best course to pursue. We settled the matter by determining to rest on Sunday, rise early the following morning and pass the fort in daylight, as we felt satisfied the troops were informed of our approach by the men who had just passed us.

Monday was a beautiful day; we traveled on without interruption until we came in sight of the fort, which was about one o'clock, when one of the severest hailstorms any of us had ever seen broke upon us. The hail fell so rapidly that our animals could scarcely travel on account of their feet balling up with it. Our train had been seen from the fort and parties had started to meet us; but when the storm broke upon them, they were compelled to retreat to their quarters. The storm was too severe for them to remain out in it.

I learned afterwards that when the storm ceased a company of men had been sent from Fort Laramie to overtake us. They followed us as far as the North Platte bridge, and not being able to reach us at this point, they deemed it best to return again to the fort. We were not aware of this at the time; but having traveled leisurely from Kearny to Laramie, our animals were in much better condition than when we started; and fearing that the people at Laramie might make some attempt to stop us, we made forced drives until we reached Independence Rock on the Sweetwater. Thus the Lord again delivered us from the hands of our enemies in a most providential manner; for had it not been for this hailstorm it is altogether likely we would have been stopped.
