Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

1

Running with the Ball

You Can Be the Leader

Time! Time out!"

The captain of the Red Raiders, the best basketball team in the eighth grade, gestured frantically toward the nearest official.

"Come on, ref! Time out!"

The referee, caught looking at the scoreboard, finally whistled the clock dead.

"Time out, red!" he shouted.

I felt a surge of excitement as the Raiders left the floor. There were just eleven seconds left on the clock, and we were ahead by one point. For the first time all season, we had a chance to beat them!

Steve Birrell, our team captain, was chattering like a squirrel as we ran off the court.

"We've got 'em, Shane! We've really got 'em! We're gonna win this game!"

I felt another rush of excitement as we joined the huddle. Steve said we were going to win. And I believed him.

Steve had said all along we could do it. "We're a good team," he told us before the game. "But they won't be up for us. If we go out there and play like we mean it, we can take 'em."

If anyone but Steve had said that, we would have laughed. After all, the Raiders were the best team in the eighth grade. They had the tallest players in the league, and they had the best shooters. Besides that, the Raiders had beaten us every time we played them that season. To suddenly start thinking about beating them wasn't very realistic. But Steve convinced us that we could do it.

Steve was our team leader. When he came fired up for a game, the rest of us were fired up, too. When he played like the next three or four minutes would determine the outcome of the entire season, the rest of us played that way, too. If he told us we could win a game—even against the Red Raiders—we believed him.

And Steve proved that he meant exactly what he said. He opened up the game with three quick baskets from the top of the key. He made two steals that we converted to points on the fast break. He played with an intensity that fired us up and rattled our opponents.

And now, with eleven seconds left and our biggest game of the season on the line, he was still pumping us up.

"We've been stopping them all afternoon," he said. "We can do it for another eleven seconds. All we have to do is keep 'em outside the line."

Steve made it sound easy, but he had already shown us that we could do it. We had no reason to doubt it. And we played the next eleven seconds like the Boston Celtics in the final game for the world championship. We beat the only team that really mattered to us.

The funny thing was, Steve wasn't our best player. He wasn't our tallest player. He wasn't even our highest scorer. But he was our team leader.

One week he had an ear infection, and so the doctor wouldn't let him come to school. We had two games that week, and we lost both of them. We didn't lose because Steve wasn't there to score points for us. We lost because Steve wasn't there to give us the boost we needed to play our best.

You probably know people like Steve. People who can motivate and inspire others. People who can take charge of a group. People who can lead others to be their very best.

You can be one of them.

I know a young woman who was the president of her high school debate team. Marci was a fine debater, and she was a superb leader. She made each person on the team want to win. She showed such interest in each one that every person felt important. She made each person feel that the team was nothing without him or her. Before meets, Marci went to every practice round. She spent time with every person, watching, helping, and making suggestions. When things went wrong, she encouraged her teammates. When things went right, she praised them.

Marci helped people because she made it clear that she was interested in them. To her, the team was only second.

Now maybe you've been called to lead the deacons quorum. Maybe you're the Laurel president. Or maybe you're the mission's newest zone leader. Then you have the opportunity to bless and guide those you serve. You can draw from them a best they've never dreamed of and give them a glimpse of their own destiny.

Think back to great leaders you've had. They were probably able to lead you as if they had laid a magic hand on your shoulder. They drew from you a best that you never thought possible. Many of them were probably just your age.

When I was in high school, a friend of mine named Melody asked me to write a play for the senior class assembly. She was the student body secretary, and she knew I loved to write.

"You've got just the personality we need for this," she said. "You could write us the best play ever."

I wasn't so certain. I loved to write, but I wasn't sure I could write anything as great as what Melody wanted.

"Yes, you can!" she said. "I've read your stories. You write with more life and energy than anyone I know. If you write the play, it'll be the best one we've ever had!"

By the time Melody had finished talking, I believed her. She had convinced me that the school needed me. She made me believe that unless I wrote the play, the whole thing would be a flop. So when I finally sat down to write it, I was determined to do the very best job I possibly could. Melody had drawn from me a best I didn't know I had.

You can do the same thing for someone else.

Most of the groups you work with will have fine adult leaders. And that's great. They can give you lessons and advice from their own experiences. Learn from them as much as you can. But remember that on many teams there are players who are leaders as much as the coach is. And you need them! Just as coaches can't get out in the game and play, your adult leaders can't always get out in the middle of the action either.

But you can! You can get right out on the floor and take charge. You can inspire, encourage, and motivate those around you. Decide now that you'll do it!

When I was in high school I had a friend named Bret who played on the football team. Bret was a defensive lineman who had a chest like a barrel and fingers like frankfurters. He wasn't fast, and he wasn't coordinated, but he could plow into an offense like a team of horses. Trying to stop him was like trying to stop a bulldozer with a hankie.

One time we were playing the team from a rival school. It was late in the fourth quarter, and we were behind by a field goal. The other team had the ball third and four on our forty-five-yard line. At the snap, their quarterback dropped back to pass as Bret charged over the line on a blitz. The quarterback darted to the side and began his pass just as someone else ran into him. The ball shot straight up into the air . . . and came straight down into Bret's beefy hands.

Now Bret had never in his life held the ball on an offensive play. He had smothered fumbles and blocked for teammates on interceptions. But he had never carried the football.

That didn't bother him. Like the most seasoned rusher in the Super Bowl, Bret tucked the ball under his arm and ran with it. He probably would have made a touchdown, too, except that nearly every player on the other team was able to catch up with him to help drag him to the ground.

The point is that Bret didn't hesitate when his time came. He was strictly a defensive player, but when his chance came, he didn't waste time worrying about his ability or experience. He didn't stop to call for help. He took the ball and ran with it.

You can do the same thing. You can take your call to leadership and run with it. You can use your talents, drive, and energy to make your group the best it can be. You can give the people you lead a glimpse of their own destiny. You can show them the quality of success.

And it doesn't matter if you're just twelve years old. It doesn't matter if you're thirteen, fourteen, or fifteen. It doesn't matter if you're the newest elder or sister in the mission. As a young person, you have all the energy and enthusiasm you need to be a tremendous leader.

Not only that, but by starting out young, you can start out right. You can develop now good, solid skills of leadership that will carry you far into your adult life.

During a recreation class, a teenage girl named Nicole stood at the edge of a cliff. She was supposed to rappel to the bottom, but she was nervous about trying. As Brandon—a boy in the class her own age—secured a safety line around her, she said, "I can't do this."

Brandon smiled at her. "Of course you can!" he said. "You just don't know how yet!"

And then, with terrific patience, support, and understanding, Brandon taught her how to get to the bottom safely. He gave Nicole the confidence to try.

People you know need leaders like Brandon. They need leaders who are able to teach them the principles of success. They need leaders who can give them the confidence to become their very best.

They need—you!

Things to Do Now!

Decide to be a leader. Tell yourself every day, "I am a leader!"

Take advantage of your youth. As a young person you have great energy and enthusiasm. Use them to fire up the groups you lead.

Promise never to be average! Strive to be your best always. When you set out to do something, don't just try to get it done. Instead, do it the best it can be done. Encourage those you lead to do the same.
