Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

2

How to Build a Raft

Forming the Group

You want us to do what?"

I looked over the knot of boys and pointed toward the dock anchored halfway across the small lake. I spoke matter-of-factly.

"I want you to build a raft, paddle it out to the dock, and bring me the can that's sitting out there."

The boys—all of them twelve- and thirteen-year-old Boy Scouts—exchanged worried glances. Micah, a boy with sandy hair, looked up hopefully.

"Why can't we just swim out to it?" He glanced at the other boys. "I could do that."

A couple of the others nodded their support and moaned when I shook my head.

"Sorry. The can contains a sensitive payload that must stay absolutely dry. The only way to keep it from getting wet is to build a raft."

I paused a moment for emphasis, and then pointed down the shore to where three other groups of Scouts were having similar conversations.

"There is a hitch," I said. "We're going to be racing those other patrols. Only the winning team will get to keep the prizes inside the can."

At the idea of a race, the Scouts became a little more enthusiastic. I led them down to the beach where I had stacked a pile of logs and poles, several lengths of rope, and four styrofoam rolls that would keep the raft buoyant.

"It doesn't matter how you build the raft," I explained. "To win the race, all you have to do is get out to the dock, get the can, and bring it back without getting it wet."

The Scouts were finally getting excited, and once they all were ready and the signal to begin was given, they took off like a pack of hounds.

That was the beginning of a week-long Boy Scout leadership course. The boys were there to learn the skills they needed to lead their troops at home.

After arriving at camp, the Scouts had been organized into groups of five or six. Care was taken to see that no one was placed in a patrol with anyone he already knew. Being with a group of strangers was an important part of this first-day's activities.

Once my group began working on their raft, I just sat back and watched. Carefully. I wasn't interested in how they built their raft, but I did want to see how they went about doing it. Right off the bat, a boy named Wade began taking charge. The other boys followed his lead. Wade wasn't the oldest Scout in the bunch, and he wasn't the biggest. But he did have a dynamic, energetic personality that made him seem like an authority.

"You guys start sorting out the rope," he said, singling out two boys standing to his left. "And the rest of us will get going on the raft."

But Wade wasn't the only leader in the group. As the boys bent into their work, Micah took a step back and began looking things over. He glanced down the bank to where the rival patrols were busy lashing away, then called to Wade.

"Look," he said, "the way we're going we're going to have a good raft, but we won't have any place to lash the styrofoam. We ought to get a couple of guys to lash all the styrofoam together, then when the raft's done, we could just lay it on top and tie it on tight."

Wade took only a moment to decide. "Good idea. Do you want to do it?"

"Sure."

"Okay. Get someone to help you, and go ahead."

Within a short time, the raft was finished. Actually, it was almost finished. But when a rival patrol began pushing their craft into the lake, Wade decided that enough was enough, and he had the gang shove off. It was a close race, and the other patrol might have won. They reached the dock first and were on their way back when Micah remembered an important stipulation: the winning team had to bring the can back dry! In the resulting water fight, the can and all of the candy it contained were sunk, but the boys had such a good time that no one really cared.

The purpose of this activity was not really to see who could get to the dock first. It wasn't to see who could build the best raft. It was to give the boys a common goal and get them working together. By the time they were finished, they had all learned to rely upon one another. They had learned the importance of working together. They had become united.

Now, you may be putting a group together, too. Or maybe you're taking charge of a group that's already been formed. Either way, you'll need to form the group into a good, cooperative unit before it will be able to work effectively.

How do you do that?

In three ways. First, you've got to get everyone moving together. Second, you've got to let everyone help. And third, you've got to make the group feel like a group.

Sound complicated? It really isn't. Let's take a look at each of the three steps and see just what's involved.

First, get everyone moving together.

I was visiting a junior high school not too long ago and got caught in the halls between classes. One minute I was walking freely down the hall, and the next I was trapped in the middle of hundreds of bustling students.

The trouble was, they were all going the other way. And I couldn't make any progress down the hall. Finally I just turned around and went the same way as everyone else. Suddenly everything was easier.

When you get everyone moving together—working toward the same goals—everyone will be helping everyone else along. The work will become easier.

Before the start of the season, a girls' volleyball team met outside the gym one afternoon. Out on the lawn was a circular platform two feet across and eighteen inches high.

"We're not going in to practice today," the coach said, "until we can get every person on the team on the platform."

"All at the same time?"

The coach nodded. "All at the same time."

If you have a ruler handy, try seeing just how big a two-foot circle is. And then imagine trying to get fifteen girls on top of it all at the same time.

It wasn't easy, but it was fun. The girls were soon crawling on top of one another, holding on to each other as if they had jumped out of an airplane with just one parachute. By the time they succeeded in getting all fifteen girls onto the tiny platform, everyone was laughing and giggling and anxious to try it again. More important, they understood when the coach asked, "Now, do you see the importance of teamwork?"

You'll find that when everyone is working together, the jobs you do will get done easier. Everyone will have more fun doing them. And the harder everyone is working, the harder it will be for anyone to try straying off.

Second, let everyone help.

A boys' club once went camping in the high Uintah Mountains of northern Utah. They planned on hiking in to a remote mountain lake for three days. Their leaders arranged for a number of horses to pack in all their gear.

Things should have worked out well, but most of the boys had brought far too much gear, and the horses were loaded down heavily. So while their leaders hiked slowly along with the horses, the boys scampered on up the mountain.

Once they reached their camping spot, the boys scattered. A couple of them went fishing. Others went exploring. One of them began hunting arrowheads.

After a couple of hours, though, their leaders had still not arrived with the horses. A few of the boys became nervous. They worried that maybe they had hiked to the wrong lake. Some thought they must be lost. As the worries sank in, tempers began to flare. Finally a boy named Bruce took control.

"Listen," he said. "Maybe we're lost, and maybe we're not. But arguing isn't going to change things."

"So what do you want us to do?" someone sneered.

"Sit around and play jacks?"

Bruce ignored the sarcasm. "If we're lost, then we'd better start doing something about it."

"Like finding our way out?"

Bruce shook his head. "No. If we are lost, it'll be best if we stay put. But we ought to get ready to spend the night if we have to. You know, build a shelter, find something to eat . . . "

The boys were instantly excited. "Yeah!" one agreed. "Let's build a shelter!"

"And I'll catch some fish for dinner," said another.

Bruce quickly organized the boys into teams. One began collecting wood and started a fire. Another set to work on a shelter. And two boys were sent back to the lake to try catching a few more fish for dinner. Everyone had something to do.

It wasn't long before the boys' leaders showed up with the horses. They hadn't been lost, just a lot slower than they'd expected. But Bruce proved an important point. By getting everyone moving in the right direction and by letting everyone help, he kept everyone busy. He channeled their energy in a positive direction.

In the group you lead, make sure that everyone has a job to do. Keep the group members' energy channeled in a positive direction. By keeping them involved, you'll make them feel important to the group.

Third, make them feel like a group.

All people have a need to belong. They have a need to succeed. So let them know that they're part of something great.

When I was in the high school band, I played trumpet with a boy named McKay. He was one of the best high school musicians in the state, and he was our section leader.

Now, our director was a wonderful musician. He was a fine teacher who could tap more work from us than anyone else I've ever played for. He gave us pride as a band.

But McKay went a step further. He showed us what a great trumpet section could really be like.

"Let's all come in right after lunch," he suggested one day. "Then we can all be warmed up and tuned up by the time class starts."

McKay was asking us to give up part of our lunch break. There were a couple of us who didn't want to do that, but McKay just said, "Fine. Come in when you can."

The rest of us, though, showed up the next day halfway through lunch. We spent a few minutes warming up, then McKay tuned us up.

"All right," he said, finally. "Let's play some trumpets!"

For the next ten minutes we played the wildest pep tunes in our folders. The next day we were back again. And the next. And soon everyone in our section was coming in during lunch to play.

The best thing was that we were all improving our musical skills. But we were also developing pride as a team. By the time class started, we were all set and ready to go. We knew we were a step ahead of the rest of the class, and that made us feel good.

We also made up a trumpet section theme song, and we played it whenever our director stopped for a break or whenever we went to ball games. It was great fun.

Every one of us was proud to be a member of the trumpet section. McKay had given us something great to belong to. And we loved it.

Not only that, but other brass sections began doing the same things we did. Some started showing up during lunch to warm up. Others made up theme songs like ours. McKay's example was spreading.

But McKay wasn't finished. "The drummers are starting to copy us," he said one day. "We've got to figure out something we can do to stay on top."

"How about ties?" someone asked. "We could all wear ties to class."

"Perfect," McKay said. "Nobody wears ties to school. We'll be the first."

And we were. Not only did we stand out through our excellence, but we stood out through our appearance as well. We were untouchable.

McKay did great things for us that year. He showed us how great we could be. He showed us how much fun we could have. He gave us the motivation and the desire to be our best. He gave us reasons to achieve.

Make your group exciting to belong to. Establish a tradition of excellence that every group member will be proud of. You'll find that all of them will respond with increased support and loyalty. Most important, you'll find the power to lead them and change their lives.

Things to Do Now!

Get the members of your group all moving in the same direction. Set goals they can work on together. Or find a contest they can attempt as a team. Let the heat of competition mold them together.

Make sure that everyone is a part of the team. Make sure that everyone has a job. Find ways to keep even the youngest, least skilled members involved and active. Let them know that the group can't succeed without them.

Develop pride in your group! Make the group exciting to belong to. Let them all know that they belong to something really great!
