Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

3

Looking for Differences

Learning Each Person's Needs and Traits

Fourteen-year-old Steve Hilton punched the throttle as he rounded the bend, pushing hard for more speed. His snowmobile shot down the trail in a spray of snow.

"Hang on!" he shouted over his shoulder. "A lot of bumps coming up!"

An instant later the snowmobile hit the first dip. It pounded the icy whoop-de-doos like it was shooting over a flight of stairs, sending bursts of snow into the sky with every bump. The next second it was high in the air as it blazed over a jump.

"Wow!" Steve shouted again. "That's the best ride we've had yet!"

David Blacker, perched precariously on the back, wasn't so sure. His idea of snowmobiling fun was driving through deep powder and around tight, tricky turns. He liked technique more than speed. Riding with Steve made him edgy and nervous.

And Steve didn't like David's dizzying spins and turns. He liked flat, open stretches of road where he could open the throttle wide.

The two boys were riding partners on a seventy-mile trek through Yellowstone National Park. They decided before starting out that they would take turns driving and would switch places after every five miles. The first thing they learned was that when Steve was at the wheel they covered ground at breakneck speed, hitting every bump and jump he spotted along the way.

As soon as David took over, the ride became slower but was no less thrilling. Waiting until the last moment to spin around sharp corners, David could punch the sled into such a fishtail that Steve was certain he was going to be thrown off.

Even though Steve and David were best friends, neither of them liked riding with the other. Their styles of driving were too different.

As you look over the group you lead, you'll notice that no two people are alike. Just like Steve and David, every person will have his or her own likes and dislikes, traits and characteristics. What's fun for one may not be fun for another. To be an effective leader, you'll need to deal with this variety of personalities. That is one of the greatest challenges of leadership.

I have two friends from Ireland who ran for Brigham Young University and became All-Americans. Carey, a world-class marathoner who ran in the 1984 Olympics, loved the distances. She thought nothing of going out for a ten- or fifteen-mile run, and she once told me that she'd rather slosh through miles of mud and snow than train on an indoor track.

Aisling, on the other hand, shook her head at any distance longer than a mile, and she loved pounding the hardwood of indoor tracks. She won the mile run in the 1983 NCAA Indoor Championships, and she went undefeated in the sprints that entire season.

At first glance, the two runners seemed identical. They were both from Ireland, they were both All-Americans, and they both loved running. But where track was concerned, the similarities ended. They were actually as different as night and day.

In the group you lead, you'll find people who are just as different. But like the coaches who trained Carey and Aisling, don't be too quick to judge them. Don't expect sprinters like Aisling to like the distances or be good at them. And don't force marathoners like Carey to master the sprints.

Being able to plan around people's strengths and weaknesses is a skill that will set you apart as a leader. It isn't always easy, but the better you know each person, the better you'll be at it.

When I was a missionary in Japan, my mission president once called me and another elder into his office.

"We're going to open a branch in a city where we've never had missionaries before," he told us. "And it's important that we establish the work there as quickly as possible."

The president said he was assigning Elder Fox and me to work as companions in the new city, and he explained why he had chosen us.

"Elder Barker, you are one of the best investigator- finders in the mission. You have a special talent for sparking interest in the gospel among the people you meet."

I nodded. I was never sure exactly how I was able to do it, but I taught a great many people. But I was slow in the way I presented my lessons. I was almost always transferred before my investigators were ready for baptism.

Elder Fox was just the other way around.

"You never have more than a handful of investigators at a time," the president reminded him. "But you baptize the ones you find very quickly."

So he put the two of us together. And what a team we made! In the eight weeks we worked together, we established in that small mountain town a branch that's still going strong today.

When you find someone in your group with obvious weaknesses, it's easy to be unhappy with him. After all, he's probably not working the way you want him to. And many leaders will simply try to change him.

But if you really want to be effective, learn to focus on his strengths. He's certain to have some. So find ways for him to contribute in the way he does best. Is he a terrible organizer? Maybe he's a terrific artist. Does she have a scratchy singing voice? Maybe she's a skilled pianist. Find out!

Just as everyone has different traits, everyone has different needs, too. I once took a group of teenage boys deep into the backcountry of southern Utah. We were preparing for a week-long outdoor leadership course, but the night after we arrived, a heavy rainstorm washed away all the roads leading onto the mountain. As soon as I learned we were stranded, I used the radio-telephone at Mt. Holly Ski Resort to phone my employer.

"I want you off the mountain as soon as possible," he said. "Drive as far as you can, then hike the rest of the way out. I'll have someone in town pick you up."

I didn't want to leave, but I had no choice. So I called everyone together and explained that we had a long hike ahead of us.

"I don't know how long it'll be before we're back," I said. "So make sure you pack up everything you're going to need."

I began by loading my backpack with notebooks, climbing equipment and other things I was sure I wouldn't be able to live without. Many of the items I packed were heavy, but they were important enough to me that I was willing to carry them.

After I was finished I went to help the others. The first thing I noticed was the difference in what everyone was taking. Justin, my chief ranger, was taking only the bare minimum of clothes, reserving most of the space in his pack for his rock- climbing gear. Jeff was busy padding his collection of cassette tapes. Roger was trying to figure out the best way to pack his fishing gear.

It didn't matter to me what the boys took. After all, it was their packs, their backs. And even though some of their selections seemed silly to me, I knew better than to interfere. No matter how much room they took, I knew Devon would be miserable without his wood-carving knives. No matter how heavy it was, I knew Evan couldn't live without his radio.

Every person's needs are different. And to realize their full potential in the group, group members will need to feel that their individual needs are being met. That is the first, best way to make them all feel that the group is working for their good, too.

Imagine for a moment being left-handed. Then suppose you went to a school that provided only desks with right-handed arm rests (you probably do!) or right-handed baseball gloves. Wouldn't you feel left out? Wouldn't you feel angry? And wouldn't you have every right to feel that way?

You bet you would! And that is why you must take each person's needs into account when you begin planning any project.

A dance teacher named Linda was once preparing a team of young dancers for a recital. Most of her dancers were high school and college age, but many of them were less than ten years old.

Teaching such different age groups was difficult. The older dancers wanted time and instruction to perfect their routines. The younger dancers needed practice, mostly, but their young bodies weren't yet capable of doing hard routines over and over again.

And so, while the older dancers were rehearsing, Linda took the younger ones into another room where she had them lie on the floor. Then she dimmed the lights, turned on the music, and asked the children to think through the dance in their minds, picturing every step and move.

It was a good trick. And it gave the children a chance to practice even when their young bodies couldn't dance any more.

Remember the people's emotional needs are just as important as their physical ones. One person in the group may be timid or shy. He'll need encouragement. The person beside him may lack self-confidence. She'll need opportunities to realize her strengths. Someone else may not feel liked. He'll need friends. And there may be someone who needs a lot of freedom. You may need to give her room to work.

When you begin to plan and provide for each person's needs, they will all begin to feel like they are each an important part of the group. They'll feel that the group is working for them, too. They'll respond with greater enthusiasm for the things you do. And they'll return your effort with increased respect and loyalty for you as their leader.

Things to Do Now!

Make a list (like the example) of every person you lead. Now list one positive word (musician, scholar, athlete, and so on) that best describes each person. Don't use the same word for more than one person.

Beside each person's name, list three traits that make that person different from everyone else. (Does he like spinach? Can she play the oboe?)

Now, beside each person's name, list three needs that person might have. (Does he need friends? Does she need to keep active?)

Find ways to meet the needs of everyone in the group. Find ways to let each one know that he or she is an important part of the group.

Name Description Traits Needs

Trent Scholar Shy, likes music, likes movies, plays clarinet, likes to read Friends, lots of attention, time to be alone
