Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

5

Flying to Pueblo

The Importance of Planning

When I was in school, I used to wonder when I was ever going to need all those weird math formulas I had to learn. Well, I knew now as I filled up my second page of calculations. I was filling out a navigation log for a flight from Salt Lake City to Pueblo, Colorado. Because I had never been to Pueblo, I knew I wouldn't be able to fly just by looking down at the ground as I often did. Instead, I would be relying on my instruments and planning.

I was surprised at how much math it took, but by the time I was finished, I had my flight planned to the smallest detail. I knew how to correct for the wind. I knew how much fuel I'd need. I knew what turns I'd have to make to avoid certain dangers and when to make them. I knew how high I'd need to fly. I knew what radio frequencies I'd need to monitor, and I had them written down. I knew how long the flight would take, and I knew what time I'd be landing.

Does that sound like a lot of work? It was. By the time I had finished, I almost thought I'd need to buy new batteries for my calculator. But it was all necessary. If I had simply taken off and climbed above the clouds, I would have had no idea when to come back down. For me, getting it all planned out in advance was the most important part of the flight. And so it is with leadership.

You'll find that few skills will help you as a leader as much as the ability to plan. When you learn to plan well, many other leadership skills will simply fall into place. You'll be able to work around your group's needs. You'll find it easier to control the group. You'll be able to make use of your evaluations.

During a youth conference, a group of young people was divided into smaller groups of ten that were asked to form human pyramids. "Start with four people on the bottom," their leader said, "then three, then two, then one on top."

In an instant, everyone was piling on top of one another, much the way college cheerleaders do at ball games. The problem was, not many of the kids really had any idea of how to make a good pyramid. People came tumbling down even before anyone got all the way to the top.

One team, though, tried something different. Instead of bursting right into the activity, the team members took a few minutes to think it through. And they suddenly realized that no one had ever said they actually had to climb on one another. So, finding a clear spot of grass, they simply lay down in formation to make a perfect 4-3- 2-1 pyramid which won the contest.

As much fun as it is to jump right into an activity, that's usually not the best approach. More often some good, thoughtful planning is necessary to achieve a quick, efficient solution.

A photographer I once worked with told me how a magazine asked him to fly from Salt Lake City to Mt. Hood, Oregon, to photograph a member of the United States ski team.

"He'll be in Mt. Hood tomorrow," his editor said. "He's flying out from Park City tonight, so you should be able to reach him anytime tomorrow."

The photographer suddenly cut in. "You mean he's in Park City right now? Park City, Utah?"

"That's right. He's been racing there all day."

Park City was only an hour's drive from my friend's home. Had anyone thought out the assignment carefully in advance, my friend could have made the short drive to Park City, shot the story, and been finished. As it was, he had to buy round-trip airfare to Oregon. He had to spend several nights in an expensive lodge. His bill came to more than a thousand dollars in expenses alone. With a little planning, the whole thing could have been done with a twenty-five-dollar trip to Park City.

Actually, planning is a simple process. All it takes is a little time and a lot of thought. When you begin planning your group's next project, just follow these steps:

First, consider the task. Be sure you know what it is you want to have done. Write down the goals you want to achieve.

Second, list your resources. Decide how each person in the group will be able to help. Find ways for every person to contribute in the way he or she does best. And don't forget about physical resources. Do you know anyone who can get you the paint you need? Do you know anyone with a video recorder? Make a list of the things you'll need, and write down the names of the people who can help you get them.

Third, organize your plan. Write it on paper. Outline the steps you'll need to follow, and place them in the order you need to do them. Next to each step, list assignments for each person. As you do that, be sure to consider alternatives. If there is a better, quicker, easier way to get the job done, do it. And learn to assign your physical needs logically. If someone's father owns a hardware store, put that person in charge of getting the paint and brushes.

While you're organizing your plan, don't be afraid to ask for help. Let the group help out. Brainstorm if you need to. The more people you have working on the problem, the better the chance of finding a solution.

When I was in high school, some friends and I spent part of our summer vacation backpacking through New Mexico. None of us had ever been there before, but we didn't worry about that. We had a good map, and we planned our route carefully. Before we set out, we knew exactly where we were going. We knew what mountains we were going to climb. We knew what trails we were going to follow.

Matt, one of my best friends, went a step further. He planned each of our meals, deciding what we were going to eat and when we were going to eat it. I was always glad he did because he saved us a lot of weight.

Instead of just packing a sack of mix for our pancakes, Matt took the time to figure out exactly how much mix he would need to make five pancakes for each person. Then he measured that amount of mix and placed it in a plastic bag that he labeled, "Friday's breakfast." He did the same thing with each meal so that we weren't packing any more food than we really needed. It was a lot of work, but fifteen miles down the trail we were all thanking him for the weight he saved us.

One of the best planners I know is a sixteen-year-old gymnast named Tami. When preparing a floor exercise— her best event—she first decides which stunts she will perform. She knows the requirements (one easy trick, four intermediate tricks, one difficult trick, and as many others as she can fit into a seventy-five-second routine), and she knows her own limitations. She's realistic about her abilities, and she plans her routines accordingly.

Tami also plans a lot of cleverness into her act. She doesn't have good leaps—which are a required part of her routine—so she plans her routines so that she does her leaps at the far end of the mat where the judges can't see them quite so easily. At state meets—where judges are positioned at all four corners—she plans her weakest skills for the center of the mat. She plans her strongest tricks, on the other hand, so they appear where the judges will have the best look at them.

That's creative!

To plan a job well, you've got to think your problems out in advance too, and find answers to them ahead of time. That means having a few emergency plans available in case things don't go the way you expect them to.

I was flying cross-country one time when a red light suddenly began flashing on the instrument panel. It meant that I was losing voltage.

Now, I had always thought I was a good pilot. I had studied everything I could about the planes I flew. And though I recalled reading the steps for dealing with low voltage, I couldn't remember them now.

So reaching beneath my seat, I fished out my pilot's checklist. I quickly flipped through the pages—passing up steps for dealing with fires in flight, electrical problems, icing, power loss, and engine problems. Then, suddenly, there it was. The procedures for low voltage!

As it turned out, solving the problem was easy:

The sheet said that if cycling the switch off and on didn't turn off the light, then the plane should be landed as soon as possible. But that wasn't necessary. I cycled the switch once—and the light blinked off.

I later learned that I never was in much danger. If I had lost voltage, I would have lost the use of my flaps and radios. But the plane would have continued to fly. Even so, I was happy that someone had thought the problem out in advance and had a solution planned for me.

A cross-country skier named Jarom was once touring through the mountains of northern Utah. He was several miles from the nearest road when he suddenly lost control on a steep hill. He pitched face first down the slope and rolled for several feet.

Jarom wasn't hurt by the fall, but one of his skis was. The tip had snapped off about four inches from the top.

If you ski much, then you know that skiing without a tip is nearly impossible. Jarom tried it but wasn't making any progress. He was just beginning to think of the long hike back to the road when one of his friends skied up.

"Here," he said, dropping his pack and fishing something out. "I always carry this with me." With that, he tossed Jarom an emergency ski tip. Jarom fastened it to his broken ski and was able to enjoy the rest of the day.

When we plan activities, we don't like to think of problems we might have to face, but they do happen. It's best to be ready for them so that they don't take you by surprise. Plan for every possible disaster and find solutions for each one. With luck, you'll never need them. But if you do, you'll be glad you have them.

Things to Do Now!

Consider the next job you have lined up. Think it through before you start. Decide to do it better than it's ever been done before.

Plan ways to involve everyone in the group. Assign jobs according to each person's needs and abilities.

Learn to organize yourself. Start carrying a notebook and pencil. Know what you're doing, where you're going, and what's next on the agenda.

Look for different ways of getting the job done. That doesn't mean to sacrifice quality. But if there's a better, easier way to do it, do it!
