Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

6

Anyone Tie a Timberhitch?

Knowing and Using Resources

The Scoutmaster handed each of the seven boys a length of rope. "Okay," he said. "Anyone know how to tie a one-handed bowline?"

A thirteen-year-old Scout named Bryan raised his hand. "I do."

"Good. Would you please show everyone?"

Bryan stood and passed the rope around his waist. "All right. First, you put the rope around your back and hold it like this." He waited until everyone was ready, then took them step by step through the process of tying the one- handed bowline until everyone could do it.

This was a training and planning conference being conducted by a local Boy Scout troop. All of the troop's officers were there to plan for the coming year and to receive leadership training. Bart Peck, the senior patrol leader, conducted the conference, and his Scoutmaster handled the training sessions.

The Scoutmaster was a genius at this sort of thing. As he watched Bryan teach the one-handed bowline, he nodded his approval, then said, "Good. Now, everyone tie a timberhitch." He looked around. "Anyone not know how to tie a timberhitch?"

Two boys raised their hands. The Scoutmaster turned to a boy named Chris, who had already knotted a timberhitch over the arm of his chair.

"Chris, would you help Mike and Jason?"

"Sure."

After the timberhitch came the clove hitch, sheet bend, two half hitches, water knot, and the figure eight knot. In each instance, the Scoutmaster had Scouts who knew the knots teach those who didn't. Finally, when all of the knots had been covered, the Scoutmaster stepped back and clasped his hands behind his back. He rocked back and forth on his heels.

"How many of you learned new knots just now?" he asked. Every one of the boys raised his hand. "And how many of those knots do you think I know?"

Mike was quick. "All of them." There were various nods of agreement.

The Scoutmaster cocked an eyebrow. "Hold on," he said. "Think about it. Did you actually see me tie any knots?"

"No."

The Scoutmaster spread his hands. "Is it possible, then, that I don't know how to tie any of them?"

There was a thoughtful pause. "Yeah."

"Well, if I didn't teach them to you, who did?"

"We did."

The Scoutmaster jumped forward and slammed his fist down on the table with enough force that water sloshed out of a glass resting more than a foot away. The boys all jumped in surprise. The Scoutmaster's voice surged with enthusiasm.

"Who did?"

Everyone shouted. "We did!"

Suddenly calm again, the Scoutmaster stepped back and pushed his hands deep into his pockets. "You know," he said, "you don't need to know everything to be a good leader. Not if you know how to use your resources."

He paused and met each of the boy's eyes in turn. His voice was low. "Remember that when you're leading your patrols."

The Scoutmaster understood an important principle of leadership: he knew how to use his resources. I'm sure that he knew each of the knots he used that day, but rather than teach them himself, he kept his Scouts busy and involved by having them teach one another. By doing this he also helped them to feel part of the group.

Just as important, the Scoutmaster demonstrated the truth of his statement: "You don't need to know everything to be a good leader." A good leader, after all, is not one who knows everything; a good leader is one who is able to draw upon the skills and talents of the group he leads.

I have a friend named Hal who coaches tennis at a junior high school. He didn't start out coaching tennis, but when the former coach moved to another school, Hal was asked to take his place.

Now, Hal knew very little about coaching tennis. He played once in a while, though he was far from being an expert. But Hal was a leader. The first thing he did was talk to each of the boys on the team. He found out which players had the best serves and which had the best footwork. It turned out that while Hal had only one or two players he considered stars, nearly everyone had strengths in some aspect of the game.

As practice began, Hal paired his players according to their needs. Players who served well taught those who needed help. Players who were good at the net helped those who were less aggressive. Not only were the boys improving their tennis skills, but they were helping to teach others. Everyone felt needed and important. Even though Hal knew only the basics of the sport, by using his resources he was able to develop a team that competed well throughout the year.

One problem faced by many leaders is that they don't know the members of the group well enough to know their particular skills and talents. That can happen when a group is just newly formed or when someone takes over an existing group. Often you can let the group function as it is until you have time to learn more about everyone. But sometimes you don't have time.

When I was in college, I used to work as a guide on the Colorado River. For a couple of weeks each summer I guided white-water raft trips down the Grand Canyon, sometimes spending as many as eighteen days at a time shooting rapids. To be certified, I was required to receive training in first aid. So were each of the other guides, though we rarely faced emergencies more dangerous than cut fingers and sunburned legs.

On one trip a partner and I were escorting nine passengers through the Grand Canyon. On our first day out, we were driving the boat through a strip of boiling rapids when a woman was suddenly tossed from position, gashing her leg against a metal rack. My partner quickly steered the boat back into calmer water and took a careful look at the bleeding wound.

"Nothing to worry about," he said, both to his patient and to the other passengers, who had gathered around. "I've been trained in first aid. I'll have this fixed up in a jiffy."

And then, with considerable enthusiasm, he began cleaning the wound, explaining each step of the procedure as he did.

"This is called neosporin," he said at one point, showing a small white bottle to his attentive audience. "When I pour it over the wound, it seeps inside and bubbles dirt and germs back up to the surface."

The passengers ooed and aahed as if viewing some spectacular miracle of science.

After cleaning the wound, he dressed it, instructing his patient on how to care properly for it. "You've got to keep it dry," he cautioned. "If the dressing gets wet, it'll allow germs to move in from the outside and down into the wound."

The patient nodded solemnly, promising to keep the dressing clean and dry.

Later that night, around the evening campfire, we organized an informal introduction session so we could learn more about our passengers. It turned out that of the nine people with us, six—including the patient—were doctors, and the other three were registered nurses.

We laughed about the incident later, but it illustrates a point. My partner was doing a job when there were people on hand far more qualified than he was to do it. In fact, everyone on hand was more qualified than he was to do it.

It doesn't make sense to have someone with little interest in stars teach an astronomy session if someone else can point out Altair, Vega, and Deneb. But when it comes time to assign certain tasks, many leaders don't know who, if anyone, has the needed skill or interest. One way to find out is through a survey. Consider the tasks you have to do, jot down the assignments that need to be made, then take a survey to find out what you need to know. A class president forming a committee, for instance, may need an art director, a publicity chairman, and a finance chairman. Before making these assignments, he might distribute a survey such as this one.

Personal Resource Survey

Check the box that best applies to you.

Very skilled Somewhat skilled Not skilled Not skilled but would like to learn

Drawing

Singing

Painting

Carpentry

Writing

Mathematics

Acting

Sports

Managing

Musical instruments

(which?)

Leading music

Favorite hobbies?

Favorite school subjects?

Just as important as skills, interests, and talents are physical resources. The class president in our example might want to know if anyone has access to paint, party materials, or poster paper.

I remember once hearing of six boys who had become lost while hiking. After wandering through the woods in circles for several hours, one of the younger boys quietly approached the leader of the bunch and handed him a chart.

"Here's a map," he said. "Maybe it will help."

The older boy was furious. "You've got a map? Why didn't you say anything?"

"Because you never asked!"

It may seem silly, but don't wait for people to volunteer their resources. Ask!

A similar incident was reported by United Press International during the winter of 1985. Two fourteen-year- old boys were hiking in the snow-covered mountains east of Salt Lake City when they became trapped on a rocky ledge. Thick fog swirled all around, reducing visibility to zero. The sun was going down. They both knew they would be forced to spend the night.

The boys had plenty of matches, and one of them even happened to be carrying a small survival handbook. As the mountains grew dark and the temperature dropped, the boys worked hard to build a fire. They searched the ledge for dry kindling, and then scoured the rocks for tinder. Unfortunately, the wood was wet and wouldn't light.

The survival manual had plenty of suggestions for getting the fire burning, but nothing seemed to work. The boys read and reread the manual, trying and retrying every suggestion. But still, no fire.

After about two hours—with fingers numb and spirits dampened—the two finally tried one more trick: they burned the book. And within minutes they had a roaring blaze.

"I don't know why we didn't think of it sooner," one said.

When you have a group to lead and a job to do, find out first what resources you have available. Get to know the members of your team well enough so that when you need to make an assignment, you'll know who is best suited for the job. Learn what physical items the group may be able to contribute. Most important, give each member the chance to contribute in areas of personal strength. Not only will everyone feel a sense of importance, but each person will have the chance to learn, to share, and to grow.

Things to Do Now!

Jot down the names of the people you lead, and make a list of each person's skills and talents.

Write down ways to use the talents of each person. Think of ways to keep everyone involved. Give everyone the chance to contribute and feel important.

If you don't know your group well enough to do that, make a survey. Get to know every person!
