Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

8

How to Catch a Fish

Controlling the Group

Tyson Cayley waded knee- deep in the water and cast his hook toward the middle of the lake. He held his pole even with the surface and let the line run loosely through his left hand.

After a moment he felt a tug on the line. A second later he felt it again. He set the hook and began reeling furiously.

"Yahoo!" he shouted. "I've got another one! A monster!"

Roger Pace, standing just a few feet away, looked over in disbelief.

"You've got another one? I can't believe it!"

Tyson's pole was bent at a crazy angle—his line slicing through the water—as he reeled.

"Yeah! And it's a monster!"

Roger glanced once toward his own bobber—which was floating lazily on the lake as it had all morning—then sighed and placed his pole in the fork of a stick.

"I can't believe it," he said. "I'm standing less than ten feet from you, and I haven't had a bite all day."

"And this is my fifth fish!" Tyson shouted.

Roger reached for his net and waded over to Tyson's side.

"Almost got 'im," Tyson said. There was an arc of silver as the fish flashed through the water.

Roger whisked the net over the water, then sent it plunging beneath the surface. A moment later he pulled the fat trout from the water. He shook his head.

"Okay," he said. "I give up. I want to try some of those grasshoppers you're using."

Grasshoppers? That's all it had taken for Tyson to catch five fish. It may not sound like a big deal, but standing just a few feet away, baiting his hook with marshmallows, Roger hadn't caught a thing all morning.

I have a friend named Sam who had an experience much like Tyson and Roger's. He was ice fishing on Scofield Reservoir. Like everyone else he drilled a small hole in the ice, dropped his line until it touched bottom, then raised it about six inches. Right away he began catching fish. So was nearly everyone else.

Not too far way was a young man who wasn't having any luck. Standing near his hole with his hands in his pockets he watched as people all around him caught fish. Finally, when he couldn't stand it anymore, he decided to change bait. Since he didn't have anything but cheese, he asked another fisherman if he could borrow a few salmon eggs. And a couple of minutes later he had his first fish.

If you've ever been fishing, then you know that you can't force a fish to take your hook. But if you offer it the right bait you can probably convince it to at least take a couple of nibbles.

Controlling a group is often like that. You can't force people to behave. And you can't force them to do the things you want them to. But with the right incentives you can entice them a little.

I once had a science teacher who knew that. And he used it to control his classes.

"I'd like you to answer the questions on page 143," he'd tell us. "And I'll give bonus points for every problem you have done by the end of class."

With that he'd leave us to it. He never had to shout to keep us quiet, and he never had to get mad at us. We were too busy being good—we were too busy doing our work!— to have time to be noisy. And if someone in the room wasn't interested in the bonus points—well, that someone had a hard time finding anyone to talk to!

One of my neighbors works at a fast food store. She learned some good lessons about controlling from her shift boss.

"We used to be really bad," Andrea told me. "During rush hours the work was always hard and tiring. And when things slowed down, it got boring. Most of us hated work."

Andrea's boss tried her best to boost morale but never could. And so her employees were lazy and discouraged, and their service lacked quality.

After a number of weeks a new manager took over. And right away she began changing things. Just before rush hour one day she said, "I'll give a $5 bonus to the waitress who serves the most customers in the next hour."

For the first time in weeks everyone in the store was looking for someone to help.

"May I help you?" one would say as soon as she had completed an order.

"Is there anyone who isn't being helped," pleaded another from the side.

The service might have lacked sincerity at first, but it was a start. With a small incentive, attitudes had changed. The new boss could have improved performance by getting mad, yelling, and maybe even firing a few people. But she didn't. Instead, she found ways to reward those who worked the way she wanted them to. She made them want to work hard.

There's a good lesson in that. After all, it shouldn't be the fear of punishment that keeps people in line. It should be the fear of missing out on something good.

During a Boy Scout camp out, a patrol leader named Wyatt needed to have his patrol clean up the many small pieces of garbage that littered the campsite.

"There's a certain piece of garbage out there," he told everyone. "And I'll give a candy bar to the person who finds it."

In an instant the boys were out scouring the campsite. They weren't working for fear of being punished; they were working for fear of missing out!

I once had an English teacher who used similar tactics to get her English classes to listen to her lessons.

"I'm going to write five words on the blackboard," she said. "And I'll use each of those words in my lesson today. Listen for each one and write it down when you hear it. For everyone who can list the words in the order I use them, I'll award five bonus points."

Five bonus points weren't much, but many of us needed every point we could get! And you can bet we were all listening hard as she presented her lesson that day.

When it comes to discipline and control, preventing problems is far better than facing them head on. If you can find ways to make the group members want to work, your job will be easier to do. If you can find ways to make them want to behave, they'll be good even when you're not around to keep an eye on them.

Of course, you can't really expect to lead without meeting someone who doesn't act up once in a while. And how you deal with that is very important. If you holler, shout, or lose control, you might also lose the respect of those you lead. And you'll probably just make the situation worse. But if you can react to the situation calmly, you'll keep everyone's temper cool. You'll be able to handle the situation much more effectively.

During a high school basketball game, a key player named Dan got into a fight with an opposing player. Both players were ejected immediately from the game.

Dan's coach was mad as a hornet. After all, the team was behind, and they needed Dan. But rather than chasing him down and yelling at him, the coach gave himself time to cool down. Then after the game he took Dan aside for a talk.

"What happened out there?" he asked.

Dan shook his head angrily. "The guy kept pushing me!" he said. "He kept jabbing me with his elbows!"

The coach nodded. "So what did you do?"

Dan made a fist. "Finally I just lost my temper and belted him."

"Did that solve the problem?"

"No. I guess not. I ended up hurting the team."

"What do you think that you should have done?"

"I should have talked to the ref. Or to you. I know I shouldn't have blown up like that."

Dan knew he had made a dumb mistake. He knew it the minute he threw the first punch. And if his coach had gone storming into the locker room yelling about how Dan nearly cost his team the whole game, he wouldn't have been telling Dan anything that he didn't already know.

Instead, the coach gave himself and Dan some time to cool down. He let Dan analyze his own actions. There was no way he could have gotten Dan back into the ball game. But by handling the situation the way he did, he made sure that Dan understood the seriousness of his actions. He made sure that Dan would remember the lesson the next time.

Try this the next time you get mad. Give yourself a little time to cool down, then take the person you're mad at aside for a little talk. Remember that he probably knows what he's done wrong. So rather than point it out to him, let him analyze his actions. This will help him to understand the mistake he's made.

It also helps if you have a few clear, specific consequences outlined just in case. Make sure everyone knows what they are. And make sure everyone knows that if someone chooses to act wrongly, that person also chooses to accept the consequence.

I used to work at an aquatics base where we taught boating, skiing, sailing, and snorkeling. The days were warm, but the nights were exceptionally cold, and no one ever wanted to get out of bed in the mornings. Our program director, though, insisted on having a staff meeting at seven o'clock each morning down by the lake. He never ordered anyone to be there. But he made it clear that anyone who didn't show up—and anyone who was late— would be assigned K.P. for the entire day.

No one ever got yelled at for being late. No one ever got mad. But they all knew that if they were late, they were on K.P. that day. It was a fair rule, and it was fair discipline. No one could complain when they found their name on the K.P. roster.

It also helps if you remember that people always have reasons for the way they act. If you come to know the people you lead and understand why they do what they do, you'll be in a far better position for discipline.

And when they come to know that you really care about them, they'll respond better. If they make a mistake, show them that you're worried about them first, and the job second. It's tough to do, sometimes. Especially if you're just getting started with the group. But if you're consistent and fair, the group will learn to respond.

Your best bet is to keep the group members busy and active. Keep them moving in a positive direction, and reward them for their good efforts. If you keep them busy enough, they won't have time to get into mischief. And if they do, have a few consequences ready. They don't need to be tough ones. The simple fact that you have them is often enough to get the message across.

Things to Do Now!

Find ways to reward those who behave the way you want them to. A simple, "Good job!" is often all it takes.

Make certain that everyone knows your expectations. You can't expect group members to sit quietly unless they know that's what you expect them to do.

Be fair and consistent. Treat everyone in the group equally. It's easy to play favorites, but it's important that you don't!

Have a couple of consequences ready just in case. Remember that these really don't need to be harsh. Often just the fact that you have them is enough.
