Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

9

Hamburgers, Eggs, and Banana Boats

Effective Teaching

Now this is the way to cook hamburger!" Erika Morrey stepped away from the campfire and molded a ball of hamburger into an empty orange peel. She trimmed away a bit of extra meat and then carefully set the orange peel into a bed of glowing coals.

"Ummm, she said, wiping her hands clean on her chef's apron. "Can't you just taste it?"

The nine girls standing around the campfire nodded eagerly. Their mouths were already watering.

"You see, by cooking your meat in the orange, you don't have any pans to clean," Erika explained. "And the orange peel gives the hamburger a special flavor you just can't get at the Burger Palace!"

Erika smiled. Her fire, shaped like a keyhole and lined with rocks, blazed cheerfully. Off to one side was a platform made of dry pine branches and loaded with firewood. A couple of feet away was another platform made of branches, this one about three feet off the ground and covered with food.

Erika was teaching a lesson on primitive cooking. And she held her fifteen-year-old students spellbound as she taught them.

"You might have noticed the way I've shaped my fire," she said as she began molding another hamburger patty. "It's shaped like a keyhole for a very important reason. I can keep the fire burning up here at the top, and I can scrape the coals down into the narrow part to cook over. That way I can have flames and coals at the same time."

Erika took her hamburger patty and slapped it onto the side of a flat rock facing the coals.

"There. Flat rocks make great barbeques when you can't find an orange peel."

Erika's next trick was to boil an egg in a paper cup. Really! Taking an ordinary unwaxed cup, she filled it with water, plopped the egg into it, and set it right in the middle of the hottest coals. The rim of the cup quickly burned away, but the rest of it remained unharmed.

And that wasn't all. She cooked bacon and eggs in the bottom of a paper bag, heated a banana stuffed with chocolate chips and marshmallows, and baked a "cake" in another orange peel.

You've probably seen people do primitive cooking lessons before. So have I. But they have never been taught as cleverly as Erika's lesson. Trying to make the experience as realistic as possible, she even had her girls follow a quarter-mile compass course through the woods to find her backcountry kitchen.

Erika was a master teacher. She knew how to take a topic and squeeze out every bit of fun there was in it. She did it with primitive cooking, she did it with sewing, and she did it with spiritual topics, too. Her lessons were always fun, and they were always remembered.

I'm sure you know teachers like Erika. They love the subjects they teach, and they go to great lengths to teach them well. They don't just make them fun—they make them meaningful.

A Scout leader named Travis once took a group of boys deep into the mountains of southern Utah. For three days they camped and hiked, and soon everyone was covered with thick layers of dirt. Travis decided they all needed a lesson on how to keep clean in the mountains, but instead of just giving the boys a stiff lecture, Travis called them all together one night after dinner.

"Everyone tired?" he asked as the boys took seats around the blazing bonfire he had built.

The boys nodded.

"Me, too," Travis said. "So I thought we could all just sit here for a few minutes and talk."

With that, Travis began telling stories. Mostly about mountainmen, Indians, grizzly bears, and other things that boys find interesting. After a few minutes, without breaking the rhythm of his story, he unbuttoned his dusty shirt, removed it, and folded it over a nearby pine branch.

"There was a trapper who once had to run his horse 125 miles with a band of mad Indians hot on his tail the whole way," Travis said as if he were doing nothing unusual. "He'd spur his horse until he had a two- or three- hundred-yard lead, then he'd slow down to rest and take off when the Indians started getting close again."

As he talked, he pulled a bandanna from his pocket and poured a little water from his canteen over it. Still telling his story, he used the bandanna as a washcloth and began washing his face and arms.

After a moment—in the middle of a story about John Wesley Powell now—he unlaced his boots. He paused long enough to make a point and then removed his boots and socks and washed his feet.

The boys watched all this with wide eyes. Many of them were even rubbing their dirt-caked arms and legs, longing to be a shade cleaner themselves.

Finally Travis toweled himself dry, pulled on a fresh shirt and clean socks, and laced up his boots. He smiled, clapped his hands, and said good night.

Not once did Travis say a word about staying clean. Not once did he say anything about taking baths. But so well did he teach his lesson that every boy had taken a backcountry bath that night before going to bed.

With a little creativity, you can teach many important lessons, too. You can make your lessons meaningful. The key is to find ways to get everyone to want to learn.When you are called upon to teach—when your group needs training or instruction—find ways to let everyone know that the things you're teaching them are important. Convince them that the skills they are learning are useful. Let them see that your motive is to help them.

Many teachers find success by emphasizing performance. They make certain their students have the opportunity to use the things they learn. Drama instructors, for instance, produce plays. English teachers publish newspapers and magazines. Coaches organize games and contests.

When I was in junior high, I had a friend named Burke who played the trumpet. He liked playing in the band, and he was good at it. But he never practiced as hard as he did when he had a big solo coming up in a concert. Most people are like that.

So if you're going to teach cooking, make certain you give everyone the opportunity to cook! (Better yet, let the class know that someone is going to eat the things they cook!) If you're going to teach knot tying and lashing, find something for them to build!

I once attended a citizen's academy taught by the Orem, Utah, police department. Once a week we learned about patrol tactics, crime investigation, firefighting, and other aspects of police work. All of our instructors were performance oriented. After a lesson on search procedures, we were marched to a nearby building and told there was a burglar inside. We were each given pistols (loaded with blanks) and flashlights and told to search the building.

Even though I knew it was a game, the experience was so real my palms were sweating as I searched.

Later we learned about accident investigation. After the lesson, we were taken to a nearby street where a typical accident had been staged. We had to study the scene and decide which car had caused the accident.

We all knew it wasn't real. But during class we knew we would be making searches. We knew we would be investigating accidents. So we listened hard to what we were being taught.

Many times this success formula can also be used in reverse. Instead of teaching a skill and promising an opportunity to do it later, many teachers expose their students to a problem and let them see how frustrating it can be. Then the students are prepared when the teacher asks, "Now, would you like to see an easier way?"

A college math professor once gave some difficult problems to a class I was in. After letting us struggle with them for several minutes, he asked, "How's it going?"

When most of us grumbled that things weren't going very well at all, he asked, "Would any of you be interested in learning a shortcut?"

You bet we were! And every eye in the room was on the blackboard as he demonstrated a simple solution for difficult problems. By exposing us to the problem ahead of time, our teacher neatly prepared us for his lesson. He let us see a need for a better way. And by the time he was ready to teach it, we were ready—and eager—to learn it.

I once saw a recreation teacher do that. He had his backpacking students come to class with fully loaded backpacks—some of them weighing thirty or forty pounds— and had them march a full mile around the college campus. By the time they returned to class, the young backpackers knew how miserable a heavy pack could be. And they were ready when their instructor showed them how to load a pack so it was easiest to carry.

This formula is effective for three reasons. It lets everyone see exactly how much he or she knows about what's going on. It convinces them all that they would benefit by knowing more. And it gives them a desire to know more. Once they have that desire, they'll be asking for more!

You'll find that people learn best those things they want to learn. They learn best when they have a compelling reason for learning. So your challenge is to take the things you want to teach and find ways to get your students to want to learn.

A young woman named Vicki told me about a home economics class she had in high school. The class was once scheduled to learn about hazards in the kitchen—something most girls thought would be rather boring.But when they arrived in the classroom, the teacher had arranged the kitchen in careful disorder. A can of cleanser was placed near the flour bin. An electric cord from the toaster trailed through the sink. Knives in the drainer were placed blade up.

Rather than giving a lecture, the teacher challenged her students to find as many hazards as they could. Students were given points for finding hazards, and they were given points for explaining why the situation was dangerous.

With a little imagination and creativity, the teacher had taken a dull topic and made an enjoyable—and valuable— lesson out of it.

During a district camporee, a Scoutmaster found a way to give his troop some practice in knots and lashings. (And if you're a Boy Scout, you probably know how dull that can be!) But this Scoutmaster was an inspired teacher, and he had a few tricks up his sleeve.

Assembling his boys near the edge of the river, he held out a bowl containing gingerbread men decorated as Scouts.

"My wife made these," he said. "And I'm going to give them to Troop 870."

The boys howled in protest. Troop 870 was their arch rival. For the Scoutmaster to give presents to the enemy troop rankled even the most easygoing boys in the troop.

"You can't do that!" one protested.

"Well, I'm sorry," the Scoutmaster said. "But I didn't realize that you'd want them so badly." He motioned toward a pile of ropes and pioneering poles that had been set out along the river bank. "Of course, there might be a way out."

The boys were instantly enthusiastic. "What is it?"

"Well, I told them to come for the gingerbread men at noon. It's now 10:45. If you could build a bridge and get everyone across the river by noon, I suppose there wouldn't be any way we could share them."

Bart, the senior patrol leader, jumped forward. "Yeah! Let's do it!"

"There is just one more thing," the Scoutmaster said. "To be fair, I'm going to let the Scoutmaster of Troop 870 inspect the bridge before I let anyone cross. If it's not put together correctly—if the knots and lashings aren't all tied the way they should be—I won't let anyone across. Fair enough?"

That was more than fair. And an instant later the boys were busy lashing poles, pounding stakes, and tying knots, knowing they were working under a fierce deadline. And they made it, too—barely. More important, they had been given a good reason—a good incentive—for practicing dull skills and for doing top-quality work.

When it is your turn to teach an important skill or concept, be sure your students have ample incentive to learn it. Give them opportunities to perform the things they've learned. Show them the importance of what you're teaching them. Once the group has seen that your lessons are going to benefit them, your lessons will come alive. You'll find the group eager to learn and hungry for more. And you'll find them ready for the many other important lessons you have for them.

Things to Do Now!

Vow that you'll never—ever—read your lessons straight from the lesson manual!

Begin planning your next lesson right now. Give yourself plenty of time (at least a week whenever you can). Give it plenty of thought. Find ways to relate it to the lives of those you're teaching.

Find some way to make your next lesson come alive. Through a demonstration, activity, or discussion, create interest in what you have to teach.
