Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

11

Getting the Cook Started

Applying Leadership

R on Cutler was standing along the Colorado River with his hands in his pockets. One of the best river guides in the Grand Canyon, he was discussing plans for the next day with his boat crews. "We'll need to get an early start on the river tomorrow," he said. "Who's fixing breakfast?"

Todd Nelson lifted a hand. "I am."

"Good. What do we have planned?"

"Hash browns and ham."

"Sounds good. I'm looking forward to that. Can you have them ready by 7:30?"

"No problem."

"Good. Will you need any help?"

"No. I'll be fine."

"Good."

With that, Ron went on to review the next day's schedule and then sent everyone to bed. With a few soft questions and a low-key delivery, he had effectively made certain his crews were ready for another day on the river.

Ron didn't do much yelling as a leader, and he rarely gave orders. He liked to be more subtle. If one of the boats needed a little air, he would wait until one of his crewmen was standing around with nothing to do and then say: "Do you know where the blower is? I think I ought to put a little more air in the boat."

Almost always the crewman would say, "Oh, hey, I'll do that for you."

Ron would look pleased and say, "Why, thanks, Dave. I appreciate that."

And if the cook was late getting dinner started, Ron would start hitching up the butane stoves. He wouldn't actually start cooking, but he'd casually begin making preparations. He rarely spent more than a few minutes doing that before the cook saw him and came running.

"Here, I'll take care of that," he'd say.

And Ron would look pleased again and say, "Thanks, Cam. I appreciate that."

Ron's style of leadership might sound silly, but it was effective. It worked for him because his crew knew what he expected of them. Ron, in turn, knew that his crewmen were capable of doing their jobs. He just kept them moving in the right direction.

Other leaders are sometimes less subtle. As a sportswriter, I used to cover high school football games. I'd stand right on the sidelines where I could walk up and down the field to get the best view of the action. I usually spent half of the game on one side of the field, and I'd switch at halftime. This gave me a better feel for the teams I was covering.

As I did this I was surprised at how different the coaches were. While one stormed the sidelines, shouting and yelling and turning blue in the face, the man across the field might have been pacing quietly back and forth. I saw coaches who would stomp and yell and throw things (even when their team was winning), and I saw coaches who could watch a player make a spectacular diving catch without showing a trace of excitement.

The interesting thing was that the style of leadership didn't have a whole lot to do with the team's ability to win. Mean coaches won just as often as nice coaches.

You, too, will have your own style of leadership. But you should remember that every person you lead will be different. You have to learn to guide the group according to the needs and abilities of each member. At times you'll want to be forceful. At other times, you'll want to blend a little deeper into the background. Knowing when to hammer in nails with a sledgehammer and when to tap at them gently with your softest mallet will help determine how successful you will be as a leader.

One thing you need to remember is that everyone has different levels of ability. You need to treat people accordingly. Some people, for instance, may be very willing to do what you ask but might not know how. These are people who brim with excitement but don't yet have the proper training.

I have a friend named Norma who is a ski instructor. She likes to tell about a boy named Robert who was in her ski class one year.

"Robert was a natural daredevil," she told me. "He was excited to learn, and he'd try anything."

The trouble was, Robert had never been on skis before in his life. He didn't have any idea how to turn or stop, but that didn't bother him!

Before their first class, Norma spotted Robert bombing down the run, holding his arms out for balance and shouting with excitement. When the run curved, Robert went blasting off into the trees where the soft snow stopped him. Then he picked his way back onto the trail and started over again.

"He was the first skier in the class to parallel," Norma said. "He was so eager to learn I just couldn't hold him back."

People like Robert need opportunities to exercise their enthusiasm. Work with them personally, if you can, until they have the necessary skills to continue on their own. Or place them with someone who knows what to do and who can teach them.

Whatever you do, don't become angry or frustrated with someone if he just doesn't know what to do. Instead, teach him! You'll also meet people who are able to do the job but who don't have the confidence to try. People who are shy may be like that. They might not need any instruction or training, but they will need plenty of support, encouragement, and friendship.

I once knew a young woman who was a member of the high school orchestra. A fine violinist, Vicki was also very timid. When she was asked to perform a solo at the school Christmas concert, she was almost too afraid even to try. She played so beautifully that she would have needed little extra practice to prepare, but she was frightened of playing before a large audience.

Vicki's teacher, though, was an inspired leader. He built her confidence by having her play in front of the violin section and then in front of the entire orchestra. These were people Vicki knew, and she wasn't quite as timid playing for them. Through lots of support and encouragement, both from her teacher and from her friends, Vicki played a beautiful solo at the concert.

People like Vicki need lots of encouragement. Be sure you give them the support and friendship they need to succeed.

You may also lead people who are not only willing to do the job but who are also very able. Let them get to it! Your best service to them will be to make sure they understand your expectations and then to provide plenty of opportunities for them to work.

When I was earning my pilot's license, I often practiced takeoffs and landings with my instructor. As we lifted off one time and were climbing out, the tone of the engine suddenly changed. Doing as I was taught, I pulled at the carburetor heat knob—and pulled it completely out of the instrument panel.

We were less than a thousand feet high, and I knew we had to land immediately. So, lowering the nose to maintain airspeed, I banked quickly to the left and made straight in for a short, crosswind runway where I landed safely.

My instructor sat calmly in his seat the entire time. He didn't do anything more than man the radio so I could be free to fly the plane. I know that he wanted to jump in and take over. It probably took every last ounce of willpower he had not to. But by letting me bring the plane in alone, he let me prove that I could handle myself in an emergency. That was a lesson I needed to have. He was ready to jump in and help at any time, but he knew that as long as I was flying correctly, he might as well sit back and let me.

An eighteen-year-old Eagle Scout named Jason used to spend his summers working at a Boy Scout camp. And he was good at it. Many of his friends also spent their summers there, and there was little about the camp that they didn't know very well.

One summer a new man came to direct the camp. Mr. Harston was a good camp director, but he was blunt and forceful. When he wanted something done, he'd explain in great detail everything he wanted and then he'd stand by and watch to make certain it was done exactly right.

But Jason and his friends were used to being trusted. They were good workers, and they resented being ordered around and watched over so carefully. A few of them began protesting, and morale in the camp dropped to an all-time low. Finally, Mr. Harston took Jason aside one day for a talk.

"Things aren't working out so well," Mr. Harston began.

Jason nodded. "I know."

"I'd like to hear what you think the reasons are."

Jason took a deep breath. "Well, I've been working here for a long time. So have most of the other guys. We all know our jobs and we think we do them pretty well. Before, we've always been allowed to do our work. But you watch over us like a hawk. You act like you don't trust us. You treat us like a bunch of little kids."

Mr. Harston smiled. "I've spent the last five years directing Camp Walker," he said. "It's a smaller camp than this one, and the boys who work there are a lot younger than you are. I've always had to keep close tabs on them to make certain everything was done right."

Jason and Mr. Harston were now looking at each other. For the first time, they were beginning to understand one another. Jason's friends were young men who were both willing and able to do their jobs. They needed the opportunity to be left alone to do them. Mr. Harston, on the other hand, was used to dealing with boys who were willing but not quite able, boys who needed extensive training, instruction, and supervision.

For the first time, Jason realized that his boss wasn't a mean old ogre. He was just a man who had never worked with a highly qualified staff before. And, for the first time, Mr. Harston realized that Jason's staff wasn't a bunch of troublemakers. They were just young men who knew what they were doing and who needed to be left alone to do it.

Morale in the camp suddenly changed. Jason convinced his friends to tolerate Mr. Harston's need to watch over them. Mr. Harston gave the young men more freedom to work. And when Mr. Harston saw that his staff could indeed do their work without supervision, he let them do it.

Before you start ordering people around, find out how much they can do. Give them a few small tasks, if you need to, to find out just what abilities they have. Then adjust your leadership methods accordingly. If they know what you want and they know how to do it, let 'em. If they can do it but they lack confidence, encourage 'em. If they want to do it but don't yet know how, train 'em. And don't be afraid to let others help out, too. Giving group members a chance to work and a chance to prove themselves will boost morale and confidence, and it will help to make your group the very best it can be.

Things to Do Now!

Take a good look at the people you lead. Decide what abilities they have. If they know what to do, learn to let them do it. If they need encouragement, learn to stand by them. If they need training, learn to teach them.

Remember that nice coaches win as often as mean ones. But nice ones are usually liked better. Learn to be a nice coach. If you need to yell, yell encouragement.
