Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

12

Getting Rid of Ticks

Effective Counseling

The Colorado River is good for more than just riding rapids. It's great for washing dishes.

Filling my second bucket full of the cardboard-colored water and setting it on the stove to heat, I surveyed the knot of people standing around the dinner table about ten feet away. This was our fourth day on the river, and after a long day of shooting rapids, everyone was hungry.

I turned back to my wash water and was moving the bucket to a better spot on the stove when a fifteen-year- old boy named Bryan walked over.

"Got a minute?" he asked.

"Sure. Need something?"

Bryan scuffed his right shoe in the sand and shrugged. "I'd just like to talk to you for a minute if you're not busy."

I wiped my hands dry and nodded. Bryan was a boy usually full of life and energy, I reflected. This was the first time I remembered seeing him without a smile. I figured something must be wrong.

"Not busy at all," I said. "Let's go for a walk."

Bryan was unusually quiet as we walked away from camp and over a small ridge. And I worried about what might be troubling him. So when I thought we were a comfortable distance from camp, I asked, "How's everything going?"

Bryan shrugged. "Okay, I guess."

"Are you enjoying the trip?"

"Yeah. Pretty much." He paused. "But I've got a problem."

"Want to talk about it?"

He hesitated for a moment and his face turned red. "Promise you won't tell?"

I nodded. "Promise."

Bryan hesitated another moment.

"I've got a wood tick."

A wave of relief flooded over me. Bryan's solemn manner had convinced me that I was in for a heavy-duty counseling session. And I hated the thought of his struggling with some inner turmoil: he was too nice a kid to be bothered with serious problems. But a wood tick! I tried not to grin.

Because I live in tick-thick country, I'd seen dozens of wood ticks. And I knew that when you're careful, they're usually not much trouble to get rid of.

But to Bryan, having a wood tick was the worst thing in the world. He was certain the little pest would have to be cut out by a doctor, and he was scared to death of needles, scalpels, and other medical equipment. When I told him I could oust the tiny beast just by dabbing on a little ointment, he breathed a sigh as if all the burdens in the world had just been lifted from his shoulders.

I was lucky. When Bryan first came to talk with me, we were both certain that the end of the world was close at hand. What a great feeling it was to find a quick solution to the problem and have it over with. Even though it was all over in just a few minutes, it drew Bryan and me closer together as friends.

As a leader, you too will have many opportunities to deal with the problems of others. Each individual has his or her own set of problems. And when these individuals join your group, they'll bring those problems with them. Be ready with an ear to listen and a shoulder to lean on if they need it.

A young neighbor of mine once came to ask some advice about school. Denise was a bubbly thirteen-year- old in the eighth grade. She was a member of the student council, and she could talk the ears off Mr. Spock. As she told me about life in junior high, she laughed and joked about her history teacher, telling me that she was doing poorly in his class, and I was surprised when I suddenly noticed tears. I knew that people sometimes shed tears of happiness. But even though Denise was laughing, I had a hunch her tears were not happy ones.

"You're worried about it, aren't you?"

Denise wiped at her tears and tried to keep up the smile, but couldn't.

"I'm getting As and Bs in all my other classes," she said. "But Mr. Wright is giving me a D!"

Denise went on to tell me that she tried hard in history, but no matter how much work she did she couldn't seem to make things work out. She'd been on the honor roll every term since seventh grade, and she'd never had a grade lower than a B-. To suddenly be faced with a D was more than she wanted to think about.

And her parents—she didn't dare tell them yet, she said. She knew they wouldn't be mad at her, but she didn't want to disappoint them. Her parents valued high grades, and they had always been proud of her efforts.

And the student council! If she received a D, her grade average might be too low to stay on the student council!

I knew how Denise was feeling. As insignificant as a D might seem, there are some situations where one can nearly be fatal. I nearly received a D in a college physics class. It was during my last semester of school, and it was a required class. Any grade lower than a C- wouldn't have counted, and I wouldn't have graduated. My entire college career boiled down to a mere couple of points in physics!

I didn't tell Denise any of this. I just listened as she continued to talk. I knew how I felt when I faced my D, and I remembered how much I longed for someone to share my problems with.

After several minutes, Denise mentioned that her history teacher was the only person who could really help her. She asked if I thought she should talk it over with him.

I nodded. And with that, Denise smiled and left. A few days later she was back with a plate of chocolate chip cookies.

"Thanks for helping me," she said. "I went and talked with Mr. Wright and guess what?"

"What?"

"I wasn't even getting a D in the first place! It was a mistake!"

"Well, good for you!"

"Anyway, I wanted to say thanks again for helping me."

I didn't say anything, but I really hadn't done much helping. All I'd done was listen. I had given her a chance to talk about her worries, and I had shown her that I cared.

That's all that most people need. After all, they understand their problems a lot better than anyone else. And being able to talk about them is sometimes all they need to feel better. Sometimes that's all they need to find a solution.

Sharie, a high school sophomore taking an algebra class, once asked an older friend named Marilyn to help her with a difficult problem. As Marilyn watched, Sharie wrote the problem and explained what she needed to do. As she described each step, her eyes suddenly lit up.

"Oh, my gosh!" she said. "I see what I've been doing wrong!"

And with that she went to finish her homework without any problem. Marilyn didn't do a single thing to help, but she got all the credit for the answer! Besides that, Marilyn boosted Sharie's confidence by letting her solve the problem herself.

It's hard not to give advice when someone has problems, but it's important that you don't. As much as it hurts to see someone struggling for answers, you won't be helping by making decisions for him or her. And unless you know all the facts—a rare possibility!—you could even make things worse by making the wrong decision.

Instead, just listen. Let the person vent concerns, worries, and frustrations. Acknowledge those feelings. Show the person that you care.

It's important, too, that you don't take sides when someone comes to you with a problem. If the person is upset or angry, he or she is probably not going to give you an accurate picture of the situation. And by jumping to conclusions you could do someone else great harm.

A better idea is to remain neutral.

If someone tells you that "Mrs. Galbraith called me a nerd! Right in front of the whole class!" don't say, "Boy, she really is a jerk, isn't she?"

Instead, say something like, "Boy, you must have been mad!"

By doing this you keep the conversation neutral. You recognize your friend's feelings without taking sides. You'll help to calm him rather than to fuel his anger.

Many times people just need the chance to spout a little steam. They need the opportunity to vent their concerns, worries, and angers. By listening to them you can help to relieve their frustrations. By not fueling their emotions you can help to calm their feelings and learn to cope with the situation.

There will be many times when people will act quite differently. They might want someone to talk with but might not dare to ask. Maybe they don't want to bother you, or maybe they're just frightened. But if you're tuned in to those you lead, you'll know when they have a problem. They might appear sad or moody. They may not act as happy as they usually are.

If you suspect that members of your group have something on their mind, let them know that you're willing to listen. But don't force them to talk. If they're not ready to share their feelings, it's best that you don't try to make them. Instead, show them increased friendship and understanding. Show them you care. And when they're ready to talk, they'll come to you.

There was a time while I was in college when everything seemed to be going wrong for me. I was working hard in my classes and at my job, but even so, rewards were few and far between. I became sad and moody.

One day a good friend of mine named Paul came to visit me in my office. He locked the door behind him, took my phone off the hook, and looked me square in the eyes.

"What's wrong?" he asked.

"What do you mean?"

"I mean you. There's something wrong. I haven't seen you laugh or smile in a week. I know you. I can tell when there's something wrong."

Paul's approach was blunt—maybe too blunt for most people—but it was just what I needed at the time. Sitting back in his chair, he showed that he was ready to listen. And he sat there for nearly an hour as I poured out my soul to him.

There's a great blessing that comes from counseling— and from being counseled. Baring your soul to someone draws the two of you closer together. Think about a time that you've talked your problems out with someone who really listened. Afterward, didn't you feel closer to that person than when you started? I certainly did!

Counseling is a healthy process that's good for both people. When you learn to counsel effectively—when you show through your undivided interest that you really do care—the two of you will grow closer. You'll build a bond of friendship, gratitude, and mutual respect that will last a lifetime.

Things to Do Now!

Learn to be a listener. Practice listening. When people know that you're a good listener, they'll be more confident coming to you with problems.

Watch your group members for mood swings that might indicate a need for counseling. Even if there isn't a problem, they'll see that you really are concerned about them.

Remember to remain neutral. Listen when people are angry, but don't fuel the fire!
