Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

13

Camping in the Rain

The Need for Evaluating

Tom Baugh shrugged off his heavy backpack and looked for a place to set it. Heavy rain lashed at the forest all around him, and sharp forks of lightning bit through the night sky.

Tom paused as a crack of thunder boomed over the mountain, and then he took his two-man tent and began setting it up. He didn't have anyone camping with him that night, but he wasn't on a normal camping trip, either. Tom was, in fact, evaluating backpacking gear. He had gone out into the mountain thunderstorm because he had a certain tent that he needed to try out.

"A lot of backpackers have to set up camp after dark and in storms," Tom told me. "And I needed to see how this tent would cooperate."

Tom said he was worried that by pitching the tent in the middle of a storm, he would get everything wet. But he was surprised. Even though it was dark and he had no one to help him, the tent went up so fast the storm didn't have a chance.

"It was an easy tent to pitch," Tom said. "I'd pitched it before in daylight so I had a good idea of what I was doing. The tent is designed so simply that there wasn't any guesswork. I just laid it out, slipped the poles into the sleeves, and bingo! It was up."

After tightening down the rain fly, Tom took his backpack and stuffed it inside. He spent a few minutes getting ready for bed, then took a flashlight and checked every seam he could find for leaks. There weren't any.

Over the next couple of months Tom spent a lot of time with that tent, and with many others. He filled notebooks with his impressions of them. He knew which ones were good and which ones weren't. Most important, he knew why they were good or not.

That was all part of a research project. By reading Tom's evaluations, manufacturers learned how well their gear worked. They learned which features worked well and which needed improvement.

We improve our leadership in much the same way. By evaluating our progress, we learn what things we do well and what things we need to do better.

After you finish a job, analyze what happened. If things went well, find out why. Then the next time you have an assignment, you'll have a good idea of what things to try again.

But if things didn't go so well, decide why not. And the next time you have a job, you'll know what sort of things to avoid. Only when you evaluate your performance can you expect to improve.

I used to work with a young woman who was on the high school debate team. After every tournament Julie sat down with her teammates and carefully evaluated the meet. They talked about what things worked well and what didn't. They talked about tactics that were effective and plans that bombed. They learned by experience how to present certain ideas, and they learned tricks their opponents were likely to spring on them. By the time they reached the state tournament, they were as polished as a team could get.

Evaluation is one of the most important keys to leadership because it is the step in which we learn. We try something, and if it works, we find ways to make it better. If it doesn't work, we haven't failed—we have simply learned what doesn't work.

A friend who spent many years as a sportswriter said he used to bristle at the idea of someone editing his stories. But he soon learned that good writers appreciate good editors.

"I found out that no matter how well I wrote a story," he said, "a good editor could always make it better. And I liked that."

Instead of being offended when an editor changed his copy, Steve found out why the editor changed it. By carefully reading his stories after they had been edited, and by learning why certain changes had been made, he became a better writer. As time went on, his editors made fewer and fewer corrections. And soon he was allowed to send his work out without having it edited at all.

Be aggressive in evaluating yourself. Learn what things you do well, and repeat them. Learn what things you need help with, and improve them.

Being evaluated is often hard. Most of us live for praise and encouragement, and listening to someone outline our faults isn't much fun. But we all have to take our lumps sometime, so don't be afraid of it! Instead, when something goes wrong, make the most of it. Analyze why it went wrong, and ask yourself, "What can I learn from this? What can I do better next time?"

I once knew a diver who was, well, awful. Greg belonged to a club that didn't have a good coaching staff, and no one ever took the time to tell him just how bad he was. He did manage to win a few ribbons at local meets, and that led him to think of himself as average—which was stretching things quite a bit. When he won, it was because no one else showed up who was any good.

One time, though, while Greg was warming up for a meet, a diver from another club came up and began talking with him.

"You know," he said, "if you'd kiss the board instead of jumping clear into the middle of the pool, you'd have more time to execute your dives."

Greg was surprised. "What do you mean?"

"Well, to do a dive really well, you've got to get as much height off the board as you can. But when you dive, you jump out instead of up."

"Really?"

The diver nodded. "Yeah. And you know what else would help?"

Greg shook his head. "No. What?"

"When you make your hurdle, try to keep your body straight and rigid. That way you won't absorb as much spring from the board, and it'll give you a better jump."

Because it was the first time anyone had really evaluated his dives, Greg listened closely. Not only that, but he took the suggestions to heart. He worked to improve his hurdle, and he concentrated on jumping up rather than out. He also began asking other divers to watch him, and by acting on their observations he became a better diver.

As you progress in your leadership, you'll find many opportunities to evaluate those you lead, too. Some leaders are good at this, and some aren't. Some evaluate too harshly, looking only for things that go wrong. Others are too kind, noticing only what goes well. But neither leader is doing much good. If you focus on others' mistakes, they may feel picked on. If you mention only their good points, they may never improve.

A good evaluation must cover both good points and bad. Make sure you praise your group for things they've done well. And make sure they know what things they can do better.

If you feel uncomfortable about this kind of evaluation (as many of us do!), then let the group evaluate itself. You'll find that in many cases the group members already know what went right. And they usually know where they goofed up, too. So instead of telling them what they already know, simply direct the conversation with a few questions.

"Well, what went best for you today?"

"Anything go wrong?"

"What could you have done differently?"

"What things should you try again next time?"

To get everyone really thinking, don't forget to throw in the question "Why?" Everyone may realize that a certain activity was the hit of the party, but only when they stop to figure out why it was popular will they be able to find other, similar activities. And only by deciding why something went sour will they be able to avoid other, similar mistakes in the future.

When Penn State played Miami for the national football championship at the end of the 1986 season, Penn State was picked to lose the game by a touchdown. After all, Miami hadn't lost a game all season, and the Hurricanes featured some of the top players in the country.

But the Penn State coaches knew that every team had its weaknesses. In the final weeks before the game, they spent long hours watching films of the Hurricanes, evaluating how they played and how they reacted to certain situations. They noticed, for instance, that when Miami's receivers were jammed at the line, they lost their confidence. And they noticed that in dire situations, Miami's quarterback stared at the receiver he was going to throw to.

So late in the game, when the Hurricanes had the ball fourth-and-goal on the 13, Penn State watched the quarterback's eyes. The score was 14-10 for Penn State. If Miami made this play, the Hurricanes would win. The national championship boiled down to one play.

By the way Miami lined up, Penn State knew the Hurricanes were going to pass. And they knew the quarterback would give away his target. At the snap Penn State dropped eight men to the goal line, and they watched the quarterback. He had three receivers running for the end zone, but he looked at only one of them. The Lions converged on that player and intercepted the ball before it reached him. They won the championship.

Penn State had a team full of great players. But it was by evaluating their opponents that they knew how to beat them. And the upset was ranked as one of the greatest games of the season.

As a leader, you'll have many successes. And you will probably make a few mistakes, too; all of us do. But as you begin to evaluate your performance and learn from your experiences, you'll find more successes and fewer mistakes.

As you evaluate your progress, remember to find the reasons for your successes as well as the reasons for your failures. When you've done something right, you'll want to do it again!

Things to Do Now!

Decide not to worry about mistakes you make. Instead, treat them as learning opportunities. Learn what you can from each of them, and resolve to do better next time!

Evaluate your progress as a leader. List both your strong points and weak points.

After your next group project, carefully evaluate what happened. Make a list of which things went right and which went wrong. Determine why certain ideas worked or failed, and use this information when planning your next project.

Ask your group to evaluate itself. Remember to ask for strengths and weaknesses. And don't forget the question "Why?"
