Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

14

Saying Thank You

Giving Positive Feedback

Mrs. Shaha walked up to the boy sitting in the third row and tapped him on the shoulder. "Rob, would you mind staying for a few minutes after class?"

Rob shook his head. "No. Not at all."

Rob's friends snickered as Mrs. Shaha walked back to her desk. And Rob worried about what his English teacher wanted. He was sure he was up on his assignments. He knew his latest compositions had been well written. And he had been scoring well on tests and quizzes. He couldn't imagine what was wrong.

The class period passed slowly, but finally the bell rang and Rob's friends filed from the room. Rob waited until everyone had left and then approached his teacher.

"You wanted to talk to me?"

Mrs. Shaha nodded. "Yes, Rob. I wanted to tell you that I called your father this morning."

Rob felt his heart sink. That was all he needed.

"I wanted to tell him about your work," Mrs. Shaha continued. "Because I've never had a student who writes as well as you do."

Rob looked up sharply. "What?"

"You're a tremendous young man, Rob," the teacher said. "And you have a gift for writing. I told your father it would be a shame to see such talent wasted. I said he should encourage you to find every opportunity to polish your skills."

Rob left the room with an ear-to-ear smile. His teacher had gone out of her way to do what she did, and it made Rob feel terrific. He loved writing. And he had secret hopes of someday writing for magazines. To have his teacher praise him as she had gave him a surge of confidence.

There is no motivation quite so powerful as positive reinforcement. You don't think so? Take a minute and go looking through one of your drawers. Find any merit badges? Ribbons? Certificates? Newspaper clippings with your name on them?

Think of the work it took to earn those items. I still have the certificate I won in a high school math contest. I spent hours and hours preparing for that contest. And all I got for it was a simple certificate. But the satisfaction of winning that certificate was worth millions.

People enjoy recognition, even when they receive nothing more than a blue ribbon or a piece of paper with their name on it. People enjoy being noticed. Think how good it makes you feel when someone notices or mentions something you've done. You can make someone else feel that same way. It isn't what you say or reward them with that matters. It's just the fact that you noticed.

I used to work with a young woman who always wore a certain ring. It wasn't an expensive ring—it wasn't even her best ring—but it was the one she wore. It was her favorite. Why? It was given to her by our employer as a reward for hard work.

When you find times to praise the members of your group, remember it's not how much you give them. It's just the fact that you recognize them. A small token of thanks is just as effective as something very expensive.

The power of positive feedback can also prevent many discipline problems. When a person knows there's a chance for praise, he's likely to do his very best work. Even people who are known for being lazy or causing trouble are likely to work if they have a chance to be praised.

Remember that you're not just trying to motivate your top workers. Many of them will be doing their very best anyway. What you want is to nudge those along who might lack motivation or desire.

There are a few guidelines.

First, give your praise immediately. Don't wait until the end of the week to recognize a good deed. Do it now!

A junior high school science teacher made it a habit to walk around the room as his students worked. He'd look at what everyone was doing and make comments as he went.

"Nice work, there, Mary . . . You've got that just right, Steve . . . Very neat material, Lisa."

He didn't just disappear behind his desk as many teachers do, but he got right out in the room and offered feedback. He let his students know right then that they were doing good things.

Second, remember to praise small triumphs as well as big ones. After all, small ones lead to big ones. And they are just as important.

My friend Linda had been practicing a dance routine for several weeks. Part of her dance included a triple turn that she had a lot of trouble with. She couldn't do it without falling.

Her teacher kept encouraging her, and Linda kept working on it. One day she was practicing her routine when—voil!—she did the triple turn!

As soon as she finished the dance, her teacher gave her a hug and handed her a pair of movie tickets. "Congratulations!" she said.

The triple turn was only a very small part of a complex dance number. But Linda's teacher knew how important it was to Linda. By recognizing her—even with something as simple as a hug and movie tickets—she made it clear that she was as thrilled with Linda's success as Linda was.

Third, be unpredictable. Surprise can make many rewards far more effective. When a school class learns that by giving the teacher an apple they are going to be given a break, their effort isn't sincere. They'll be bringing apples just to be bringing apples.

And your praise shouldn't be considered payment for a job well done. Instead, it should be seen as a way of saying: "Hey! You're okay! And I appreciate what you're doing!"

Finally, be specific. Don't just say, "This is for a good job, Steve." Instead, say: "Your poster was the most creative one I've ever seen." Or, "This is for baking the best chocolate chip cookies I've ever eaten."

When the rewards are many, and people believe the possibility of earning them is high, the average person will stretch to achieve them. It doesn't matter if the rewards are big or small. When people get praised for doing something right, they'll be out beating the bushes to do it again.

I remember in high school having a math teacher who asked us to begin work on a page with about forty problems.

"I'll give you twenty minutes to work on them," he said. Many of us—most of us, actually—moaned. But the teacher just smiled and said, "And I'll give you double points for every correct problem you do past number fifteen."

The moaning stopped immediately as we all bent into our work. We received bonus points only for the last half of the assignment—and we had to finish the first half first— so we were all racing to get there. Because our teacher graded mostly on tests and quizzes, the bonus points we were earning didn't really amount to much, but that didn't stop us from working. We had a chance for a reward, and we were going for it. Each of us had an equal chance to succeed, and each of us could decide exactly how far to go.

On a week-long backpacking trek, a guide named Rick developed a morale-boosting method of offering feedback. He knew that because everyone was sharing tents, there would be some questions about who had to pack the tent every day. After all, they were hiking through rugged country, and even a five-pound tent makes a lot of difference when you're climbing up the side of a rocky mountain.

The first morning out, Rick had everyone line up. Then he said, "Okay. I'd like everyone who is packing a tent this morning to step forward."

Seven boys looked up and stepped forward.

"For being good sports and volunteering to pack tents on our first day on the trail, I'd like to present each of you with the coveted Heavy Pack award." With that he handed each of the boys a bagful of raisins to eat on the trail.

The raisins weren't reward enough to make anyone want to lug a heavy tent around. But they proved to everyone that Rick noticed and appreciated the effort.

The next evening, as everyone was sitting around the campfire telling stories, Rick asked, "Who made dinner tonight?" When two boys raised their hands, Rick said: "That was the best trail dinner I've eaten in a long time. For cooking above and beyond the call of hunger, I'd like to give each of you a bag of raisins."

A few days later, during a dry camp, four boys hiked a mile or so to a fresh water source to fill a couple of water bottles for breakfast the next morning. When they returned, Rick was ready with more raisins.

Rick was effective for several reasons. He gave his awards right away. He rewarded small deeds as well as big ones. He was unpredictable: he didn't give awards for the same things every day. Instead he tried to make the awards spontaneous and meaningful. He let everyone know that he was looking for good behavior and that he was noticing their efforts.

Rick was much of the reason that everyone had a good time on the trail.

At girls' camp a counselor did much the same thing. Every day—while the campers were busy with activities— Marci inspected the cabins. If a girl's bed was made and everything left neatly, Marci left a white feather on the pillow with a thank-you note. If she saw someone doing a favor for someone else, she secretly slipped a note and a prize into the girl's pocket.

She never told anyone what she was doing, and she never signed her notes, so no one ever knew who was doing this. But when a girl went out of her way to help someone else on the trail, she'd return to find a white feather on her pillow with a note with a simple message like, "Thanks so much for helping Bonnie today."

A little word of thanks or recognition is often all it takes to boost someone's spirits. It gives people a chance to grow a little, to feel success, and to feel good about themselves. And when you treat people like A people, they'll give you A work—or at least their very best effort—in return.

Things to Do Now!

Remember that every person in your group has the ability to do something well. Find that something and praise him for it.

Say something positive to each person you lead. Look for their triumphs and successes. Don't let a day go by without complimenting each one on something.

Be sincere. Learn to appreciate each person's successes.

Find a simple reward system to show your appreciation for good effort. It doesn't have to be elaborate. Something as simple as notes or white feathers is as effective as expensive prizes.

Give your best appreciation to those you lead. See if their best doesn't come back to you!
