Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

15

A Lesson in Hugs

The Importance of Love

Dax Anderson came running up the driveway and into the garage.

"Are you leaving? Today?"

I tossed a sleeping bag into the back of my truck and nodded. "Yeah. I've got to pick up my partner in an hour."

Dax, ten years old at the time and wearing his favorite tennis outfit, looked disappointed.

"How long will you be gone?"

"Ten days." I thought for a moment. "I'll be back a week from Wednesday."

"So long?" Dax frowned.

I nodded. And I frowned, too. Dax lived a couple of houses down the street from me. We often played tennis together after school, and we spent a lot of time sitting around the backyard telling stories. During the ten days I was gone, I would miss him.

Dax helped me finish loading my truck. "Well," I said. "I think that'll do it. Thanks for your help."

"Sure."

Just then, Dax's mother called. He turned. "Well, I've got to go. I'll see you next week."

"Okay. 'Bye, Dax."

"Bye."

He turned and began running for home. He had gone only a little way before he stopped and came running back. He jumped up and threw his arms around me.

"Be careful," he said. "I'll be praying for you."

The next ten days were hard ones for me. I was leading a section of the national camping school, and I faced problem after problem. Heavy rains forced me to change schedules nearly every day. One of my students developed serious medical problems on the trail. Supplies I depended on never arrived.

But throughout everything, one thought kept cropping up. I kept hearing Dax say, "I'll be praying for you."

It's amazing what the power of love can do for a person. And knowing that back home a ten-year-old boy was praying for me kept me going, even when everything else seemed to be going wrong. Dax's simple love fueled me for ten grueling days.

Dax wasn't a leader of mine, but he influenced me in many ways. And his love for me motivated me, inspired me, and made me want to be at my best at all times. I would have done anything for him.

Think how you feel when someone does something special for you. Think of the warmth you feel when you know that somebody really loves you.

You can make someone else feel that same way.

To be an effective leader, you must love those you lead. You must show them that you love them. You'll find that nothing will motivate them quite so well.

I have a couple of friends named John and Matt. John has two of the most obnoxious little brothers anyone could ever have, and Matt hated visiting John's home—just because he knew John's brothers would be there.

One day, though, while John was away at college, Matt told me that he was taking John's brothers fishing. I couldn't believe it.

"But you hate them!"

"Not really," he said. "I used to, but I found out that they're really not all that bad."

I still couldn't believe it.

"What changed your mind?"

Matt pushed his hands in his pockets and shook his head. "I found out they liked me."

It's hard to hate someone who likes you. It's hard not to like someone who loves you. The simple fact that John's little brothers liked him completely changed Matt's attitude.

People's attitudes change when they know you like them. People like being loved! And—with enough time— even the most hardened person will return those feelings.

Aaron Cross told me a story about his college geology teacher that proves a similar point.

During his first year at the university, Aaron signed up for a difficult geology course. Like many other college classes, it was taught in an auditorium. And there were more than one hundred students in the class.

The first thing the professor did was make a seating chart. He let everyone choose a seat, and then he wrote everyone's name down. Within a couple of weeks he was calling everyone by name—without the use of his chart. When he returned tests and papers, he passed them out individually—all one hundred of them—without the use of his chart. Memorizing everyone's names must have been an awful chore. But by doing so the professor showed his students that he really cared.

"It was funny," Aaron told me. "Just the fact that he was walking up to me, calling me by name and handing me my papers made me want to do better on them. I knew I wasn't just a face in the crowd to him. I would have been embarrassed if I had a low score."

What a lesson in motivation! If Aaron's teacher could motivate students just by knowing their names, think what you could do with a lot of loving and caring!

At a high school tennis camp, two young women became close friends. Toward the end of camp, while Kristine was taking some pointers in serving, Tracy became sick. Leaving the courts she went back to her room and curled up in bed with a very upset stomach. She hadn't been there long before Kristine suddenly burst into the room

"I heard you were sick," she said. "So I came as fast as I could."

There wasn't much that Kristine could do to help. But the fact that she cared enough to come was all that Tracy needed.

"I would do anything for Kristine," Tracy told me, "because I know that she really cares about me. I love her as much as anyone I know."

I once took my friend Duke down to the airport to look at the planes. We spent more than an hour crawling through cockpits, looking under wings, and watching takeoffs.

As we walked out onto the tarmac, Duke, who is nine, took my hand. He held onto it as we visited hangars and looked around.

After a while he looked up and asked, "Do you mind if I hold your hand?"

No, indeed! By holding my hand he was sending me a message. He was saying, "I like you!"

What a powerful message! What a great feeling it is to know that you're loved! And like Tracy, I wanted to return the love I received.

Feeling the love of another person creates such strong feelings of friendship and goodwill that it's hard not to return them. It's hard not to share them. It's hard not to burst with love for everyone around us.

Of course, we can't go around holding people's hands and giving them hugs as much as we'd like—or even as much as we should. But there are different ways of doing the same thing. You can do it with notes, if you want to. It takes only a minute and it has the same marvelous effect.

A simple message such as "Great game!" or "Good Luck!" is just the ticket. No matter what you write, the message is still the same: "I like you!"

It's a message that no one ever tires of hearing.

And if you really want to make it fun, be clever. Instead of just walking up and handing someone a note, hide it in a shoe or hang it in a locker. It doesn't have to be long. Just a line or two will do it.

When I was serving my mission, I received a small Christmas package from my parents. Inside were dozens of tiny matchboxes, each wrapped like tiny Christmas gifts. They made no noise when I shook them and I wondered what could be in them. It bugged me for days. And on Christmas morning they were the first things I turned to.

Inside each box was a note from one of my friends at home. There was one from my dentist, one from a school teacher, one from the family vet. Some were from girls I had dated. Others were from people I had worked with. All of them were from people I missed.

None of the notes was more than a couple of lines long. But they were my most welcomed Christmas gifts. Just knowing that so many people were pulling for me, thinking of me, and praying for my success was enough to charge my batteries for many weeks.

When I was in college, I worked as a sportswriter. I worked for the university's Sports Information Office, and I wrote for a couple of local newspapers at the same time.

Going to school and working so many hours was hard. And I remember one time becoming especially discouraged. For several days in a row I had left for school before 8:00 a.m. and hadn't returned home until after 8:00 p.m. That didn't leave much time for doing anything else.

Besides that, nothing seemed to be going very right for me. My classes were hard, and I didn't seem to be doing all that well in them. I was given tight deadlines for almost everything I wrote at work, so I didn't have time to make my stories as good as I usually did.

After several days of this, I returned home from a ball game one night feeling discouraged. Nothing seemed to be fun anymore. Nothing I did seemed to be worth the effort. No one seemed to appreciate anything that I did. That was all a heavy burden for me. And I was feeling pretty low.

But a couple of weeks before I had taken a young friend of mine named Bryan on an overnight campout. He had been going through some rough times himself, and he had asked to spend a little time alone with me. We had hiked to a remote spot that we both liked and spent the evening talking and watching stars.

I hadn't seen him since.

But as I walked up to my home, tired, discouraged, and wishing that I could just go to bed and put a merciful end to the day, I found a note taped to the door. The message was simple and direct.

Dear Shane,

Thanks for being my friend. You're just like a big brother to me.

Love,

Bryan

Those two simple sentences did more for me than anything else could have. It was just the medicine I needed. And late as it was, I spent several hours that night polishing up stories and feeling good about myself.

I later realized that I could work that same magic on other people. And so can you. If you like someone, tell him. If you appreciate something that someone has done, tell her. Your love will go far in brightening other people's lives. It will set you apart as a true leader.

Take a minute and write the note. Say the word. Make the call. You can brighten someone's day. You can change someone's life.

And it only takes a second.

Things to Do Now!

Write a note to someone you love. Let that person know that you're a friend.

Think of something positive about every person in the group you lead. The next time you're alone with each of them, tell them!

Don't be afraid to show your feelings. If someone's done a good job, tell him. If you like or appreciate someone, tell her. Now!
