Shane R. Barker, Youth Leading Youth ( 1987)

16

Being a Battery Charger

Generating Enthusiasm

Stacey McDaniels took the inbounds pass and in a burst of energy bolted down the court. Her teammates wheeled through the lane as she crossed the midcourt line and called out a play for the low post.

"No mistakes now! Screen! Screen! C'mon, Leslie, post up! Move! Move!"

Running up and down the court while directing an explosive offense at the same time, Stacey was tiring to watch. But she wasn't about to slow down. With twin ponytails flailing the air behind her, she whipped a pass down the baseline, cut into the lane to set up the pick, shuffled left, raced right, then darted back to the left again, shouting to her teammates the whole time.

"Lisa! Watch the key! Move the ball, now, move the ball . . . "

A point guard on an all-girl team, Stacey had already scored a game high of seventeen points, captured four rebounds, and forced three turnovers. Even when she was on the sidelines, she was a running flurry of action, pacing up and down the gym, clapping her hands, and keeping up that nonstop stream of talk.

"Good play, Pilots! Good play! Take the post, now, Nicole, take the post! Screen! Screen!"

And now, with her team leading by seven points, Stacey was still guiding the Pilots' offense. Taking a pass from underneath she cut back to the outside, faked with her head and shoulders, then sent the ball winging into the basket.

Whether her team was winning or not, Stacey always played like a can of pop: full of fizz and ready to burst with energy. She sparked such intensity among her teammates that the entire team played with furious enthusiasm.

You probably know people like Stacey. People who are always smiling. People who have the energy and enthusiasm to fire up their friends. People who don't complain when the weather is bad or when things go against them but who do whatever it takes to make the situation better. People who are fun to be around.

I like to call these people Number Ones. They bring out the best in their friends and teammates. They help others to be Number Ones. Like human whirlwinds, they sweep into their work and fire their friends up with energy and enthusiasm. As a leader, you'd be wise to keep a couple of Number Ones around you. Better yet, be one yourself, and those you lead may follow your example.

You probably know a few Number Twos as well. They're the people you hear moaning and groaning whenever things aren't going exactly right. They skip assignments, and they don't smile much.

Number Threes, unfortunately, are just as plentiful as Number Twos. But more than just complaining when there's a job to do, they are often openly antagonistic. Many times they'll refuse to work at all, and they'll try to get others to quit, too. Sadly enough, many Number Three types become leaders, and they can often take a good experience and make it miserable.

The difference between these three types of people is simply one of attitude. Decide now that you will be a Number One.

I used to spend my summers working as a guide on the Colorado River. And let me tell you that there's nothing that can fire up enthusiasm like crashing a boat into a boiling stretch of rapids.

But one week was very different. For five straight days rainstorms lashed the river. Passengers who came loaded with suntan lotion spent most of their time huddled beneath ponchos or sleeping in plastic tube tents. The trip would have been pretty miserable except for a boy named Tim.

Tim was thirteen years old. He had smooth, gunstock hair and a mouthful of braces that he flashed around like his most prized possessions. He was vigorous and exciting—a teenage speed blur, his mother said—and on our first day out he knew the names of everyone on board before we were even ten minutes down the river.

Because the Colorado River inside the Grand Canyon is exceptionally cold, our passengers relied on the hot Arizona sun to keep warm. But on this trip, black-bellied clouds blocked out the sun most of the time. So when we smashed our boat through the rapids and sent freezing water crashing all around, things got miserable in a hurry.

None of this bothered Tim. The first thing every morning he took up position at the front of the boat where things got the wettest. Flashing his braces he'd wait eagerly for us to get underway. And when we went slicing through the rapids, he'd shout and wave his arms like a bronc- busting cowboy at a rodeo.

One time, as the boat boomed down from a high wave, another wall of ice-cold water shot up to meet us. The bow bit savagely into the wave, and for a moment Tim seemed to disappear. Almost instantly the boat was being slammed again into the waves as gallons of liquid ice crashed down upon us.

Through all of it, I kept seeing Tim's flashing smile as he shook the water from his gunstock hair and shouted, "More! More! Give us more!"

By the time we passed the rapids and were into smooth water again, I was laughing so hard at Tim that I could barely steer. It didn't matter that the sun wasn't shining. It didn't matter that the water was cold: I could hardly feel it. I was having fun! And so was everyone else. And the reason was Tim. His youthful enthusiasm was so contagious that everyone caught it. He kept the entire group perked up the entire time we were on the river.

I remember returning from a cross-country ski trip one January morning and trying to start my new Bronco. Because the temperature on the mountain was below freezing—and because it had been several days since it had last been fired up—the engine wouldn't start. It couldn't: the battery was dead. I had to borrow a pair of jumper cables and a friend's car battery to get my own started again.

People sometimes need their own batteries charged just like that. Work gets hard, and maybe they haven't had a pat on the back in quite a while. At these times, a person with an encouraging smile or a contagious sense of humor can lift them out of the doldrums.

You can be that person.

When you are a Number One type person—when you become a battery charger—your friends and those you lead will notice. They'll come to you for the simple reason that people like being with Number One types. People like battery chargers.

More to the point, when you are a Number One person you'll find that leadership becomes easy. When you make a suggestion, your friends will respond because your enthusiasm will make them enthusiastic. They will draw upon your energy. You'll be surprised at how many problems will just seem to disappear.

Enthusiasm is contagious.

A Boy Scout troop I work with once volunteered to haul several hundred pioneering poles up to a local Scout camp as a service project. Loading the poles into the back of the truck was a dirty, tiring job, and everyone was soon sapped of energy. By the time we reached the camp and were ready to unload, several boys were beginning to moan and grumble. It looked as if we were in for several hours of backbreaking work when a boy named Jeff climbed to the top of the load like the King of the Hill.

"You guys are all wimps!" he declared. "I bet I can throw poles out faster than any of you!"

His challenge was immediately accepted. Everyone else climbed to the ground, and Brad set the stopwatch on his digital wristwatch.

As Brad readied himself as timer, Jeff went through the motions of warming up, stretching his arms and flexing his fingers.

"I'll give you sixty seconds," Brad said in his most authoritative voice. "On your mark. Get set. GO!"

Jeff began heaving poles out of the truck as fast as he could. A minute later Brad yelled, "STOP!"

Jeff tossed one more log over the side, which the boys decided was an illegal pole. They picked it up and put it back in the truck.

"You got only seventeen poles," Darren said. "I can do better than that."

Darren managed only fourteen poles, and he wanted to try again, but the boys refused to allow him another turn until everyone had had a chance.

By the time everyone had taken a turn, Jeff's record of seventeen poles still stood, and by the time the truck had been emptied the boys were as full as excitement and energy as little kids at Christmas. With just a bit of creativity and a whole lot of enthusiasm, Jeff had taken a tedious chore and turned it into a fun-filled adventure. He had taken hard work and made a game of it.

When I was in eighth grade, I signed up for first-year algebra. Until then math had never been one of my strong subjects. It had never been one of my favorite subjects. And I wasn't looking forward to taking the class.

But there was a bright side. Many of my friends had also signed up for algebra, and several of us were assigned to the same class at the same time. One of these was a boy named Rhett.

Now, Rhett was one of those students who never had trouble in school. Our math teacher, Mr. Baugh, liked to call him an "Albert Einstein think-alike."

Part of Rhett's success was his enthusiasm. Instead of moaning when Mr. Baugh gave us an assignment, Rhett jumped right into it. Sometimes he'd lean over and say, "I'll bet I can finish faster than you can."

I knew he could finish faster than I could, but I'd race him anyway. It became a game, and I found myself listening more intently to Mr. Baugh's lectures so I'd be able to do the assigned problems as easily as possible. Racing against Rhett, I needed every bit of help I could get!

Algebra soon became my favorite class, and like Rhett, I was soon spreading enthusiasm for the subject. I'm not saying it was always easy, but through the excitement of a Number One type person, our entire class began seeing the fun in math, rather than the work.

Even battery chargers need to be charged themselves now and then. And it helps to find a special friend who has the ability to fire you up when you need it. My own battery charger is a ten-year-old boy named Jimmy. Spending a few minutes with Jimmy is like spending a few minutes with a firecracker. Whenever I need a charge—and even when I don't!—just by talking with Jimmy for a while I feel recharged and ready to go climb a mountain or something.

As you develop your own style of leadership, you'll find many chances to build enthusiasm yourself. The day may be cold and the job may be hard. And most likely there'll be lots of grumbling about it. But at times like these, dare to be enthusiastic. Charge the batteries of those around you, and make dull tasks fun. As you do, many will follow your example, and everything you do will take on its own flavor of success and adventure.

Things to Do Now!

Smile whenever you're with your friends. Let them know that you're a happy person.

Speak only positively about your friends, teachers, and leaders. If you have problems with someone, work them out privately.

Be excited about the work you do! No matter what the task, you're bound to find fun in it somewhere.

Share your excitement with others! Don't be afraid to show your enthusiasm. By sparking up vigor and energy in your friends you can change a ho-hum group into a dynamic force.

Find a special battery charger of your own. Make that person's friendship a special one, and draw on his or her zest for life to keep yourself highly charged.
