The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the July 2007 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “Family Faith” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  Divide the Primary into two groups. Have one group look up Exodus 20:12 and the other look up Mosiah 13:20. Invite them to read their verses at the same time. Explain that the scripture in Exodus is part of the Ten Commandments, which Moses received on Mount Sinai. In Mosiah, Abinadi is quoting Moses. Help the children memorize this scripture by going down the rows and having each child say one word. Allow them to use their scriptures the first few times.

    Conduct a panel discussion (see “Panel Discussions,” Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 175–76). Invite three to five members of the ward or branch of varying ages, including children, to come to Primary to answer questions about honoring parents. Let your panel members know what questions you will be asking. For example, “What is one thing that your child has done to honor you?” or, “How old do you need to be before you can stop listening to your parents?” Stress the importance of always honoring your parents—both your earthly parents and your heavenly parents.

    Show a picture of your parents, and share a story about how honoring your parents has blessed you. Bear testimony of Heavenly Father’s love for His children.

2.  Help the children prepare a family home evening to share with their families (with their parents’ permission). Set up three stations (see “Stations,” Teaching, No Greater Call, 179). Divide the children into three groups, and have them rotate through the stations. At station 1 review “Love Is Spoken Here” (Children’s Songbook, 190–91)—or another song about the family—so the children will be able to teach their families the truths in the song. At station 2 tell a story of the first person in a family to join the Church. Challenge the children to find their own stories of an ancestor or family member to share in family home evening. At station 3 teach the children to prepare a simple treat. Select a treat that would be simple and inexpensive for a child to make.

    Sing “The Family” (Children’s Songbook, 194; Liahona, Apr. 2004, F11). Bear testimony of how family prayer, family scripture study, and family home evening bring families together.

3.  Song presentation: “Love Is Spoken Here” (Children’s Songbook, 190–91). Display signs such as “English Is Spoken Here,” “Russian Is Spoken Here,” “French Is Spoken Here” around the room. Ask the children to describe where that language is spoken. Display another sign that reads, “Love Is Spoken Here.” Ask what kind of place this would be. Explain that it is important to speak loving words at home, no matter what language they are spoken in.

    Ask the children to help you create a picture of a place where love is spoken. Ask them to listen as you begin the picture. Sing, “I see my mother kneeling.” Invite a girl to represent a mother. The child representing the mother can reinforce the words by using gestures. For example, the child can bend her knees when the songs says, “kneeling”; the child can point to her mouth when the song says, “whispers”; the child can put her finger over her mouth when the song says, “quiets.” At the end of the verse, have the child point to the sign “Love Is Spoken Here.”

    Invite a boy to represent a father for the second part of the song. Use similar gestures to reinforce the words. Again point to the sign at the end. Teach the final line of the song by displaying a picture of the Savior next to the “Love Is Spoken Here” sign.

    Explain to the children that the picture you have created might not be the picture they see right now. Vicki F. Matsumori, second counselor in the Primary general presidency, says: “Because I grew up in a nonmember home, I did not see my mother kneel in prayer or experience my father exercising the priesthood. The song represents the example I hoped my own children would have in our home and the standard I hope will continue through the generations of our family.” Challenge the children to prepare to have eternal families of their own.
