A Japanese edition of the triple combination, combining into one volume the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price, is now available online at scriptures.lds.org/jpn. An audio recording is also available at the same site and will be available on CD soon. The scriptures site includes footnotes, maps, and photographs, and allows readers to mark the scriptures and perform key word searches. The scriptures site now includes 19 languages.

In an effort to attract participants from around the world for the LDS Motion Picture Studio’s New Testament film project, the Church has created a website, casting.lds.org, where interested members of the Church may apply to participate as actors or extras in all Church film and video productions, including the New Testament project. Filming will begin in spring 2011 in Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, and will continue through the summer.

New resource guides supplement the Aaronic Priesthood and Young Women lesson manuals, Aaronic Priesthood Manual 3 and Young Women Manual 3, for 2011. The guides provide teachers with recent general conference references, discussion questions, additional scripture references, and activity ideas that tie into and refresh the existing lessons, making them more relevant to issues youth face today. The guides are available in 27 languages at Church distribution centers or online at resourceguides.lds.org.

A new set of four DVDs assists in the study of the Doctrine and Covenants and Church history. The set contains interactive charts, quotations from latter-day prophets and apostles, paintings, and learning activities. It features videos such as Legacy, Mountain of the Lord, and Joseph Smith: The Prophet of the Restoration, which has been showing in the Joseph Smith Memorial Building since December 2005. Doctrine and Covenants and Church History Visual Resources DVDs is available in English, Portuguese, and Spanish. Order online at store.lds.org or by calling 1-800-537-5971. Check with local distribution centers for availability.
