Derin Head Rodriguez, From Every Nation: Faith-Promoting Personal Stories of General Authorities from Around the World

ALEXANDER B. MORRISON

Alexander B. Morrison is a scholar, a scientist, and an administrator — one who speaks with the confidence and fluency born of knowledge, education, and years of being in the public eye. There is a forthright directness about him that says here is a man people listen to and believe.

But when he talks of things close to his heart, his voice trembles and his eyes become moist. At times his words are slow and deliberate as he searches for the right phrase to express his innermost feelings. Other times, he never waxes more eloquent than when he is filled with the Spirit of the Lord and moved by compassion and love for his fellow beings. For this is a man full of contradictions. He was born into the most humble home, yet he has achieved high-level government positions and international recognition. He is an intellectual who is comfortable associating with some of the world's most brilliant persons, yet he feels an equality of brotherhood among the world's most poor and illiterate. He has earned the acclaim and gratitude of national leaders, yet he is a humble servant who obeys the Lord's anointed without question or hesitation.

Elder Morrison has devoted many years of his life to fighting malnutrition and disease. Before being called as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy in April 1987, and a member of the Second Quorum two years later, he served as an advisor to many committees of the World Health Organization (WHO), an agency of the United Nations dedicated to improving the health of people everywhere, but primarily in third-world countries. In this capacity he visited Africa many times and fell under the spell of the huge continent. "There's something about Africa which, for some people, becomes a life-long love affair," he claims. "Once it's got its hooks into you, you can't get away. I've been hooked, and it has affected my life profoundly."

For several years Elder Morrison chaired the Scientific and Technical Advisory Committee to WHO's Special Program for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases. The job of this committee was to combat such diseases as malaria, leprosy, sleeping sickness, and onchocerciasis, or river blindness, a parasitic disease spread by a black fly that flourishes in the Volta River Basin area of West Africa. Every year many thousands, mostly children, were blinded by the disease. Elder Morrison was involved in the development and distribution of Ivermectin, a drug that today promises virtually to eliminate this scourge. "For seven years now [in 1990], as a result of extensive spraying programs to kill black flies that spread the disease, now supplemented by the availability of Ivermectin, there have been no more people blinded," he reports.

In addition to his work in Africa with WHO, Elder Morrison's first assignment as a General Authority was as second counselor to the president of the United Kingdom/Ireland/Africa Area. He finds it impossible to separate his secular from his religious interests in the more than 400 million black Africans, which gives him a unique dual perspective. His expertise as a scientist, with degrees in nutrition and pharmacology, is enriched immeasurably by his knowledge of the gospel. "My perspective gives me a greatly enhanced sense of brotherhood and obligation, as well as a realization of the changes that can come into these people's lives through the gospel of Christ," he explains. This sensitivity to the suffering and deprivation he has seen has become a burden he carries with him constantly.

"I remember what starvation looks like as I sit down to abundance three times a day," he says. "I feel jungle heat on my skin as I move through air-conditioned corridors. I carry victims' faces in my mind as I brush my teeth and rinse my mouth with water whose purity I take for granted."

Elder Morrison believes that many Latter-day Sants have some misconceptions about the African people — that the Africans are "ignorant, illiterate, woolly-headed savages with no history and nothing to commend them," and that they have somehow brought their horrible circumstances on themselves. This is simply not the case. Rather, they are intelligent and courageous with a fundamental understanding of the importance of families. "If one works, a dozen eat," he points out.

"You cannot help but feel the fear and worry an African father has. He loves his children, just as we love ours, and he knows malaria will be back in the wet season and some of his children will probably die," he said in a Church News interview. "And if the rains don't come, he knows there will be no food. I was in a village two years ago and the rains were three weeks late. Those poor people had to decide whether to plant the last seed grain they had or to eat it. That was a sad village with slack-eyed women, pot-bellied children and gaunt men. They live on the brink of disaster all the time. They had the courage to plant. How many of us could do that?" (Church News, May 10, 1987, p. 14.)

Tears fill his eyes as he describes the heart-breaking conditions he was witnessed, poverty so wretched that "you can't imagine what it's like unless you've seen it, destitution ten times worse than anything we have in this country." Some people view the widespread poverty and affliction as a contradiction of the existence of God, or at least of a caring, concerned Heavenly Father. But not Elder Morrison. "God is not the author of such injustice and tragedy. He weeps at what he sees more than do I — and I do weep for the children. But these conditions are the products of ignorance, greed, and selfishness. The answer to the devastation these people suffer is the gospel of Jesus Christ."

At last the time is at hand for the "dawning of a brighter day," as the gospel spreads throughout Africa, said Elder Morrison, speaking in general conference shortly after being called as a Seventy. "The light of the fulness of the gospel of Christ, like a beam of transcendent clarity and effulgent beauty, is bursting majestic upon those ancient lands and peoples. It dispels the spiritual gloom and drives away the shadows of error and superstition which long have lain over the `dark continent.' It falls on a prepared people — a people prepared by the Spirit of God. . . . If the price of spirituality be suffering and affliction, travail and sorrow, our humble African brothers and sisters are well prepared to receive and obey the fulness of the gospel of Christ." (Ensign, November 1987, p. 25.)

"When they become converted to the gospel, the scales of ignorance and superstition fall away and they raise themselves up," he explains. A common mistake of charitable groups is to make those they help become dependent. "The Mormon way is to teach them to look after themselves and then stand back and let them do it — teach them to grow their own grain instead of depending on handouts of grain. All of the African converts I've ever known have had their lives improved, some dramatically, by the living gospel."

One such person is a physician in eastern Nigeria. Like many other African men, he drank a lot and was abusive to his wife and their children. "When he heard about the gospel he went to his wife in tears, which is difficult for an African man to do, because it is considered unmanly to treat a woman as anything but chattel," relates Elder Morrison. "But he did, and he told her, `From this day forth I promise I will never again be unfaithful to you; I will not stay out at night drinking; I will not beat you and I will be a good father.' About a year later his wife, who was an educated woman herself with a degree in political science, told me, `Elder Morrison, he has been true to his word, I have a real man now.' And he is a real man now, a leader in the Church with a strong testimony of the truth. Only the gospel in its broadest sense has the power to touch men's hearts like that. And only the gospel can touch our hearts and make us sensitive to the suffering of our brothers and sisters."

Perhaps it was the humbleness of Elder Morrison's own beginnings that drew him into a life of service to the poor and underprivileged. He was born the middle of five children on a "very, very modest farm" in the prairies of northcentral Alberta, Canada. "I was an impoverished farm kid who went barefoot all summer and got one pair of overalls and a shirt in the fall." His paternal grandfather was John Morrison, a Scottish laborer and coal miner who never learned to read or write but who had a cherished ambition to improve his lot. In 1911, at age fifty-three, he took his family from Scotland to Canada, where land was cheap and plentiful. Conditions in northern Alberta were harsh and unyielding, as was the living the family eked out, but they adapted and survived. His mother's family also came from Scotland in the early 1900s, when his mother was a "wee girl of eight or nine," and settled in the same untamed land of central Alberta, four miles from their nearest neighbor and twenty miles from town.

"That makes me straight Scots," says Elder Morrison. "When I go back I'm taken back into the language of my childhood within half a sentence. I'm at hoome thaire because I'm one a' their ain lads, ye ken, noot a fooreigner," he says, lapsing into a Scottish brogue.

His parents, Alexander S. and Christina Wilson Morrison, settled in Vermilion, 125 miles east of Edmonton, Alberta. They taught their five children to worship God and work hard, the latter a quality Alexander didn't much appreciate at the time, but for which he is very grateful now. Many of the never-ending chores that abound in farm life fell to him, the middle child. He began his education at age five in a one-room schoolhouse two miles from home. During the bitterly cold winters, swathed from head to toe, he followed in his older brothers' tracks, his own legs too short to break a trail in the deep drifts as they trudged to school.

"There are two kinds of Scots; one type is wild, stubborn, and proud, and the other sweet, compassionate, and truly Christian," claims Elder Morrison. "My mother's people were the second type, and certainly she was the great gentling influence in my life. If ever I was hurt as a wee lad, I would run and bury my face in her apron. I still remember the way her apron smelled — like bread, warm and comforting like my mother."

His father was the first type, with a quick temper and prickly pride. Yet, despite his flaws, he taught his children three things: to be honest, to honor integrity ("if you gave your word about something you had to keep it"), and to love learning. In the small farming community, where little premium was placed on education, he always provided books for his children and saw to it that they finished high school, which Alex thought was of "monstrous size — eighty-seven students and four rooms." Alex didn't plan to continue his education; no one in his family had ever gone to a university, and he assumed he would go into farming, although "I was always kind of clumsy on the farm and not very well suited to it," he admits.

However, his father, who had been apprenticed to a baker at the age of fourteen and always regretted his lack of formal education, told his son in no uncertain terms, "You are brighter than you think you are, and you have an obligation to develop your mind." All Alex needed was that one little push into educational waters, where he quickly discovered he loved to swim, and the University of Alberta became his wide ocean. As soon as he adjusted to city life — Edmonton, with a population of 95,000, was the largest city in the province — he dove into academia with all the vigor his eager, untried soul could muster. That year, 1947, thousands of homecoming soldiers, anxious to catch up their lives after World War II, swelled the classrooms and toughened the competition. But the farmboy rose to the challenge and graduated at the top of his class with a bachelor's degree in agriculture and then a master's in nutrition. He was fascinated by the blend of scientific areas a major in nutrition offered — biochemistry, medicine, agriculture, anthropology, and sociology — and by graduation he was a devoted scientist.

His university years brought a spiritual as well as an educational awakening. David Blackmore, a humble, serious World War II veteran, told his younger classmate about his church, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and gave him copies of the books Articles of Faith and Jesus the Christ by James E. Talmage. Alex was immediately convinced of the truthfulness of what he read, and was especially interested in two doctrines. The first was that we are put on this earth to learn. To a university student hooked on the wonders of education, being told that the glory of God is intelligence, and that he, as a son of that omniscient being, has the possibility of learning and progressing eternally, was very appealing. Second, the principle of eternal marriage was especially attractive. He was dating Shirley Brooks — "the most beautiful girl I had ever met in my whole life; the only girl I ever went out with or ever wanted to go out with, and the only one I ever dated or kissed that I wasn't related to." The thought of being sealed to her forever was almost too splendid to be believed. When Shirley read the same materials and was equally convinced they were true, the couple were baptized in December 1950. He was twenty and she was seventeen. N. Eldon Tanner was their first branch president, and Hugh B. Brown was their Sunday School teacher. Both of these men would later serve as General Authorities.

Alex met Shirley at the university farm, of which her father was the superintendent. He was drawn to the five-foot-two high school student with the blue eyes, brown hair, and pretty face — "Oh, dear me, she was beautiful!" he interjects. But he was even more attracted to the great reservoir of goodness he felt in her. They became best friends right away, talking incessantly and missing each other immensely when apart, and they still feel the same way forty years later. A week after they were baptized, they were married, and later they were sealed in the Alberta Temple.

After Alex completed his master's degree in 1952, he took a government job in Ottawa for a year. Then he moved to Ithaca, New York, to attend Cornell University, and earned his Ph.D. in 1956. The years in New York were happy ones for the Morrisons, though they were "as poor as the proverbial church mice," struggling to make it by on a monthly stipend of $207. Alex worked fourteen hours a day, six days a week, at the university, and Shirley worked just as hard at home, caring for the children who came along right away (they had three by the time they left Ithaca, and five more were born over the next few years).

After graduation, Alex worked three years in the nutritional research department of a pharmaceutical company in Evansville, Indiana, studying ways to improve infant formula, among other projects. He also became president of the Evansville Branch of the Church. In 1959 he took his family back to Ottawa, where he took a drastic cut in order to work as a research chemist for the Food and Drug Directorate, the national agency that controls the quality of food and drugs in Canada. Soon he was again made branch president, and Shirley was active in Relief Society and the Young Women's Mutual Improvement Association.

In 1966 the Canadian government asked Alex to return to school for a master's degree in pharmacology. So the Morrisons moved again, this time to the University of Michigan, where Alex was now one of the older students, competing against younger ones. "These kids aren't going to beat me," he determined, and once again he graduated number one in his class.

Then it was back to his government post in Canada, and in 1971 he was named assistant deputy minister over the Health Protection Branch, the Canadian agency charged with regulating food, drugs, cosmetics, medical devices, pesticides, harmful radiation, and dangerous chemicals and micro-organisms. In that capacity, he held the highest-ranking nonelected government position ever held in Canada by a Mormon. For the thirteen years he ran that agency, he supervised a $110 million annual budget and 2,000 employees, made approximately 25,000 regulatory decisions yearly, had two full-time press secretaries, and appeared almost daily in the press or on television. He learned to make high-pressure decisions quickly, decisions sometimes worth billions of dollars, and became fascinated by the interface between science and public policy. Under his direction the organization became known as one of the best regulatory agencies in the world. However, Elder Morrison was even more satisfied with its reputation for honesty, a standard that must run from top to bottom in any organization, depending heavily on the ethics of its leader. Because of the nature of the business, opportunities for dishonesty were abundant. "If we were to let a drug go on the market before everything was right, or were willing to wink at some malfeasance, there were possibilities to make a lot of crooked money fast," he explains.

Several years after Elder Morrison retired, his son Allen met one of his father's former colleagues, who told the younger Morrison, "The thing I remember most about your dad is his integrity."

"If I am to be remembered for anything, I would rather it be for honesty," Elder Morrison says.

Burned out after many years of such a high-pressure, high-visibility job, Dr. Morrison retired from public service in 1984 and took a position as a professor and chairman of the Food Science Department at the University of Guelph, near Toronto. Even during the times he was busiest professionally, he was active in the Church, serving as bishop, stake high councilor, and in several district and branch presidencies. He admits that he didn't always have as much time to spend with his children as he would have liked. But now his life slowed considerably and he was able to concentrate more on Church and family, as well as teaching and consulting.

He also had more time to devote to the World Health Organization, with which he had been involved since the early 1970s. In 1981 he had taken a sabbatical from government service to serve as a consultant to the director general of the WHO in Geneva, Switzerland. As a result of this association, he earned a reputation as a fighter of tropical diseases and developed his consuming passion for Africa. In 1984 he became the first recipient of the David M. Kennedy International Service Award from the Kennedy International Center at Brigham Young University, in recognition of his international efforts to improve health and nutrition.

On March 24, 1987, Dr. Morrison was on a WHO assignment in Geneva when the phone rang in his hotel room. A voice came on the line and asked, in English, "Is this Elder Morrison?" When he confirmed that it was, he was asked to hold for President Thomas S. Monson. Elder Morrison, who was serving as a regional representative for Eastern Canada at that time, had met President Monson nearly thirty years before, when President Monson served as a mission president in Canada. After the two friends talked for a while, President Monson told Elder Morrison he was being called as a member of the First Quorum of the Seventy. Then he asked, "Would that be convenient for you?"

"I told him it may not be convenient, but that wasn't the point. My wife and I made the decision many years before to serve the Lord in any way he required of us."

The Morrisons immediately began preparing their lives to answer the Lord's call. "We had three months to tear up all of the roots we had put down in the last thirty-five years," he recalls. "I resigned at the university and we sold our home, cars, and many other things and put the rest of our belongings in storage. I quit all of the consulting and committee work I had been doing and severed all ties with the WHO. Since then, although I have many fond memories of the people and places I've known and things I've done, I have not had a single moment of regret or doubt. When the Lord calls you, that's the end of the game for everything else. If you look back, you're not fit to be a servant. Besides that," he adds, "I have a special love for President Monson. If he had asked me to jump out the hotel window, I might have hesitated for half a moment on the ledge, but not any more than that."

The call did not take the Morrisons completely unawares, for they had felt for several months that something was coming that would change their lives. At first Elder Morrison felt as if he were an unlikely person to be serving among the brethren. "There was probably no greater stranger among the General Authorities than I," he claims. "I was nobody's relation, nobody's friend. I didn't go to school with any of them and had met only two or three members of the Twelve. But although I came in as a stranger, they have made me feel like a brother."

Having spent most of his life in highly competitive situations, replete with all of the backstabbing and corruption such positions have to offer, he very much appreciates the differences he now finds among his colleagues. "Here is a group of men who are as diverse as mankind itself, yet I am touched by the brotherhood and loving concern I feel among them. The love the brethren have for President Benson and each other is a real example of how we should all treat one another. It is certainly a contrast to what you find out in the world."

In his assignment as first counselor to the president of the United Kingdom/Ireland/Africa Area, Elder and Sister Morrison were headquartered in Solihull, West Midlands, England. Only Mary, the youngest of their eight children, was living with them. The others were all pursuing studies or careers: Heather as a student at Brigham Young University; Jeffrey, attending law school in Toronto; Allen John, a business professor at the University of Western Ontario; Sandra, a homemaker in Toronto; Howard, a graduate student at the University of North Carolina; Barbara, a homemaker in Edmonton; and David, an archeologist with the Canadian National Museum in Ottawa.

For Elder Morrison, the transition from scientist administrator to General Authority has come fairly easily, but has also brought with it increased sensitivity to the frailties of man, including his own. He has, he believes, become more patient, more tolerant. He now has more time to spend with his eternal companion, Shirley, as they labor side by side in the Lord's vineyard. "The great blessing in my life is that my wife is such a superb woman and such a superb mother," he says. "I am married to an angel."

Though his Church assignments require a lot of administrative duties and "paper pushing," Elder Morrison is an experienced manager who is used to handling the organizational mechanics decisively and efficiently, leaving him as much time as possible for people. On a recent afternoon, after hours spent making phone calls, writing letters, and finishing up other details, he spent an hour counseling with a friend who had fallen away from the Church. He gave the man a blessing and the two wept together. Later a woman came to his office to discuss having her blessings restored following disciplinary action, a "tender, tender time when many more tears were shed," he says. "That's when I realized that that is what the work amounts to — you have to do the administration, but it is the ministering that really counts. There are plenty of opportunities for both."

Although Elder Morrison's calling as a member of the Second Quorum of the Seventy is probably a temporary one (members of that quorum generally serve for five years), he is not concerned about what the future holds. Once released from full-time Church service, he may go back to teaching in a university, perhaps in Canada or at BYU. He and Sister Morrison would like to be near their children and grandchildren, if possible, and would like to do temple work. He has recently completed a book on the Church in Black Africa, The Dawning of a Brighter Day (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book, 1990). He enjoys writing, having published volumes of scholarly articles, and will probably continue in that pursuit as well.

Elder Morrison has always that found his profound religious convictions have reinforced his stature and knowledge as a scientist. "I've never encountered anything but the greatest respect from my non-Mormon professional associates," he declares. "I think there is a considerable respect for someone who believes in something. Besides, how could there ever be a conflict? Wherever there appears to be one, you can be sure the revealed religion is correct, and the scientists will just have to go back and rethink their position. Christ knows more chemistry than I'll ever know, at least in this life. `Truth is truth where e'er `tis found, whether on Christian or on heathen ground,'" he quotes.

It is difficult to imagine any future for Elder Morrison in which he is not involved, at least on some level, with Africa. In 1987 he accompanied Elder Marvin J. Ashton of the Council of the Twelve to that continent for the dedication of three countries for the preaching of the gospel, and in the spring of 1990 he assisted Elder Neal A. Maxwell in dedicating two more lands. These nations, together with the other countries where proselyting is already taking place, are fulfilling the prophecy that the gospel will be carried "unto the uttermost part of the earth" (Acts 1:8), says Elder Morrison.

"The bursting of the gospel light upon Africa is a great manifestation and testimony of God's love for all of his children. . . . The gleaning and gathering of the children of God in Africa is just beginning. In the words of the Prophet Joseph Smith, `it will go forward . . .till the purposes of God shall be accomplished, and the Great Jehovah shall say the work is done' (History of the Church, 4:540)." (Ensign, November 1987, p. 26.)

This work of spreading the gospel and becoming as one with our brothers and sisters of the world is a responsibility that must necessarily involve every member of the Church, according to Elder Morrison. He refers to the twenty-fifth chapter of Matthew in which the Lord charges all of his followers with feeding the hungry and ministering to the sick. "We can't all go to Africa to help dig wells or nurse dying children, nor can we all go on welfare missions. But each of us can be more loving and tolerant. We can eliminate the prejudice and bigotry from our own souls, realizing that we truly are a global family."
