Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

OUR GUIDE

As we journey through Book of Mormon Lands, our guide will be that Sacred Volume. It will lead and counsel us, and make known unto us the marvelous works of the Lord. It will comfort us when the paths we tread become strewn with failure and disaster. It will give us courage and strength to continue onward as we behold the many burdens that were carried by the ancient Nephites along these very same roads, and which, at times, appear to have been more than they could bear. It will give us succor equal to our tasks, and will measure such help according to the hour and power of our needs. It will speak to us "of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be." (Jacob 4:13)

Indeed, the Book of Mormon is the voice of prophecy and of revelation. It is an account of God's dealings with His children who lived on these American Continents centuries ago. It is their Holy Scriptures. It is founded upon truth. Knowledge and understanding are to it as bonded servants. Its light shines brightly wherever it may abide. Wisdom has endowed it with riches far beyond the measure of man. It, like the Bible, is God's Holy Word.

When the Risen Redeemer taught His Gospel to the Nephites in the Land Bountiful, He said of the words they then recorded, "It is I that doth speak." (III Nephi 20:39) All the words of Scripture, whether spoken by Him in Person, or by His inspired servants, are His. Whether they come to us from the prophets of old, or through the seers of our own times, they bespeak His Holy Mind and Will.

We recall many others of His gracious words. They are also recorded in the sacred writings of the Nephites. Shortly after Lehi and his little company arrived in the new Land of Promise (600 B.C.), the Lord enjoined them, saying, "Follow thou me." (II Nephi 31:10) This divine injunction was given to Joseph, in America, as it was later given to Judah at Jerusalem. It is also given to us!

But, asks the Prophet Nephi, "Wherefore ... can we follow Jesus save we be willing to keep the commandments of the Father?" (Ibid.) After more than 2,500 years have passed away that summons to us is clear, and in our hearts, welled up to overflowing with His grace, we determine to do His bidding even though it cost all we hold most dear.

Alma, the younger, the Presiding High Priest of God's Church, (73 B.C.) whose Presidency we will hereafter consider, saw a remarkable resemblance in following the Lord, thereby doing His will, to the Compass or Director which showed unto Lehi the way to go in his exodus from Jerusalem. He used this notable comparison in the parting instructions he gave to his son, Helaman, who succeeded his father in the high office Alma then held:

And now, my son, I have somewhat to say concerning the thing which our fathers call a ball, or director—or our fathers called it Liahona, which is, being interpreted, a compass; and the Lord prepared it.

And behold, there cannot any man work after the manner of so curious a workmanship. And behold, it was prepared to show unto our fathers the course which they should travel in the wilderness.

And it did work for them according to their faith in God; therefore, if they had faith to believe that God could cause that those spindles should point the way they should go, behold, it was done; therefore they had this miracle, and also many other miracles wrought by the power of God, day by day.

Nevertheless, because those miracles were worked by small means it did show unto them marvelous works. They were slothful, and forgot to exercise their faith and diligence and then those marvelous works ceased, and they did not progress in their journey;

Therefore, they tarried in the wilderness, or did not travel a direct course, and were afflicted with hunger and thirst, because of their transgressions.

And now, my son, I would that ye should understand that these things are not without a shadow; for as our fathers were slothful to give heed to this compass (now these things were temporal) they did not prosper; even so it is with things which are spiritual.

For behold, it is as easy to give heed to the word of Christ, which will point to you a straight course to eternal bliss, as it was for our fathers to give heed to this compass, which would point unto them a straight course to the promised land.

And now I say, is there not a type in this thing? For just as surely as this director did bring our fathers, by following its course, to the promised land, shall the words of Christ, if we follow their course, carry us beyond this vale of sorrow into a far better land of promise.

O my son, do not let us be slothful because of the easiness of the way; for so was it with our fathers; for so was it prepared for them, that if they would look they might live; even so it is with us. The way is prepared, and if we will look we may live forever. (Alma 37:38-46)

Here, too, it is well to remember the words of the Prophet Isaiah, found emblazoned, as it were, upon the Smaller Plates of Nephi, "O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord." (II Nephi 12:5)

Thus, surrounded by a heavenly influence and under His watchful care, we will continue our studies which we have likened to a journey. And, like a father guiding his children, we will go where He goes, do the things He teaches us to do, and we will walk humbly by His side.

Anxious in the Cause of the Lord, and fearful for those who reject His words, we will be diligent in our efforts, and with real intent, seek to guide the erring through their difficulties, and lead back to the right path those who have gone astray. This shall be the object of our journey, the purpose for which we strive, to the honor and glory of God.

Truly, the Book of Mormon shall be our guide, but we must realize that, as the Liahona was given to father Lehi to guide him to the Promised Land, just so, we, in the exact ratio to our faith in God, will be guided by its holy promptings.

Day-by-day, as we go from place-to-place, we will see unfold before us, the glories of God's Plan of Salvation. We shall hear the wonderful harmonies of the Gospel of Jesus Christ proclaimed by His Nephite servants. Again and again, we shall hear the exhortations of the righteous and their rejection by the ungodly. We shall learn many lessons.

Among these lessons is, that to bring souls to Christ is the greatest work of the angels in Heaven, or of men on Earth. We shall also learn that obedience is a gem whose value is as a pearl of great price, and "that each of us is endowed with reason to distinguish between right and wrong, and with freedom to choose good and evil." We shall see wherein "righteousness exalteth a nation."

Also, we shall see "the rich, who are rich as to the things of the world," "the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men." We shall see much that is painful to the heart and perplexing to the mind. We shall see great throngs of the wicked, crowded together, and, who, in their infatuation and greed, feast hungeringly upon the fat of their wrongdoing. We will hear their raucous voices as they mock their righteous brethren. We will hear their boasting, their laughter, and their gibes.

We will see the House of Joseph, through Manasseh, spread far beyond "the bounds of the everlasting hills." We will see his waywardness, his backsliding, and his pride. We will see the "follies and faults of youth." Our guide will show us vast hosts of men and women, rushing to and fro, some "smitten and afflicted," some rebellious and heading for destruction, others seeking to retrace their steps, and still others who are "firm and steadfast, and immovable in keeping the commandments of the Lord." And interwoven throughout every turn of their lives, we shall see, indelibly inscribed on every page of their sacred record, the Book of Mormon, the proof that God always remembered the promise He made to Lehi's children, "Inasmuch as ye will keep My commandments ye shall prosper in the land." (Jarom 9)

The lands of the Book of Mormon are lands of plentitude. We know little of their geography, but we do know, somewhat, of their vast domain. Together they are a land where the time of winter is cut short, except in its most northern and southern portions. Between these extremes one may find whole regions ideally suited for man and beast. For more than 2,200 years it has been known to the inhabitants of the Western Hemisphere as America, meaning, The Land of the King, or The Land of the Lord, Our King; that is, The Land of Zion. (See, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Vol. II, p. 331)

It is "a land that is choice above all other lands." (I Nephi 13:30) The riches of the earth, the precious ores and useful metals that abound in its hills, the fountains of water that give life to the thirsty soil, the grassy uplands and the wide, billowing savannahs upon which graze myriads of both sheep and cattle, the fields of ripening grain, the green woodlands, the sunny skies, and the waterbrooks, altogether make it a happy, holy place for God's children to dwell. The Lord, himself, in speaking of it to Nephi, the leader of one of its pioneer families, said, It is a "land which I have prepared for you." (I Nephi 2:20)

The thoughtful reader of the Book of Mormon will remember the promise of the Lord to the Brother of Jared concerning this same land: "And there will I bless thee and thy seed, and raise up unto Me of thy seed, and the seed of thy brother, and they who shall go with thee, a great nation. And there shall be none greater than the nation which I will raise up unto Me of thy seed, upon all the face of the earth." (Ether 1:43)

This is, briefly, the land in which we shall sojourn. Some will remain here longer than others; many will tarry, while a few, unmindful of God's blessings, will hasten their footsteps. But, to all it is a hallowed land. It is, let us repeat, "A choice land, above all other lands." "Wherefore," saith the Lord, "I will have all men that dwell thereon that they shall worship Me." (II Nephi 10:19) "... this land shall be a land of liberty ... and there shall be no kings upon the land ... for I, the Lord, the King of Heaven, will be their King, and I will be a light unto them forever, that hear My words." (Ibid., 10:11, 14)

And, when at last, this journey is at an end, and we have completed the task we have chosen to do, and also have witnessed the many manifestations of His grace, we, too, will bow before The Majesty on High, and, with hearts filled to overflowing with gratitude, exclaim, as did that ancient, Hebrew Patriarch, the scholarly Lehi, Great and marvelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty. (I Nephi 1:14)

P. C. R.

THE LAWS OF THE NEPHITES UNDER THE JUDGES

We, having considered the laws of the Nephites while they were ruled by kings, (COMMENTARY OF THE BOOK OF MORMON Volume II, p. 292) will now discuss their laws under the Reign of the Judges. We will draw our information from various passages of Book of Mormon Scriptures, and form our conclusions by comparing them with other portions of the same Scriptures wherein the Law is directly referred to, or its operation expounded when some historical incident is narrated which throws light upon the powers of the Law and the manner of its execution.

From the time that King Mosiah II died (91 B.C.) the governmental authority was vested in a Chief Judge and other subordinate judges and officers, all of whom were elected by the voice of the people. These popularly elected magistrates were to judge according to the laws which had been presented to the people for their approval, and by them had been accepted as the Law of the Land. The authority of these judges was defined by the Code of Mosiah, but within the bounds therein prescribed these magistrates appear to have held unrestricted powers. This was especially so in the case of the Chief Judge. No civil council or parliament divided with the Chief Executive, who was the Chief Judge, the authority to make war or conclude peace, to decide the terms of treaties, or to frame any enactment for the regulation of public affairs.

No direct statement is made of the length of time that a judge remained in office, but from the historical narrative we gather the idea that he was elected for life, or during good conduct. We have instances where judges have resigned, but none where they were removed from office because their term had expired.

Each city or land appears to have had its chief judge or ruler as well as its inferior magistrates, all of whom were responsible to the Chief Judge of the whole nation, whose seat of government was located in the Nephite Capital, Zarahemla, when the city was not in the hands of the Lamanites, or traitors.

The manner of conducting elections is not clearly defined. The result is always spoken of as the voice of the people. The mode of procedure was uniform, that is, it was the same throughout the land. In the election of the first Chief Judge (Alma, the younger), the people assembled themselves in bodies throughout all the land to cast their voices, which conveys the impression that they declared their choice by viva voce, or by acclamation rather than by lot or ballot. It is quite possible that the methods were entirely dissimilar to any known at modern elections; this, however, is but conjecture. (Mosiah 29:39)

When the sentiments of the people were greatly divided and party feelings ran very high, the opposing factions assembled in separate bodies to cast their voices, as in the attempt to make Amlici king. The decisions of the people in these assemblies or mass meetings were laid before the judges, who proclaimed the result. In cases where the petition was made for any particular object, or for a change in the law, the judge directed that a special election (if we may so term it) be held, and the results were proclaimed according to the voice of the people, as a whole, or if they were divided, according to the majority.

Under the Code of Mosiah, the judges received wages according to the time which they labored to judge those who were brought before them to be judged; and their wages a senine of gold, or its equivalent, a senum of silver for each day that they were thus employed. As the Nephites had changed the names and the values of their coins from the old Hebrew standards, we have no direct way of judging from the record how liberally these officers were remunerated. Lawyers, also, were hired and appointed by the people to administer the laws at times of public trials; it is presumable these acted in behalf of the Republic somewhat in the capacity of prosecuting attorneys, the same as do the Attorney General and his staff in the United States. If trial by jury was in vogue among the Nephites, we have not been able to find any reference to that method; indeed the evidence is altogether in favor of the idea that the judge decided as to the guilt or innocence of the accused, and, if adjudged guilty, passed sentence on the one so found. The corruption of these attorneys and judges early became, in some portions of the land, a foundation for the destruction of the government.

When the Chief Judge was elected he took an oath of office, and it is presumable that the lesser officers did the same. The nature of that oath easily can be understood by referring to the case of Pahoran. He was appointed Chief Judge and Governor over the people, taking a solemn oath and binding it with a sacred ordinance, that he would judge righteously, keep the peace, uphold the freedom of the people, and grant unto them their sacred privilege to worship the Lord their God; yea, to support and maintain the cause of the Lord as long as he was a judge, and to bring the wicked to justice, according to their crimes.

The punishment of corruption, or malfeasance in office, was specially provided for. King Mosiah explained the provisions of the law on this subject in the following language: "And now if ye have judges, and they do not judge you according to the law which has been given, ye can cause that they may be judged by a higher judge. If your higher judges do not judge righteous judgments, ye shall cause that a small number of your lower judges should be gathered together, and they shall judge your higher judges according to the voice of the people." (Mosiah 29:28-29) These safeguards became strong bulwarks for the protection of the rights of the individual and the preservation of the liberty of the whole people.

When Alma, the first Chief Judge, resigned that office, so that he might devote all his spare time and energies to the work of the ministry, he nominated or suggested his successor, but whether this was simply a courtesy extended to him by the people on account of their great love for his person and respect for his judgment, or whether it was a provision of the law, is not plain. The passage states that Alma chose Nephihah as his successor, and gave him power, according to the voice of the people, to enact laws, according to the laws which had been given, and to put them in force and to exact penalties for the crimes committed.

The rights of the people were, [^1]

PERSONAL LIBERTY

It was contrary to the Law of Mosiah that there should be any slaves among the Nephites.

EQUALITY BEFORE THE LAW

No privileged classes. All men to enjoy their rights and privileges alike.

UNIFORMITY OF TAXATION

The burden of supporting the government fell on all the citizens, that every man might bear his part.

THE ELECTIVE FRANCHISE

Whether suffrage was confined to men alone, or was universal, or was limited by any particular restrictions, does not appear to be plain.

THE RIGHT OF PETITION

As examples of the exercise of this right we introduce the following: At the time when Pahoran was Chief Judge a part of the people desired that a few particular points of the Law should be altered. The Chief Judge refused their request so to do, whereupon a portion of them petitioned him, and he directed that an election be held, or rather that the voice of the people as a whole be appealed to. This being done, the result proved a majority objected to the suggested changes. Again, Moroni, the Commander-in-Chief of the Nephite Armies, sent a petition to the Chief Judge asking for powers to compel certain dissenters to help defend their country against the national enemies, or to put them to death. His request was granted; it being in accordance with the voice of the people. Here we have instances of the right of petition exercised, in the one case by a large body of the people themselves, and in the other by a single, though an important individual. Both were extraordinary circumstances, and in the latter case it appears to have required the all-powerful vox populi to give validity to the action of the executive.

The statement is frequently made, though in slightly different phrases, that the Law had no power to punish a man for his belief, for it was strictly contrary to the commands of God that all men should stand before the Law on equal grounds. If a man believed in God, it was his privilege to serve Him; if he did not believe in Him, there was no law to punish him for his disbelief.

A man was punished, only, for the crimes he had committed; therefore, all men were on equal grounds. Unbelief was handled by the Church, and not by the Civil Law. The names of those who became hardened in their attitude towards the Church were blotted out and were remembered no more among the People of God. During the days of the Judges there was no Church established by law; when the people served God they elected righteous men for their rulers; when the masses fell into unbelief and transgressed God's Laws, they chose men such as Gadianton Robbers to administer their laws.

If the rights of women, under the Law, were any different, more or less than those of men, we have no information; in fact, the Inspired Record is entirely silent on this subject.

The Criminal Law inflicted the death penalty for murder, rebellion, and treason; for robbery, theft, adultery, sexual abominations, fraud, and lying, lesser punishments were inflicted.

The first recorded case of an execution for murder under the rule of the Judges is that of Nehor, for slaying the aged patriot, Gideon. Another noteworthy case is that of Paanchi, the son of Pahoran, of whom it is written that he was tried according to the voice of the people, and condemned to death; for he had raised up in rebellion and sought to destroy the liberty of the people.

No high priest, judge, or lawyer, had power to inflict capital punishment. When a man had been tried and condemned to death by the Law, his condemnation had to be signed by the Governor of the Land before the sentence could be carried out. The mention of the name, Governor, in this relation, with other passages in which the Chief Judge and the Governor are spoken of as different persons, suggests the idea that as the Nephites grew in numbers and spread over distant regions, the duties of the Chief Judge became excessive, and a separation was made between the executive and judicial responsibilities, and were divided between two officers.

The mode of inflicting the death penalty is not stated, but we incline to the idea that hanging was often resorted to. Military offenders were, as a rule, put to death with the sword. Of Nehor it is stated that he suffered an ignominious death at the top of the Hill Manti, and that, before his death, he acknowledged between heaven and earth that he had taught false doctrine. Zemnarihah was hanged upon the top of a tree until he was dead, and then the Nephites felled the tree to the ground. Many of the martyrs were burned to death by unjust judges, or stoned, as was Timothy, who afterwards became one of the Twelve Disciples; but we regard this last act as one resulting from the violence of a mob, rather than from any pretended execution of the Law.

The law with regard to debtors seems to have been somewhat severe. On this point it is stated, "Now if a man owed another, and he would not pay that which he did owe, he was complained of to the judge; and the judge executed authority, and sent forth officers that the man should be brought before him; and he judged the man according to the law and the evidences which were brought against him, and thus was the man compelled to pay that which he owed, or be stripped, or be cast out from among the people as a thief and a robber." (Alma 11:2) If a man desired to pay, but could not from misfortune, we doubt not but that the Law contained some merciful provision in his behalf.

It is more than probable that the mode of procedure in all criminal cases very much resembled the one cited above, and from it we can gather a very clear idea of the practice of their courts, which differed little from that of our own day. The complaint was first made, the proper officer was then authorized by the court to arrest the accused and bring him before the judge, the trial then took place, the witnesses gave their testimony, the law and the evidence were examined, the opposing lawyers were heard, the judgment was given, the sentence pronounced, and lastly carried out. In times of war the military code seems to have varied according to the exigencies of the situation. As a rule, the Nephite armies were composed of volunteers. In times of great danger to the Republic, enlarged powers were given to the Commander-in-Chief. In one place the statement is made that Moroni, having been appointed by the Chief Judge and by the voice of the people to head the Nephite armies, had power given him that according to his will he could establish and maintain order among them. His decision was final. Over the military authority he exercised, there was no appeal. In the enforcement of his decrees he caused those of the Amalickiahites (rebels) who would not enter into a covenant to support the cause of freedom and protect the rights of their fellow-countrymen to be put to death. (Alma 51:13-16)

Prisoners of war were evidently treated much the same as in modern civilized nations. Indeed, in somewhat apologetic tones, mention is made of the fact that Moroni, because of the necessities of his position, was compelled to set his Lamanite prisoners to work. When such prisoners attempted to escape, they were slain by their guards. There are numerous instances recorded where prisoners were released on parole, or on their giving such promises of neutrality as were thought necessary to the Nephite commander.

It frequently happened during the days of the judges that the Nephites in some of their periodical spasms of apostasy and wickedness would clamor for changes in their just and wise laws so as better to suit their degraded habits and course of life. When a majority of the people were on the side of righteousness these attempts were in vain. When wickedness abounded the corrupt majority carried their points. The history of the Nephites shows that by the sixty-second year of the Judges (30 B.C.) the people had altered and in doing so trampled under their feet the laws which the Lord had commanded Mosiah to give unto them. Besides perverting and corrupting the laws they had thus received, the Nephites had grown wicked like unto the Lamanites.

Seven years later the evils of which they were guilty and also the motives that guided their actions had become pitiable. The Gadianton Robbers filled the Judgment Seats, they having usurped the power and the civil authority of the land. In their wicked ways these unrighteous scorners of what is just and good laid aside the commandments of God and judged not in the least aright before Him. They did no justice unto those who were brought before them; they let the wicked go unpunished, and condemned the righteous because of their righteousness. Wealth and the possession of money were often the deciding factors in finding one guilty or innocent.

In this way the Gadiantons perpetuated themselves in office. Their eagerness to rule and thus do according to their base desires was prompted by a lust to get gain and thereby obtain the glory of the world. Moreover, the wicked occupants of the Judgment Seats made it far easier for their co-conspirators to break the laws of God and the land with impunity.

This condition in the affairs of the Republic gradually wrought national disintegration which would have come sooner had it not been for the influence exerted by the mighty preaching of God's servants who through untiring efforts brought many Nephites to again serve the Lord.

But such happy periods were short-lived, and matters went from bad to worse until thirty years after the birth of Christ in Judea, the republican form of government was broken up, and the people split up into numerous tribes; each one caring only for its own interests, and giving obedience to its own chief. Such a state of disunity among the Nephites lasted for only about four years, as during the terrible devastations and convulsions that occurred at the time of the Crucifixion of our Lord, the more wicked part of the people were destroyed.

Footnotes

CHRONOLOGY—VOLUME III

B.C. Signifies—BEFORE THE BIRTH OF CHRIST. N.A. Signifies—NEPHITE ANNALS, or YEARS AFTER LEHI'S DEPARTURE FROM JERUSALEM. Y.J. Signifies—YEAR OF THE JUDGES.

B.C. N.A. Y.J.

Priestcraft first introduced among the Nephites by Nehor. Nehor slays the aged patriarch, Gideon. Nehor is tried and executed. King Lamoni and all his household are converted by Ammon. (Approx.) [^2] 91 510 1

Priestcraft spreads among the Nephites; pride and contention develop in the Church. A Church established by Ammon among the Lamanites in the Land of Ishmael. (Approx.) 90 511 2

Continued peace among the Nephites notwithstanding persecution and increased wickedness. 89 512 3

Amlici, a disciple of Nehor, desires to be king, and to destroy the Church of Christ. His pretensions are rejected by the voice of the people at a special election. Amlici raises a rebellion and is consecrated king by his followers. Amlici's forces are defeated by the Nephites under Alma at a hill called Amnihu. The Lamanites invade Zarahemla, and are joined by the defeated Amlicites. Their united armies are also defeated by Alma on the west bank of the River Sidon, and are driven back to their own lands. Peace is again restored. Aaron and other missionaries are imprisoned by the Lamanites in the Land of Middoni. 87 514 5

The Nephites because of their late afflictions are humble, and many are baptized. Ammon and Lamoni proceed to Middoni to release Aaron and his brethren. They meet Lamoni's father on the way, and he attempts to slay Ammon. Antiomno, king of the Lamanites in Middoni releases the captive missionaries. (Approx.) 86 515 6

3.500 Nephites are baptized into the Church. Great peace and prosperity among them. Lamoni's father baptized. He issues a proclamation in favor of the Nephite missionaries. (Approx.) 85 516 7

Pride increasing in the Nephite Christian Church causes many envyings, much malice, strife, and persecutions. 84 517 8

Alma, because of the increasing iniquity, resigns the Chief-Judgeship, and nominates Nephihah as his successor. Nephihah is accepted by the voice of the people. Alma devotes himself entirely to the work of the ministry. Alma sets the Churches in Zarahemla and Gideon in order. 83 518 9

Alma, as Presiding High Priest, visits and ministers to the people of Melek and Ammonihah. Amulek visited by an angel; he receives Alma into his home. They preach to the people of Ammonihah. Alma and Amulek are imprisoned and abused. Zeezrom, the lawyer, converted; he is healed of a fever and is baptized. Those who accepted the Gospel are cast out of Ammonihah, some are martyred by fire. Alma and Amulek are delivered by the power of God from prison. The prison is destroyed, and with it, their persecutors. Massacre of 1,005 believing Lamanites. 82 519 10

The Lamanites, as foretold by Alma, destroy Ammonihah. With it all its people are slain, but the Lamanites are afterwards disastrously defeated by Zoram. 81 520 11

The Church greatly increases during this and the two following years. 80 521 12

Second massacre of the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi. (Approx.) 79 522 13

The people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi arrive in the Land of Zarahemla. (Approx.) 78 523 14

Notes

REFERENCE TO VOLUME II

In Volume II, of this COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, we noted the growth of the Nephite Nation under the wise rule of King Benjamin, and of his son, Mosiah II, who were two of the three great prophet-kings who reigned at Zarahemla from about 200 to 91 B.C., the other being Mosiah I, the father of King Benjamin.

Mormon, the abridger of the records which had been kept by the kings, and also the one after whom the Book of Mormon is named, interpolated some words of explanation regarding the momentous work, which, under God, he had entered upon. In them he said, "For behold, King Benjamin was a holy man, and he did reign over his people in righteousness." (Words of Mormon 17)

Benjamin, for many years, was the head of the nation, as too, he was the Presiding High Priest of the Church. He thus was prophet, priest, and king. He was like a father to his people who loved him even as children love their parents. By example as well as by precept he "taught them to keep the commandments of God, that they might rejoice and be filled with love towards God and all men." (Mosiah 2:4)

King Benjamin reigned over the Nephites for a great period of time, but at length, unable to bear, longer, the burdens which he so nobly and reverently had carried, he called a conference of all the Saints to meet on the morrow at the Temple in Zarahemla, where he, as the Lord had directed, would proclaim his son, Mosiah, who was a just man, king and ruler over "this people, whom the Lord our God hath given us." (Mosiah 1:10)

Mormon quoted other words of King Benjamin, stating a further purpose of the conference. "I," he said, "shall give this people a name, that thereby they may be distinguished above all the people which the Lord hath brought out of the land of Jerusalem; and this I do because they have been a diligent people in keeping the commandments of the Lord." (Mosiah 1:11)

That name was The Children of Christ, His sons, and His daughters. Benjamin explained to the Saints gathered there, Why the name of Christ? He said, "For behold, this day He hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on His name; therefore, ye are born of Him and have become His sons and daughters." (Mosiah 5:7)

King Benjamin lived for three years after Mosiah was made king. Notwithstanding his worn frame, and other unmistakable signs of old age, he exhorted his people to continued righteousness; in his parting instructions to them, he earnestly implored his faithful followers, "And now, my brethren, I would that ye should do as ye have hitherto done. As ye have kept my commandments, and also the commandments of my father, and have prospered, and have been kept from falling into the hands of your enemies, even so if ye shall keep the commandments of my son, or the commandments of God which shall be delivered unto you by him, ye shall prosper in the land, and your enemies shall have no power over you." (Mosiah 2:31)

King Benjamin was illustrious for the justice and mercy with which he administered the laws, for his great devotion to God, and for the love he had for his people. The frugality and simplicity of his life were a never ending source of inspiration to his industrious and loyal subjects.

Of King Benjamin's son, Mosiah, Mormon comments, "... King Mosiah did walk in the ways of the Lord, and did observe His judgments and statutes, and did keep His commandments in all things whatsoever He commanded him." (Mosiah 6:6)

Mosiah was born in the Land of Zarahemla 154 or 153 years before the coming of Christ. He was instructed in all the wisdom of the Nephites, and trained up in youth in the fear of the Lord. By the direction of the Almighty he was consecrated by his father to succeed him on the Nephite throne, which ceremony was attended to at the time when the whole nation had gathered at the Temple in Zarahemla to listen to the words of Benjamin, their aged and beloved ruler. At this same time all that had gathered there covenanted with the Lord to be His servants ever after. There, in the presence of his future subjects, under the shadow of the Lord's House, Mosiah was set apart to rule a people whose sins were all forgiven through their abiding faith in the unborn Savior. We may ask ourselves, "Could a king come to a throne under more auspicious circumstances?" Profound peace reigned with all outside his dominions, and within its borders dwelt union, contentment, prosperity, happiness, and what is more, righteousness.

Mosiah followed in the footsteps of his father, taught his people to be industrious, and set them the example by, himself, tilling a portion of the earth to maintain his dependents.

It was in the fourth year of his Reign that Mosiah sent out an expedition to find what had become of Zeniff's people. Of its success and the happy return of Limhi and his people at about the same time as Alma's joyous advent, the Sacred Record is almost complete.

Soon after the arrival of Limhi and Alma, Mosiah gathered all the Nephites to one place that they might hear how God had dealt with both. First, he had the records of Zeniff and Alma read in their hearing, at which they were amazed; but when they beheld the newcomers, they were filled with exceeding great joy, mingled with sorrow for the loss of their kindred who were slain by the Lamanites in their attempts to be free. Again, when they listened to the marvelous deliverances wrought by heaven in behalf of Alma and his faithful few, the assembled thousands raised their voices on high and gave thanks to God for His mercy and loving-kindness. (See, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Vol. II, p. 87; also pp. 256-258)

Taking advantage of the presence there of so many of his subjects, Mosiah addressed them on such matters as he deemed necessary and desirable. At his request Alma also taught them. When they assembled themselves into large bodies, Alma went from one multitude to another preaching repentance and faith on the Lord. After hearing Alma's teachings, Limhi and all his people requested that they be baptized. Following a consultation with King Mosiah, Alma baptized them in the same manner as he had previously done his own faithful believers. Under the direction of Mosiah, Alma then went throughout the land, organizing and establishing Churches and ordaining priests and teachers over every Church. Thus were seven branches of the Church set up in the land of Zarahemla.

Let us return, for a moment, to the records of Zeniff's people, and also of Alma's.

Having heard nothing of what had become of the Nephites, who with Zeniff, had departed from Zarahemla during the early part of Benjamin's Reign to establish anew their homes in the Land of Lehi-Nephi which was considered the land of the Nephite's first inheritance, Mosiah sent an expedition under Ammon, one of King Mosiah's trusted servants, to find them.

They found them, and this in brief is what they found: Zeniff and his people traveled southward after leaving Zarahemla, and came at length to the Land of Lehi-Nephi which then was the head-quarters of the Lamanite king. The blessings of the Lord were not greatly with them, for they did not seek Him, nor strive to do His will. In the wilderness they lost their way, and suffered from hunger and many other afflictions; but after many days the object of their journey was in sight, the former home of their race. Here Zeniff chose four of his company and with them he went to the king of the Lamanites. This monarch received them with the over-all appearance of kindness. He made a treaty with Zeniff, and gave him the Lands of Lehi-Nephi and Shilom to dwell in. He caused his own people to evacuate these lands so that Zeniff's people could have undisputed possession of them. The king of the Lamanites was not as friendly as he pretended to be. His object was to get the industrious Nephites to settle in the midst of his own people, and then, by superior numbers, to make them slaves. His own subjects were a lazy, unprogressive race.

As soon as Zeniff and his followers occupied their new possessions they went to work to build houses and to repair the walls around the cities. The idle and slothful Lamanites had permitted the once resplendent cities to fall into decay. They also commenced to till the soil, and to plant all manner of grain, vegetables, and fruit, therein. Soon, through their thrift and industry, they began to prosper and multiply. This caused the Lamanite King, Laman, to grow uneasy. He desired to bring them into bondage so that his people could reap the benefits of Nephite labor. But they were growing so rapidly that he feared that if he did not stop it soon they would become the stronger of the two peoples.

To prevent this he began to stir up the hearts of his people to anger against the Nephites. He succeeded so well that in the thirteenth year of Zeniff's rule in the Land of Lehi-Nephi, a numerous host of Lamanites suddenly fell upon his people while they were feeding their flocks, and began to slay them. The Lamanites also carried off some of the Nephite's flocks and herds, and much of the corn from their fields.

Those of the Nephites who were not slain or overcome by the Lamanites fled to Zeniff. As quickly as he could he armed his people with bows and arrows, swords and cimeters, clubs and slings, and with such other weapons as they could invent. Thus armed they went forth in the strength of the Lord to meet the enemy, for in their hour of peril they had cried mightily unto Him, and He heard their cries and answered their prayers.

Strengthened by Power from On High they met their foes. The battle was an obstinate and a bloodthirsty one. It lasted all day and night. At last the Lamanites were driven back with a loss of over 3,000 warriors, while the people of Zeniff had to mourn the death of nearly 300 of their brethren. After this there was peace in the land for many years—almost twenty-two.

At this time the old King Laman died, and his son succeeded him on the throne. Like many young men, he desired to distinguish himself in war. So he gathered a numerous host of the Lamanites, and armed them as were the Nephites, then he led them to the north of the Land of Shemlon, which lay side by side the Land of Lehi-Nephi.

When Zeniff learned of the approach of young King Laman's armies, he caused the women and children to hide in the wilderness; but every man, young or old, who was able to bear arms was placed in the army of the Nephites to go out and fight against the foe. Zeniff, himself, was an aged man, but he still continued to command his forces and led them in person to battle. But before doing so he rehearsed to his soldiery the history of the two peoples, stimulated them to valor by showing them that in this contest they were in the right; then calling upon them to put their trust in God, he led them in the onset of conflict. Strengthened by the faith Zeniff had renewed in their hearts, the Nephites gained a great victory. So numerous were the dead that they were not counted. After this there was peace in the land which lasted all the remaining days of Zeniff. Shortly after this Zeniff died, but before his passing he chose for a successor an unworthy son, named Noah. King Noah led the people into many sins, and lured them on into such folly and weaknesses that they fell an easy prey to the ever-watchful foes that everywhere surrounded them.

King Noah did not walk in the ways of his father; he was a very wicked man. He was filled with lust and cruelty, and ruled his people with a tyrant's hand. He removed from their sacred office the good priests his father had consecrated and placed corrupt men like himself in their stead. Then he further burdened his weakened subjects with heavy taxes. Even he took one-fifth of all they possessed, whether it was gold or silver, grain or fruit, flocks or herds. These taxes he wasted upon himself and his loathsome priests, upon his wives and concubines, and the harlots with whom the priests consorted.

Noah also built a very grand palace in Lehi-Nephi for his own comfort, and spent much in lavishly ornamenting the temple in that city. Near the temple he erected a very high tower, so-high that any one standing upon its top could see all over the surrounding country. He also built many edifices in the Land of Shilom, and there erected another high tower. Furthermore, he planted many vineyards and made his people a drunken race. All this he did with the riches which he ground out of his tax-burdened subjects.

At this time when the oft-repeated attacks of the Lamanites, coupled with the iniquities of King Noah and his people had so weakened them, a prophet named Abinadi appeared among them and predicted that they would be brought into bondage to their enemies, the Lamanites, unless they repented of their wickedness. Noah and his people became exceedingly angry with Abinadi, and sought to take his life. Two years later he again came among them in disguise. This time he uttered, in the name of the Lord, many terrible prophecies against Noah and his followers. He told them that they would go into bondage to their enemies; that they should be smitten like dumb beasts and be slain; that vultures and dogs would devour their carcasses. He also told them that famine and pestilence would come upon them, and that hail and insects would destroy their crops, and in the end, if they did not repent, they utterly should be destroyed. All of which was fulfilled in the next very few years.

Abinadi was one of God's greatest prophets. He was filled with the spirit of his calling and with the Holy Ghost, but the people would not give heed to his warnings. The more he exposed their iniquities the more furious raged their anger against him. Neither did they believe his words; in their own opinion they were everything that was good. They thought they were mighty in their own strength, and unapproachably wise in their own conceit. Never, if you could believe them, had a more valiant, better, or more innocent people lived. Filled with this spirit of self-conceit they took Abinadi, bound him, and with railing accusations hurried him before the king. There the priests began to question him; they sought to confuse him with their cross-examination. They hoped that he would say something that would give them a pretext for slaying him. This conduct was providentially turned to the glory of God and to the good of many souls. It gave to Abinadi the chance in turn to question his accusers by which he showed their deceit and iniquity. It also enabled him to explain many of the principles of the Gospel of Life and Salvation. His teachings pricked the hearts of a few, while they thoroughly enraged the greater number. Particularly he impressed upon the minds of those who believed the truth that Christ should come, and to sustain his words he quoted Isaiah and other Hebrew prophets. His teachings are among the strongest and plainest that any of the scriptures record. They should be studied by all who desire to become familiar and fully acquainted with the truths of divine love and mercy for fallen humanity.

These doctrines were, however, exactly what Noah's priests did not want to hear. They charged Abinadi with having reviled the king, and on this trumped-up charge obtained Noah's consent for his execution.

Abinadi was then cruelly tortured and burned to death by his fellow citizens in the sin-stained City of Lehi-Nephi. How strange that people can so quickly grow wicked. In Zeniff's days they kept God's laws, if only after a fashion, but in Noah's reign, led by his bad example, they sank to the depth of taking the life of one who had done them no wrong, but whose only fault was to reprove them for their own wrongdoing and to strive to teach them repentance and the road to heaven. In this they shed innocent blood. As the fires were lighted, and the hot flames began to scorch the weary feet of Abinadi, he offered no excuses nor any apologies for the words which he had spoken, but instead he uttered more and greater denunciations of their rebellion against God's laws and the wickedness in which they took delight.

Abinadi's last words were very terrible in their prophetic warnings:

Behold, even as ye have done unto me, so shall it come to pass that thy seed shall cause that many shall suffer even the pains of death by fire; and this because they believe in the Salvation of the Lord their God.

And it will come to pass that ye shall be afflicted with all manner of diseases because of your iniquities.

Yea, and ye shall be smitten on every hand, and shall be driven and scattered to and fro, even as a wild flock is driven by wild and ferocious beasts.

And in that day ye shall be hunted, and ye shall be taken by the hand of your enemies, and then ye shall suffer, as I suffer, the pains of death by fire.

Thus God executeth vengeance upon those that destroy his people. O God, receive my soul. (Mosiah 17:15-19)

But all the people, in their hearts, did not consent to Abinadi's death. One among them especially, whose name was Alma; he confessed the truth of Abinadi's words. He knew that the grave charges the prophet made were true. He was a young man, one of Noah's priests, and when the clamor was highest for Abinadi's death he went to the besotted king and pleaded in Abinadi's behalf. This so angered Noah that he had Alma cast out of his presence, and then sent his servants to slay the young priest. Alma, however, hid from his pursuers, and, during his concealment, wrote the words he had heard Abinadi speak. These teachings of the prophet are among the most important parts of the doctrinal portions of the Book of Mormon.

The power and importance of Abinadi's teachings sank deeply in the heart of Alma; he not only realized their truth, but he also comprehended their saving value. The first lesson they impressed upon his mind was the necessity of his own repentance. This he did sincerely, and he then began to teach the same lesson to others. For fear of the king he did not do this openly, but secretly as opportunity permitted.

Alma's preaching of God's holy word was not without fruit. Many received the truth with joy, and gathered to a convenient spot on the borders of the wilderness, but not far from their city, where they could hear more of Gospel truths. This place was called Mormon. It was admirably suited for a hiding place, having formerly been infested with ravenous wild beasts, and as such was dreaded and avoided by the people. Near by was a thicket or forest of small trees, in which the believers could hide should they be pursued by the king's servants. Here also was a spring of pure water, most excellently adapted for the purposes of baptism. Here was this holy rite first administered, and here the Church of Christ was organized.

The first to go down into the Waters of Mormon for baptism were Alma and a fellow believer named Helam. Alma ministered in the sacred ordinance, and upon ending a prayer suitable for the occasion both he and Helam were buried in the water, from which they came forth rejoicing, being filled with the Holy Ghost.

Others, the Book of Mormon specifically says, 204, followed Helam into the waters of baptism, and from here we may date the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ in the Land of Lehi-Nephi. Henceforth the members of the Church assembled for worship and testimony once a week.

Notwithstanding the care and secrecy with which the members of the Church acted, Noah soon discovered that there was some hidden movement among his subjects, and with the help of his spies he found out what was taking place at Mormon. Making the tyrant's usual excuse, that the Christians were in rebellion against him, he sent his army to capture and destroy Alma and his followers. But One greater than he stretched forth His arm to preserve His people. The Lord warned Alma of the king's intentions, and by divine direction he assembled his people, some 450 souls, and told them to gather together their flocks and herds, load up their grain, provisions, and other supplies, and then when they had complied they departed into the wilderness.

Being strengthened by the Lord, notwithstanding they were impeded by their flocks and families, the pilgrims traveled with sufficient rapidity to escape the pursuing forces of the king, who were reluctantly compelled to return to the Land of Lehi-Nephi without having accomplished their mission. At the end of eight days Alma's company ceased their flight and settled in a beautiful and pleasant valley where there was an abundant supply of pure water. We have no direct information with regard to the course taken by this colony, but it is evident from the details of their later history that the new settlement lay somewhere between the Lands of Lehi-Nephi and Zarahemla, though somewhat aside from the most direct route. We think it is probable that it was situated at the headwaters of one of the numerous rivers that rise in the eastern slopes of the Andes Mountains, although the topography of that particular district may have been greatly changed at the time of the Crucifixion of our Lord.

The colonists, whose industry is especially noted by the inspired historian, immediately set to work to till the soil and build a city. The city and the surrounding territory they named, the City and Land of Helam. Now that they were established as a separate people, independent of both Lamanite and Nephite princes, they desired a form of government, and requested Alma be their king. This honor he declined. He rehearsed to them the history of their fathers; he pictured to them the infamies of King Noah's reign; he showed them how wicked rulers could lead their subjects into all manner of evil, and how such things led to bondage; and, on the other hand, how much better it was to have the Lord as their King and Ruler, and to be guided by His servants under His inspiration. This counsel the people wisely accepted. Alma, though not bearing the title of king, acted as their leader, as their High Priest and prophet, and as the mouthpiece of heaven whenever God's holy word was graciously given them. In this happy state the people of Helam continued for a number of pleasant years, the Lord greatly prospering them and crowning their labors with an abundant increase. Nevertheless, the Lord saw fit to chasten this devoted people, and to try their faith and patience under adversity. Before we outline these tribulations through which they passed, we must return to the account of King Noah and the people who remained in Lehi-Nephi.

Soon after the return of King Noah's army from their unsuccessful attempt to capture Alma and his people, a great division grew up among that monarch's subjects. They were heartily tired of his tyranny and his debaucheries. One of the most dissatisfied was an officer of the king's army named Gideon. We have no reason to believe that he was a wicked man, but rather that he was a good, pure, and wise man, for in after life he proved that he possessed all these virtues. In the disturbances that now arose between Noah and his people Gideon sought to slay the king. But Noah fled to the tower near the temple. Thither Gideon followed, sword in his hand. The king mounted to the top, and there he accidently caught sight of an invading army of Lamanites in the Land of Shemlon. In the terror caused by this unexpected sight, he appealed to Gideon's patriotism and besought him to spare him—not that the king cared for his people, but he made this excuse for pleading for his own life. Gideon consented, and Noah in mortal terror ordered his people to flee into the wilderness from before the advancing hosts of Lamanites.

The people obeyed the king's command, and with their wives and children fled into the wilderness. But the force of Lamanites, unencumbered with women and children, soon overtook them. Then the coward king commanded the men to continue their flight and leave their wives and little ones to the mercy of their enemy. Some obeyed, others would not, but preferred to stay and perish with those of whom they were the natural protectors. Those who stayed, in the agony of their terror when the Lamanites drew near, sent their fair daughters to plead with their enemies for their lives. This act saved them. For the dark-skinned warriors of Laman were so charmed with the beauty of the women that they spared all their lives. Yet they took them captives, carried them back to Lehi-Nephi, and gave them permission to retain that land, but under some very hard conditions. These conditions were that they would surrender into Lamanite hands, King Noah, and, further, that they would deliver up to them one-half of everything they possessed, and were to continue this tribute of half of their property year by year.

Gideon now sent men in search for King Noah that he might be delivered up to the Lamanites. They found that the men who followed Noah, being ashamed of their cowardly flight, swore that they would return, and if their wives and children and the men who had stayed with them were killed, they would have revenge. The king commanded that they should not return, for which they became very angry with Noah, and burned him to death as he had done Abinadi. His priests were saved a like fate by fleeing farther into the wilderness. When the men who put Noah to death were about to return to their homes in Lehi-Nephi, they met Gideon and his party, and informed them of Noah's end and the escape of his priests. When these wretched survivors of Noah's uncourageous order heard the news which Gideon brought, they rejoiced much that the Lamanites had spared their loved ones.

Noah, now dead, his son named Limhi was made king. It was almost an empty honor because his people were in bondage to the Lamanites. Still he made a treaty with their king, and because, we imagine, he could do no better, he agreed to pay a yearly tribute of one-half of their increase.

To prevent any escape of the Nephites which they might try, guards were set all around the land, for the Lamanites were now most anxious that the Nephites should not escape. They were to all intents and purposes bond servants, and the Lamanites obtained all the advantages of their labor without any of the responsibilities that generally fall upon the slave owner. Out of the tribute, the guards that held them were paid. This state of things continued for two years without an outbreak.

In these times the Lamanitish maidens were in the habit of resorting to a beautiful rendezvous in the Land of Shemlon where they gathered to make merry; with dancing, singing, and bathing, they expressed all the joys of youth and innocent behavior. One day when a few were thus gathered they were suddenly surprised, and twenty-four of their number were carried off by strange men, who, from their appearance were unmistakably Nephites.

On learning of this act of treachery the Lamanites were stirred to uncontrolable anger, and without seeking an explanation, they made a sudden incursion into the territory held by King Limhi. This attack, however, was not successful, for their movements, though not understood, had been discovered and their intended victims poured forth to meet them.

With Limhi and his people it was a war for existence; to be defeated was to be annihilated; his warriors therefore fought with almost superhuman energy and desperation, and they eventually drove the Lamanites back. So speedy did their flight become, that in their confusion the Lamanites left their wounded king lying among the heaps of those slain. There he was discovered by the victors. In the interview between him and Limhi that followed, mutual explanations ensued. The Lamanite king complained bitterly of the outrage committed on the daughters of his people, while Limhi protested that he and his subjects were innocent of the base act. Further investigation developed the fact that some of the iniquitous priests of King Noah, who had fled into the wilderness from the dreaded wrath of their abused countrymen, were the guilty ones. Being without wives, and fearing to return home, they had adopted this plan to obtain them.

On hearing this explanation, King Laman consented to make an effort to pacify his angry hosts. At the head of an unarmed body of Nephites he went forth and met his armies who were returning to the attack. He explained what he had learned, and the Lamanites possibly somewhat ashamed of their rashness, renewed the covenant of peace they had made with the Nephites.

This peace, unfortunately, was of short duration. The Lamanites grew arrogant and grievously oppressed the Nephites. Under their exactions and cruelty the condition of Limhi's people became continually worse until they could no longer bear them. Three times they broke out in rebellion which proved ineffectual, and just as often as they rebelled their taskmasters put upon them greater burdens and more toil. Their spirits were then entirely broken, and they cowered before their oppressors and bowed "to the yoke of bondage." They submitted themselves to be smitten, and to be driven to and fro, and meekly to be weighted down with whatsoever their enemies desired.

After a time the Lord softened the hearts of the Lamanites so that they began to ease the burdens of their bond servants, but He did not, at once, deliver the Nephites out of their serfdom. The Nephites, however, gradually prospered; they raised more grain, flocks and herds, so that they did not suffer with hunger.

The people of King Limhi kept together as much as possible for protection. Even the king did not trust himself outside the walls of the city without his guards, lest he might fall into the hands of the Lamanites.

In this sad condition of bondage and serfdom the Nephites had one hope. It was to communicate with their brethren in Zarahemla. In the attempt so to do, Limhi secretly fitted out an expedition consisting of a small number of men. This company became lost in the wilderness, and traveled a long distance northward until they found a land of many waters covered with the dry bones of men who appeared to have fallen in battle. Limhi's men thought this was surely the Land of Zarahemla and that their Nephite friends who dwelt there had been destroyed. But in this they were mistaken, for they found with the dead some records engraved on plates of metal, which, when afterwards translated by the power of God, showed that these bones they discovered were those of some of the Jaredites who had been slain in war many years before. They missed the Land of Zarahemla, having probably traveled to the west of it and passed northward through the Isthmus of Panama.

Shortly after this a small company of sixteen men reached them, they having come from Zarahemla. Their leader's name was Ammon. He had been sent by King Mosiah to the Land of Lehi-Nephi to find out what had become of the people, or their descendants, who left with Zeniff. When Ammon and those who were with him reached Lehi-Nephi, King Limhi of that land happened to be outside the walls of the city, and his guards, thinking that Ammon and his friends were some of the priests of the late King Noah, took them and put them into prison. The next day they discovered their mistake, and Limhi and his people were overjoyed to hear from their brethren whom they thought were all dead. Soon plans were laid to effect the escape of the enslaved Nephites, which, under the guidance of Limhi, Ammon, and Gideon, was successfully accomplished. The Lamanite guards were made drowsy with a large present of wine which they drank copiously, and in the drunken stupor which followed, the people of Limhi escaped through an unfrequented pass, taking with them such things as they could safely carry away. They were then led by Ammon to Zarahemla.

When, to their great surprise, the Lamanite guards found that their bond servants had escaped, they sent an army to search them out. It so happened that this body of soldiers lost themselves in the wilderness. While traveling hither and thither, not knowing where to go, they came across the priests of Noah, who had fled from the face of their fellows to escape the just indignation their continued iniquities had aroused. These priests, at the instigation of Amulon, their leader, joined the Lamanites and unitedly endeavored to get back to the Land of Lehi-Nephi. While thus engaged, they wandered near the City of Helam.

When the people of Alma first perceived the approach of these men, they were engaged tilling the soil around their city, into which they immediately fled in great fear. In this perilous hour the faith and courage of Alma were greatly inspiring to his distraught followers. He gathered the people around him, called upon them to cast aside their fears and exhorted them to remember God who had ever delivered them that trusted in Him. The words of Alma had the desired effect; the people silenced their terrified appeals, and they, as one, called upon the Almighty Father to soften the hearts of the Lamanites that they might spare their lives and those of their wives and children. Then with the assurance in their hearts that the Lord God would hearken unto their prayers, Alma and his brethren went forth out of their city and delivered themselves up to their former foes.

The Lamanites were in a dilemma, therefore they were profuse in promises. They said that they were willing to grant the people of Helam their lives and liberty if they would show them the way to Lehi-Nephi. Having obtained this information and having reached their homes in safety, they broke their promises and made Amulon the king over a large district of country, including the Land of Helam.

Alma and Amulon had known each other in the days when both were priests of King Noah, and with the venom so often conspicuous in apostates, the latter soon commenced to persecute those who were faithful to the Lord. Amulon caused that taskmasters should be placed over them, and otherwise imposed inhuman burdens upon them. They became grievously afflicted by his wanton demands.

In their agony they called continually upon the Lord for deliverance. Their prayers annoyed their cruel masters, and they were forbidden to pray; but no tyrants, no matter however powerful or cruel, could prevent Alma's people from beseeching the Great Father when from their hearts they called upon Him for succor in the time of need. This, the people of Alma continued to do most fervently, and in due time, though not immediately, they were set free. In the meanwhile the Lord comforted and strengthened them in their afflictions so that they bore their burdens more easily.

The time of their deliverance finally came, for on a certain day the Lord promised them that He would deliver them "on the morrow." (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Vol. II, p. 34) They immediately began to prepare for their journey; they gathered up all their flocks and herds and other provisions they would need in such a hegira. In the morning of the day appointed their Lamanite guards and taskmasters were immobilized by a deep sleep. Alma's people, taking advantage of the conditions imposed upon them by the Lord, departed into the wilderness.

After traveling all that day they pitched their tents in a valley which they called Alma. The Lord warned Alma to hasten out of this country for the Lamanites were in pursuit, but He would stop them in the valley where Alma was then encamped. Alma and his company then traveled yet another twelve days at the end of which time they arrived at Zarahemla. This, with the eight days occupied in traveling from the Waters of Mormon to the Land of Helam, makes twenty days' travel from Lehi-Nephi to Zarahemla.

We must now leave the Lamanites in the Land of Lehi-Nephi and return to King Mosiah in Zarahemla. Of the happy appearance of King Limhi's people among them, and the advent of Alma and his followers at about the same time, we have already spoken.

In the course of years many of the rising generation gave no heed to the word of God. These were mostly those who were too young to enter into covenant with the Lord at the time King Benjamin anointed Mosiah to be his successor. Not only did they themselves reject the doctrines of the Atonement, Resurrection, and other Gospel principles, but they led away many of the members of the Church into darkness and into iniquity, and abused, reviled, and persecuted those who remained faithful to the cause of Christ. Neither the fear of the evil law nor the divine ones restrained them. Their course, and that of those in the Church who gave way to evil-doing gave much trouble and caused deep anxiety to Mosiah and Alma, the latter now being the High Priest of the whole Church. When sought in prayer, the Lord directed what action should be taken with transgressors in the Church, and after due consultations with the priests of the Church, with Alma and others, Mosiah issued a proclamation of equality to his people, forbidding all his subjects to persecute, vex, or abuse their fellows because of their faith or religion, and announcing that in matters of conscience all men were equal before the law, and all were the subjects of his protection. Still it required a greater than an earthly king to bring to naught the evil intents of the disbelievers, who were greatly encouraged in their misdeeds by the fact that the King's four sons and one of Alma's were their leaders.

Frequent and fervent were the prayers offered by Mosiah and the elder Alma in behalf of their rebellious sons, and these prayers prevailed with Him who sits on Heaven's Eternal Throne.

One day, as the younger Alma and his company were going about persecuting the members of the Church, an holy angel descended in a cloud and stopped them in their way. When the angel spoke, his voice was like thunder that caused the earth to tremble beneath their feet. Naturally this manifestation of the power of God spread terror and dismay in the hearts of those who witnessed it. They fell to the ground, and so confused and astonished were they that they failed to understand the words of the holy messenger.

"Alma, arise and stand forth," the angel cried, "for why persecutest thou the Church of God? For the Lord hath said, 'This is My Church, and I will establish it; and nothing shall overthrow it, save it is the transgression of My people." The angel further said, "If thou wilt of thyself be destroyed, seek no more to destroy the Church of God." (Alma 36:9)

Besides this the angel spoke to Alma of his father's prayers in his behalf, and that because of those prayers, he told him, he was sent to convince him of the power of God. He also recounted to Alma the captivity of his fathers in the Lands of Lehi-Nephi and Helam, and of their miraculous deliverance therefrom. But Alma heard none of these latter sayings, for the terrors of the first salutation had overpowered him.

When the angel departed Alma was overcome, dismayed, and soul stricken. He sank to the ground. When his companions gathered around him, they found that he could not move, neither could he speak. Outwardly he was dead to the world; the torments of the damned had taken hold of his soul, and in the most bitter pain and mental anguish he lay racked with the memory of all his past sins. He thought of standing before the Bar of God to be judged for his iniquities. It filled him with horror. He desired to become extinct both body and soul without being brought before his Creator. Thus he continued for three days and three nights to suffer the pains of hell, which, to his racked conscience must have seemed an eternity.

When his companions found that he could neither speak nor move, they carried him to his father, and related to him all that had happened. Strange as it must have seemed to them, the elder Alma's heart was filled with joy and praise when he looked upon the body of his much-loved son. He realized it was God's power that wrought all this, and that his long-continued prayers had been answered. In his joy he gathered the people to witness this mighty manifestation of the goodness and power of Jehovah. He assembled the priests, sought their co-operation, and unitedly, in God's own way, they prayed and fasted for the stricken youth. For two days they continued their cries to heaven, at the end of which time, Alma stood upon his feet and spoke. He comforted them by declaring, "I have repented of my sins, and have been redeemed of the Lord; behold I am born of the Spirit." (Mosiah 27:24)

From that time to the end of his mortal career, Alma labored without ceasing to bring souls to Christ, and to guide his fellow men in the paths of righteousness.

The effect of that heavenly visit upon the sons of King Mosiah was, too, exceedingly great. From that moment they sought no more to vex the members of the Church, and in their newly found faith they labored most diligently to bring others to a sense of their own folly. They realized there was a God, and that they had been fighting against Him. The conviction within themselves of their own unworthiness filled their hearts; remorse and anguish reigned therein, and they condemned themselves as the vilest of sinners. By and by the bitterness of their remorse was swallowed up in their faith in the coming of the Redeemer, and they determined by God's help, to their utmost strength, to undo the evil that their previous course had wrought. These resolutions they faithfully carried out. If they had been energetic in their wrong-doing, they were yet more active in their works of restitution. They journeyed from city to city, from land to land, and everywhere bore triumphal testimony of the incidents of their miraculous conversion. In no equivocal tones they proclaimed the glorious message of the Gospel of Christ's love, and the Salvation it would bring to all mankind.

Of the missionary experiences of Mosiah's sons, whose names were Aaron, Ammon, Omner, and Himni, we will discuss further on in this volume of the COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON.

* * * * *

The inhabitants of Zarahemla at this time were all considered Nephites, though the descendants of Mulek and his companions were the most numerous. But the Nephites, though they were the last comers to Zarahemla, were the governing race, and the kingdom had been conferred upon none but those who were the descendants of Nephi, the son of Lehi. The Nephites ruled by right of their higher civilization, the possession of the records, and the authority of holding the Holy Priesthood.

There is another strange fact in regard to the inhabitants of South America at this time. The Lamanites were twice as numerous as the combined peoples of Nephi and Zarahemla. This may have been owing to the fact that when any defection occurred among the Nephites, the dissatisfied portions of the community went over to the Lamanites, and became absorbed in that race.

In these days there was much peace in the land of Zarahemla. The Lord blessed the people and they became very numerous, contented and wealthy. When Benjamin was king, his people appear to have resided near to, or in the capital city of that land, as the king directed his son to gather them at the temple there on the morrow. Although as it has been pointed out, morrow does not necessarily mean within the next twenty-four hours, it does mean shortly, or within a brief period of time. At the time appointed, all were there. It seems to us that this would have been impossible had they lived at any great distance from headquarters.

We judge that at the time of Benjamin the majority of the Nephites inhabited the city and farmed the surrounding lands. Up to this time no other city than Zarahemla is mentioned in that land, but now the people began to spread out, building, as the historian says, large cities and villages in all quarters of the land. We may reasonably suppose that in this epoch were founded the Cities of Aaron, Ammonihah, Gideon, Manti, Melek, and others mentioned in the annals of the next twenty years.

Notwithstanding the great good they had already done at Zarahemla, the sons of King Mosiah were not content to confine their labors there. They longed to carry the glad tidings of Salvation to the benightened Lamanites. Ignoring the dangers and despising the pains such a mission would entail, they pleaded with their father many days for his consent for them to go to the Land of Lehi-Nephi. The bloodthirsty and revengeful character of the Lamanites was too well known to the king for him to think of his sons going into their midst without causing him feelings of dread and apprehension. However, he had no desire to quench their righteous zeal towards God and their love for their fellows, lest he should sin by so doing, and rob thousands of the opportunity of hearing the everlasting truths through obedience to which mankind is saved. He therefore inquired of the Lord. The answer came, "Let them go up, for many shall believe on their words, and they shall have eternal life; and I will deliver thy sons out of the hands of the Lamanites." (Mosiah 28:7) With this divine assurance, Mosiah consented, and shortly after, with some other missionaries whom they had chosen to go with them, these four valiant God-fearing youths started on their perilous mission.

Mosiah now felt that it was time that the question of succession to his throne should be settled. In his magnanimity he sent among the people to learn whom they desired to be their king. The people chose his son, Aaron, but Aaron would not accept the royal powers. He had set his heart upon the conversion of his fellow men to the knowledge of the Gospel. The refusal of Aaron troubled the mind of Mosiah; he apprehended difficulties if Aaron at some future time should change his mind and demand his rights even though he then refused them.

Mosiah then issued another address to his much-loved subjects, as usual full of the spirit of wisdom and love. In it after recounting the peculiarities of the situation, he said,

... Let us be wise and consider these things, for we have no right to destroy my son, neither should we have any right to destroy another if he should be appointed in his stead.

And if my son should turn again to his pride and vain things he would recall the things which he had said, and claim his right to the kingdom, which would cause him and also this people to commit much sin.

And now let us be wise and look forward to these things, and do that which will make for the peace of this people.

Therefore I will be your king the remainder of my days; nevertheless, let us appoint judges, to judge this people according to our law; and we will newly arrange the affairs of this people, for we will appoint wise men to be judges, that will judge this people according to the commandments of God. (Mosiah 29:8-11)

Inspired and directed by the Lord, the king further advised many changes in the law, so that all things were done by the voice of the whole people. These changes were gladly accepted by the people, as they gave them greater liberty and a voice in all important national affairs.

Mosiah's sons having now started on their mission to the Lamanites, Mosiah chose Alma, the younger, and gave into his keeping the sacred plates and the associate holy things. The elder Alma made this same son the Presiding High Priest of the whole Church, and the people chose him for their first Chief Judge.

The Church, the Records, the Nation, all being thus provided for, Mosiah passed away to the joys of eternity. He was 63 years old, and had ruled his people in righteousness for 33. When he passed away no fierce convulsions wrecked the ship of state, the political atmosphere was calm, the people joyfully assumed their new responsibilities, and as we have noted, "The first of the judges succeeded the last of the kings without causing one disturbing wave on the placid waters of the national life."

THE BOOK OF ALMA

THE SON OF ALMA THE ACCOUNT OF ALMA, WHO WAS A SON OF ALMA THE FIRST, AND CHIEF JUDGE OVER THE PEOPLE OF NEPHI, AND ALSO THE HIGH PRIEST OVER THE CHURCH. AN ACCOUNT OF THE REIGN OF THE JUDGES, AND THE WARS AND CONTENTIONS AMONG THE PEOPLE AND ALSO AN ACCOUNT OF A WAR BETWEEN THE NEPHITES AND THE LAMANITES, ACCORDING TO THE RECORD OF ALMA, THE FIRST AND CHIEF JUDGE.

CHAPTER 1

Alma 1 1Verse 1

Alma 1 1King Mosiah having gone the way of all the earth. When King Mosiah died, he left no successor to the Nephite throne, but he did leave a code of laws by which the Nephites thereafter were to be governed. His sons, who had chosen to perform missions among the Lamanites, had renounced any claim to kingship and had rejected, publicly, the right to rule as monarchs. Nevertheless, in wisdom, lest, at a later date, they should change their minds and demand that which was rightfully theirs, King Mosiah caused that the monarchial form of government by which the Nephites for more than 500 years had been ruled should be replaced by a republic. A new Constitution, founded upon good and equitable laws, was framed by Mosiah who was the last king of the Nephites. The statutes he compiled provided many modifications in the manner of the legitimate procedure of government. Instead of one voice, which was the ultimate of all, he advised that the people, themselves, should have the final say as to who was to rule over them. In this Constitution Mosiah also caused it to be written that all things should be done only after the approval of a majority vote in which every one was to be permitted to participate. This system of organic law became the supreme ruling power of the Nephites when they accepted it through the popular vote of the people. For 120 years after the death of Mosiah the Nephite Commonwealth was ruled by the authority vested in Judges. Alma, who was the son of that Alma who led the righteous among the Nephites from Lehi-Nephi to Zarahemla, was the first Judge and also the chief among them. Although Alma was appointed to this high and holy office by Mosiah, his successors in office were always thereafter chosen by the people.

Alma 1 2Verse 2

Alma 1 2In the first year of the reign of Alma. Could our readers have taken a glimpse at the fair capital of the Nephites at that time (91 B.C.), already rich in the awards of human industry, combined with the lavish productions of nature in that much favored land, they might have noticed in the principal street a portly, handsome man, manifesting in his carriage the evidences of great bodily strength, imbued with vanity, self-sufficiency and subtlety. They might observe that his raiment was made of the finest fabrics that the looms of Zarahemla could produce, lavishly embroidered and ornamented with the labors of the cunning workman in silk, in feathers and in the precious metals, whilst at his side hung a richly decorated sword. This man was no king, no governor, no general of the Nephite armies; he was simply Nehor, the successful religious charlatan of the hour, to whom the unstable listened and the weakminded flocked.

Alma 1 3Verse 3

Alma 1 3And he had gone about among the people, preaching. Nehor's teachings had at any rate the interest of novelty to the Nephites, yet some of them were older than the world, itself. They had been rejected in the Councils of Heaven before Lucifer, the Son of the Morning, fell. He preached, as do most impostors, that all priests should while away their time in pleasant surroundings, and should not be required to labor with their hands, but, instead, should be upheld and maintained in their office by public support.

SCAlma 1 4Alma 1 5Alma 1 6Verses 4-6

SCAlma 1 4Alma 1 5Alma 1 6He testified that all mankind should have Eternal Life. He would save all men in their sins and with their sins; he abolished hell, established a paid order of priests, and taught doctrines so liberal that every man could be a member of his church and yet continue to gratify every vice his nature inclined to. For this liberality of doctrine, Nehor expected in return, liberality of support for himself and associates in which anticipation he was not disappointed. Many adopted his heresies; his success fired his ambitions and developed his vanity.

Alma 1 7Verse 7

Alma 1 7Nehor met a man who belonged to the Church of God. Nehor was so used to the obsequious flattery of his converts, and their servility in his presence that he was restive under contradiction. One day when he was reproved by one who was a member of the Church of God, and who also was a teacher therein, whom Nehor had met on the streets of Zarahemla, his arrogance knew no bounds. Nehor used sharp language, and when upbraided for the sinful course he then pursued, grew exceeding angry.

SCAlma 1 8Alma 1 9Verses 8-9

SCAlma 1 8Alma 1 9Now the name of the man was Gideon, and he withstood him with the words of God. Gideon was one of those who with Ammon and Limhi assisted the people of Lehi-Nephi to escape Lamanite bondage. He was now a very old man, and in physical combat was not equal to one "who was large and who was noted for his great strength." Nehor drew his sword, and unmindful of Gideon's age, nor his many virtues, smote him until he died. Nehor thought that might is right, and that his finery and his prowess in contending with the sword would excuse his rash conduct. But in this he was mistaken.

SCAlma 1 10Alma 1 11Verses 10-11

SCAlma 1 10Alma 1 11Nehor was taken by the people of the Church. Nehor was taken before the Chief Judge, Alma, by some Church members, and was tried for his willful and unprovoked crime. He made, himself being his own advocate, a bold defense of his action, and, without any doubts, pleaded that he had been purposely aggravated by Gideon.

SCAlma 1 12Alma 1 13Alma 1 14Verses 12-14

SCAlma 1 12Alma 1 13Alma 1 14Thou hast shed the blood of a righteous man, and, what is the first time, priestcraft has been introduced among this people. Alma, apparently shaken by the effrontery of Nehor and his justification of the intentional and reprehensible act of which he was accused, found him guilty not only of slaying Gideon, who was a man without blameworthiness, but also, of criminal responsibility in introducing priestcraft "among this people," and of attempting to enforce it "by the sword." Alma concluded this part of his decision by stating that if such a procedure was allowed to continue it would be the source of great contention among the people and that if they were coerced or compelled to uphold any pretender like Nehor with their worldly goods as well as to believe their teachings, they might, themselves, take up arms. This would, in the end, destroy the entire people because there were those who, under no circumstance, would deny the holy prophets. If death was the reward of faithful observance of God's laws, there were many among them ready and willing to accept it. They would prefer it to denying the teachings of His revealed Truth.

SCAlma 1 12Alma 1 13Alma 1 14Priestcraft means, not only crafty and wicked ruses to lead others astray, but also the making of religion a profession in which the aim is to obtain worldly honor, gold and silver, and the plaudits of men.

SCAlma 1 12Alma 1 13Alma 1 14The Lord, through the Prophet Nephi, the son of Lehi, said, "There shall be no priestcrafts; for, behold, priestcrafts are that men preach and set themselves up for a light unto the world, that they might get gain and praise of the world; but they seek not the welfare of Zion." (II Nephi 26:29, also See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume I, p. 313)

Alma 1 14Verse 14

Alma 1 14Therefore thou art condemned to die. Nehor, having been pronounced guilty, was condemned to die according to the laws under which the Nephite Republic was founded. The people had accepted those laws and therefore, they were compelled to abide them, otherwise the government of which they were part would collapse as being without effect, and would be impotent.

Alma 1 15Verse 15

Alma 1 15They carried Nehor to the top of the Hill Manti, and there he suffered an ignominious death. At the place where Nehor died, he confessed that the things he had taught to the people were false and were contrary to the Word of God. Manti, the name of the Hill where Nehor was executed, is a word that is to be found in ancient Egypt. The name is also found in numerous places in the geography of both North and South America. (See Manti, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 324)

SCAlma 1 16Alma 1 17Alma 1 18Verses 16-18

SCAlma 1 16Alma 1 17Alma 1 18Nevertheless, the death of Nehor did not put an end to the preaching of priestcraft through the land. Though Nehor's shameful life was thus ended, unfortunately, his doctrines did not die with him. It was too pleasant to those who desired to gain a home in that Eternal Abode in spite of a life of sinful joys and follies. Consequently it spread widely through the teachings of his followers. The law under which they had recourse in teaching their pernicious doctrines was one that assured to them religious freedom or liberty. The law was made to protect the innocent, but some found in it a convenient way to take refuge when to hide their own deceit suited their purposes best. To be proven false was to be branded with the mark of infamy, and those who dared lie were in danger of the law prohibiting it. Punishment for this crime was keen and sure. However, there was one recourse—one we call a loophole—that enabled many to escape punishment for their acts. Religious liberty was a sacred rite among the Nephites; no one could be in jeopardy of the law by stating his or her own belief. The followers of Nehor's teachings contended that they believed all things they taught, and therefore could not be accused of advocating that which they knew to be false. This part of the statutes of the new-born Republic excused many of the charge of spreading untruths or of falsely swearing. Later we shall see in the historical portions of the Book of Mormon the story of the traitorous Amlicites, the apostate Amalekites, the bloodthirsty Amulonites and Ammonihahites, that all these faithless deserters from the Church of God were those who embraced the teachings of Nehor. In all the lessons the people of the Lord have learned, in all the instructions they have received from experience, none are more vividly noted than the bitter hatred, the unexhaustible spite, the bloodthirstiness and the hardened hearts of those enemies of the Church of God who were once numbered among its faithful. The Book of Mormon often speaks of them as "being after the order of Nehor." We imagine that to belong to that order required conformity to certain unholy covenants, and to take other vicious and immoral oaths. Besides lying, the Nephite Republic had laws penalizing those who robbed, those who stole from another, and those who committed murder, or whoredoms. Murder was punished by death.

SCAlma 1 19Alma 1 20Verses 19-20

SCAlma 1 19Alma 1 20Non-believers began to persecute those who had taken upon themselves the name of Christ. In every dispensation of the Gospel, wherever the people of the Lord abide, the antagonism that exists between the forces of good and those of evil find expression in the lives of those who deride the good and deny the truth. These forces continually oppose each other. They are at war. The word war, to some, may sound extreme; but it is not! The War in Heaven is a point in view. There, even before the earth was created, Lucifer, the son of the morning, led the rebellious and those who sought to usurp the power and the authority of God, to utter defeat. He was the leader of one-third of the heavenly hosts, and leads those who today clamor against the righteous and revile the good and the pure. Lucifer and his followers were cast out from heaven and he became Satan; they continue, even now, their rebellion and attempted usurpation. Men, inspired by Satan's unholy desires, persecute the meek, and seek to bring to naught the purposes of the Lord.

SCAlma 1 19Alma 1 20It appears that in the heritage of the faithful, there is persecution. We need not be surprised at this, for we know there are many blessings that await those who are faithful and endure to the end. And, that is not all—true believers in Christ become stronger in their faith when they pass through affliction. When the great billows of adversity would almost overwhelm them, they rise to unprecedented heights of courage and fortitude. They remember the pains of their Redeemer, and resolve, their trials notwithstanding, to be "steadfast and immovable in keeping the commandments of the Lord." (See V. 25)

SCAlma 1 19Alma 1 20The truth of these statements is upheld in the account of the Nephites in Alma's second year as Chief Judge. The people were divided into two groups; those who believed and who took upon themselves the name of Christ, and those of them who did not.

SCAlma 1 19Alma 1 20Those who did not believe began to persecute those who did believe. False teachers began to increase among the Nephites; most of them were followers of Nehor. Class and class distinction, and social division developed rapidly in their midst. Those who loved the vain things of the world became the ready adherents to deceit and treachery. They became proud and overbearing, and bitter in their feelings towards the members of the true Church of Christ. Because of the humility and meekness of its believers, the unbelievers scornfully afflicted "them with all manner of words." But the faithful, unmindful of the wrath and the belligerency of their opponents, labored unceasingly to minister to the wants of their fellows. The Sacred Record says, "They did impart the word of God, one with another, without money and without price."

SCAlma 1 21Alma 1 22Alma 1 23Alma 1 24Alma 1 25Verses 21-25

SCAlma 1 21Alma 1 22Alma 1 23Alma 1 24Alma 1 25The law of the Church regarding persecution. Notwithstanding the harassment that was heaped upon Church members, a law of the Church, which was strictly enforced, prohibited any member from retaliation, or, speaking of persecution, from rendering like for like. This law also went further than that; it restrained brethren from pursuing brethren in a manner that would inflict injury, or to cause them to suffer for any belief which they held. Freedom of belief was a prized possession of every Nephite, and was often claimed by them.

SCAlma 1 21Alma 1 22Alma 1 23Alma 1 24Alma 1 25Although many of the believers in Christ received grave persecution at the hands of the dissenters, they bore it without returning evil, but others, more inclined to personal combat, gave insult and blow for blow.

SCAlma 1 21Alma 1 22Alma 1 23Alma 1 24Alma 1 25That "the hearts of many were hardened" was a great sorrow to Alma, who was President of the Church, and their refusal to be guided by his counsel added to his trials. In rejecting him as their leader, they served on him a direct notice of their withdrawal from communion within the Church. Nevertheless, those who remained true to God's holy laws showed their patience and firmness under affliction by faithfully performing whatsoever the Lord required of them.

SCAlma 1 26Alma 1 27Alma 1 28Alma 1 29Alma 1 30Alma 1 31Verses 26-31

SCAlma 1 26Alma 1 27Alma 1 28Alma 1 29Alma 1 30Alma 1 31And thus did they prosper. The Lord rewarded the fidelity of the Church members by granting to them a sufficient portion of worldly riches. They neither wanted for the necessities of life, nor the enjoyment of many of its luxuries. They gradually became rich in the material things of the world and in heavenly treasures. They sought the Lord, and mingled joy in His praise. They caused His great name to be hallowed, and in all their doings invoked His blessings. They ceased not to call on Him in mighty prayer, and with united hearts they besought His grace. They prayed for those by whom they were abused, and asked the Eternal Father "to hasten the day when His Name should be worshiped in all the world, when unbelief and error be no more." They were a happy, holy people; they remembered the teachings of their youth, "Happy is every one that feareth the Lord, that walketh in His ways."

SCAlma 1 26Alma 1 27Alma 1 28Alma 1 29Alma 1 30Alma 1 31In these verses the historian of the Sacred Record noted the deeply-felt fellowship that abounded amongst them, and united the members of the Church in the true spirit of the Gospel. To them, nothing was so important as was Christ, the promised Messiah. Both the priests and the people left their labors, the one to impart the Word of God, the other, joyously to receive it. Engraved upon the Smaller Plates of Nephi, they read what Jacob, the son of Lehi, said regarding worldly store: "But before ye seek for riches, seek ye for the kingdom of God." (Jacob 2:18) Those who tilled the soil left their plows in the field; they left their flocks and herds unattended that they might hear God's Holy Word. In all their joys and sorrows, they felt that the rewards of righteousness were more to be desired than all the riches the earth can produce. With renewed hope and fresh courage, after hearing God's inspired teachers, they returned to their many tasks, unashamed of the coming Redeemer in whom they believed, and determined to serve Him, whom they had never seen.

Alma 1 26Verse 26

Alma 1 26The preacher was no better than the hearer. We may obtain an insight into the religious life of the faithful, which was, in the end, the very sum and substance of their existence, when we find that their lives encompassed the idea they had of equality, which in them was innate. They believed all men were brothers, and that God was their Father. They, before Him, were equal. This conclusion raised them to the highest levels of "Gospel Ideals." (See Sermons by President David O. McKay) It did not spring from any outward sign of worldly gain, nor did it stem from the superficial grandeur of the unbelievers, who had divided themselves into classes and were separated by social distinctions. It sprang from the heart.

Alma 1 26The older among the faithful remembered the teachings of King Benjamin many years before, and the others, too young at that time to realize their import, nevertheless, gave heed to his words. They thought of his parting instructions, when, about thirty-five years previously, Benjamin told these same people, that in serving them "I have only been in the service of God." (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, pp. 42-45) We can imagine the magnificent effect this sentiment had upon the righteous. It is expressed in the simple, but beautiful words of the inspired writer:

Alma 1 26And the priest, not esteeming himself above his hearers, for the preacher was no better than the hearer, neither was the teacher any better than the learner; and thus were they all equal, and they did all labor, every man according to his strength.

SCAlma 1 27Alma 1 28Verses 27-28

SCAlma 1 27Alma 1 28And they did impart of their substance, every man according to that which he had, to the poor, etc. Still another phase of the believers' lives lay in the fact that they had, inspiring them to continual goodly deeds of loving-kindness, a particular quality we know of as charity, which charity was displayed by each of the faithful towards his fellow men. Although the Sacred Record does not identify this certain virtue by calling it charity, still we choose to use that appellation because it reveals to our senses the exalted pattern which the believers in our Lord had of one another. (See Complete concordance, of the word charity, both Bible and Book of Mormon at end of this Chapter.)

SCAlma 1 27Alma 1 28Charity does not only mean good will to the poor and the suffering, almsgiving and the like, but, also, it means the act of loving all men as brothers because they are sons of God. (Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary) It means a divine love which is transplanted within our hearts; a Christian love for our fellows. The Revised Version of the Bible translates the word charity as meaning love. Charity is love. (II Nephi 26:30)

SCAlma 1 27Alma 1 28The members of the Church of Christ, at this time, displayed charity (love) in numerous ways to "the poor, and the needy, and the sick, and the afflicted," even to those who were not numbered among them, for as the Book of Mormon says, "Whether out of the Church or in the Church, having no respect as to those who stood in need." (Verse 30)

SCAlma 1 27Alma 1 28Because they were just and equitable in their thoughts as well as righteous in their actions—they being charitable to those in want and just to the wayfarer—they grew in grace and in the knowledge of God's glory. Their historian says of them, "They did not wear costly apparel, yet they were neat and comely." We imagine that, inspired by their lofty ideals, the Nephite members of the Church preferred to share, not only the gifts of the Spirit which they received, but also, with them as had not, their worldly goods. As we read of other Nephite Saints in other generations dividing their possessions with their brethren, we conclude that in serving God we put to the highest use the gifts we constantly receive from His bounteous hands; this by upholding the falling, by strengthening the weak, by clothing the naked, by feeding the hungry, and by ministering, as these Nephites did, to all those in need. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 44, vv. 16-17)

SCAlma 1 27Alma 1 28Also, the fact is noted that the members thereof established the affairs of the Church. The Church of Christ, itself, was already set up in Zarahemla, and had been for a long period of time. But, at this particular time, its members united their efforts in strengthening its several Branches and in building the glorious fabric whereby they could worship the coming Redeemer who was their promised Messiah, in truth and without molestation. In spite of great persecution, this was accomplished by them.

Alma 1 31Verse 31

Alma 1 31And thus did they prosper. Here the Sacred Record bears testimony that the riches of the earth come to them that unitedly seek, first, God's Kingdom. The Prophet of the Lord, Jacob, who was the brother of Nephi, after exhorting his brethren of the Church to seek for the Kingdom of God before they sought for silver and gold and other of the earth's riches, promised them:

Alma 1 31And after ye have obtained a hope in Christ ye shall obtain riches, if ye seek them; and ye will seek them for the intent to do good—to clothe the naked, and feed the hungry, and to liberate the captive, and administer relief to the sick and the afflicted.

Alma 1 31And now, my brethren, I have spoken unto you concerning pride; and those of you which have afflicted your neighbor, and persecuted him because ye were proud in your hearts, of the things which God hath given you, what say ye of it?

Alma 1 31Do ye not suppose that such things are abominable unto Him who created all flesh? And the one being is as precious in His sight as the other. And all flesh is of the dust; and for the selfsame end hath He created them, that they should keep His commandments and glorify Him forever. (Jacob 2:19-21; also See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume I, pp. 458-459)

Alma 1 31It is related in this verse that because of the "steadiness of the Church" its members became "far more wealthy than those who did not belong to their" organization.

Alma 1 31We read much about the wicked who prosper in the world, of robbers whose tabernacles prosper, and how "they who provoke God are secure; into whose hand God bringeth abundantly." (See Job 12:6) But where there is one mention of the wicked who prosper, there are many which declare their destruction.

Alma 1 31The Psalmist, David, the Sweet Singer of Israel, rejoiced that after temptation he prevailed against the wicked who promised him great riches and an abundance of the fat of the land. He says, "For I was jealous of the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked," but, he further said, "These are the ungodly, who prosper in the world; they increase in riches." Then in triumphal voice he praised the great Name of the Lord:

Alma 1 31So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before Thee.

Alma 1 31Nevertheless I am continually with Thee: Thou hast holden me by my right hand.

Alma 1 31Thou shalt guide me with Thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.

Alma 1 31Whom have I in heaven but Thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire beside Thee.

Alma 1 31My flesh and my heart faileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.

Alma 1 31For, lo, they that are far from Thee shall perish: Thou hast destroyed all them that go whoring from Thee.

Alma 1 31But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord GOD, that I may declare all His works. (See Psalm 73)

Alma 1 31How often do we find recorded in the Holy Scriptures, both Hebrew and Nephite, the Bible and the Book of Mormon, the story of man's faithfulness being rewarded with the treasures of heaven and the riches of the earth. We impatiently wait to tell you more of these wonderful times. In fact the whole history of the Book of Mormon is written with God's promise to Lehi's children in view; it was fulfilled.

Alma 1 31Inasmuch as ye shall keep My commandments ye shall prosper in the land. (III Nephi 1:20)

SCAlma 1 32Alma 1 33Verses 32-33

SCAlma 1 32Alma 1 33For those who did not belong to their Church did indulge themselves in sorceries, etc. The example of these self-appointed teachers (See v. 16) produced a spirit of idleness in their churches, and their members became full of devices to enable them to live without honest toil. They gave way to sorcery and idolatry, to robbery and murder, and to all manner of wickedness, for which offenses they were punished according to the law whenever conviction was obtained, and also when the intent of the law was not thwarted by their unholy combinations. This development of priestcraft also gave rise to another evil. Many belonging to the apostate churches, though not willing to openly plunder or murder for gain, were anxious for a monarchy to be established, that thereby they might be appointed office holders, etc., and by taxes maintain themselves in plenty. Their hope and intention was to destroy the Church of God, and, undoubtedly, to despoil its members.

SCAlma 1 32Alma 1 33By unselfishly enforcing the law every breaker thereof came within its power, and no one was excused because of station or rank. The deportment of those who before had sought to evade or circumvent its authority, became more inclined to observe its requirements and, "therefore, there was much peace among the people of Nephi until the fifth year of the reign of the judges."

GENERAL NOTES

The spirit of Indian culture. The Iroquois Peace League, of which we will discuss in Alma 24:5-18, was the embodiment of the very spirit of the highest Indian culture to be found anywhere on the American Continents. Had it not been destroyed by the European colonization it is thought by some that there would have been no conquest of Mexico by Cortez, and no overthrow of the Incas of Peru by the Pizarros. Even the warlike, degenerate Indians who inhabited Tuzulutlan, "the Land of War," north of Guatemala and bordering upon Yucatan, were conquered without bloodshed by the missionaries under Las Casas who came to them with the story of the life and crucifixion of Jesus Christ, both in prose and verse.

The United Order. No less remarkable than the peace doctrine in the Book of Mormon is the exemplification in that record of the United Order on a large scale. The story of this feature of American life—the rise and fall of an American Millennium—is recorded in IV Nephi.

And it came to pass in the thirty and sixth year, the people were all converted unto the Lord, upon all the face of the land, both Nephites and Lamanites, and there were no contentions and disputations among them, and every man did deal justly one with another.

And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift.

And it came to pass that the thirty and seventh year passed away also, and there still continued to be peace in the land. ...

And now, in this two hundred and first year there began to be among them those who were lifted up in pride, such as the wearing of costly apparel, and all manner of fine pearls, and of the fine things of the world.

And from that time forth they did have their goods and their substance no more common among them.

And they began to be divided into classes; and they began to build up churches unto themselves to get gain, and began to deny the true church of Christ. (IV Nephi vv. 2-4, 24-26)

The spirit of the Millennium in America. We are here informed that the people were converted and accepted the Gospel of Christ. They were filled, as a consequence, with the spirit of love and unity and had all things in common. Peace prevailed. "Indeed, it may be said that a type, a foreshadowing of the Millennium for once found place among the erring sons of humanity." (Story of the Book of Mormon, George Reynolds, p. 290, Edition of 1957) This wonderful condition lasted for between 150 and 200 years.

Another evidence for the Book of Mormon. This era of peace and brotherly love is one more remarkable evidence of the agreement of the Book of Mormon with the New Testament, even when these teachings are concealed as they are in the authorized Bible translation instead of their being revealed in it.

In the New Testament we read that the converts on the Day of Pentecost, whom the Spirit filled with power from on high, "continued steadfastly in the Apostles' doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers." (Acts 2:42)

The word translated fellowship is keinonia, which really means (as in verse 44) an arrangement whereby things are held in common. It means practically, what the Latter-day Saints term, the United Order. Thus a faithful translation would be: "They continued steadfastly in the teachings of the Apostles, in the United Order, in the breaking of the bread, and the prayers." Here the keinonia, the United Order, was part of the teachings of the Apostles, as was also the Sacrament and the prayers. It was not the clumsy, impractical Communism which misleads so many today, but a wise, practical arrangement, entirely voluntary, whereby every member of the Church was provided for in "all things," both temporally and spiritually.

Nor was this a purely Pentecostal condition born of enthusiasm of faith. It was part of the Christianity of the New Testament. A long time after Pentecost, Paul wrote to his beloved Timothy: "Charge them that are rich in this world, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate." (I Timothy 6:17-19) The word keinonikous is translated willing to communicate. It might better be rendered, actively interested in the United Order, thereby "laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life." This was the doctrine preached by Paul to the end of his earthly mission. This koinonia, or United Order, is especially ascribed to the Holy Spirit. Paul says: "The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God and the koinonia of the Holy Ghost be with you all." (II Cor. 13:14) That accounts for where the Apostle says that the divine promise is that those who escape the corruption of the world may be partakers (koinonioi) of divine nature. (II Peter 1:4) It also explains the fact that wherever the Holy Spirit is poured out upon the believers, there is a union of interests, both temporal and spiritual that comes into existence naturally.

Thus we have a United Order in the New Testament as well as in the Book of Mormon. In the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, too, the doctrine of the United Order is taught. That it is also taught in the Book of Mormon is strong proof of the divine inspiration of that volume. Joseph Smith could not have invented from his knowledge of the New Testament the story of all things being common that is found in the Sacred Record when the Saints accepted the teachings of the Gospel of Christ. Neither could anyone else!

Community of interests among Indians. Again the question arises whether ancient Indian culture, as recorded, knew any community of interests—akoinonia—such as that described, particularly in Fourth Nephi. Again, too, the answer is a wonderful confirmation of the Book of Mormon; for, in fact, the very foundation of the highest social structure among the Indians is community of interests.

Construction of Indian Society. Unlike civilized society in our day, Indian society was made of gentes, totems, or clans, and not of families. The gens is a body of "consanguinal kindred" whether by birth or adoption. All live together in one house or lodge, and are under obligation to assist each other. Each gens is self-governing. It elects its own chieftain and decides on all questions of property within its own limits. Marriage within the gens is prohibited, and descent is frequently traced, but in the female line only.

When descent was reckoned through the female line, the husband joined, through the marriage the gens of the wife. Property, with the exception of a few articles of personal necessity, belonged to the wife, and the husband had no claim on it. Among the Hurons, the price of a man, if killed, was only three-fourths that of a woman.

This social arrangement may seem strange to us today, but it was similar to that which prevailed among the Semites in the days of Abraham. Sarah was the "princess," as the very name implies. That is, she was the chieftainess. Her successors were Rebekah, Leah, Dinah, and Sarah, the daughter of Asher, the son of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid. (Numbers 26:46)

In Egypt, too, in those days, the woman was the mistress of the house. She held the property, and inheritance was through the female line.

This special feature was preserved among the American Indians, as it is to this day to some extent, among the Arabs of the desert.

A group of gentes or clans formed a phratry or brotherhood, generally for religious purposes, and a group of phratries constituted a tribe. The tribe was governed by a council. The chief was elected by the council, but his authority was limited to affairs of peace. For war, a war chief was elected by the council, and he was supreme while the war continued.

The Long House. The so-called Long House of the Iroquois Indians illustrates the principle of a United Order. This habitation was from fifty to a hundred feet long. The interior was separated into compartments, six or eight feet each, and opened towards a passageway or aisle that ran through the center of the house. There was one fireplace for each four rooms and was used by the four families occupying the rooms nearest.

Thus a house with five fires would contain twenty apartments and accommodate twenty families, unless some were reserved for storage. They were warm, roomy, and tidily-kept habitations. Raised bunks were constructed around the walls of each apartment for beds. Whatever was taken in the hunt or raised by cultivation by any member of the household was for the common benefit. Provisions were made a common stock within the household.

To this extent they had preserved the principle of the United Order, which was practised by the Nephites as related in the Book of Mormon.

This was, as Dr. Daniel G. Brinton says, the ideal theory of the American tribal organization. We can recognize its outlines almost anywhere on the American Continents, although it was carried out with more and sometimes with less faithfulness to the perfect pattern.

In Peru the principles of the United Order were applied on a larger scale and more in detail than anywhere else.

There is a striking similarity between the ideals and the aims of the Iroquois reformers and those of the Peruvian Incas.

The rules of Peru also aimed at the unification of the nations there, under one divinely appointed head, and, although their powers were that of absolute despotism, they generally sought to overcome opposition by the exercise of paternal benevolence.

Where, then, it may be asked, did the prehistoric inhabitants of America obtain their ideas of a "Millennial" kingdom on this earth? Whence came their inspiration?

There is, as far as we know, only one answer. The marvelous light which their ancestors once enjoyed, as related in the Book of Mormon, was never entirely extinguished. Here and there a spark from the divine fire glowed dimly, uncertainly, but yet perceptible to men and women who had the gift to see and reflect. In other words, many Indian tribes have traditions, in more or less imperfect form, of the institutions and teachings of their ancestors, and of the Gospel that promises a reign of peace on earth. And they have endeavored, in their imperfect way, to follow the dim light, in the hope of finally reaching the goal—the "golden age" of which prophets and poets in all ages have spoken.

---
Notas:
[^1] The people had doubtless other rights which we have failed to notice, or that are not mentioned by the writers in the Book of Mormon. The events where approximate is noted are those about which the record does not appear sufficiently clear to make the year certain. It is occasionally difficult to decide whether the circumstance narrated took place near the close of one year, or at the commencement of the
