Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 2

SCAlma 2 1Alma 2 2Verses 1-2

SCAlma 2 1Alma 2 2Amlici, a cunning man after the order of Nehor. The development of priestcraft among the Nephites also gave rise to another evil. Many of those who belonged to the apostate churches were not willing to openly plunder or murder for gain, but they were anxious that a monarchy be established that they might be appointed to offices such as therein would be provided. The kings of the Nephites had always been men of integrity, who ruled in righteousness. They had allowed no burdensome taxes to be imposed upon the people. Under them the people had prospered when they kept the commandments of God. There was no inequality among them; the ruled and the ruler were alike when they stood before the judgment bar of man. No one was permitted to fatten upon the public coffer. This thing was not agreeable to some who preferred authority, and not palatable to others who desired to dip their arms into the fat of sacrilege. Their hope and intention was to destroy the Church of God, and, undoubtedly, to despoil its members.

SCAlma 2 1Alma 2 2In the Fifth Year of the Judges, a willing instrument arose to effect their purposes. His name was Amlici who was a follower of Nehor, corrupt and ambitious, but was a man cunning in the ways of the world. He was chosen by the enemies of the commonwealth to be the king of the Nephites.

SCAlma 2 3Alma 2 4Verses 3-4

SCAlma 2 3Alma 2 4This was alarming to the Church members because they knew that such things must be established by the voice of the people. The prospect of substituting the republican form of government for a one man rule was perturbing to the members of the Church, who saw in it a repudiation of the established system, and of the laws King Mosiah had left but a few years before. They knew that Amlici was a wicked man and that he, if he gained governmental control, would dispossess them of justice and whatever was right, including any privileges the Church afforded them. Many of the Nephites succumbed to the false promises of Amlici, and yielded to his flattery; he thus lured them into supporting his ambitious cause.

SCAlma 2 5Alma 2 6Alma 2 7Verses 5-7

SCAlma 2 5Alma 2 6Alma 2 7The voice of the people came against Amlici. When all was ready and the issue was drawn, the people assembled, each one to where his sympathies guided him, and there after listening to "much dispute and wonderful contentions" voted as their convictions urged them. After a count by judges, evidently appointed for that purpose, Amlici was declared to have been defeated.

SCAlma 2 8Alma 2 9Alma 2 10Alma 2 11Alma 2 12Alma 2 13Alma 2 14Alma 2 15Alma 2 16Alma 2 17Alma 2 18Alma 2 19Verses 8-19

SCAlma 2 8Alma 2 9Alma 2 10Alma 2 11Alma 2 12Alma 2 13Alma 2 14Alma 2 15Alma 2 16Alma 2 17Alma 2 18Alma 2 19The followers of Amlici were not pleased, and did consecrate him to be their king. This should have ended the matter, but it did not; the turbulent minority, incited by Amlici, would not accept this constitutional decision. They assembled and crowned their favorite as king of the Nephites, and he at once began to prepare for war that he might force the rest of the people to accept him to be their ruler. Nor was Alma idle; he, too, made ready for the impending struggle. He gathered his people and armed them with all the weapons known to Nephite warfare. The two camps were known as Nephites and as Amlicites, and their armies, the members of which had but a short time before dwelt together as brethren, marched against each other and met near a hill called Amnihu, on the east bank of the River Sidon. There a bloody battle was fought in which Amlici's forces were badly defeated with a loss of 12,532 men, whilst the victors had to mourn the loss of 6,562 warriors slain.

SCAlma 2 20Alma 2 21Alma 2 22Alma 2 23Alma 2 24Alma 2 25Alma 2 26Alma 2 27Verses 20-27

SCAlma 2 20Alma 2 21Alma 2 22Alma 2 23Alma 2 24Alma 2 25Alma 2 26Alma 2 27After pursuing the defeated monarchists as far as he was then able, Alma rested his people in the Valley of Gideon, which was named after him who was slain by Nehor. There he took the precaution to send out four of his men as spies to watch the movements of and learn the intentions of the retreating foe. These men, presumably officers, were named Zeram, Amnor, Manti, and Limher. On the morrow these scouts returned in great haste and reported that the Amlicites had joined a vast host of Lamanites in the Land Minon, where, unitedly, they were slaying the Nephite population and were ravishing their possessions; at the same time they were rapidly pushing towards the Nephite Capital with the intent of capturing it before Alma's army could return. Alma at once headed his soldiers for Zarahemla, and in great haste marched towards it. He reached the crossing of the River Sidon without meeting the enemy, but while attempting to pass to the western bank of the river he was confronted by the allied armies of Lamanites and Amlicites.

SCAlma 2 28Alma 2 29Alma 2 30Alma 2 31Alma 2 32Alma 2 33Alma 2 34Alma 2 35Alma 2 36Alma 2 37Alma 2 38Verses 28-38

SCAlma 2 28Alma 2 29Alma 2 30Alma 2 31Alma 2 32Alma 2 33Alma 2 34Alma 2 35Alma 2 36Alma 2 37Alma 2 38The Lord did strengthen them. When the soldiers of Alma met the combined armies of the enemy a terrible battle ensued; the Nephites were taken somewhat at a disadvantage, but being men of great faith, they fervently sought Heaven's aid, and in the increased valor this faith inspired, they advanced to the combat. With Alma at their head the advance guard forded the river and attacked the enemy who stood awaiting them. By the fury of their charge they drove into the ranks of their opponents, and as they pushed onward, throwing the dead bodies of their fallen foes into the river, they made an opening for the main body of Alma's troops to gain a foothold. In this charge Alma met Amlici face to face, and they fought desperately. In this midst of this hand to hand combat, Alma lifted his heart to the One on High, and prayed for renewed strength that he might not be overpowered, but live to do more good to his people. His prayers were answered, and thereby he gained new vigor to battle with Amlici, and eventually slay him. Amlici slain, Alma led his attack to where the king of the Lamanites fought. That monarch retired before the impetuous valor of the High Priest, and then he commanded his guards to close in upon Alma. This order was promptly obeyed, but it did not succeed. Alma, with his men, bore down upon them with such fury that the few of the monarch's warriors who escaped the onslaught made a hasty retreat. Pushing steadily on, Alma kept driving the allies before him, until at length his whole army had crossed the Sidon. There the enemy, no longer able to meet Alma's well-ordered advance, broke in all directions and retreated into the wilderness that lay to the north and west. They were hotly pursued by the Nephites as long as the latter's strength permitted, and Alma's armies were met on all sides by patriots rallying to the call of the Commonwealth, and who slew the Amlicites and Lamanites by the thousands. A remnant of the allied armies eventually reached that part of the wilderness known to the Nephites as Hermounts. In that vast, uncharted area, many died and their bodies were devoured by wild beasts and vultures with which that region abounded.

AMLICI

Amlici was the first Nephite, in the days of the Judges, who sought to overturn the Republic and establish a monarchy, 86 B.C. His ambition was to be king of the Nephites, but the people rejected his pretensions by their votes; however, his followers consecrated him their king. Amlici then raised an army to sustain his claims. A battle was fought near a hill called Amnihu which was on the east bank of the River Sidon. The force opposing his army was a vast group of Nephites under the leadership of Alma, the younger.

The next day the defeated Amlicites joined a body of invading Lamanites in the Land of Minon where they unitedly ravaged the country.

Alma's troops followed the invaders and met them at one of the crossings of the River Sidon. Another desperate battle ensued, during which Alma met Amlici in single combat and slew him. Amlici's followers were defeated and most of them fled to a portion of the northwest wilderness known as Hermounts where many of them died and their bodies were devoured by wild beasts.

Amlici is represented as being a very cunning and worldly-wise man and as belonging to the order of Nehor.

MINON

The Land of Minon was on the west bank of the River Sidon, and was occupied by the Nephites. We assume that it was about one and one-half days journey south of the City of Zarahemla. (See Alma 2:23-24) In 87 B.C. an invading host of Lamanites were here joined by the defeated followers of Amlici, and as they marched northward they ravaged the country through which they passed. The inhabitants of Minon fled before the invading army with their families and flocks.

Alma came to the rescue of the fugitives and in a desperate battle defeated the allied warriors.

Minon is only mentioned in connection with this invasion. Otherwise the Sacred Record is silent about it.

Elder Orson Pratt calls it about two days' journey south of Zarahmela.
