Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 4

SCAlma 4 1Alma 4 2Alma 4 3Alma 4 4Alma 4 5Verses 1-5

SCAlma 4 1Alma 4 2Alma 4 3Alma 4 4Alma 4 5They began to establish the Church more fully. Although, during the fifth year of Alma's reign as Chief Judge, the Nephites, who were led by him, gained a great military victory over the combined forces of the rebellious Amlicites and the bloodthirsty Lamanites, and, although, throughout the sixth year contentions and warfare troubled the people of Zarahemla no more, there still was long continued mourning and sorrow in all the land.

SCAlma 4 1Alma 4 2Alma 4 3Alma 4 4Alma 4 5The great losses sustained by the Nephites in war, not of warriors alone, but of women and children, together with the vast amount of their property which was destroyed, had the effect of humbling them and softening their wayward hearts, so that many thousands during the next few years were added to the Church. It is recorded that in the next, or, seventh year 3,500 souls "united themselves to the Church of God and were baptized."

SCAlma 4 1Alma 4 2Alma 4 3Alma 4 4Alma 4 5The Church, under the divinely inspired leadership of Alma, who was its Presiding High Priest, or the President of the Church, was more fully established in every Branch throughout the nation. Teachers, priests, and elders were consecrated to administer the sacred ordinances of the Church to all who believed and who took upon themselves the name of Christ.

SCAlma 4 1Alma 4 2Alma 4 3Alma 4 4Alma 4 5On the banks of the River Sidon which flowed down the eastern borders of their Capital City, Zarahemla, the believing Nephites congregated to pledge, some anew, some fully repentant, but all in the joyous hope of life everlasting, their fealty to God by entering the sin-cleansing waters of baptism. Alma, the younger, who received the Holy Priesthood "by the hand of his father Alma," presided at these gatherings and each recipient of the sacred ordinance joined the others there in taking upon themselves the blessed name of Christ and covenanting with the Lord that they would ever after serve Him and Keep His commandments.

SCAlma 4 1Alma 4 2Alma 4 3Alma 4 4Alma 4 5The new converts then departed for their own abodes, and took with them the "glad tidings" of the promised Messiah, their Lord and God, whose coming was "not far distant."

SCAlma 4 1Alma 4 2Alma 4 3Alma 4 4Alma 4 5The natural consequence of this outpouring of the Spirit, together with the holy fervor the faithful showed, was continual peace among them. It brought prosperity into the homes of the believers which was made all the more joyous by bringing with it, life's "purest happiness and its greatest satisfaction."

Alma 4 6Verse 6

Alma 4 6The people of the Church began to wax proud. The recollection of their former disasters were gradually worn away by time and prosperity, and three years later we find great inequality among the Nephites. This was especially to be noted in the Church, where some were poor and some were rich; the more powerful ones abusing and oppressing their weaker and poorer brethren. This inconsistency with God's laws was not only "a great stumbling-block" to those who did not belong to the Church—that is, those who were actively interested in so becoming—but it was also a prolific source of excuses for those who saw in it a reason to relax their efforts to further God's Kingdom. Two classes began to develop in the Church. Again, those who "set their hearts upon the vain things of the world" treated with scorn the attempts of the righteous to bring to pass the cause of God. In their stiffneckedness and pride they persecuted the meek and reviled the righteous because of their righteousness. On the other hand, there were many, far more noble souls who helped those, who of themselves, were helpless; there were many who imparted of their own substance to the poor and the needy, and who for the sake of their belief in Christ "suffered all manner of afflictions."

Alma 4 6In their time of need, the Lord did not forsake the faithful; the Saints of God found comfort when they remembered the promise of King Benjamin, in whose words they continually rejoiced:

Alma 4 6And behold, I say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true.

Alma 4 6And ye will not have a mind to injure one another, but to live peaceably, and to render to every man according to that which is his due. ...

Alma 4 6And also, ye yourselves will succor those that stand in need of your succor; ye will administer of your substance unto him that standeth in need; and ye will not suffer that the beggar putteth up his petition to you in vain, and turn him out to perish. (Mosiah 4:12-13, 16)

Alma 4 6These words which King Benjamin uttered to the Saints in Zarahemla almost two score years before, awakened in the believer's hearts a desire to remain steadfast to the cause they had espoused. They also moved them to assist their brethren to stay firm; this they did by ministering to the wants and needs of the sick and the afflicted, the poor and the helpless, the hungry and the naked. Thus was the Church made stronger, the Saints became more united, and the attempts of the unfaithful to frustrate the purposes of God were brought to naught.

SCAlma 4 15Alma 4 16Alma 4 17Alma 4 18Alma 4 19Alma 4 20Verses 15-20

SCAlma 4 15Alma 4 16Alma 4 17Alma 4 18Alma 4 19Alma 4 20Now this man's name was Nephihah, and he was appointed Chief Judge. Alma, seeing that his people, because of their humility, were made the victims of the haughty's oppression, and that because of their righteousness they were the object of the ungodly's hatred, resolved that, with the help of the Lord, their persecutions would not longer continue. In great sorrow he sought the Lord for guidance. He asked Him to lead the way, and "Surely," we imagine he said, "I will walk in Thy path." "The Spirit of the Lord did not fail him." Help from above was Alma's portion.

SCAlma 4 15Alma 4 16Alma 4 17Alma 4 18Alma 4 19Alma 4 20Finding that no one man could properly attend to the duties of his many offices, Alma determined to resign his Chief Judgeship and devote his entire time to his duties as the earthly head of the Church. Preparatory to his resignation, he selected one of its leading Elders, named Nephihah, to be his successor as Chief Judge. This choice was confirmed by the people, (83 B.C.) for, be it remembered, the Laws of Mosiah which were made the Constitution of the Republic, provided that all things must be done by the voice of a majority of the people. Alma gave Nephihah power to enforce the laws according to that voice, which was the court of last appeal.

SCAlma 4 18Alma 4 19Verses 18-19

SCAlma 4 18Alma 4 19Alma retained the office of high priest unto himself. So that he might go forth unhindered by the demands on his time to fulfill his obligations as Chief Judge, Alma requested and received a release from that high office. He now had more time to go from city to city, from one land to another, bearing testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ. He did not fail to stir up the people continually to a "remembrance of their duty," and by God's Holy Word he exposed the "pride and craftiness and all the contentions" which were among God's people. By the power and forcefulness of his words, Alma sought to reclaim from their slothfulness those whose faintheartedness was a burden to their diligent brethren. He did not relax his efforts, nor slacken his zeal, but until the end of his days, Alma proclaimed the glory of God and the majesty of His coming. Jesus Christ, His Atonement and Resurrection, was his message to all.

Alma 4 20Verse 20

Alma 4 20Alma, in the commencement of the ninth year ... delivered up the Judgment-Seat to Nephihah. The two highest offices in Zarahemla were now held by righteous leaders; the duties of the Chief Judgeship devolved upon Nephihah, in which office he rendered a complete and dignified service. In this (the ninth) year, Alma was relieved of his secular duties in order that he might spend his entire time in the work of the ministry; which he did, to the honor and glory of God.

GENERAL NOTES

Verse 6

Riches through industry. The inspired historian notes in this verse that the Nephites in Zarahemla, during the eighth year of the Reign of the Judges, having had peace for several years (Alma 3:24), began to feel proud because of their prosperity. They had costly garments, flocks and herds, gold and silver, and other precious possessions.

Moroni (Ether 9:1) makes a similar observation regarding the people of Ablom, a country situated east of Cumorah, by the seashore. (V. 3) During the Reign of Emer they had fruit, grain, silks, linen, gold, silver, and horses, etc. (Vv. 17-19)

The statement is repeated in Ether 10:22-27, concerning the entire population of the "land northward," during the Reign of Lib, the son of Kish. At that time the northern country was densely populated (Ether 9:26; 10:12, 21). It had many cities within its borders.

It should be noted that the authors of the Book of Mormon speak of some of the ancient Americans as highly civilized. This agrees fully with the modern appreciation of the people in the two great centers of known culture, Yucatan and Peru. Students find that the Mayas, for instance, knew more about the movements of the Sun and the planets than the Egyptians and the Babylonians, and that they had a chronology covering a period of 374,000 years, exact to the day. They had a sign for the mathematical quantity of "0"—one of the greatest inventions of all ages. Their crafts consisted in agriculture, painting, engraving, weaving, architecture. During the first centuries of our era, they built numerous cities, with temples, palaces, astronomical observatories, and many dwelling places.

Peru occupied a strip of shore line of South America from about two degrees north, to 37 degrees south latitude. It embraced the present Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, and part of Chile. It was a glorious strip of earth, stretching along the Andes Mountains ("Copper Mountains"), on which the highest peaks of America, Nevada de Sorata, 25,250 feet, and Illimani, 24,300 feet (Wm. H. Prescott, Conquest of Peru) raise their snow-covered heads glistening in the sun. But it is a "land of promise," to men, only as ingenuity and industry make it so. It is sandy and dry, and the mountainsides are broken up by precipices, torrents, and seemingly bottomless abysms. Yet, this country was, at one time, the home of a great civilization, second only to that of the Mayas in Central America.

Undoubtedly, migrating Jaredites had at some time found a refuge there, as it, later, as we believe, became the center of the culture of that branch of the descendants of Lehi, which the Book of Mormon knows as the Lamanites. And it may have become the meeting place of other immigrants, of which the Book of Mormon has given us no account, because it was outside its scope.

Origin of the Peruvian Culture. According to one legend, Manco Capac and Mama Oello Huaco, children of the Sun, came to the Valley of Cuzco from the region of Lake Titicaca. They had a golden wedge, and they had been instructed to settle where that implement sank into the ground without effort. That happened in the valley we have mentioned, and there they remained and taught the people the arts of agriculture, weaving, spinning, etc. They laid the foundation of the City of Cuzco, and under their guidance and that of their descendants, the Peruvian Culture gradually extended both northward and to the south.

Other legends relate that white, bearded men, came from the region of Lake Titicaca and taught the people, whereupon they left with a promise to return. These seem to be similar to the legends of the Aztecs concerning Quetzalcoatl who appeared among the people of Central America.

Cause of the end. At the time of the arrival of the Spaniards, the Peruvians were a seemingly prosperous people. They certainly had "costly garments, flocks and herds, gold and silver," but their government was the most absolutely, socialistic despotism, imaginable. The entire country belonged to the Inca. The common people worked for him and the nobility and the priesthood which kept them cowering to the monarch. Besides, they were expected to maintain themselves and their dependants by their labor. But they owned nothing, not even their time. Consequently, they had not prospect of bettering their conditions. There was no progress for them. As Mr. Wm. H. Prescott observes (Conquest of Peru), "The Peruvian, laboring all his life for others, might be compared to a convict in a treadmill, going the same dull round of incessant toil, with the consciousness that, however profitable the results to the state, they were nothing to him." As a consequence the people lost genuine patriotism. They became incapable of exercising intelligent individual enterprise. The problems of the state and the people in it were for the ruler alone to meet and solve. Having assumed unlimited power, only he was responsible for what happened. When, therefore, Pizarro with a handful of men invaded Peru, he did not encounter a united people, intelligently determined to defend what did not exist—independence and liberty. He met only the bewildered owner of a multitude, in some respects as helpless as a flock of sheep. And that "conquest" was a literal fulfillment of previously made prophecies. (Compare II Nephi 1:20; Jarom 9; Omni 6; Mosiah 1:7; Alma 9:13, 46:19, 20)

NEPHIHAH

Nephihah was the second Chief Judge of the Nephite Republic. Of his birth and early life nothing is said in the Sacred Record, but at the time of his elevation to the Chief Judgeship he is called "a wise man who was among the elders of the Church." It appears that when Alma found the combined duties of Chief Judge and President of the Church was too excessive for one man properly to perform, he selected Nephihah as his successor in the office of the Chief of all Judges (83 B.C.) and that this selection was ratified by the voice of the people.

The principal events that occurred among the Nephites during Nephihah's Judgeship were:

The destruction of Ammonihah by the Lamanites (81 B.C.)

The Ammonites established in Jershon (77 B.C.)

The defection of the Zoramites, and the invasion of Nephite lands by the Lamanites under Zerahemnah (74 B.C.)

The rebellion of Amalickiah, and the Lamanite attack upon the City of Noah (73 B.C.)

Contention between the peoples of the City of Morianton and the Land of Lehi (68 B.C.)

The years that Nephihah judged the Nephites were of great material progress. Many new cities were founded, and a wide stretch of country reclaimed from the wilderness.

Nephihah passed away to the realms of the blessed 68 B.C., having, according to the sacred historian "filled the Judgment Seat with perfect uprightness before God." Alma had such great confidence in him that he desired to entrust him with the Sacred Records. This honor and responsibility Nephihah declined to accept, and Alma conferred these treasures upon his son, Helaman.

Nephihah was succeeded in the Judgment Seat by Pahoran.
