Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 5

Alma 5 1Verse 1

Alma 5 1Alma began to deliver the word of God unto the people. Alma, having appointed Nephihah the Chief Judge, but retaining the office of Presiding High Priest, went on a mission, beginning in Zarahemla. From Zarahemla he went to all the cities in the land.

Alma 5 1In Gideon. From Zarahemla he first went to the City of Gideon, which was in a valley called by the same name. His special message to the people there was that the Son of God would come upon the earth to establish His kingdom. Having delivered his wonderful message, Alma returned to his home in Zarahemla.

Alma 5 1In the Land of Melek. In the tenth year of the reign of the Judges, Alma went to the Land of Melek, which was situated on the west of the River Sidon, by the borders of the Lamanites. Here he filled a very successful mission.

Alma 5 1The City of Ammonihah. After Alma had labored unceasingly in the land of Melek where he reaped a bounteous harvest of them who loved the Lord and who sought to do His will, he traveled three days on the north of the Land of Melek and came to the City of Ammonihah. The people there refused to listen to the message he bore. They reviled him and cast him out of their city. Full of sorrow he departed. On the road to the City of Aaron he was met by an angel of the Lord who commanded him to return to the City of Ammonihah. Alma did so. As he entered the city he asked a man whether he was willing to give an humble servant of the Lord something to eat. The man to whom he spoke was Amulek, a Nephite, who received him with great hospitality. In Amulek, Alma found a faithful and invaluable missionary companion.

Alma 5 1In the Land of Sidon. After exceedingly painful experiences in Ammonihah, Alma and Amulek went to the Land of Sidom where they found a number of exiles from Ammonihah who had been driven out of that city because of their belief in the words of Alma. Alma organized a Church among them. Then he with Amulek returned to Zarahemla where Alma shared his home with his missionary companion.

Alma 5 1Desolation of Nehors. In the eleventh year of the reign of the Judges, the Lamanites destroyed the City of Ammonihah, and all its population perished. The Lamanites were eventually driven back into the wilderness whence they came. The site of the City of Ammonihah, being one great graveyard because of the spoilage of the Lamanites, was called "Desolation of Nehors," because the slain were of the profession of Nehor and their lands remained desolate.

Alma 5 2Verse 2

Alma 5 2And these are the words which he spake. According to Alma's own record which he, himself, kept, he, as the Presiding High Priest or the President of the Church, began first to labor among the members of the Church which, from the days of King Benjamin (about 125 B.C.), had been established in the City of Zarahemla. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, pp. 78-82)

Alma 5 3Verse 3

Alma 5 3My father, Alma ... he having power and authority from God. Alma, the younger, early in the course of his remarks to the Saints in Zarahemla, proved to them his divine right to minister in the ordinances of the Priesthood and to hold the position of High Priest over the Church. Definitely, he outlined unto them his sacred calling. Proudly, he published the good name of his father who had consecrated him the earthly head of the Church and its Presiding Officer, a position the elder Alma had held until he appointed his son to succeed him. [^1]

Alma 5 3Alma recounted to the Saints the experiences of the Church, the problems and vicissitudes through which it had passed since his intrepid father, boldly and fearlessly, established a Branch of it at a place called Mormon in the Land of Lehi-Nephi. (Ibid., pp. 193-196) He also pointed out that his father had not only organized a Church there, by the authority of the Priesthood which he held, [^2] but that King Mosiah granted him power and authority to establish Churches throughout the whole land of Zarahemla, and also to appoint priests and teachers over every Church. (Mosiah 25:19) All these things were done by my father, "he having power and authority from God" to do them, Alma said.

Alma 5 3Alma, besides making that somewhat brief mention of the Church established by his father in Lehi-Nephi, also noted that the believing ones (204 souls) were baptized by his father in the Waters of Mormon, which were near where they congregated for worship and for prayer.

SCAlma 5 4Alma 5 5Verses 4-5

SCAlma 5 4Alma 5 5Members of the Church were delivered out of the hands of the people of King Noah, by the mercy and power of God. Alma now traced the difficulties the members of the Church endured since those days at Mormon, when the evil intents of King Noah threatened them with destruction. But, he praised the Lord whose mercy and power had delivered them out of the wicked hands of Noah's people, who, unquestioningly, would have slain them, even as the people of King Noah had only a short time before, burned to death, the Prophet Abinadi.

SCAlma 5 4Alma 5 5Neither was that all. Alma reminded them that "they were brought into bondage by the hands of the Lamanites in the wilderness" after escaping the iniquitous rule of Noah at Lehi-Nephi. He also reminded the Saints of the sore captivity of God's people there, but in their new homes in the Land of Helam, he declared that they remained firm to God despite their sufferings, and that many would rather have perished under the burdens imposed by their unrelenting taskmasters than to have wavered in their steadfastness. Again, he said that the Lord had rewarded them for their faithfulness, and again He had delivered them from their unpitying captors. Led by the power of God's word they eventually came to Zarahemla where the main body of the Saints was living, and here amid thanksgiving and praise to God, Alma says that "we began to establish the Church of God throughout this land also."

Alma 5 6Verse 6

Alma 5 6I say unto you my brethren ... have you sufficiently retained in remembrance the captivity of your fathers? In this verse and those immediately following, Alma approached the high point in the appeal he was to make. Many of the things he recited to his brethren were familiar to them. Some, at least, of his listeners had undergone with him the tribulations of which he spoke. Others had seen, with their own eyes, the bedraggled appearance of his people and the people of Zeniff when they arrived in Zarahemla after the terrible ordeals they had undergone when in bondage to the Lamanites. Out of all their trials and afflictions, which were many, they all knew whereof Alma spoke: "The Lord did deliver them out of bondage."

Alma 5 6All these things out of which the Lord had rescued them and of which Alma reminded them, led to the questions which were uppermost in his mind: "Have you sufficiently retained in remembrance the captivity of your fathers?" Do you keep constantly in your minds "his mercy and long-suffering towards them?" Has the knowledge "that he had delivered their souls from hell" given you fresh courage and hope? Has the remembrance of these things stirred you up to a renewed determination to serve God, even that you keep all His commandments?

Alma 5 6Alma now opened the floodgates to a river of joy and happiness to everyone who kept God's commandments.

Alma 5 7Verse 7

Alma 5 7Behold, he changed their hearts. Alma, in sorrow, recalled to his listeners' minds the wicked intents that filled the hearts of their fathers in Lehi-Nephi, and also the hearts of some of them that now heard his words. He reminded them, that in that land all but a few rejected the words of God's holy prophet. But, Alma said that the Lord "changed their hearts." As before they took pleasure in evil, they now rejoiced in sobriety. There was a change within; therefore, there was a change without. The things they once hated, they now love; what once they drew closely to their bosoms, they now despise. A keen desire to do no more evil but to do good, reigned supreme in their hearts. Light, love, joy, and peace—God's most precious gift—overflowed their very existence. Nor, was that all! Knowledge from heaven illumined their souls; waters from the Wells of Salvation slaked their thirst; the words of God's servants became meat to their once impoverished beings; the Lord "awakened them out of a deep sleep, and they awoke unto God."

Alma 5 7Behold, they were in the midst of darkness. Darkness, as used here, means, error, unbelief, or ignorance. The darkness which enshrouded the Nephites in Lehi-Nephi was dispelled by God's holy word, and the preaching thereof by His servants brought light where, formerly, darkness prevailed. The words of this verse remind us of the words of Isaiah and also words of King David, "O house of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the light of the Lord," (II Nephi 9:5; Isaiah 2:5) for "In thy light shall we see light." (Psalm 36:9)

Alma 5 7The bands of death, and the chains of hell. We will have Nephi, the son of Patriarch Lehi, comment on the meaning of these words:

Alma 5 7O how great the goodness of our God, who prepareth a way for our escape from the grasp of this awful monster; yea, that monster, death and hell, which I call the death of the body, and also the death of the spirit.

Alma 5 7And because of the way of deliverance of our God, the Holy One of Israel, this death, of which I have spoken, which is the temporal, shall deliver up its dead; which death is the grave.

Alma 5 7And this death of which I have spoken, which is the spiritual death, shall deliver up its dead; which spiritual death is hell; wherefore, death and hell must deliver up their dead, and hell must deliver up its captive spirits, and the grave must deliver up its captive bodies, and the bodies and the spirits of men will be restored one to another; and it is by the power of the resurrection of the Holy One of Israel.

Alma 5 7O how great the plan of our God! For on the other hand, the paradise of God must deliver up the spirits of the righteous, and the grave deliver up the body of the righteous; and the spirit and the body is restored to itself again, and all men become incorruptible, and immortal, and they are living souls, having a perfect knowledge like unto us in the flesh, save it be that our knowledge shall be perfect. (II Nephi 10:13)

Alma 5 8Verse 8

Alma 5 8Were they destroyed? Alma both asked and answered that important question. The psychology, or method, of bringing sharply to the minds of his hearers the close relationship that existed between them and the involved subject matter, was Alma's strong appeal. They knew whereof he spoke. They, personally, were being discussed by him. He lay bare before them their very own history. Their parents had undergone the temptations and the wrath of hell, they remembered all that he said of them, but, he also said that they had repented, believing, too, on the Lord Jesus, who was their God. "Were they destroyed?" Alma asked, and then answered his own question, "Nay, they were not." The whole matter of which Alma spoke, was touched, everywhere, by the power of repentance and faith in "redeeming love." (V. 9)

Alma 5 9Verse 9

Alma 5 9I say unto you that they are saved. Alma continued to question his listeners as he further advanced toward the climax of his great sermon. The resurrection of the dead through "him who should come to redeem his people" was his message. Part of this message was, that the bands of death—which is the grave—were broken, and the chains of hell—which is the death of the spirit—were loosed.

Alma 5 9Death held fast in its inexorable grasp, power over all them that lay in the grave; to its unyielding misery, hell chained its helpless victims. Alma's message proclaimed that both death and hell must deliver up to Eternal Life the prisoners they kept entombed in the grave, and also them that, in hell, partook of the bitter cup of endless torment. The grave must release from death the temporal body, and hell, the spirits of men. Then they'll be united, the body and the spirit which is the soul of man. From that time forth they will go on forever; the soul will "expand"; it will go from grace to grace in the nurture and admonition of God. "In the knowledge of the glory of him who created them," the souls of men will expand until all the promises the Lord has made to His children are fulfilled. With grateful hearts and united voices they will give thanks to God who with abounding love hath redeemed them.

Alma 5 9In these verses, Alma spoke in what is called prophetic past; that is, of things yet to be as though they had already been.

Alma 5 10Verse 10

Alma 5 10And now I ask you on what conditions are they saved? That question was, perhaps, the greatest one Alma could ask. The answer to it embraces the whole Plan of Life and Salvation; it begins with the story of man's immortal spirit, and that, as yet, is incomplete. God's love for His children is its major portion. His love for them is interwoven throughout the entire fabric of His Fatherly devotion. His righteous purposes, His holy mind and will are pledged to our welfare. It is His work and His glory to make our Salvation sure. Alma now asked, "What grounds had they to hope for salvation?" We immediately answer, "God's love!" That answer, in itself, is all embracing; it explains His long-suffering towards us, His denial of any right to act for us, that we may act for ourselves, (See II Nephi 2:16) His justice and mercy. In His loving-kindness He has prepared the way in which we are loosed from the "bands of death, yea, and also the chains of hell." In that "way" which is the Plan of Salvation we may find a complete and satisfactory answer to Alma's question.

SCAlma 5 11Alma 5 12Alma 5 13Verses 11-13

SCAlma 5 11Alma 5 12Alma 5 13Behold, I can tell you. Alma proceeded to make plain the truths of Salvation. He called upon his then lately deceased father, the elder Alma, to testify to the truth of what he was about to say. All in the congregation assembled there remembered his father and knew him to be a just and trustworthy person. The younger Alma rejoiced in the words of Abinadi in which his father had believed. Alma I had accepted as being true the things which he heard the Prophet declare, and with gladness of heart, and boldly, he went to King Noah to persuade that monarch, also, to believe them. Noah became very wroth with Alma, and sought the young priest's life. Though surrounded by a wanton disregard of truth, and an unrestrained wickedness which would not hesitate to claim it, Alma's father had offered his life in defense of God's Prophet. No greater proof of his convictions could the elder Alma show, no better witness to the truth of the Prophet's words could his son present. Abinadi was a Prophet of God; the elder Alma knew it and so did his son.

SCAlma 5 11Alma 5 12Alma 5 13There was a mighty change wrought in his father's heart. Alma, himself, testified that all this was true; the bands of death were broken, and the chains of hell were loosed. This knowledge renewed in Alma a steadfast spirit and a clean heart. Like his father he was enlightened by God's wisdom and was sustained by His power. From the first, when he heard Abinadi, Alma I resolved to put aside the base desires of his heart and then, ever after, in meekness, serve the Lord.

SCAlma 5 11Alma 5 12Alma 5 13The heart is said to be the seat of spiritual light; the source whence springs our love and our devotion, our likes and dislikes, our joys and our sorrows, and our loyalty and fidelity.

SCAlma 5 11Alma 5 12Alma 5 13By the preaching of the word, a mighty change was also wrought in the hearts of the people of Lehi-Nephi. From the time at Mormon, when, under God, Alma I established the Kingdom, or the Church of Christ, he had continually preached God's holy word to his faithful followers. Also, at the end of his long journey through the untracked wilderness of the Land of Nephi, when he led his persecuted but faithful people to Zarahemla where the main body of the Nephites dwelt, Alma, without rest, went forth, as directed by King Mosiah, and bore witness of Christ's atoning Sacrifice. Alma went from city to city, and from village to village, throughout the whole land proclaiming the coming of the Redeemer whose advent was not far distant. (See Alma 7:7) He was filled with such power from On High that the might of his testimony prevailed over all doubt and uncertainty in the hearts of all who heard him. By preaching God's holy word a great change was wrought in the hearts of their fathers; their fathers trusted in God, and humbled themselves before him. They continued all their remaining days to do good. "Therefore," Alma, in solemn restrospect, said, "They were saved." (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 79; also p. 82, v. 12)

SCAlma 5 14Alma 5 15Verses 14-15

SCAlma 5 14Alma 5 15Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? Have you experienced, even as your fathers did, a great change of heart? When before, they sought for that which was pleasing unto God. Have you been born of God, in that your desires are to do good and to eschew all evil? Does the light of His holy countenance continually shine in your faces? These are questions that, we imagine, Alma asked his brethren.

SCAlma 5 14Alma 5 15Many of his listeners remembered the face of the Prophet Abinadi, how the light of God's countenance shone therein as he pleaded with Noah's iniquitous priests to leave their wicked ways and to worship the Lord with much gladness. We repeat what we said before concerning this incident.

SCAlma 5 14Alma 5 15The assembled throng dared not interfere with Abinadi, nor did they molest him, for they saw in his countenance, the Spirit of God, making it bright like "Rays of Living Light." His face shone with exceeding luster, the Sacred Record says, "Even as Moses" did while in the mount of Sinai while speaking with the Lord." (Exodus 34:29-30; II Cor. 3:7; See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 139)

SCAlma 5 14Alma 5 15We will shortly read, further on in the Book of Mormon, that Nephi and Lehi, sons of Helaman, were imprisoned by the Lamanites in Lehi-Nephi, that they went on their mission to their dark-skinned brethren, and that Nephi and his brother were treated with all the venom and cruelty their rude captors could suggest. They were denied both food and drink for many days, and were outraged by every mode of pain and grief the powers of hell could invent. Again, we repeat:

SCAlma 5 14Alma 5 15The walls of the prison rocked beneath the surges of an earthquake. Those who had gathered there to revile the servants of God became afraid, as if a "solemn fear came upon them." They could not move, they could not flee, a sudden darkness enshrouded them about. In the tumult which followed, scenes they never before had witnessed, contrasts so striking, through the darkness that encircled the Lamanites, they saw Lehi and Nephi in the attitude of prayer, singing praises to God. Their faces "did shine exceedingly, even as the faces of angels." (Helaman 5; also See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 139, v. 5.)

Alma 5 15Verse 15

Alma 5 15Do you exercise faith in the redemption of Him who created you? The Redemption wrought by our Lord and our Creator, Jesus Christ, was believed in by the Nephites long before that holy Sacrifice was made on Calvary. The Nephites looked forward to its redeeming grace, just as we look back. Both visions, we have noted "are equally efficacious." In both, there is for all, the opportunity to act, or, cause action. To act, not amiss, is the aim of the faithful.

Alma 5 15By faith, we may assure ourselves of the existence of that, which, to us, is not seen. It is the power through which things unseen are made real. By the faith we show, in that exact ratio will our works be. If our faith is great, so also, will the things we do be great. If our faith be in Christ, we will keep His commandments. We will so order our lives that in them we will glorify our Father which is in heaven.

Alma 5 15In this verse Alma referred to faith as an eye. So it is! He called it, the eye of faith. The more it is used, the clearer becomes its perception. In it, there is no impaired vision; no corrective measures need be taken. To those who were once blind, the light of faith which shines in their eyes, is like a beacon to the mariner, it guides the weary sailor safely to the peaceful shores.

Alma 5 15Alma now asked, "Do you look forward with an eye of faith?" Do you view your unworthy bodies, each with its own certain traces of death, raised to immortality and Eternal Life? The weaknesses of the flesh and its afflictions, those ill-omens of death and corruption, do you see them "swallowed up in everlasting and glorious victory through Christ, our Lord?" Do you see yourselves standing before God "to be judged according to the deeds which have been done in the mortal body?" Alma brought home to each of his listeners, especially those who before had refused to heed his words, the terrible forebodings of coming woe.

SCAlma 5 16Alma 5 17Verses 16-17

SCAlma 5 16Alma 5 17Come unto me ye blessed. When, at last, your labors on earth are finished, and the great day of the Lord shall come, in your imagination, can you hear His voice saying unto you that your works on earth have "been the works of righteousness," therefore, "Come unto Me," and partake of My goodness and My glory.

SCAlma 5 16Alma 5 17Or do you imagine that in His mercy you can deceive the Lord and falsely claim that your works on earth were good, and that in the mistaken testimony which you give, He will save you?

SCAlma 5 16Alma 5 17Many of us imagine that at that time and in that day, when we stand before the Lord to be judged, we will escape the just rewards of merit or demerit because our deeds will be unknown to Him. If you do, just remember:

SCAlma 5 16Alma 5 17He that planted the ear, shall he not hear? he that formed the eye, shall he not see?

SCAlma 5 16Alma 5 17He that chastiseth the heathen, shall not he correct? he that teacheth man knowledge, shall he not know?

SCAlma 5 16Alma 5 17The LORD knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are vanity. (Psalm 94:9-11)

SCAlma 5 16Alma 5 17All our works are known unto God!

SCAlma 5 18Alma 5 19Verses 18-19

SCAlma 5 18Alma 5 19Can ye look up to God ... with a pure heart? Alma's appeal to his listeners was direct. He carried his message right into their hearts. He did not seek, with a show of great emotion to soften the blows he delivered; nor did he excuse any evil existing among his people. Profoundly, and with a feeling of deep concern, he denounced the iniquity of which some were guilty. Alma portrayed the awful state in which one will find himself at that last moment, when, naked, with nothing to hide under, he must acknowledge before God, his wickedness while in the flesh. Alma also asked all those in his congregation to imagine, if they could, their remorse, if when standing in God's presence, they remembered, perfectly every time while on earth they defied His holy laws or rejected His commands. [^3] In this we are reminded of the words of Ezekiel:

SCAlma 5 18Alma 5 19And there shall ye remember your ways, and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled; and ye shall lothe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed. (Ezekiel 20:43)

SCAlma 5 18Alma 5 19The seriousness evinced by Alma in his queries made the counsel he gave more convincing. Yet every sentence he spoke, each word he said, was interwoven with a fatherly love as for a wayward child. He did not condemn them, only their wicked ways. He admonished them all that when that day should come they would be able to look up to God, having clean hands, and with a pure heart.

SCAlma 5 18Alma 5 19We can well imagine that Alma, himself, remembered the words of Jacob, the son of Lehi, to his brethren, spoken almost 500 years previously, and which were written upon Nephi's smaller plates:

SCAlma 5 18Alma 5 19O, my beloved brethren, remember the awfulness in transgressing against that Holy God, and also the awfulness of yielding to the enticings of that cunning one. Remember, to be carnally-minded is death, and to be spiritually-minded is life eternal. (II Nephi 9:30)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24Verses 20-24

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24There can no man be saved except his garments are washed white. There are many who are servants of evil; they are those who have become subject to the temptations of hell and have yielded to its blandishments. With no thought of repenting, they give little heed to else than worldly things. "If there be a hereafter," they say, "we hope to be saved." But Alma offered no excuses for them, or for those who defiantly reject God's commands. There is another class for whom Alma presented no apology. They are they who, with spirits untroubled, do as the devil wishes; for them who continue in so doing, Alma said that there is no hope for everlasting life in God's Kingdom. Besides that, many are careless of what the Lord requires; they have no just provocation in relaxing their efforts to further His cause; they are given to dalliance and are trifling with the Lord. They care nothing for His holy word, and decry every endeavor to please Him. Carelessness is wickedness; we rank it next to a wanton disregard of God's holy laws.

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24Early in the history of Alma's people, Nephi, after whom the Nephites received their name, prophesied concerning this same class as did Alma:

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24For behold, at that day shall he [the devil] rage in the hearts of the children of men, and stir them up to anger against that which is good.

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And others will he pacify, and lull them away into carnal security, that they will say: All is well in Zion; yea, Zion prospereth, all is well—and thus the devil cheateth their souls, and leadeth them away carefully down to hell. (II Nephi 28:21)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24Yea, his garments must be purified until they are cleansed from all stain. A good and proper comment on this verse may be had by reading the following passages of Book of Mormon Scripture:

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And these twelve ministers whom thou beholdest shall judge thy seed. And, behold, they are righteous forever; for because of their faith in the Lamb of God their garments are made white in his blood.

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And the angel said unto me: Look! And I looked, and beheld three generations pass away in righteousness; and their garments were white even like unto the Lamb of God. And the angel said unto me: these are made white in the blood of the Lamb, because of their faith in him. (I Nephi 12:10-11)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And may the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless, that ye may at last be brought to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and with Jacob, and the holy prophets who have been ever since the world began, having your garments spotless even as their garments are spotless, in the kingdom of heaven to go no more out. (Alma 7:25)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24Now, as I said concerning the holy order of this high priesthood, there were many who were ordained and became high priests of God; and it was on account of their exceeding faith and repentance, and their righteousness before God, they choosing to repent and work righteousness rather than to perish.

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24Therefore they were called after this holy order, and were sanctified, and their garments were washed white through the blood of the Lamb.

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24Now they, after being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, having their garments made white, being pure and spotless before God, could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence; and there were many, exceeding great many, who were made pure and entered into the rest of the Lord their God. (Alma 13:11-12)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And this I know, because the Lord hath said he dwelleth not in unholy temples, but in the hearts of the righteous doth he dwell; yea, and he has also said that the righteous shall sit down in his kingdom, to go no more out; but their garments should be made white through the blood of the Lamb. (Alma 34:36)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And it came to pass that Jesus blessed them as they did pray unto him; and his countenance did smile upon them, and the light of his countenance did shine upon them, and behold they were as white as the countenance and also the garments of Jesus; and behold the whiteness thereof did exceed all the whiteness, yea, even there could be nothing upon earth so white as the whiteness thereof. (III Nephi 19:25)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And no unclean thing can enter into his kingdom; therefore nothing entereth into his rest save it be those who have washed their garments in my blood, because of their faith, and the repentance of all their sins, and their faithfulness unto the end. (III Nephi 27:19)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And these things are written that we may rid our garments of the blood of our brethren, who have dwindled in unbelief. (Mormon 9:35)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And it came to pass that the Lord said unto me: If they have not charity it mattereth not unto thee, thou hast been faithful; wherefore, thy garments shall be made clean. And because thou hast seen thy weakness thou shalt be made strong, even unto the sitting down in the place which I have prepared in the mansions of my Father.

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And now I, Moroni, bid farewell unto the Gentiles, yea, and also unto my brethren whom I love, until we shall meet before the judgment-seat of Christ, where all men shall know that my garments are not spotted with your blood. (Ether 12:37-38)

SCAlma 5 20Alma 5 21Alma 5 22Alma 5 23Alma 5 24And then cometh the New Jerusalem; and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they whose garments are white through the blood of the lamb; and they are they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph, who were of the house of Israel. (Ibid., 13:10)

Alma 5 25Verse 25

Alma 5 25Ye cannot suppose that such can have place in the kingdom of heaven. In the beginning, God decreed, or promised, Eternal Life in His Kingdom to everyone who obeyed His word and served Him well. That promise was to all His children, those who were afar, and to those who were near. God did not promise those who disobeyed Him, or who made and loved a lie, a place in that Celestial abode. He hates a liar.

Alma 5 25The Lord is God of truth; not only is He a God of truth, but God, now and forever. No qualifying article is needed before His great name. "The LORD is God, and beside Him there is none other!" (See Deut. 4:35, 39; I Kings 8:60; Isaiah 45:5, 6, 14, 18, 22; 46:9; Mark 12:32) He speaks only that which is true, and His word endures throughout all eternity. He lies not! "God is not a man, that he should lie; neither the son of man, that he should repent: hath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and shall he not make it good?" (Numbers 23:19) God's purposes are eternal. His promises will all be fulfilled.

Alma 5 25We, in turn, have no place in the Kingdom of Heaven if we love a lie and make it our portion. If we follow that one who is the father of lies, our place is with him in his kingdom and not with the blessed in the Kingdom of God. We are, indeed, the children of the devil in the same sense and by the same sign as the righteous are the children of God.

SCAlma 5 26Alma 5 27Verses 26-27

SCAlma 5 26Alma 5 27Have ye walked, keeping yourselves blameless before God? See verses 14-15; also verses 20-24.

SCAlma 5 28Alma 5 29Verses 28-29

SCAlma 5 28Alma 5 29Are ye stripped of pride and envy? Envy, when used throughout the Scriptures—the Book of Mormon and the Bible—means a discontent at the excellence or good fortune of another. Frequently, in both volumes, it is used with the distinct understanding of malice or spite. Jealousy is often used to replace its use, or vice versa.

SCAlma 5 28Alma 5 29 Pride, one of the deadly sins, the others being covetousness, lust, anger, gluttony, envy, and sloth. They are considered fatal to spiritual progress. (Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary) Pride is the state or quality of being proud; possessing or showing too great self-esteem; arrogant, haughty, lordly, insolent, overbearing, supercilious, disdainful, exhibiting scorn for those considered inferior. Pride implies a disposition to claim more consideration than is due; it also involves by inference, a contemptuousness for the weaker, or the littler things of life, so considered. It exhibits an excessive vanity which leads to boasting and an arrogant display of one's power, skill, influence, or the like. (See ibid.)

SCAlma 5 30Alma 5 31Alma 5 32Verses 30-32

SCAlma 5 30Alma 5 31Alma 5 32Is there one among you that doth make a mock of his brother? Alma warned against creating a brother with scorn or contempt. On them that delight in deriding a brother, thus making him the butt of mirth or derision and thereby holding him up for ridicule in his efforts in keeping the Lord's commandments, he pronounced wo, which, he implied, would surely follow such ungodly actions. Alma further denounced any attempt made to belittle a brother in the eyes of the Saints. He cautioned Church members of the greatness of the sin committed in so doing, and called upon the offenders to repent without delay.

SCAlma 5 30Alma 5 31Alma 5 32Plainly, we can see by Alma's exhortations that he knew, by the spirit of prophecy, the time was near for the advent of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ. By that same spirit he called upon the transgressors to abjure all pretense of evil and to prepare themselves to join the vast numbers of righteous men and women who take delight in serving the Lord. "The time is not far distant," he declared, when the Lord, the mighty King of Heaven shall come down from the Courts of Glory and shall redeem His people. Therefore, Alma cried, "Repent, repent," and be ready for that day which is soon to come; the coming of which is sure "for the Lord God hath spoken it!"

SCAlma 5 30Alma 5 31Alma 5 32Alma's appeal had a great effect upon his listeners, for they realized that unless they cast away all sinful pleasures and took joy in His service, they "cannot be saved."

Alma 5 33Verse 33

Alma 5 33Repent, and I will receive you. The Lord requests, graciously, that all men should come unto Him; in loving-kindness He urges them to draw near unto Him, and then, without any upbraiding, He says, "I will receive you."

Alma 5 34Verse 34

Alma 5 34Ye shall eat and drink of the bread and waters of life freely. Entreatingly, as if He were pleading, the Lord God who is the Savior of the world extends His arms in loving-kindness unto all men, saying as He does so, "Come unto me and ye shall partake of the fruit of the tree of life."

Alma 5 34Anxious in the cause of the Lord and being desirous to learn more of His ways we may ask as did Laman and Lemuel, the eldest sons of the Patriarch Lehi, "What meaneth this thing which our father saw in a dream? What meaneth the tree which he saw?" Nephi, the next oldest son, gave answer, "And I said unto them: it was a representation of the Tree of Life." (I Nephi 15:21) Now, we may ask again, "What is the Tree of Life?"

Alma 5 34Soon after Lehi and his little family group left their home in Jerusalem at God's command to go, they knew not where, he was highly favored by the Lord with a vision in which many things pertaining to his children and their seed were shown unto him. Among the scenes presented to Lehi, he saw a rod of iron which led to a tree by which he stood. Nearby was a river of water which ran near the tree of which Lehi was partaking of its fruit. Again, Nephi's brothers asked, "What meaneth the river of water which our father saw?" Nephi answered:

Alma 5 34And I said unto them that the water which my father saw was filthiness; and so much was his mind swallowed up in other things that he beheld not the filthiness of the water.

Alma 5 34And I said unto them that it was an awful gulf, which separated the wicked from the tree of life, and also from the saints of God.

Alma 5 34And I said unto them that it was a representation of that awful hell, which the angel said unto me was prepared for the wicked. (I Nephi 15:26-28)

Alma 5 34Later in telling his wife and sons of the incidents occurring in that vision, Lehi said:

Alma 5 34And it came to pass that I did go forth and partake of the fruit thereof; and I beheld that it was most sweet, above all that I ever before tasted. Yea, and I beheld that the fruit thereof was white, to exceed all the whiteness that I had ever seen.

Alma 5 34And as I partook of the fruit thereof it filled my soul with exceeding great joy; wherefore, I began to be desirous that my family should partake of it also; for I knew that it was desirable above all other fruit.

Alma 5 34Lehi's vision not only astonished the members of his family, but awakened, especially in his son, Nephi, an almost undeniable prayer to God that he, too, be shown these things and also know their truth. Nephi recorded his experiences upon plates the Lord had commanded him to prepare:

Alma 5 34For it came to pass after I had desired to know the things that my father had seen, and believing that the Lord was able to make them known unto me, as I sat pondering in mine heart I was caught away in the Spirit of the Lord, yea, into an exceeding high mountain, which I never had before seen, and upon which I never before set my foot.

Alma 5 34And the Spirit said unto me: Behold, what desirest thou?

Alma 5 34And I said: I desire to behold the things which my father saw.

Alma 5 34And the Spirit said unto me: Believest thou that thy father saw the tree of which he hath spoken?

Alma 5 34And I said: Yea, thou knowest that I believe all the words of my father.

Alma 5 34And when I had spoken these words, the Spirit cried with a loud voice, saying: Hosanna to the Lord, the most high God; for he is God over all the earth, yea, even above all. And blessed art thou, Nephi, because thou believest in the Son of the most high God; wherefore, thou shalt behold the things which thou hast desired.

Alma 5 34And behold this thing shall be given unto thee for a sign, that after thou hast beheld the tree which bore the fruit which thy father tasted, thou shalt also behold a man descending out of heaven, and him shall ye witness; and after ye have witnessed him ye shall bear record that it is the Son of God.

Alma 5 34And it came to pass that the Spirit said unto me: Look! And I looked and beheld a tree; and it was like unto the tree which my father had seen; and the beauty thereof was far beyond, yea, exceeding of all beauty; and the whiteness thereof did exceed the whiteness of the driven snow.

Alma 5 34And it came to pass after I had seen the tree, I said unto the Spirit: I behold thou hast shown unto me the tree which is precious above all.

Alma 5 34And he said unto me: What desirest thou?

Alma 5 34And I said unto him: To know the interpretation thereof—for I spake unto him as a man speaketh; for I beheld that he was in the form of a man; yet nevertheless, I knew that it was the Spirit of the Lord; and he spake unto me as a man speaketh with another.

Alma 5 34And it came to pass that he said unto me: Look! And I looked as if to look upon him, and I saw him not; for he had gone from before my presence.

Alma 5 34And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the great city of Jerusalem, and also other cities. And I beheld the city of Nazareth; and in the city of Nazareth I beheld a virgin, and she was exceedingly fair and white.

Alma 5 34And it came to pass that I saw the heavens open; and an angel came down and stood before me; and he said unto me: Nephi, what beholdest thou?

Alma 5 34And I said unto him: A virgin, most beautiful and fair above all other virgins.

Alma 5 34And he said unto me: Knowest thou the condescension of God?

Alma 5 34And I said unto him: I know that he loveth his children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things.

Alma 5 34And he said unto me: Behold, the virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh.

Alma 5 34And it came to pass that I beheld that she was carried away in the Spirit; and after she had been carried away in the Spirit for the space of a time the angel spake unto me, saying: Look!

Alma 5 34And I looked and beheld the virgin again, bearing a child in her arms.

Alma 5 34And the angel said unto me: Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father! Knowest thou the meaning of the tree which thy father saw?

Alma 5 34And I answered him, saying: Yea, it is the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men; wherefore, it is the most desirable above all things.

Alma 5 34And he spake unto me, saying: Yea, and the most joyous to the soul.

Alma 5 34And after he had said these words, he said unto me: Look! And I looked, and I beheld the Son of God going forth among the children of men; and I saw many fall down at his feet and worship him.

Alma 5 34And it came to pass that I beheld that the rod of iron, which my father had seen, was the word of God, which led to the fountain of living waters, or to the tree of life; which waters are a representation of the love of God; and I also beheld that the tree of life was a representation of the love of God. (I Nephi 11:1-25)

Alma 5 34These words of Nephi now close the first part of his vision. He had asked for an explanation, or an interpretation of the tree's symbolism. His companion on the journey through the sequestered events of his dream was an angel from heaven who acted as Nephi's guide and interpreter.

Alma 5 34"Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father!" (V. 21) the angel exclaimed. "Knowest thou [now] the meaning of the tree which thy father saw?" And Nephi, almost exultingly, replied, "Yea, it is the love of God, which sheddeth itself abroad in the hearts of the children of men."

Alma 5 34In other words, the tree symbolized the same eternal truth which our Lord taught Nicodemus:

Alma 5 34For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. (John 3:16)

Alma 5 34(See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume 1, pp. 79-84)

Alma 5 34The latter part of verse 34, "Ye shall eat and drink of the bread and the waters of life freely," is best explained by Jesus, himself:

Alma 5 34When the people therefore saw that Jesus was not there, neither his disciples, they also took shipping, and came to Capernaum, seeking for Jesus.

Alma 5 34And when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said unto him, Rabbi, when camest thou higher?

Alma 5 34Jesus answered them and said, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Ye seek me, not because ye saw the miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled.

Alma 5 34Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endureth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him hath God the Father sealed.

Alma 5 34Then said they unto him, What shall we do, that we might work the works of God?

Alma 5 34Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent.

Alma 5 34They said therefore unto him, What sign shewest thou then, that we may see, and believe thee? what dost thou work?

Alma 5 34Our fathers did eat manna in the desert; as it is written, He gave them bread from heaven to eat.

Alma 5 34Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Moses gave you not that bread from heaven; but my Father giveth you the true bread from heaven.

Alma 5 34For the bread of God is he which cometh down from heaven, and giveth life unto the world.

Alma 5 34Then said they unto him, Lord, evermore give us this bread.

Alma 5 34And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on me shall never thirst.

Alma 5 34But I said unto you, That ye also have seen me, and believe not.

Alma 5 34All that the Father giveth me shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out.

Alma 5 34For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.

Alma 5 34And this is the Father's will which hath sent me, that of all which he hath given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

Alma 5 34And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day.

Alma 5 34The Jews then murmured at him, because he said, I am the bread which came down from heaven.

Alma 5 34And they said, Is not this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? how is it then that he saith, I came down from heaven?

Alma 5 34Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, Murmur not among yourselves.

Alma 5 34No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day.

Alma 5 34It is written in the prophets, And they shall all be taught of God. Every man therefore that hath heard, and hath learned of the Father, cometh unto me.

Alma 5 34Not that any man hath seen the Father, save he which is of God, he hath seen the Father.

Alma 5 34Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that believeth on me hath everlasting life.

Alma 5 34I am that bread of life.

Alma 5 34Your fathers did eat manna in the wilderness, and are dead.

Alma 5 34This is the bread which cometh down from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not die.

Alma 5 34I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.

Alma 5 34The Jews therefore strove among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat?

Alma 5 34Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you.

Alma 5 34Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day.

Alma 5 34For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.

Alma 5 34He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him.

Alma 5 34As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me.

Alma 5 34This is that bread which came down from heaven: not as your fathers did eat manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this bread shall live for ever.

Alma 5 34These things said he in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum. (John 6:24-59)

Alma 5 34Clearly, and with unfailing sight, we can see that Christ is the Bread of Life.

Alma 5 34It is written in the Hebrew Scriptures how the Children of Israel ate of Manna [^4] which they found every morning except the Sabbath in the fields surrounding their camp. The Jews remembered the painful efforts of Israel to exist, and at the same time thought of Moses. To him they ascribed special merit which saved their fathers in the Wilderness of Canaan when no food could be found to state their hunger. But, notwithstanding this bread which in mistaken zeal they thought came down from Heaven, they all, sooner or later, died.

Alma 5 34Christ, in answer to questions [^5] of the Jews concerning His lineage, told them,

Alma 5 34I am the Bread which came down from Heaven.

Alma 5 34* * * * * * *

Alma 5 34I am the Bread of Life: he that cometh to Me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on Me hath Everlasting Life.

Alma 5 34* * * * * * *

Alma 5 34Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness, and are dead.

Alma 5 34* * * * * * *

Alma 5 34But,

Alma 5 34This is that Bread which came down from Heaven: not as your fathers did eat Manna, and are dead: he that eateth of this Bread shall live for ever.

Alma 5 34* * * * * * *

Alma 5 34I am that Bread of Life.

Alma 5 34(See John 6, Entire Chapter)

Alma 5 34The beauty of Isaiah's words is now more fully known to us as we read:

Alma 5 34Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my salvation.

Alma 5 34Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation. [^6]

Alma 5 34And in that day shall ye say, Praise the LORD, call upon his name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name is exalted.

Alma 5 34Sing unto the LORD; for he hath done excellent things: this is known in all the earth.

Alma 5 34Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy One of Israel in the midst of the. (Isaiah 12:2-6)

Alma 5 34The wells of salvation—from them we draw Eternal Life through Christ our LORD.

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36Verses 35-36

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36Come unto me and bring forth works of righteousness. Wherever His Church is established, there is the Kingdom of God. At various times and in different places, the Lord's inspired servants have called His Kingdom a vineyard, and have compared it to a fruitful field or a watered garden. We may properly conceive that God's Zion and God's Kingdom are one and the same; they comprise His vineyard.

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36Note what joy is Israel's if it be that they will again choose to honor God by sharing with the needy the gifts received from His bounteous hands.

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36Thy righteousness shall go before thee; the glory of the LORD shall be thy rereward.

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36* * * * * * *

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36And the LORD shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought, and make fat thy bones: and thou shalt be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water, whose waters never fail. (Isaiah 58:5-11)

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36How like the Vineyard of the LORD is this promised garden!

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36In the LORD'S vineyard are many different trees; some bear good fruit, others, bad. The fruit of some is sweet; of others it is sour. The yield of good fruit is abundantly increased; but the bad is worm-eaten and fit only to be cast into the fire. The trees whence the bad fruit comes, their leaves quickly wither and their branches become dry. The servants of the vineyard's owner will dig about the roots of all such trees; they will prune them and make the sun to shine upon them; they will water them and in every way guard them from destruction, if perchance they might restore the tree's desirable former vigor. Often the workmen in the vineyard will retrieve that which was lost, in that the trees which once were bad will again bud and blossom and will again yield forth much fruit that is good and desirable.

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36For the Lord shall comfort Zion, he will comfort all her waste places; and he will make her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord. Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody. (Isaiah 51:3; also II Nephi 8:3)

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36Notwithstanding the labors of the Owner's servants to renew in them their uncorrupted attributes, many of the trees fail to respond to the efforts of the workmen; they continue to produce evil fruit and endanger the trees whose fruit is good. To the everlasting sorrow of the vineyard's Master, they must be hewn down, and to protect the other trees, "cast into the fire."

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36Alma now exhorted all to bring forth good fruit, which, they knew were in "the ways of righteousness," and not leave to the bitter end when the axe would be laid to the roots of the bad trees, the resolve to do no more iniquity and thereafter serve the Lord. This, the Lord, the righteous Judge, commanded, and those who rejected God's holy order and thereby rebelled against Him would "have cause to wail and mourn," he said.

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36To him that overcometh will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God. (Revelation 2:7)

SCAlma 5 35Alma 5 36Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. (Ibid., 22:14)

SCAlma 5 37Alma 5 38Alma 5 39Alma 5 40Alma 5 41Alma 5 42Verses 37-42

SCAlma 5 37Alma 5 38Alma 5 39Alma 5 40Alma 5 41Alma 5 42The good shepherd doth call you. Alma was resolute in the appeal he made; unhesitatingly, he called on them that heard his voice for good works. His audience was sympathetic to the demands he made; they understood his warning, but, nevertheless, there were some, who, because of their pride, rejected his words. To them, Alma was most direct in his denunciation. He likened them, as did Isaiah, when that Prophet was confronted with similar stragglers, to "sheep having gone astray." They once knew their shepherd's voice and followed it; now, he implied, they go their own way. Once, they saw the right and did it; now they offer all manner of pretexts and excuses for not so doing. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 160; also Isaiah 53:6; p. 62, v. 17; p. 78 ff.; p. 85, vv. 1-2; p. 260, vv. 19-24)

SCAlma 5 37Alma 5 38Alma 5 39Alma 5 40Alma 5 41Alma 5 42Therefore, Alma drew the only logical conclusion, "If a man bringeth forth good works he hearkeneth unto the voice of the Good Shepherd, and he doth follow him." Conversely so, "Whosoever bringeth forth evil works, the same becometh a child of the devil, for he hearkeneth unto his voice, and doth follow him." (See, Comments v. 25)

Alma 5 42Verse 42

Alma 5 42Whosoever doeth this must receive his wages of him. "The laborer is worthy of his hire," and in the vineyard of our Lord he will receive a just reward. That reward is Eternal Life in God's Kingdom. However, he that works for the devil must expect and will be paid with that which the devil has to give, namely, death; death to "things pertaining unto righteousness." Death to even a desire to do good, but to do evil continually. We can understand this thoroughly when we remember that "whatsoever is good cometh from God, and whatsoever is evil cometh from the devil." "The wages of sin is death; but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." (Romans 6:23)

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Verses 43-62

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62I am commanded to stand and testify unto this people. After Alma had concluded that part of his sermon wherein he admonished the Zarahemlaites to turn from their pride and repent all sinful pleasures, he calmly and very persuasively presented many reasons for so doing. That there would be no mistake about the justice of his words, no cause or ground for error, Alma spoke plainly that every man there should understand his words. No doubt Alma remembered the words of Nephi which were written upon the Plates of Nephi:

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62For my soul delighteth in plainness; for after this manner doth the Lord God work among the children of men. For the Lord God giveth light unto the understanding; for he speaketh unto men according to their language, unto their understanding. (II Nephi 31:3)

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62He also remembered what Jacob, Nephi's younger brother said—Jacob's words were likewise engraved upon the Smaller Plates:

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Behold, my brethren, he that prophesieth, let him prophesy to the understanding of men; for the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are manifested unto us plainly, for the salvation of our souls. (Jacob 4:13)

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62The spirit of prophecy is the spirit of testimony. Except it be through the spirit of prophecy, no man ever testified of Christ. Filled to overflowing with that spirit, Alma diffused knowledge and understanding in every direction as if they were rays of light. Like Abinadi, in Lehi-Nephi, Alma was commanded of the Lord to declare His holy word, and to proclaim true, "the things which have been spoken by our fathers concerning the things which were to come." This, in meekness, Alma had done.

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Alma now called upon a Higher Judge than he to witness the truth of all he had said. He carried his appeal to the supreme tribunal in the land, Conscience, "that court of righteous and holy decisions" which is folded up in the bosoms of even the humblest. Alma's case was that his people should eschew the very appearance of evil and be prepared for that day which Alma said was not far distant when "The Son of God cometh in his glory, in his might, majesty, and dominion."

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62In the cause he had espoused, Alma was his own advocate; the spirit of prophecy was his witness. Plainly, and with great deliberation, the spirit testified that there is a God in heaven, and that through Jesus Christ, His Only Begotten Son, all mankind might be saved from the sins of the world, "Yea, the sins of every man who steadfastly believeth on his name." Alma invited all men, everywhere, to repent of their sins and banish pride from their hearts which in times past had interfered in God's service. Keep the commandments of God that His Spirit will always be with you that thereby you will be holy unto Him, was the counsel Alma gave. The faithful knew that if the Holy Spirit was ever within them, many of the problems that otherwise would be painful to their hearts and perplexing to their minds could never assail their determination to do His will.

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Like King Benjamin, forty years before, when that God-fearing monarch preached Salvation to his people, Alma was filled with the spirit of prophecy and by that same spirit his people, too, understood his words. Here we find an ideal place to repeat the words of the Apostle Paul:

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of man that is in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man but the Spirit of God. (I Cor. 2:11)

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62The Apostle Peter, in writing to the Hebrew Saints in Asia Minor, said that the apostles had not followed "cunningly devised fables" when they recounted the life of Jesus, His power and coming: for they were eyewitnesses to His majesty; they saw His glory and heard the voice from heaven when they were in the holy mountain. But, he argued, if one wants still more evidence of Jesus' divinity,

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62We have a more sure word of prophecy; whereunto ye will do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the scriptures is of any private interpretation.

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. (II Peter 1:19-21)

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Such is the value the Apostle Peter placed on the prophetic word. It is more sure than what? More sure than the historical part of the Gospel to which the apostles testified as eyewitnesses! It shines as a light in a room during the dark hours. It is given us to heed, not to ignore. Indeed, the prophetic word is one of the most wonderful manifestations of the Priesthood, caused by the operations of the Spirit upon the minds of holy men. It is the starlight for the guidance of the people of God, until the day-star, the sun, comes up in glorious effulgence.

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Alma's testimony grew more overpowering as he fervently invoked God's blessings upon his beloved people. As a father, he cautioned them against pride and its attendant deceptions. As their High Priest, he warned them of its follies, and pointed out the path which is straight and narrow, and into which the Good Shepherd called them with His own voice. "If you will hearken unto his voice he will bring you into his fold," Alma said, "and ye are his sheep."

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62The final appeal Alma made was, no doubt, influenced by the words of Isaiah, all of whose sayings the Nephites loved. These words were engraved upon the Plates of Laban, Lehi had brought from Jerusalem, and were then in the possession of Alma:

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near:

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. (Isaiah 55:6-7)

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62Alma's message to the people of Zarahemla was now complete. He had testified as the Lord had commanded him to do; the burden of his message was:

SCAlma 5 43Alma 5 44Alma 5 45Alma 5 46Alma 5 47Alma 5 48Alma 5 49Alma 5 50Alma 5 51Alma 5 52Alma 5 53Alma 5 54Alma 5 55Alma 5 56Alma 5 57Alma 5 58Alma 5 59Alma 5 60Alma 5 61Alma 5 62The Lamb of God is the Son of the Eternal Father, and the Savior of the world; and that all men must come unto him, or they cannot be saved. (I Nephi 13:40)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "And it came to pass that Alma was appointed to be the first chief judge, he being also the high priest, his father having conferred the office upon him, and having given him the charge concerning all the affairs of the church." (Mosiah 29:42) 6. Italics are the editor's
[^2] See, Footnote COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 236.
[^3] "I expect, by the power of the resurrection and the quickening power of the Celestial glory, that my memory will be perfected, and that I will be able to remember all the acts, duties, and doing of my own life. I will also remember, most correctly and perfectly, every act of benevolence that had ever been done to me in the name of the Lord and because of my calling." (Parley P. Pratt, Journal of Discourses, September 7, 1856, Volume 5, p. 196)
[^4] The word Manna, means, what is this? It was the food by which Israel was sustained during the 40 years in the wilderness
[^5] It was customary among the Jews to interrupt a speaker and ply him with questions, mainly concerning matters about which he spoke
