Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 6

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4Verses 1-4

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 41. They began to establish the order of the Church in the City of Zarahemla. After Alma had concluded his sermon, or sermons, which he delivered to the members of the Church in Zarahemla, he immediately organized anew the Church of God in that city.

Over forty years previously, or about 125 B.C., King Benjamin had established the Church among the Nephites, which Church was the Church of Christ—the Nephite God being Jesus Christ. King Mosiah, Benjamin's son and heir to the Nephite throne, shortly thereafter, gave Alma's father, the elder Alma, authority to establish Branches of the Church throughout the whole Land of Zarahemla, and to ordain priests and teachers over each congregation. (Mosiah 25:19) Thus all the Saints dwelling in different part of the Nephite domain were provided with spiritual and moral leadership. Their welfare was the continual watchword of the General Authorities who resided in Zarahemla. Never were any people more blessed than the Nephites under the wise rule of these gracious and God-fearing monarchs. The Nephites prospered both in spiritual gifts and in the material things of life.

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4However, in the years that had passed since the time of Benjamin and Mosiah, many of the Church members had grown weary in well doing, and also became negligent in keeping the Lord's commandments; others waxed increasingly remiss in attending to their Church duties, and still others were wanting in those qualities that make of a man a humble follower of that meek and lowly One who should come down from Heaven and take away the sins of the world. The Church in that growing center of Nephite activity had declined in whatever influence it exerted upon its members. (Alma 7:3) Pride and worldly riches had divided them into different classes and therefore into class distinction. Communion between members thereof was disrupted, and the purposes for which the Church was established by Benjamin, their just and discerning old prophet-king, were, by them, being brought to naught.

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4Alma, much perturbed by the persistent reports coming to him concerning the great lack of unity and of improper decorum among the members of the Church in Zarahemla, valiantly sought to stem the rising tide of disaffection among them. As Presiding High Priest, or President of the Church, he called a conference of all Church members dwelling in Zarahemla. His purpose was to awaken in them a goodly sense of their own unworthiness, to declare anew the coming of the Savior, and to spread a canopy of protection over the humble and pure.

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4The people came in great numbers to hear him, and Alma realizing this to be the appropriate time, spoke plainly and boldly of their wicked ways. He decried pride and the love many had for the vain things of the world; things that had rendered them unfit for Salvation in God's Kingdom. He condemned disunity among them, as he also did the unseemly actions of various members of the Church towards their brethren. He implied that some, because of their riches, had boldly and shamelessly declared themselves better than were others; they forgetting all the time that "the blessing of the Lord maketh truly rich," but that "treasures of wickedness profit nothing."

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4Alma called upon all to repent, and warned of the disaster that awaited them unless they speedily returned to the Lord. (Chapter 5:56)

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4Alma's personal testimony, together with his undaunted spirit, had the greatly hoped for effect. The righteous among his people rallied around him; those who were willing to forsake all sinful pleasures and do good thereafter were numbered among the Saints of God. The Church was thus strengthened, and its members comforted.

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4However, there was another class whose names "were blotted out," and they were no more counted among the righteous. They were those who refused to "repent of their wickedness and humble themselves before God." In this way the proud and those who chose to do wickedly were cast out, and were thereafter denied any opportunity that by their actions they might disarrange the affairs of the Church.

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4When we consider the blessed effect of Alma's exhortations to obey the Lord's commandments, we remember:

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4Thy law, O Lord, is my commandment!

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4And we think also of the prayer offered to the Great Giver of All Good by the faithful among the Jews:

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4May Thy law rule in the hearts of all Thy children, and Thy truth unite them in bonds of fellowship.

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4May the righteous of all nations rejoice in Thy grace and exult in Thy justice. (Union Prayer Book)

SCAlma 6 1Alma 6 2Alma 6 3Alma 6 4We may judge of the rejoicing that overflowed their very beings as the faithful Nephites gathered in groups after hearing Alma's forthright and inspiring address. They, as one, offered the Lord praise and thanksgiving, and pledged anew their soul's greatest desire—that they might serve Him all the remaining days of their lives.

SCAlma 6 5Alma 6 6Verses 5-6

SCAlma 6 5Alma 6 6The word of God was liberal unto all. Mormon, the abridger of Alma's record, makes it plain that no one was deprived of the privilege of assemblage where he might hear the word of God. Alma recognized this truth, that it is not only the right of Church members to acquaint themselves with the things of God, but it is also their duty. They were, in fact, commanded to meet together often to learn more of Heaven's exalted Plans, and, too, with fasting, fervently invoke God's blessings upon those who knew not the Lord, their God.

SCAlma 6 7Alma 6 8Verses 7-8

SCAlma 6 7Alma 6 8Alma went and began to declare the word of God in Gideon. See, Land of Gideon.

LAND OF GIDEON

In a valley on the east of the River Sidon there was an important city built during the early days of the Republic, which was named after the martyr Gideon. The valley was also known by the same name and is frequently called the Land of Gideon. We have no evidence that the land extended beyond the borders of the Valley of Gideon. Nearly all we know of this region is contained in a single passage (Alma 6:7):

And now it came to pass that when Alma had made these regulations he departed from them, yea, from the church which was in the city of Zarahemla, and went over upon the east of the river Sidon, into the valley of Gideon, there having been a city built, which was called the city of Gideon, which was in the valley that was called Gideon, being called after the man who was slain by the hand of Nehor with the sword.

From the references in the historical narrative we incline to the opinion that this valley lay either directly east or somewhat to the southeast of the City of Zarahemla. Travelers coming from the north are never mentioned as passing through it on their way to Zarahemla, unless they had a purpose in so doing, as in the case when Moroni marched from the northeast to the relief of Chief Judge Pahoran (Alma 62). In the same chapter it is stated that Moroni and Pahoran "went down" from Gideon to Zarahemla, which, following the course of the Sidon, would be northward.

After the battle with the Amlicites, in the fifth year of the Judges, the Nephites, under Alma, pursued them until they reached the Valley of Gideon, and there the Nephites pitched their tents. Learning of the approach of an army of Lamanites, Alma moved his troops towards Zarahemla in order to protect the Capital City.

CITY OF GIDEON

An important city of the Nephites situated in a valley of the same name on the eastern side of the River Sidon, and not far from the City of Zarahemla.

It was named in memory of the aged patriarch, Gideon, who was slain by Nehor.

In 82 B.C. Alma, the High Priest, made this city a missionary visit and set the Church therein in order, after which he returned to his home in Zarahemla.

In 75 B.C., Korihor, the anti-Christ, visited Gideon and for a short time taught his pernicious doctrines, but he was taken by some of the Church members before the Chief Judge of that land, was examined by him and was then sent over to Zarahemla to be judged by Alma, the Chief Judge of all the Nephite Lands.

Later, in 62 B.C., the King-Men, under Pachus, drove Pahoran, the Chief Judge, out of Zarahemla, who then established himself in Gideon and issued a proclamation calling the people of the surrounding regions to arms.

The patriots assembled at Gideon, where they were quickly joined by Moroni, the Nephite Commander in Chief, who had gathered a large body of volunteers in his march from the Land Bountiful. The united forces gave battle to Pachus, recaptured Zarahemla, and replaced Pahoran on the Judgment Seat.

Samuel the Lamanite, in 6 B.C., pronounced a woe against the City of Gideon because of the wickedness and abominations that were in her (Helaman 13:15), but we have no account of the manner of her destruction at the time of the Crucifixion of the Redeemer.
