Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 7

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6Verses 1-6

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6I trust that ye are not in a state of so much unbelief as were your brethren. We have already noted that Alma, after setting the Church in Zarahemla in order, went eastward over the River Sidon to a place named after the martyr, Gideon.

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6Previously, only through the written word or by someone's acting in his stead, had Alma been able to communicate with the Saints in Gideon. His duties as Chief Judge were so numerous and exacting that practically all his time was occupied in matters of state. As Chief Judge he was the ruler over all Nephite Lands, and as Presiding High Priest of the Church he was the vicegerent of God here upon earth. Finding that the duties of both callings were more than he could perform in an acceptable manner, he resigned the office of Chief Judge, and, thereafter, spent all his time in the work of the ministry. Now, relieved of the tasks of political guidance, Alma went from city to city proclaiming the glorious message he was ordained to deliver wherever the Nephites dwelt, or to whomsoever they might be. In his own beautiful but simple words—the language he used and not in the words of another—Alma went forth to testify "of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who should come to redeem His people from their sins."

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6The first words Alma said after expressing joy because the Lord, in His mercy, had granted him the privilege of meeting with the Saints in Gideon were words of thanksgiving and praise to God.

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6Alma found that the Gideon Saints were strong in the faith; that they were imbued with and cherished a hope in the Messiah which hope had caused their fathers to struggle and endure that Salvation might be the heritage of their children. He also found that they were greatly endowed with humility, that they were resolute in keeping the commandments of the Lord, and that they continued steadfastly in prayer.

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6In these things, Alma had inexpressible joy; they were "not in the awful dilemma" that their brethren were in at Zarahemla. We note again that many of the Zarahemlaites had made idols of worldly riches, and had allowed pride to master them. Haughtiness and also scorn for their less fortunate brethren had dulled their desires for God's blessings. In their hearts, arrogance and self-conceit replaced meekness and lowliness, and each sought for that which would please the fancy or satisfy his whims. Each had walked in his own path. But, now, all was changed!

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6Alma rejoiced before the Saints in Gideon that the Saints in Zarahemla had repented of their sinful ways, and that righteousness had again been established among them. "Blessed be the name of the Lord," Alma cried, for, he said the Lord had made it known to him that the Saints there had turned from the paths of vanity and conceit along which they had walked, and were worshiping Him in truth and with gladness.

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6However, and notwithstanding the joy that was Alma's in the triumph of right and righteousness over the powers of hell that had been leading many of the Saints in Zarahemla to destruction, he expressed an added joy in the faithfulness of these Saints who lived in the Land of Gideon. In Gideon Alma found none in distress whose needs were not being taken care of; there was no class distinction among these Saints. Unlike many Church members in Zarahemla, their unselfish labors to ameliorate the sufferings of those in need—to benefit and better their condition—was a sacrifice of which the Lord approved; then, too, it put to the highest use the gifts God had vouchsafed the Saints in Gideon.

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6The joy of which Alma spoke came to him not by "wading through much affliction and sorrow" as he was compelled so to do in Zarahemla, but was because of the righteousness he found among the Saints in Gideon.

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6When we consider the awful state into which the wayward Church members in Zarahemla had fallen, and the scorn they heaped upon their poorer brethren, we can conclude at least two things: 1. That when the faithful saw the overbearing homage which the wicked demanded, the gaudy display of their fine clothes, their jewelry and precious things, they also saw in it the chastening love of God which gave the poor and meek, strength and a will to bear their trials with courage and fortitude. 2. That Alma accepted the challenge laid down by the wicked when they refused to heed God's holy promptings and the words of their appointed teachers. He weighed their defiance and called upon One mightier than he, to gird the humble and lowly with power to strengthen and purify their own resolves.

SCAlma 7 1Alma 7 2Alma 7 3Alma 7 4Alma 7 5Alma 7 6Filled with the spirit of his office and calling, and with the testimony of Jesus burning within his heart, Alma continued to wage, fiercely, the battle he was fighting against the forces of evil that in the past had so enfeebled the spirits of many Church members in Zarahemla, and, too, had hardened their hearts.

Alma 7 6Verse 6

Alma 7 6I trust ... that ye look forward ... with an everlasting faith. The word trust as used here means "confidence in the integrity or acts of another"; the "assured reliance on their moral soundness," their "justice," and "veracity"; the "assured anticipation of something."

Alma 7 6Alma expressed assurance that the Saints in Gideon would continue in well doing, in observing the Lord's commandments; that they would not, as their brethren in Zarahemla had, worship idols, but bow down to and worship the true and living God. He also assured them that the remission of their sins would come to all those who looked forward continually with an eye of faith, having in view those things of which the prophets had long spoken.

Alma 7 7Verse 7

Alma 7 7I say unto you there are many things to come. Alma now left the sphere where men live by mortal sense, and entered into a realm where only the spirit of prophecy dwells. In that realm, eyes that are blind are opened; ears that hear not are unstopped; things yet to come are unveiled. The spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Christ. It speaks only the truth.

Alma 7 7Alma's testimony of the Redeemer lives as a witness that Jesus is Christ, the Eternal Son of God. He is the Messiah in Whom all Israel rejoiced, and who waited His coming. His advent was of all things most important; that He lives is the greatest of all prophetic utterances. Thank God! "He liveth and cometh among His people."

Alma 7 8Verse 8

Alma 7 8I do not say that He will come among us at the time of His dwelling in His mortal tabernacle. Alma was constrained by the spirit of prophecy which was within him to offer the foregoing qualification. There were some, who in mistaken zeal, expected the Messiah, immediately upon birth, to take up His abode among them. They did not understand God's purposes. This caused much dissention among the Nephites and some of the believing Lamanites, who wondered why Christ, of whose coming they looked forward to, should be born in a land they knew only by name, and by hearsay. Some termed His coming a "wicked tradition," and spoke of it as a deception to enslave us, and keep us in ignorance "all the days of our lives." (See Helaman 16:13-25)

Alma 7 8Prophecy, we should note, not only heralds the future, but also it interprets the past, and, in addition, it explains difficult passages of scripture. In this case the spirit of prophecy had not made known to Alma the time in the life of the Redeemer when He should come "among His people" in their new Land of Promise. But, however, that spirit had manifest to him that Christ would come at no "far distant time." Of this, Alma was sure! He knew the Lord God, whose servant he was, "hath power to do all things" which He had promised. Therefore, Alma spoke with knowledge and understanding.

Alma 7 8Alma's prophecy concerning the Redeemer was confirmed about forty years earlier by an angel from Heaven who roused King Benjamin, the Presiding High Priest of God's Church, from a peaceful slumber, and said to him, "Awake, and hear the words which I will tell thee; for behold, I am come to declare unto you the Glad Tidings of great joy." (124 B.C.)

Alma 7 8The angel then began to declare to Benjamin the "Glad Tidings," to deliver which was the angel's divine commission.

Alma 7 8The words of the celestial visitor caused the king to rejoice, and later in that same day Benjamin prophesied to his people concerning the angel's words, and, they, too, rejoiced and were filled with gladness.

Alma 7 8Alma's and King Benjamin's prophecies of the Redeemer are among the greatest testimonies of the Messiah ever recorded in the annals of any people. Almost in detail, they set forth many conditions about which there is much contention in the world. But, we can thank God that they make plain many things that now burden the minds of unbelievers, and of those who make a mock of God's Plan of Salvation.

Alma 7 8Not far distant. Compare same statement made by King Benjamin and recorded in Mosiah 3:5.

Alma 7 9Verse 9

Alma 7 9Repent, and prepare the Way of the Lord. Although the Holy Spirit did not make the time known to Alma when the Son of God should come among the Nephites—whether in His mortal tabernacle or not—it did say unto him, "Cry unto this people, saying—Repent ye, and prepare the Way of the Lord."

Alma 7 9The cry to repent has been a clarion call sounded to every generation of Israel. All the holy prophets have made repentance their message. Whether their voices come to us through the revelations of old, or through the seers of our own time, they bring a command of God. To repent is a direct order coming from Him who presides over all, and not through an ambitious priest who presumes to act as His vicegerent. Repentance from evil is the natural move of those who understand God's holy purposes. To turn from pride, and humble oneself before Him is the mark of the true believer. It matters not who one is, we all have need to repent. There is only One who is good, only One who has no need to repent. That One is our Father in Heaven:

Alma 7 9Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. (Matthew 5:48; See also Mark 10:18)

Alma 7 9Repentance is a moral endeavor of the heart, not a vagrant conclusion of the mind. It is a resolve of the conscience, not a calculation. It is not a weatherglass that indicates the high and low of spiritual devotion, nor is it a mechanical proposition. It is not machine-made, having no though or feeling. A man may seek to apply stern mathematical rules to his behavior: he may add restraints and take away life's pseudo-joys and follies, or multiply his philanthropies. But in the end, and notwithstanding his intents, his arithmetic will not prepare him for life in the Kingdom of God which is immortal.

Alma 7 9Money is the god of such a man; he would fain buy the Lord's blessings and thereby make common merchandise of God's most precious gifts. Using that formula of life, his solution of its problems is wrong, just as wrong as is the answer one receives who takes paper and pencil and attempts thereby to prove the Gospel true. It cannot be done!

Alma 7 9God, our Father, has placed us here upon earth, and enjoined that we do His bidding. A keener awareness of His loving-kindness and His will, "a fuller and freer recognition of His presence and His power in all the experiences of our lives," should turn us from pursuing life's vanities and thereafter seek those heavenly treasures which "maketh truly rich."

Alma 7 9Repentance is a step forward and upward in the progress to our celestial home; it is proof that our steps are firm, and a witness to our integrity. Repentance, be it remembered, is a mandate from God.

Alma 7 9To forsake one's sins, with the added determination to do them no more, is repentance. Repentance means to "amend or resolve to amend one's life as a result of contrition for what has been done or omitted to be done." (Merriam Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary) A will to do good follows sorrow for things left undone that should have been done; and a contrition for doing that which never should have been done.

Alma 7 9Notwithstanding our divine parentage and our birthright, too many, too often, day by day, perform their allotted tasks forgetting God's wisdom and guidance. We have no time or thought for else than the world and worldly goods. The burdens we carry, the imposts life lays, its pursuits and pleasures, are the gods that fill the pantheon of our hearts. Pantheon means "a people's aggregate gods, or a temple dedicated to all their gods." We mean by the expression, "pantheon of our hearts," that place where we honor most the things we love best. If we love the things of the world more than we love the things of God, we turn our hearts into pagan temples, and worldly goods into objects of reverence and adoration.

Alma 7 9Repentance brings a change in one's manner of life, it is a change of heart. It implies a change within; unless there is a change within there can be no change without.

Alma 7 9And ye do know of yourselves, for ye have witnessed it, that as many of them as are brought to the knowledge of the truth, and to know of the wicked and abominable traditions of their fathers, and are led to believe the Holy Scriptures, yea, the prophecies of the holy prophets, which are written, which leadeth them to faith on the Lord, and unto repentance, which faith and repentance bringeth a change of heart unto them—(Helaman 15:7)

Alma 7 9When the righteous King Benjamin, in Zarahemla, preached repentance and faith in God to his greatly loved people, this change wrought in them through the power of God's redeeming love was made manifest by them unitedly praising Him, and by them covenanting "with our God to do His will, and to be obedient to His commandments in all things that He shall command us, all the remainder of our days."

Alma 7 9And now, it came to pass that when King Benjamin had thus spoken to his people, he sent among them, desiring to know of his people if they believed the words which he had spoken unto them.

Alma 7 9And they all cried with one voice, saying: Yea, we believe all the words which thou hast spoken unto us; and also, we know of their surety and truth, because of the Spirit of the Lord Omnipotent, which has wrought a mighty change in us, or in our hearts, that we have no more disposition to do evil, but to do good continually....

Alma 7 9And now, these are the words which King Benjamin desired of them; and therefore he said unto them: Ye have spoken the words that I desired; and the covenant which ye have made is a righteous covenant.

Alma 7 9And now, because of the covenant which ye have made ye shall be called the Children of Christ, His sons, and His daughters; for behold, this day He hath spiritually begotten you; for ye say that your hearts are changed through faith on His name; therefore, ye are born of Him and have become His sons and His daughters. (Mosiah 5:1-7)

Alma 7 9This brings us to the thought that the power of man may make a just and an upright person, the power of a priest may make an "ecclesiastic," but the power of God, alone, can make a righteous man out of a sinner; can change into a good one, a bad heart, or "quicken one that is dead in trespass and in sin." All these come through faith on His name, and repentance through Christ, our LORD.

Alma 7 9Repentance changes the countenance of the sinner so that the old man (Ephesians 4:17-32) is not recognized, but is swallowed up in the likeness of our Lord, Jesus Christ.

Alma 7 9And now behold, I ask of you, my brethren of the Church, have ye spiritually been born of God? Have ye received His image in your countenances? Have ye experienced this mighty change in your hearts? (Alma 5:14)

Alma 7 9In commenting on the words heart and trust as the latter is used in verse 6, we refer the reader to words written by King Solomon:

Alma 7 9My son, forget not my law; but let thine heart keep mine commandments:

Alma 7 9For length of days and long life, and peace, shall they add to thee.

Alma 7 9Let not mercy and truth forsake thee; bind them about they neck; write them upon the table of thine heart:

Alma 7 9So shalt thou find favour and good understanding in the sight of God and man.

Alma 7 9Trust in the LORD with all thine heart; and lean not unto thine own understanding.

Alma 7 9In all thy ways acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths. (Proverbs 3:1-6)

Alma 7 9Prepare the Way of the Lord. Among the ancient Orientals it was customary when a reigning monarch or a foreign potentate planned a visit to a friendly people for all of them to turn out almost en masse and prepare the way along which he would travel. They made straight any crooked paths and removed from his route any obstructions that might impede the progress of the royal visitor or his entourage. In general they repaired his way. In doing so, they made more pleasant his stay among them, and aided him in doing the thing he set out to do. This practice persisted until just recently when the old method of conveyance gave way to modern automotive transportation.

Alma 7 9The analogy used by Alma, prepare the Way of the Lord, was also used by many of the great Hebrew prophets in exhorting the Jews to make ready for the promised visit of the King of kings. It, too, was a comparison easily understood by the Nephites to whom it presented an active desire to have all things ready for the day when He should come among them. In addition to that, it reveals to us another relic in the thinking of the Nephites which they had inherited from the people from whom their fathers had sprung.

Alma 7 9Prepare ye the Way of the LORD, make straight in the desert a highway for our God. Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain shall be made low: and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough places plain. (Isaiah 40:3)

Alma 7 9For this is He that was spoken of by the prophet Esaias, saying The voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the Way of the Lord, make His paths straight. (Matthew 3:3)

Alma 7 9And thou, child, shall be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare His Ways. (Luke 1:76)

Alma 7 9This refers to John the Baptist, whose mission was to "prepare the Way of the Lord." The fact that Jesus had a forerunner, a herald, to proclaim His advent and command that the Way be prepared for Him, proves that He was more than a common mortal, more than a teacher and reformer. As we have noted that when kings and potentates in those days were about to travel, they notified their subjects that they were coming, and that the roads were to be repaired and straightened so that there should be no unnecessary delay.

Alma 7 9A notable illustration of this oriental custom was furnished by the Sultan of Turkey, Abdul-Hamid II, when he, having received word that the German Emperor desired to visit Jerusalem, issued an order that the road between Jaffa and Jerusalem be prepared for the Imperial Visitor. This was done. Hundreds of men and women were drafted for work on the road.

Alma 7 9Now the very mission of John proves that the advent of Jesus was the coming of a King to His kingdom. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume I, p. 72)

Alma 7 9 For behold, the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Alma's admonition, "Repent ye, and prepare the Way of the Lord," was not only a warning in advance of Christ's coming, but a command for his listeners to make themselves ready for that great and long-awaited event of prophecy, the coming of our Lord, which he said, "was not far distant." (V. 7) "Behold," Alma cried, "the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, and the Son of God cometh upon the face of the Earth."

Alma 7 9To many it is a cause of great wonderment that the Nephites, they say, were blest far beyond their brethren at Jerusalem in the knowledge they had of Christ's coming to Earth, His ministry, death and resurrection. This, however, is not the casel From the sacred records, the Book of Mormon and also the Bible, itself, we will show that supposition to be in error. The Gospel and its Divine Author, their Savior and Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, were proclaimed to the Jews from the time when Moses led the Children of Israel out of Egyptian bondage down to the close of the prophetic dispensation. How long before that time only those things are known which are revealed in the Book of Moses, now divided into five parts, and the books of modern revelation, including the Pearl of Great Price and the Book of Mormon.

Alma 7 9Christ, himself, when, in marvelous condescension, appeared to the Nephites gathered about the Temple in Bountiful "marveling and wondering one with another," and also "conversing about this Jesus Christ, of whom the sign had been given concerning His death," introduced Himself by stretching forth His hand, saying:

Alma 7 9Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world. (III Nephi 2:10)

Alma 7 9A few days later as the Risen Redeemer preached His Gospel to the Nephites who had gathered in great numbers to hear Him, also said:

Alma 7 9Behold, I am He of whom Moses spake, saying: A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me; Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever He shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass that every soul who will not hear the Prophet shall be cut off from my people.

Alma 7 9Verily I say unto you, yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have testified of Me. (III Nephi 20:23-24)

Alma 7 9But, behold, ye not only deny My words, but ye also deny all the words which have been spoken by our fathers, and also the words which were spoken by this man, Moses, who had such great power given unto him, yea, the words which he hath spoken concerning the coming of the Messiah.

Alma 7 9Yea, did he not bear record that the Son of God should come? And as he lifted up the brazen serpent in the wilderness, even so shall He be lifted up who should come.

Alma 7 9And as many as should look upon that serpent should live, even so as many as should look upon the Son of God with faith, having a contrite spirit, might live, even unto that life which is eternal.

Alma 7 9And now behold, Moses did not only testify of these things, but also all the holy prophets, from his days even to the days of Abraham.

Alma 7 9Yea, and behold, Abraham saw of His coming, and was filled with gladness and did rejoice.

Alma 7 9 Yea, and behold I say unto you, that Abraham not only knew of these things, but there were many before the days of Abraham who were called by the order of God; yea, even after the order of His Son; and this that it should be shown unto the people, a great many thousand years before His coming, that even redemption should come unto them.

Alma 7 9And now I would that ye should know, that even since the days of Abraham there have been many prophets that have testified these things; yea, behold, the prophet Zenos did testify boldly; for the which he was slain.

Alma 7 9And behold, also Zenock, and also Ezias, and also Isaiah, and Jeremiah, (Jeremiah being that same prophet who testified of the destruction of Jerusalem) and now we know that Jerusalem was destroyed according to the words of Jeremiah. O then why not the Son of God come, according to his prophecy? (Helaman 8:13-20)

Alma 7 9And now, whoso readeth, let him understand; he that hath the Scriptures, let him search them, and see and behold if all these deaths and destructions by fire, and by smoke, and by tempests, and by whirlwinds, and by the opening of the earth to receive them, and all these things are not unto the fulfilling of the prophecies of many of the holy prophets.

Alma 7 9Behold, I say unto you, Yea, many have testified of these things at the coming of Christ, and were slain because they testified of these things.

Alma 7 9Yea, the prophet Zenos did testify of these things, and also Zenock spake concerning these things, because they testified particularly concerning us, who are a remnant of their seed. (III Nephi 10:14-16)

Alma 7 9Zenos was a Hebrew prophet often quoted by the Nephite servants of God. All we are told of his personal history is that he was slain because he testified boldly of what God revealed to him. There is no account of him or his teachings in the Hebrew Scriptures as we presently have them. Jewish secretaries and copyists deleted, at the behest of their "teachers and leaders," every reference made to Zenos or his prophecies concerning the Messiah of whom he foretold many wonderful things.

Alma 7 9Zenock was also a prophet of Israel whose personal history, like that of Zenos, we know nothing. Neither do we know to what age he belonged. However, his testimony points definitely to the great knowledge concerning the Redeemer which the Jewish people once enjoyed.

Alma 7 9Ezais, of him, only Nephi, the son of Helaman, makes mention; but the mere fact that Nephi included him among the prophets he named as testifying of the Son of God is another proof of the truth of our statement—if such a proof is needed—that the Jews were amply forewarned of Christ's great mission.

Alma 7 9The Jews were guilty of effacing the Sacred Scriptures to suit their own purposes, but, however, they could not erase every mention of—no matter how they tried—their Saviour and Redeemer. If one looks into every fragment of their sacred writings that have been handed down to us, and known as the Old Testament, one will find many references to the Holy One of Israel, their Saviour and Redeemer.

Alma 7 9(See, He hath redeemed Jerusalem, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 130)

Alma 7 9One of the first, and certainly the greatest, of Christian Apologists was Justin Martyr. In his famous dialogue with the Jew Trypho, he charges "the teachers and leaders of the Jews" with having deliberately defaced and, where possible, removed from the Scriptures every trace of the true Messianic Gospel, which the Jews themselves once taught. He makes it very clear that Christianity is strictly an "eschatological" [^1] religion, that stands or fall on its apocalyptic [^2] claims. They are the same claims, he insists again and again, that the real inspired Jews of old used to make, the very things that the prophets always taught. The Christians alone, the dialogue insists, are in direct line with the ancient prophets (Dial. 52); the Christians preach an eternal and unchanging gospel (Dial. 29-30), the very same which was taught by the Patriarchs in the beginning. It was Christ whom Abraham saw and talked with (Dial. 56); it was not an angel but the Lord himself who wrestled with Jacob (Dial. 58-60). As Elias came anciently, so he came in John the Baptist to announce the Christ, and so he will come to herald Him when he comes again. (Dial. 49) When Trypho declares this paradoxical, Justin points out that while Moses was still alive God caused the spirit of Moses to descend upon Joshua, who was thereby both a Moses and a Joshua. Circumcision began with Abraham, and sabbaths and sacrifices with Moses [?]; [^3] but behind these was an eternal law that had no such beginning, and that is the law brought by Jesus Christ, withheld in other ages because of the wickedness of their hearts, but known to the patriarchs in the beginning none the less. (Dial. 43)

Alma 7 9We are really in the same tradition of teaching that you are, Justin tells Trypho the orthodox Jew (Dial. 11), but we look behind all tentative and provisional rules to the one eternal plan; behind all this passing show is the real thing, ageless and changeless (Dial. 45).

Alma 7 9However much they may quarrel about other things, there are two basic doctrines, say Justin, in which all Christians must believe. The resurrection and the millennium. (Dial. 80) Why don't the Jews believe in them? Because, says he, they have been led astray by their "teachers" (Didaskaloi) and "leaders" (archontes). It is they who make and control the official doctrines, and because they happen to sit in Moses' seat and enjoy the support of the government and the control of the schools, it does not follow for a moment that their "official" doctrine is the true patriarchal tradition they claim it is. Indeed, they fight that tradition tooth and nail. "You know very well that your teachers whenever they detect anything in your scriptures that might refer to Christ, diligently efface it." (Dial. 120) "Your teachers not only undertake their own interpretations in preference to the Septuagint (once their official Bible), but have also removed many passages from the text entirely." To this the indignant Trypho replies: "Do you mean to charge us with completely rewriting the scriptures?" And in answer Justin cites three important passages—all strong evidence for the Gospel of Christ—that have been deliberately removed from the Scriptures by "the leaders of the people." (Dial. 71-72) The teachers of the Jews have shut their minds to the great possibilities of the scripture," he continues,—and are determined to fix things so that no one else will see them either. ... His most serious charge against the doctors is, indeed, that they no longer have prophets among them. (Dial. 51, 52, 87) Hugh Nibley, Ph.D., Professor of Religion, Brigham Young University, An Approach to the Book of Mormon, Printing of 1957, pp. 309-311.

Alma 7 9A few verses of Hebrew Scripture with which we are familiar will serve to point to the truth of our statement that Jesus Christ, the mighty Jehovah, together with His mission were thoroughly understood by the Jews in and about Jerusalem until their apostasy as a nation blotted out nearly every vestige of the Gospel which had been proclaimed to them by their holy prophets.

Alma 7 9According to the Old Testament, "Who were the Prophets?"

Alma 7 9In common usage the word prophet means one who foretells future events. It also is one who speaks for God; a teacher and one who interprets the Scriptures. Throughout the whole Old and New Testaments, men and sometimes women are cast in the role of prophets because they had the gift, often in great abundance, of speaking about things that were yet to come, of reproving and admonishing, of directing and warning of evil. Yet many of them left no writings to record their prophecies or their length of days. It has been pointed out that Aaron, his brother, the great lawgiver Moses, and Jesus, the greatest Prophet of all times, are among these.

Alma 7 9Those who recorded their prophecies, and of such we have a record in the Bible, are divided into two groups.

Alma 7 9The first of these groups consists of four major prophets—Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and Daniel. The other group are those whose names are given to the last 12 books of the Old Testament. There are also a number of prophets that were important in their day but who left no writings behind them. The most important of these are Elijah and Elisha, whose deeds are related in 1 Kings 17:21; 2 Kings 1:9, 13.

Alma 7 9The periods of the prophecies preserved to us are in some cases a little uncertain. The following is, at least, approximately correct.

Alma 7 9Isaiah began to prophesy near the time of the death of Uzziah, King of Judah. He continued to prophesy to the reign of Manasseh, who caused him to be put to death.

Alma 7 9Jeremiah began in the thirteenth year of the reign of Josiah, King of Judah. He continued to prophesy till the taking of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, and it is thought he died two years later in Egypt. Baruch was his disciple and amanuensis or secretary.

Alma 7 9Ezekiel was carried captive into Babylon, along with Jeconiah, King of Judah, eleven years before the destruction of Jerusalem. He preached during the captivity for about 22 years. We do not know when he died.

Alma 7 9Daniel was taken into Chaldea in the third year of Jehoiakim, King of Judah, and prophesied at Babylon to the end of the captivity.

Alma 7 9Hosea prophesied under Jeroboam II, King of Israel, and his successors, perhaps to the destruction of Samaria.

Alma 7 9Joel prophesied under Josiah about the same time as Jeremiah.

Alma 7 9Amos began to prophesy the second year before the earthquake, which was in the reign of King Uzziah, about six years before the death of Jeroboam II, King of Israel.

Alma 7 9Obadiah dwelt in Judea, probably after the taking of Jerusalem, and before the desolation of Idumea.

Alma 7 9Jonah lived in the Kingdom of Israel under the Kings, Josh and Jeroboam II, about the same time as Hosea, Isaiah, and Amos.

Alma 7 9Micah lived under Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah; he was contemporary with Isaiah, but began later to prophesy.

Alma 7 9Nahum appeared in Judah under the reign of Hezekiah, and after the expedition of Sennacherib.

Alma 7 9Habakkuk lived in Judea during the reign of Jehoiakim, before the coming of Nebuchadnezzar into the country.

Alma 7 9Zephaniah appeared at the beginning of the reign of Josiah, and before the twenty-eighth year of his prince.

Alma 7 9Haggai was the great prophet of the return to Jerusalem, and the rebuilding of the Temple. He is supposed to have been an old man, as Haggai 2:3 is taken to mean that he had seen the old Temple before its destruction by Nebuchadnezzar.

Alma 7 9Zechariah prophesied in Judea at the same time as Haggai, and continued to prophesy after him, being younger.

Alma 7 9Malachi, the author of the last book in the Old Testament, lived about the time of Nehemiah's second visit to Jerusalem. Nothing whatever is known of him. (Cruden's Complete Concordance of the Bible)

The Place Where Christ Was to Be Born

Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem.

Saying, Where is He that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen His star in the east, and are come to worship Him.

When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.

And when he had gathered all the chief priests and scribes of the people together, he demanded of them where Christ should be born.

And they said unto him, in Bethlehem of Judea: for thus it is written by the prophet, [^4]

And thou Bethlehem, in the land of Juda, art not the least among the princes of Juda: for out of these shall come a Governor, that shall rule My people Israel. [^5]

A literal translation of the Greek into which the New Testament was originally written was made by the late George Ricker Berry, Ph.D., Professor of Semitic Languages, University of Chicago and Colgate University; Dr. Berry renders the sixth verse:

And thou, Bethlehem, land of Juda, in no wise least art among the governors [^6] of Juda, out of thee for shall go forth a Leader, who shall shepherd My people Israel.

Let us now turn to the prophetic history of the Servant whose birth among the lowly, His growth and development into manhood, His mission, and the reception accorded Him by the apostate Jews, is vividly set forth by Isaiah. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, pp. 152 ff.)

Yea, and my soul delighteth in the words of Isaiah, for I came out from Jerusalem, and mine eyes hath beheld the things of the Jews, and I know that the Jews do understand the things of the prophets, and there is none other people that understand the things which were spoken unto the Jews like unto them, save it be that they were taught after the manner of the things of the Jews. (II Nephi 25:5)

ISAIAH 53

Verse 1

Who hath believed our words of Him in whom the power and authority of God is made known? (Paraphrase by the Editor)

Verse 2

For He shall grow up before Him as a tender plant.

Verse 3

A Man of sorrows and acquainted with grief. Some translations say "familiar with grief," others "and knowing grief."

Verse 4

Surely He hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. In some very ancient MSS, these words are translated, "Surely our afflictions He hath borne, and our sorrows He carrieth them."

Verse 5

The chastisement of our peace was upon Him. We prefer to say, "The burden of establishing our peace was His." Now Isaiah here proclaims that the burden is upon the Servant to re-establish the peace they once had—"a state of peace and favor with God."

Verse 6

And the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.

Verses 7-8

He was oppressed, and He was afflicted yet he openeth not His mouth. And who shall declare His generation? Here Isaiah continued his description of the Servant's reception by the apostate Jews. He was despised by them, and as their long-awaited Messiah, He was rejected.

Verse 9

And He made His grave with the wicked, and with the rich in His death. With others we believe a transposition of the words His grave and in His death has been made by careless copyists, and we suggest that the better meaning of this thought would be, as they have suggested,

Yea, His death was appointed among the wicked; And with a rich man, His tomb.

Verse 10

And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in His hand. We repeat what we said in commenting upon this same verse on page 163, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II.

That the purposes of the Lord shall be brought about, and all His words fulfilled wherein He promised Eternal Life to mankind, the Lord permitted His righteous Servant to suffer and make His life an offering for sin. That we may be pardoned of our sins and receive Salvation in His Kingdom was the end for which the Servant, Jesus Christ, suffered and died; "He was smitten to death."

The exact completion of this prophecy by Isaiah will be fully shown by adding here the several circumstances of the burial of Jesus. All were collected from the accounts of the evangelists:

There was a rich man from Arimathea, named Joseph, a member of the Sanhedrin, and of a respectable character, who had not consented to their counsel and act. He went to Pilate and begged the body of Jesus. He laid it in his own new tomb, which had been hewed out of the rock, near the place where Jesus was crucified; having first wound it in fine linen with spices, as was the custom of the Jews in burying the rich and the great. (Dr. Adam Clarke, Commentary on the Old Testament)

The prophecies of the Old Testament are not to be regarded as apart from, or separated from each other. Together they present one picture of God's most holy purposes. The ritual and ceremony attending Israel's worship were part of a great culmination to which they vividly pointed. Israel's history, including its frequent wars and contentions, was not a series of "loosely connected events," but each one had a clear and unmistakable end to which all things struggled. That end was the enthronement of their Messiah, and the establishment of God's Kingdom here upon Earth.

Dr. Edersheim, hereinafter cited, has made of this conclusion a deeply considered study, and in appreciation of his labors we give especial approbation by quoting him directly, and referring the reader to Appendix IX, Volume II of his great work, The Life and Times of Jesus.

In accordance with all this, the ancient Synagogue found references to the Messiah in many more passages of the Old Testament than those verbal predictions, to which we generally appeal; and the latter formed a proportionately small, and secondary, element in the conception of the Messianic era. This is fully borne out by a detailed analysis of those passages in the Old Testament to which the ancient Synagogue referred as Messianic. Their number amounts to upwards of 456 (75 from the Pentateuch, 243 from the Prophets, and 138 from the Hagiographa), and their Messianic application is supported by more than 558 references to the most ancient Rabbinic writings. But comparatively few of these are what would be termed verbal predictions. Rather would it seem as if every event were regarded as prophetic, and every prophecy, whether by fact, or by word (prediction), as a light to cast its sheen on the future, until the picture of the Messianic age in the far back-ground stood out in the hundredfold variegated brightness of prophetic events and prophetic utterances.

Dr. Edersheim also points out:

Large as this number is, I do not present the list as complete. Thus, out of the thirty-seven Parashahs constituting the Midrash on Leviticus, no fewer than twenty-five close with an outlook on Messianic times. The same may be said of the close of many of the Parashahs in the Midrashim known as Pesiqta and Tanchuma (Zunz, u. s. pp. 181, 234). Besides, the oldest portions of the Jewish liturgy are full of Messianic aspirations. (Ibid., 163, Volume I)

A remarkable statement made by members of the Sanhedrin, [^7] and which is included in the Talmud, [^8] will help prove the assertion that the knowledge God revealed to the Jews in Judea through His holy prophets concerning the coming of Christ, His mission, death and resurrection, was as resplendent to them as were the effulgent rays of wisdom that illumined the paths trod by the Nephites, who also awaited that glorious Day of Promise:

All the prophets prophesied not but of the days of the Messiah. (The Talmud, quoted by Alfred Edersheim in The Life and Times of Jesus)

If one takes Christ, Israel's Messiah and King, out of the Old Testament, it cannot be understood. The rule of the Earth by God's Kingdom is the sum and substance of every prophecy made. The calling of Israel and its mission among the nations of the world, its sacrifices and other institutions, its temple ordinances and the promises therein given, all express knowledge of its King and of His Kingdom. The New Testament is but the fulfilling of the Old; it is the fruition of the seeds planted by God's holy prophets since ever the world began. "Thus the whole Old Testament was a preparatory presentation of the rule of Heaven, and the Kingship of its Lord." (Alfred Edersheim, ibid.)

And the LORD shall be King over all the Earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and His name one. (Zechariah 14:9)

I saw in the night visions, and, behold, One like the son of man came with the clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of Days, and they brought Him near before him.

And there was given Him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve Him: His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and His Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed. (Daniel 7:13-14)

Also, we will call attention to the following bit of Hebrew Scripture:

Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall call His name Immanuel. (Isaiah 7:14)

Immanuel. This name appears twice in the Book of Mormon (II Nephi 17:14; 18:8) from the writings of Isaiah. It is a Hebrew word meaning God is with us.

Now to the 22nd Psalm:

They part My garments among them, and cast lots upon My vesture. (Verse 18)

We need not wonder because there is more recorded in the Book of Mormon concerning the coming Messiah, His birth, ministry, death, and resurrection, than is likewise noted in the Hebrew Scriptures as we presently have them in the Old Testament.

In their pride and presumptive folly, the Jews forgot the Covenant the Lord had made with their fathers at Sinai, and also they had grown remiss in the worship of the True and Living God which for centuries had characterized their religion. Judaism became, it has been said, "the sanctuary of fools," and of those who interpreted the Torah (Law) to satisfy the gnawing pangs of ambition and greed. Throughout all Judah only the crumbs of spiritual sustenance fell to the lowly from the tables of the rich. Pharisaical haughtiness regarded the poor and needy as beggars, and besides the hierarchy had in them little interest. The common people were taught only those things which their "teachers and leaders" thought best. Gradually the Jews, deprived of the food nourishing to the soul, and also its comforts, quickly surrendered to the heathen worship of their neighbors, and to gods whom they knew not. Apostasy, at its darkest, settled over Judah.

The abandonment of their fathers' religion by the Jews, and the spiritual immorality of which they were guilty, were almost universal among them, and lasted, off and on, for centuries. In its darkness many of the words of the holy prophets were effaced. All mention of Christ was erased from their Scriptures to clear the way of despots and rulers who brooked no interference from another who was to be "King of the Jews."

The spirit of apostasy is the same throughout every age: murder, spiritual incest (Eccl.), thievery, perjury: apostasy stops at nothing! But, however, its greatest efforts lie in the realm of darkness. To keep God's children in ignorance of their Eternal Father's Plan of Salvation is the sinful aim of many who, themselves, sit in darkness and bid others, "Do likewise!" We offer no apologies when we say that these prefer "darkness to light," albeit, they piously chant, "In Thy light shall we see light." (Psalm 36:9)

The Christian apostasy followed along the same lines. It was like a funeral pyre whose flames were fed by the same fagots. In the Dark Ages of Europe it was a crime to read God's Holy Word, and a heresy to worship Him according to the dictates of one's own conscience. The voices of God's inspired teachers and evangelists were scarcely heard above the din of Babel, and only "a form of Godliness" took the place of homage to His name, and devotion to His cause. Ignorance, darkness, crime, witchcraft, and demons, were all marks of those times. Superstition guided the feet of all who sought Eternal Life. "All Christendom," it is said, "was decked in the habiliments of absolute apostasy." (The Finger of God, D. D. Cummin. Episcopalian clergyman, A.D. 1860) Ignorance was the underlying cause of both the Jewish and the Christian apostasies.

However, what we have noted here only partially answers the question that is asked: "Did the Nephites, in American, receive a greater knowledge of Christ's advent, His ministry, and atoning Sacrifice, than did their brethren, the Jews in Jerusalem?" Our answer is, "No, they did not!"

Even the casual student of Jewish history will remember that during the long period of their awaiting Messiah's coming, of Whom all the prophets spoke, there were available few writings of the prophet's words; too, they were costly—out of the reach of ordinary men. Copies of the Scriptures were laboriously made by paid copyists and scribes who sometimes grew careless in their work, and produced but few true replicas.

Carelessness in transcribing the Scriptures was not the only fault of the amanuenses. Changes in the text were deliberately made, as we have pointed out, at the behest of the "teachers and leaders of the Jews,"—the ones who stated doctrine and formulated decisions, thereby influencing opinion, and giving shape and form to the "Messianic tradition." These scribes, whose duty it was to copy as is, often left out parts of, and sometimes whole texts.

The teachers and leaders who thus conspired one another with the scribes became the corruptors of the Law, and the perverters of the Way. They sought to justify "private interpretation" (II Peter 1:20) by editing the word of God. They followed a course that was willfully wicked, and in so doing obliterated the picture the prophets had painted of the Lord, their Deliverer and Messiah, and substituted therefor one which was embodied upon a canvas whose oils were mixed with the fat of sacrilege.

The Lord, their Rock and their Redeemer, the Messiah, who was to deliver them, they thought from earthly foes, was predicated by them upon scripture which they, themselves, had mutilated. Again, we repeat—it is by repetition we teach, and by repetition we learn—because of selfish and unworthy motives, ambitious priests and rulers tampered [^9] with the Scriptures, and the doctrines they thereupon invented not only proved unorthodox, but downright unreal and unsound. They rendered their God-made Covenant so as to subserve their own unholy purposes. Here we remember Isaiah's words:

The Earth is also defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the Ordinance, broken the Everlasting Covenant. (Isaiah 24:5)

Search the Scriptures ... they are they which testify of Me. (John 5:39)

Thus, the Great Redeemer, Israel's Messiah, called upon the Records of the Jews to witness of Him. And thus, near the end of His mission here below, the Risen Lord, as He journeyed a short distance out from Jerusalem with two erstwhile companions—but to them He appeared unknown—inquired of them the cause of their being downcast. One of them, whose name was Cleopas, not recognizing who He was, answered the Savior, saying,

Art Thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which are come to pass there in these days?

Then He who they thought was a stranger further inquired,

What things?

And again Cleopas replied:

Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people: and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered Him to be condemned to death, and have crucified Him. But we trusted that it had been He which should have redeemed Israel: and beside all this, today is the third day since these things were done.

Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonished, which were early at the sepulchre;

And when they found not His body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels, which said that He was alive.

And certain of them which were with us went to the sepulchre, and found it even so as the women had said: but Him they saw not.

Then He said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken:

Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into His glory?

And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, He expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself.

When, the next day, they returned to Jerusalem, and found the other Apostles who were gathered together, they told them all that had happened the night previously. How their hearts burned within them as the Risen Lord explained to them the Scriptures. How they then recognized Him when He brake the Bread and gave it unto them whilst He supped with them. All who were gathered together rejoiced, but they could scarcely believe what was heard. And while they conversed about the strange events of which they spoke, the Savior, Himself, stood in their midst, and said unto them, "Peace be unto you."

* * * * * * *

And He said unto them, These are the words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the Law of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning Me.

Then opened He their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures,

And said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day. [^10] (Luke 24)

Here, in the Redeemer's own words, we have the confirmation of, although He does not mention their names, the prophecies of Zenock and Zenos, two ancient Hebrew prophets whose words are recorded in the Book of Mormon, as we have already pointed out. This may be considered direct evidence that the Brass Plates of Laban which Lehi brought with him from Jerusalem were indeed full writings of the prophets up until the time Lehi and his little company left their homeland in Judea.

Alma 7 10Verse 10

Alma 7 10And behold, He shall be born of Mary. Mary is mentioned, by name, but twice in the Book of Mormon. Beside this prophecy by Alma, King Benjamin, in prophesying to his people in Zarahemla of the coming of the Redeemer (125 B.C.) said, "He shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and His mother shall be called Mary." (Mosiah 3:8)

Alma 7 10She was also shown to Nephi in his great vision of the Son of God (600 B.C.) although her name is not mentioned by him. He recorded,

Alma 7 10And it came to pass that I looked and beheld the great city of Jerusalem, and also other cities. And I beheld the city of Nazareth; and in the city of Nazareth I beheld a virgin, and she was exceedingly fair and white.

Alma 7 10And it came to pass that I saw the Heavens open; and an angel came down and stood before me; and he said unto me: Nephi, what beholdest thou?

Alma 7 10And I said unto him: A virgin, most beautiful and fair above all other virgins.

Alma 7 10And he said unto me: Knowest thou the condescension of God?

Alma 7 10And I said unto him: I know that He loveth His children; nevertheless, I do not know the meaning of all things.

Alma 7 10And he said unto me: Behold, the virgin whom thou seest is the mother of the Son of God, after the manner of the flesh.

Alma 7 10And it came to pass that I beheld that she was carried away in the Spirit; and after she had been carried away in the Spirit for a space of a time the angel spake unto me, saying: Look!

Alma 7 10And I looked and beheld the virgin again, bearing a child in her arms.

Alma 7 10And the angel said unto me: Behold the Lamb of God, yea, even the Son of the Eternal Father! (I Nephi 11:13-21)

Alma 7 10She being a virgin. The term virgin has several different interpretations. In Hebrew, with which Nephi was undoubtedly familiar, the word bethulah used by writers of that period usually suggests to us, an unmarried maiden. The Arabian root means to be mature, and the Aramaic does not connote virginity. The word apparently means one of marriageable age, and certainly not the word which would naturally be used if virginity were the point to be emphasized. (Hasting's Dictionary of the Bible)

Alma 7 10Among those who had a profound respect for the Law of Moses, and which was mixed with love and awe of the coming Messiah, it was a Jewish custom for them to dedicate to the temple service a female child born under extraordinary circumstances.

Alma 7 10In the Apocryphal Gospels—although legendary they have a basis of fact surrounding their conclusions—we are told that Mary was miraculously granted to an aging, childless, couple, named Joachim and Anna, who were known for their piety and generosity. At the age of three years she was dedicated to the Lord, or to the temple service, where, it is said that she was ministered to by angels from Heaven, and where also she grew in wisdom and virtue. Those who were so set apart for such a service were called virgins. At the age of twelve [^11] Mary was betrothed to Joseph, a widower older than she.

Alma 7 10Let us now have Luke, the author of the Third Gospel, tell us in his own beautiful but simple words, the story of the birth of the infant child, Jesus. He could have gained the knowledge he imparts in no other way than by having the Virgin Mother, Mary, relate to him the intimate details of the events occurring at that time. You will observe that his summary of the incidents therein noted are stated by him "calmly, delicately, and clearly. Saint Luke has proven to be a writer of great historical accuracy, and we may be certain that he admitted nothing within his record of which he had not thoroughly tested the truth thereof: and it is difficult to believe that he would open his Gospel with a statement that he had accurately traced the course of the Gospel history from the first, and then immediately proceed to insert untrustworthy information." (Ibid., Mary the Virgin; See also COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume I, pp. 82-83)

Alma 7 10Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us,

Alma 7 10Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word;

Alma 7 10It seemed good to me also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus,

Alma 7 10That thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou hast been instructed.

Alma 7 10There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth.

Alma 7 10And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless.

Alma 7 10And they had no child, because that Elisabeth was barren, and they both were now well stricken in years.

Alma 7 10And it came to pass that while he executed the priest's office before God in the order of his course,

Alma 7 10According to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the temple of the Lord.

Alma 7 10And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the time of incense.

Alma 7 10And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the right side of the altar of incense.

Alma 7 10And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon him.

Alma 7 10But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt call his name John.

Alma 7 10And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at his birth.

Alma 7 10For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mother's womb.

Alma 7 10And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God.

Alma 7 10And he shall go before Him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.

Alma 7 10And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years.

Alma 7 10And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew thee these glad tidings.

Alma 7 10And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not my words which shall be fulfilled in their season.

Alma 7 10And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he tarried so long in the temple.

Alma 7 10And when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he beckoned unto them, and remained speechless.

Alma 7 10And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house.

Alma 7 10And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid herself five months, saying,

Alma 7 10Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in the days wherein He looked on me, to take away my reproach among men.

Alma 7 10And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,

Alma 7 10To a virgin espoused to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name was Mary.

Alma 7 10And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women.

Alma 7 10And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in her mind what manner of salutation this should be.

Alma 7 10And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found favour with God.

Alma 7 10And, behold thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shalt call His name JESUS.

Alma 7 10He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of his father David:

Alma 7 10And He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of His kingdom there shall be no end.

Alma 7 10Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?

Alma 7 10And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee: therefore also that Holy Thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

Alma 7 10And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called barren.

Alma 7 10For with God nothing shall be impossible.

Alma 7 10And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel departed from her.

Alma 7 10And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Juda;

Alma 7 10And entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth.

Alma 7 10And it came to pass that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Ghost:

Alma 7 10And she spake out with a loud voice, and said, Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb.

Alma 7 10And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?

Alma 7 10For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy.

Alma 7 10And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a performance of those things which were told her from the Lord.

Alma 7 10And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord,

Alma 7 10And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.

Alma 7 10For He hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for, behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed.

Alma 7 10For He that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is His name.

Alma 7 10And His mercy is on them that fear Him from generation to generation.

Alma 7 10He hath shewed strength with His arm: he hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.

Alma 7 10He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low degree.

Alma 7 10He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich He hath sent empty away.

Alma 7 10He hath holpen His servant Israel, in remembrance of His mercy;

Alma 7 10As He spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever.

Alma 7 10And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her own house.

Alma 7 10Now Elisabeth's full time came that she should be delivered; and she brought forth a son.

Alma 7 10And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her.

Alma 7 10And it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to circumcise the child; and they called him Zacharias, after the name of his father.

Alma 7 10And his mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be called John.

Alma 7 10And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is called by this name.

Alma 7 10And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called.

Alma 7 10And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marvelled all.

Alma 7 10And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and he spake, and praised God.

Alma 7 10And fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judea.

Alma 7 10And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts, saying, What manner of child shall this be! And the hand of the Lord was with him.

Alma 7 10And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied, saying,

Alma 7 10Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for He hath visited and redeemed His people,

Alma 7 10And hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of His servant David;

Alma 7 10As He spake by the mouth of His holy prophets, which have been since the world began:

Alma 7 10That we should be saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us;

Alma 7 10To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember His holy covenant;

Alma 7 10The oath which He sware to our father Abraham,

Alma 7 10That He would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve Him without fear,

Alma 7 10In holiness and righteousness before Him, all the days of our life.

Alma 7 10And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare His ways;

Alma 7 10To give knowledge of salvation unto His people by the remission of their sins,

Alma 7 10Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring from on high hath visited us,

Alma 7 10To give light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace.

Alma 7 10And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel.

Alma 7 10A precious and chosen vessel. This phrase is amply explained in Luke 1:28-30. The Angel Gabriel was sent by God to Nazareth to inform Mary of the part she was to take in the mission of the coming Lord. The angel approached her, and in words that she did not understand or comprehend their meaning, saluted her, saying, "Hail, thou that art highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women." Mary, who was yet very young, marvelled at the salutation of the angel. She was confused and confounded, somewhat afrighted. The angel seeing that Mary was startled and abashed at his unannounced presence, quickly reassured her, saying, "Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God." (Revised Version) Truly, Mary was chosen above the many Hebrew women who loved the Lord and who sought to do His bidding. She was indeed a precious "vessel" in whom God carried out to all mankind the fullest expression of His loving-kindness: "Behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a Son, and shalt call His name JESUS." Alma, in his great prophecy, said, "Yea, even the Son of God."

Alma 7 10She shall be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost. The Holy Ghost is that Personage through whom God, the Father, accomplishes many of His divine purposes. The power of the Holy Ghost is its ability to produce a desired effect; it is that might, or wonderful privilege granted by God to His Second Counselor in the Presidency of the Heavens to lead and to direct, and to warn of things to come. Nor is that all; among its solemn attributes is a delegated right to act in God's stead, to represent Him in the councils of men, to be commissioned by Him, and otherwise be His Deputy. What a sacred prerogative has the Holy Ghost! (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, pp. 168-170)

Alma 7 10Mary, in great bewilderment at the angel's words, said to him, "How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?' (Luke 1:34, King James' Translation) "I have no husband," other translations interpret it. Then in explanation the angel further said to her,

Alma 7 10The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the Child to be born will be called holy, the Son of God. (Revised Version)

Alma 7 10In the Authorized King James' Translation the verse reads:

Alma 7 10The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee...."

Alma 7 10The Book of Mormon, which we may consider more accurate, says of Mary,

Alma 7 10A precious and chosen vessel, who shall be overshadowed and conceive by the power of the Holy Ghost, and bring forth a Son, yea, even the Son of God.

Alma 7 10It is fruitless to discuss further the "Immaculate Conception" of Christ, as it is often called, but it is most important for us to know that such an event did actually take place. It is the beginning, as far as mortals are concerned, of the fulfillment of God's promise to ancient Israel:

Alma 7 10Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call His name Emmanuel, which being interpreted is, God with us. (See Isaiah 7:14)

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13Verses 11-13

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13And He shall go forth, suffering pains and afflictions and temptations of every kind. As we have noted, about forty years had elapsed since King Benjamin, in Zarahemla, prophesied to his faithful people concerning the Messiah in whose promised appearance they greatly rejoiced, as also did Alma's people in Gideon.

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13Alma's prophecy is a grand supplement of Benjamin's prediction. Both prophets testified that the Lord, Israel's Messiah, at no far distant time, would come to redeem His people. Their prophecies were fulfilled not long after when Jesus, the Son of God, was born in Jerusalem, the land of their forefathers. Alma, although he does not so state, opened the understanding of his people that they quickly comprehended the truth of Benjamin's words which an angel from Heaven had unfolded to the king almost a jubilee before.

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13By the spirit of prophecy which imbued both Benjamin and the righteous Nephites over whom he reigned, they discerned the meaning of his words. They were blessed with the power to tell right from wrong, and to choose good or evil. They discerned the right and chose the good. The testimony of Christ, Jesus, filled every heart, and Benjamin, too, was almost overwhelmed by the faith of his people in the coming Redeemer. The light of God's countenance made Benjamin's face bright with rays of living light as he proclaimed to them "The Lord Omnipotent Who reigneth, Who was and is from all eternity to all eternity," and Who, with great power, would come down from Heaven to dwell among the children of mortality, and Who would take upon Himself a body of flesh and blood. Benjamin further said:

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13And He shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of Heaven and Earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and His Mother shall be called Mary. (Mosiah 3:8)

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13As did King Benjamin before him, Alma spoke to his people words that were painful to their hearts and also were perplexing to their minds. He spoke of the sufferings of our Lord; that He should endure the wrath of men; that He should be tempted, tried and afflicted; that His body should be racked with pain, and that His anguish because of the wickedness and abominations of the world should be so great that blood would exude from every pore. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, v. 7, pp. 170-171)

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13He will take upon Him the pains and the sicknesses of His people. Notwithstanding that He was innocent, Himself, the Great Messiah, Alma declared, would humbly submit to the penalty of sin, which is death, and substitute Himself in the place of sinners, thereby releasing them from the "chains" of hell and of eternal damnation, which is the grave. Through God's grace, the Lord, yea, even the Son of God whom Alma proclaimed, would, when He should come, "break the bands of death," and "loosen the chains of hell," which, with relentless fury, held fast in their inexorable grasp the bodies and spirits of men. The promised coming of the Lord was a sign to the faithful Nephites that all men should be set free from the bands of death, and a messenger of peace to the oppressed that they would soon be delivered. They no longer feared death, nor did they deprecate it, or shrink away from it. They reasoned as did Paul, 150 years later, "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (I Cor. 15:22)

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13That He may know according to the flesh how to succor His people according to their infirmities. The Messiah, Jesus Christ, was clothed in a body of flesh and blood that He might know our afflictions by Himself undergoing the pains and temptations which mortals endure. He, having suffered "according to the flesh," the Redeemer of Israel, the Savior of all mankind, condescended to things of lower estate that He might be filled with compassion for the sinner, and help for them that have no other Helper save it be Him.

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13We may ask the question that Alma already made plain: "How could He know our griefs unless He partook of them? and how could He measure our temptations, unless He, himself, withstood them?" Alma answered the query, "The Spirit knoweth all things"; [^12] and the Son of God, knowing the pains He would thereby suffer, nevertheless, took upon Himself the sorrows and afflictions of all mankind that in so doing their sins might be "blotted out," and that death, itself, without exception, should release from the grave the bodies of all men therein held prisoners. We remember the gracious promise of the LORD to ancient Israel: "I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for Mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins." (Isaiah 43:25)

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13The mighty Jehovah, who created all things both in Heaven and upon Earth, was taken by wicked men and slain. Not only did He suffer pain and sorrow as do all mortals, but, He, like they, became subject "even unto death." In humble submission to the will of God, but with mighty power and strength, Jesus, the Holy One of Israel, bowed before the Majesty on High and paid the full price of man's Redemption, thereby breaking the bands of death.

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13And thus the flesh becoming subject to the Spirit, or the Son to the Father, being one God, suffereth temptation, and yieldeth not to the temptation, but suffereth Himself to be mocked, and scourged, and cast out, and disowned by His people.

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13And after all this, after working many mighty miracles among the children of men, He shall be led, yea, even as Isaiah said, as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so He opened not His mouth.

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13Yea, even so He shall be led, crucified, and slain, the flesh becoming subject even unto death, the will of the Son being swallowed up in the will of the Father. [^13]

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13And thus God breaketh the bands of death, having gained the victory over death; giving the Son power to make intercession for the children of men—

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13Having ascended into Heaven, having the bowels of mercy; being filled with compassion towards the children of men; standing betwixt them and justice; having broken the bands of death, taken upon Himself their iniquity and their transgressions, having redeemed them, and satisfied the demands of justice.—The Prophet Abinadi. (Mosiah 15:5-9)

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13Christ's triumph over the evil consequences of Adam's Fall reminds one of Isaiah's words: "Trust ye in the LORD for ever: for in the Lord JEHOVAH is everlasting strength." (Isaiah 26:4)

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13This is the testimony which is in me. To Alma, his words testifying to the truth of the Gospel Plan were not the idle mouthings of an iterant; [^14] nor were they the effervescence of zeal, which, sometimes, lasts but a day. They were, however, his deliberate testimony—the sum and substance of his joy, happiness, and peace. In all Alma's labors, which were many, he counted his reward, great. It was the joy he received by working in the service of the LORD.

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13Knowledge of a thing's truth lies in labor to advance its cause. Especially is this true of Christ's Gospel. It was also true of the task Alma had chosen to do. He was a "Faithful servant in the vineyard of the Lord." It is the reason why the man who is already busy there can always do more, and rejoice therein. Alma sought not for the things of the world, therefore, they were not his master. The Kingdom of God, first, was his sole consideration, and thereupon his every effort to advance the cause of righteousness here upon Earth was answered in blessings toward its accomplishment. Every fibre of Alma's being attested the Gospel's truth. To bring to others the knowledge of it was Alma's greatest desire.

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13Lay aside every sin, which easily doth beset you. Beset, means to set upon on all sides; perplex; harass. To hem in; surround. (Merriam-Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary)

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13If left to his own devices man is frail. He cannot stand alone. We are told, "He is weak, and helpless, and defiled." Compared with God's, his greatest wisdom is foolishness, and his utmost strength but absolute weakness. The ordinary man is lenient toward evil, he compromises with sin, and with error he seldom joins battle. He constantly yields himself to temptation, thinking, no doubt, that giving heed to what he considers the little things of life has no great bearing upon its outcome. Success makes him bold, and he becomes intoxicated with pride. He convinces himself that in the joys and follies of the world lies life's greatest satisfaction and its just reward. The gratification of his whims, and the indulgence of his appetites, he imagines, is the key that unlocks the doors of happiness. He makes them portions of his life, forgetting all the time the truth of Alma's rebuttal to his son's erstwhile wayward behavior, "Wickedness never was happiness." (Alma 41:10) The end of that man is indeed bitter. His choice of what is good, and his efforts to obtain it, bind him hand and foot. He is no longer free to act, but henceforth will be acted upon. (See II Nephi 2:26) He, perhaps, unknown even unto himself, has become the slave of passion, the victim of cruel oppression which he once invited into his own home. Sin hath beset him!

SCAlma 7 11Alma 7 12Alma 7 13Analogously, such a man is like a picnic-seeker who cares nothing for the roughness of the road before him, nor its many pitfalls. He envisages only the delights that await him at the end thereof. But, when the day's pleasures are over, and his joys are things of the past; when night overtakes him and he is far from home; when all his friends forsake him, each step in return to his rightful abode will be uncertain, and the pleasurable paths he once trod will be found filled with failure and disaster.

SCAlma 7 17Alma 7 18Alma 7 19Verses 17-19

SCAlma 7 17Alma 7 18Alma 7 19Great is my joy. Because the people of Gideon were strong in their faith in the coming Redeemer, Alma's prophecy concerning Jesus Christ was received by them with gladness. This caused Alma greatly to rejoice. He found dwelling within each of them the enlightening spirit of prophecy which not only witnessed the truth of his words, but also united them in the bonds of brotherly love which in the end reveals the spirit of the Gospel of Christ. Alma had read the words of King David which, no doubt, were engraved upon the Brass Plates of Laban, "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity." The unity of the Saints in Gideon filled Alma with an almost inexpressible joy. He remembered reading in the Jewish Scriptures that the Lord, when He saw the united faithfulness and loyalty of Ancient Israel, commanded the blessing of Life Evermore. Unity, said the Psalmist, "It is like the precious ointment upon the head," and we, ourselves, may be assured that to the Nephites in Gideon unity was like the "dew that descended" and refreshed "the mountains of Zion" when the Lord promised to Israel that eternal blessing, Everlasting Life. (See Psalm 133)

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21Verses 20-21

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21He doth not walk in crooked paths. Alma had further cause to rejoice because he saw that the Saints in and about Gideon, that growing center of Nephite activity, were walking uprightly before God and their fellow men. He said to them, "I perceive that ye are in the path which leads to the Kingdom of God." None there were who attempted to shorten the prescribed way, none moved in by-and-forbidden paths, all labored to make straight the Way of the coming King so that those who followed after might know the right Way and walk therein without let or hindrance.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21The Lord does not, nor can He, walk in crooked paths. For Him to do so would mean a changeable god, an inconstant and variable person, on whose word we could not rely. He commands and it is so; He forgives us our trespasses, and we are forgiven. He marks the Way, and He, himself, walks therein, saying as He does so, "Follow thou Me!" or "Come after Me." (Matthew 4:19)

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21And again I speak unto you who deny the revelations of God, and say that they are done away, that there are no revelations, nor prophecies, nor gifts, nor healing, nor speaking with tongues, and the interpretation of tongues;

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21Behold I say unto you, he that denieth these things knoweth not the Gospel of Christ; yea, he has not read the Scriptures; if so, he does not understand them.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21For do we not read that God is the same yesterday, today, and forever, and in Him there is no variableness neither shadow of changing?

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21And now if ye have imagined up unto yourselves a god who doth vary, and in whom there is shadow of changing, then have ye imagined up unto yourselves a god who is not a God of miracles. (Mormon 9:10)

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21For I know that God is not a partial God, neither a changeable Being; but He is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity. (Moroni 8:18)

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21For I am the Lord, I change not ... (III Nephi 24:6)

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21His paths are not crooked; He does not say one thing and mean another. Neither does He command, and accept something else in its place.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21In describing a road, straightness is that characteristic it has of leading directly to its goal without turnings or deviations. Under any interpretation of its meaning, straightness is always the same. There can be no shortcuts, nor can it be twisted. The command, "Follow thou Me," is made clear by the Prophet Nephi, who, when speaking to his brothers, said, "Wherefore, my beloved brethren, can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments of the Father?" (II Nephi 31:10)

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21He does not dwell in unholy temples. The Spirit of the Lord, or the Holy Spirit, cannot abide in an unclean shelter, nor can it take sanctuary in a diseased and depraved habitation. Its abode, whether in our hearts or elsewhere, must be spotless; its dwelling place, pure and undefiled. The Holy Spirit giveth life and light. But, just as disease breeds in filth, so also, in corruption evil begets spiritual disorder and often, severe malady. Sin is spiritual filthiness. It destroys the soul. Death is sin's eternal compensation.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21Every son and daughter of Father Adam must receive a just reward for deeds done in the mortal body. Eternal Life in God's Kingdom is the prize awarded the righteous, while the wicked, or those who choose evil, will reap everlasting punishment in a place of despair and anguish, which is hell. Hell is that place prepared for the devil and his angels. Satan is its chief architect and builder. The Prophet Nephi said, "The devil is the foundation of it." (I Nephi 15:35) The devil is filthy. His children are also filthy. They become his children who do his bidding: by choice they elect to follow his way, not by mandate. This choice extends after the death of the mortal body, and just so long as their choice is evil they will remain filthy, and must dwell forever in their filthiness with those who also remain in their wicked condition.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21Jacob, the brother of Nephi and in whose loyalty Nephi greatly rejoiced, in a great sermon recorded in the BOOK OF MORMON, said,

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21And assuredly, as the Lord liveth, for the Lord God hath spoken it, and it is His eternal word, which cannot pass away, that they who are righteous shall be righteous still; and they who are filthy shall be filthy still; wherefore, they who are filthy are the devil and his angels; and they shall go away into everlasting fire; prepared for them; and their torment is as a lake of fire and brimstone, whose flame ascendeth up forever and ever and has no end. (II Nephi 9:16)

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21The punishment meted out to the wicked, or to those who are filthy, will be to them as the pain caused by burning brimstone.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21Nephi, the son of the Patriarch Lehi, in explaining the meaning of their father's great vision, said to his brothers:

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21And I said unto them that our father also saw that the justice of God did also divide the wicked from the righteous; and the brightness thereof was like unto the brightness of a flaming fire, which ascendeth up unto God forever and ever, and hath no end.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21And they said unto me: Doth this thing mean the torment of the body in the days of probation, or doth it mean the final state of the soul after the death of the temporal body, or doth it speak of the things which are temporal.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21And it came to pass that I said unto them that it was a representation of things both temporal and spiritual; for the day should come that they must be judged of their works, yea, even the works which were done by the temporal body in their days of probation.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21Wherefore, if they should die in their wickedness they must be cast off also, as to the things which are spiritual, which are pertaining to righteousness; wherefore, they must be brought to stand before God, to be judged of their works; and if their works have been filthiness they must needs be filthy; and if they be filthy it must needs be that they cannot dwell in the Kingdom of God; if so, the Kingdom of God must be filthy also.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21But behold, I say unto you, the Kingdom of God is not filthy, and there cannot any unclean thing enter into the Kingdom of God; wherefore there must needs be a place of filthiness prepared for that which is filthy.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21And there is a place prepared, yea, even that awful hell of which I have spoken, and the devil is the foundation of it; wherefore the final state of the souls of men is to dwell in the Kingdom of God, or to be cast out because of that justice of which I have spoken.

SCAlma 7 20Alma 7 21Wherefore, the wicked are rejected from the righteous, and also from the Tree of Life, whose fruit is most precious and most desirable above all other fruits; yea, and it is the greatest of all the gifts of God.... (I Nephi 15:30-36) (SEE COMMENTARY OF THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume I, p. 157)

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24Verses 22-24

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24Alma's purpose in his exhortations. In ministering to the Saints throughout the various branches of the Nephite Church, Alma proceeded boldly to disseminate Gospel truths among them. Unto his feet, truth was a lamp which made his steps sure; the path of righteouness was his way. Salvation for all in God's Kingdom was his goal, and Redemption through Jesus Christ, he proclaimed, was Israel's heritage.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24For a long time the Nephites had been at peace with their neighbors, the Lamanites. The Nephites, during this period, had increased in numbers until their borders extended far into every quarter of the earth. They were prosperous in their new callings, and the Lord helped them in every difficulty. They possessed many worldly goods. The Lord blessed the land for their sake, and the fields brought forth abundantly both wheat for food, and grain for their flocks and herds. The Nephites labored diligently to bring new land under cultivation, and the fruit of their labors was garnered in a service which God accepted. They were blessed beyond all measure. As a whole, the Saints in Gideon were a happy and holy people.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24But, as is so often the case, many who were relieved of the tasks of every day struggle became indolent and listless to the Holy Spirit's promptings, and sought no more God's Kingdom and His righteousness. Some fell asleep; not the sleep of the dead, but to all things pertaining to Life Eternal.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24To awaken the laggards to an active interest in the work of the Lord, and to guide them into the right paths, was Alma's purpose in coming to Gideon. The righteous men and women in Gideon, the Lord had set them apart as His very own, they having exhibited those qualities which made them truly Children of the Most High. And, too, Alma remembering God's gracious promise to Ancient Israel that He would cause His countenance to shine forth upon all them that put their trust in Him, pronounced anew that blessing. (Numbers 6:23-27)

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24Now I would that ye should be humble. Alma called upon all to follow those virtues that are distinctive traits of true believers in Christ. He brought his great sermon to a close by appealing directly to the Saints gathered there to walk blamelessly before God, always remembering the Holy Order into which they had been received. Through the sacred rite of Baptism they had been made members of Christ's Church, and therefore, Alma bade them abjure all evil inclinations, and let God's glory go before them to illumine the path which leads directly into His eternal Kingdom.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24Alma enjoined them, first "Ye should be humble." To be humble, we understand, means a showing of humility; freedom from pride and arrogance; an act of condescension or lowly service to others (not low). Humility engenders faith, begets hope, and makes charity man's first consideration for those who have lost their way. To be humble is among the fruits of being a Child of God. To consider one's self as unimportant or inferior is a faulty interpretation of the term—humble. To abase oneself is not humility, and "low-mindedness is not lowly-mindedness." A man may see in his lot that which he thinks renders him almost worthless, or of little consequence, but the vision he has of himself does not necessarily make him a humble person. He may rebel at the scene he there presents. He may be full of envy, not humility, and inward wrath may take the place of service to mankind which, after all, is the showing of pure humility whether it be to one, or to the many. Christian humility is best shown by the man who is conscious of his own great worth yet ministers in love to them that may not be blessed so much as he. Such a man is indeed humble.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24D. A. Hayes, Ph. D. LL.D., notes, in Hasting's Dictionary of the Bible, what he considers a classic example of Christian humility. It is found in John 13:3-15.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24The Lord, knowing that the Father had given all things into His hands, and that He came from God and would go again unto God, knowing His incomparable superiority to every one in that company, was yet so meek and lowly in heart, so humble in spirit and ready for service, that He girded Himself with a towel and washed the disciples' feet. The consciousness of His own transcendent worth was in no respect inconsistent with His humility. Genuine humility leads the strong to serve the weak. It never underestimates its own worth, but in utter unselfishness it is ready to sacrifice its own claims at any moment for the general good. Genuine humility loses all of its self-conceit but never loses its self-respect. It is consistent with the highest dignity of character and life. Hence we may call the Incarnation the Humiliation of Christ. He stood at the head of the heavenly hierarchies. He was equal with God. There was no dignity in the universe like unto His. Yet He humbled Himself to become a man. He made of Himself no reputation. He came not to be ministered to, but to minister. He was the Servant of all. There was no humility in the universe like unto His. He never forgot His dignity. When Pilate asked Him if He were a king, He answered him that He was. He stood in kingly majesty before the mob, in kingly serenity before the magistrates; He hung as King upon the cross. Yet He never forgot His humility. Being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. St. Paul exhorts, 'Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus' (Ph. 2:5-11). God giveth grace to all who are thus humble (James 4:6).

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24The Jews, realizing the most important part humbleness plays in God's heavenly purposes, add to the blessed thought herein imparted:

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24He guideth the humble in justice, and teaches the humble His way.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24To humbleness Alma added other qualities which he hoped would sanctify their lives to accomplishing God's holy work among His children, and further assured them that if they were guided by these holy promptings then "ye will always abound in good works." (V. 24)

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24May the Lord bless you, and keep your garments spotless. (See Comments v. 21, Chapter 5)

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24Unlike being disheartened as he was at Zarahemla when he found the members of the Church there lifted up in pride and in the vain imaginations of their hearts which almost destroyed their usefulness as Saints, the people of Gideon put gladness into Alma's heart when he, himself, saw their firmness in keeping God's commandments, and also that they were steadfastly serving the Lord. In this Alma rejoiced far more than he did upon hearing of their increase in corn and in cattle. The Holy Spirit confirmed in his heart what most he desired to know—that the people of Gideon gave heed to his words, and that henceforth they, with exceeding diligence, would comply with all his teachings.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24With blessings upon their families and households, upon their flocks and herds, and all that was theirs, Alma left the Saints in Gideon in the care of the teachers and priests whom he had set apart to minister in the ordinances and sacrifices of God's Church.

SCAlma 7 22Alma 7 23Alma 7 24But before ending his inspired instructions, Alma besought them God's most precious gift, Peace, and assured them that in living near unto God, they would also dwell in safety, "from this time forth and forever."

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Eschatalogical, refers to the final, or last things, as death, resurrection, immortality, judgment.
[^2] Apocalyptic, anything viewed as a prophetic revelation.
[^3] Question mark is the editor's.
[^4] But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall He come forth unto me that is to be Ruler in Israel; Whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting. (Micah 5:2; 710 B.C.)
[^5] In the Targum, Johnathan (Targum is Aramean, and means interpretation; it is a translation or paraphrase by some Hebrew scholar of some portion of the Old Testament into the Aramaic of Judea) this verse is interpreted: "Out of thee shall come forth before Me, Messiah to exercise rule over Israel." (Matthew 2:1-6)
[^6] Governors as used here, and princes used by Matthew (evidently a Targum rendition quoted by him), also thousands (the same as our hundreds) quoted from Micah 5:2, indicate the same idea—many.
[^7] Sanhedrin, also Sanhedrin, Assembly; the supreme council and tribunal of the Jews, consisting of 71 members having religious, civil, and criminal jurisdiction. (Merriam-Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary)
[^8] Talmud, Hebrew talmudh instruction, fr. lamadh to learn. The body of Jewish civil and canonical law, consisting of the combined Mishnah, or text, and Gemara, or commentary; also restrictedly, the Gemara alone. (Ibid.)
[^9] Tamper means (1) To deal secretly or unfairly; to plot; specifically, to use bribery; (2) To meddle so as to alter a thing; to make corrupting changes. (3) To meddle; to try trifling experiments. (Merriam-Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary)
[^10] The entire chapter deserves a careful reading.
[^11] In the Orient, women matured at what we today would consider an early age.
[^12] The Spirit knoweth all things. There is infinite comfort in the thought that the Judge Knoweth all things. He knows our frailties better than we know them ourselves. He knows our temptations, our efforts to combat them and the reasons for failures, if we have failed. He knows precisely what our surroundings have been and their influence upon our character; also how much of our shortcomings is due to inherited tendencies. He knows perfectly how much responsibility we can justly bear. "For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in the time of need." (Hebrews 4:15-16)
[^13] Late in the evening of the Passover, after celebrating the Feast with His Disciples and after administering to them the Bread and Wine, explaining the meaning thereof, Jesus, followed by them, went to the Mount of Olives to pray. There the Savior left them and went away about a stone's throw,where He being alone, sought courage and strength from the Almighty Father. Knowing that the hour of His Passion had come, and that He would be crucified for sins which He did not commit, Jesus prayed. His anguish was so great that drops of blood came from every pore. So intense was His agony that an angel from Heaven came and ministered comfort to Him. The flesh being weaker than the Spirit, caused Him to cry in humble supplication, "Father, if Thou be willing, remove this cup from Me; nevertheless not My will, but Thine, be done." (Luke 22:42)
[^14] It-er-ant. One who utters the same thing over and over again; a repeater.
