Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 8

SCAlma 8 1Alma 8 2Verses 1-2

SCAlma 8 1Alma 8 2Alma returned to Zarahemla where he rested a short time from his missionary labors. During nearly all the ninth year of the Reign of the Judges over the People of Nephi (83 B.C.), Alma labored that the Church of God, of which he was the Presiding High Priest, should be set in order both in Zarahemla and in Gideon. This, with the help of the Lord, he accomplished by himself. As he had done in Zarahemla, so also he did in Gideon—he appointed priests to teach the people that they might hear and know the commandments of the Lord, and further, to quicken them to a continual remembrance of the sacred vows they had made when received into God's Holy Order.

SCAlma 8 1Alma 8 2There were many things that Alma taught the people of Gideon which Mormon, the abridger of Alma's Record, could not write. The Record of Alma was undoubtedly large, consisting of a great number of plates, and besides, Mormon who was trained in the art of engraving his words upon metal plates, nevertheless, found in difficult to express the fullness of his thoughts in the words at his command. Mormon's son, Moroni, explained their dilemma thus: In speaking of his father's abridgment, and also of his own writings when the Lord commanded him to write concerning the Gospel, that knowledge of it might come to their father's seed through the Gentiles, said,

SCAlma 8 1Alma 8 2And I said unto Him: Lord, the Gentiles will mock at these things, because of our weakness in writing; for Lord Thou hast made us mighty in word by faith, but Thou hast not made us mighty in writing; for Thou hast made all this people that they could speak much, because of the Holy Ghost which Thou hast given them;

SCAlma 8 1Alma 8 2And Thou hast made us that we could write but little, because of the awkwardness of our hands. Behold, Thou hast not made us mighty in writing like unto the Brother of Jared, for Thou madest him that the things which he wrote were mighty even as Thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them.

SCAlma 8 1Alma 8 2Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words. (Ether 12:23-25)

SCAlma 8 1Alma 8 2The arduous task which Alma had performed in his missionary labors had greatly deprived him of his normal strength and vitality. The journey he had undertaken, the joys and sorrows he had experienced, the pleasures and pains caused by the faith, or lack thereof, among Church members, had drawn deeply upon the energy he had so unselfishly offered in the cause of Christ. Knowing that the body has limits beyond which it must not go, as well as resources that urged it to greater efforts, Alma felt it was wise to rest for a while in his own home in Zarahemla where he for a short time recruited his strength and well being.

SCAlma 8 3Alma 8 4Alma 8 5Verses 3-5

SCAlma 8 3Alma 8 4Alma 8 5Alma left Zarahemla and took his journey over into the Land of Melek. After a suitable rest at his home in Zarahemla, Alma departed, then to commence the second year of his notable mission (82 B.C.) to a place called Melek which was situated on the west of the River Sidon. The Land of Melek appears to have been quite extensive as it included within its borders many Nephite colonies that were far to the west, even to the wilderness wherein the Lamanites roamed in search for food.

SCAlma 8 3Alma 8 4Alma 8 5In the Land of Melek, throughout both cities and villages, Alma taught the inhabitants thereof the everlasting principles of the Gospel of Christ, bearing personal witness of the coming Redeemer, and calling all within sound of his voice to be baptized in His holy name, thereby taking upon themselves the Name of Christ and showing others by their actions that they truly repented of their sins.

SCAlma 8 3Alma 8 4Alma 8 5The Spirit of the Lord was so greatly manifest in Alma's labors that most of the people believed his message, and at his behest large numbers of them from every part of the land entered into the waters of Baptism, and with their past sins remitted pledged anew their faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and covenanted to keep His laws and commandments everafter.

SCAlma 8 3Alma 8 4Alma 8 5Melek, Land of. The boundaries of this land are very indistinctly stated by the inspired writer of the Book of Alma, for it is in that book alone that it is mentioned. However, two things are positively stated (Chapter 8), namely, that it was west of the River Sidon, and that it extended westward as far as the narrow strip of wilderness which ran north and south between the mountains and the Pacific Ocean. We imagine that its eastern borders touched the Land of Zarahemla, and from thence it stretched out as far as the country proved habitable, as it appears to have had a large population, judging from the account given in Alma's ministrations. (82 B.C.) That it embraced a large district of country is proved by the fact that when Alma had finished his labors in the City of Melek, he traveled three day's journey on the north of the Land of Melek before he came to the City of Ammonihah. In later years when it was considered unsafe for the Ammonites to remain longer in Jershon, they were removed to Melek, the proximity of which to Zarahemla, as well as its remoteness from the lands of the Lamanites, rendered it admirably adapted as a place of safety for that persecuted people.

SCAlma 8 3Alma 8 4Alma 8 5Melek was the name given to a region of country situated west of the River Sidon. No reason is given why it was so called, but its meaning is evident. It was the king's land. The ancient Phoenician word for king is spelled letter for letter the same as in the Book of Mormon (Melek), and the Hebrew word is almost identical.

Alma 8 6Verse 6

Alma 8 6Alma next journeyed to Ammonihah. We are not told just how long Alma continued his labors in the Land of Melek, but as he was satisfied with the fruits of his work there, he again departed this time to the City of Ammonihah which lay three days' journey farther to the northwest.

Alma 8 6There Alma found a godless people, filled with the falsehoods of Nehor, and committing all manner of abominations without any sign of repentance, because they cherished the flattering lie, as was the foundation of their creed, that all men would be saved. This city was in the hands of a corrupt clique of judges and lawyers, who stirred up sedition, tumult and rioting, that they might make money out of the conditions that followed such disturbances. Further than that they were secretly plotting to overthrow the government, and rob the people of their highly prized liberties.

Alma 8 6Ammonihah, City of. A western city of the Nephites situated in the same region as the cities of Melek, Noah, and Aaron. It was inhabited almost exclusively by the followers of Nehor, and was notorious for the wickedness of its citizens. In the year 82 B.C. it was visited by Alma but his words were rejected. He left the city to minister elsewhere, but was commanded by an angel to return, which he did and was entertained by one of its prominent citizens named Amulek. Together these two proclaimed the Word of the Lord to the people of Ammonihah, and also the terrible penalty which would follow its rejection. Their words were scorned, their warning ridiculed, and they were cast into prison while the few that had believed were either driven out of the city, or burned at the stake. Alma and Amulek were ultimately delivered by the power of God when the prison in which they were confined was destroyed by an earthquake and all except themselves, who were therein, were killed. The two prophets then left the city. Next year, in accordance with the words of Alma, the Lamanites suddenly attacked and utterly destroyed the city by fire. All its people, even the women and children, were burned to death as they had previously made martyrs of those who believed in the Gospel Message delivered by Alma and Amulek. After the place where Ammonihah stood had lain desolate for a number of years it was rebuilt and strongly fortified. In 73 B.C. the armies of the Lamanites came against it, but finding how strongly Moroni had fortified it they retired without making an attack.

Alma 8 6Ammonihah, Land of. The country immediately surrounding the city of the same name. It lay between the River Sidon and the Pacific Ocean, but exactly where cannot be determined. It was called after a man named Ammonihah, but of his life we have no record. When Alma had made the three days' journey spoken of in Alma 8:6, he reached Ammonihah. From the text some conclude that Alma traveled northward from Melek, but to us it conveys the idea that the Prophet journeyed three days' westward along the northern boundary of that land. We are confirmed in this opinion by the statement made in Alma 22:27-28 where it speaks of the western wilderness. Also in Alma 16:2 it is stated: "The armies of the Lamanites had come in upon the wilderness side, into the borders of the land, even into the City of Ammonihah." If Ammonihah had been situated three days' journey north of Melek we suggest that it could not have been near that portion of the wilderness which the Lamanites so easily reached without discovery, for a march due north would have taken them close to, or actually through, the lands of Minon, Noah, Melek, and Zarahemla, the most thickly populated parts of the country; or, to have avoided these, they must have taken a circuitous route of immense length and great danger. Then when they attempted to retire, their retreat, owing to their great distance from Lehi-Nephi would have most assuredly been cut off as was the case with the Lamanite General, Coriantumr, under these same conditions.

Alma 8 7Verse 7

Alma 8 7The custom of the Nephites in naming their cities and lands. As it was in the early days of Mormon emigration into the far west so also it was a custom among the Nephites to name a settlement after him who was first in possession of the regions round about. This custom appears to have been more prevalent among the Nephites, however, the Saints of the Latterdays established their Smithfield, their Kaysville, Wellsville, and many others. The Nephites had their Ammonihah, city of Helam, Zeezrom, etc., but often as in these last days many places of greater importance were named after events that happened there, or in commemoration of past homes and places of endearment. We believe the name, Zarahemla is a form of another name, Jerusalem. What could have been more natural than for the Mulekites to have named their new home after the one they were forced to leave, and which they loved so much? We read of New York, New Amsterdam, New South Wales! "What," may we ask, "could have prevented the loyal subjects of King Zedekiah naming their place of abode, New Jerusalem, or just Jerusalem?"

SCAlma 8 8Alma 8 9Alma 8 10Alma 8 11Alma 8 12Alma 8 13Verses 8-13

SCAlma 8 8Alma 8 9Alma 8 10Alma 8 11Alma 8 12Alma 8 13Alma began to preach to the people of Ammonihah, but they cast him out. No sooner had Alma reached the City of Ammonihah than he began to preach the word of God to its listless citizens. From every vantage point he proclaimed those same eternal truths that had been the burden of his message beforehand. He called upon them to repent and believe on the Messiah, Jesus Christ, who would soon come to redeem all those who would accept Him as their Savior. But they would not hearken unto his words. They expressed no desire to be saved in God's Kingdom as Alma exhorted them. Satan, that cunning one, had planted pride and worldly ambition in their hearts, and they wanted neither promise of future reward nor spiritual restraints to interfere with their search for the riches of the earth, or the plaudits of men. "They loved vanity, and sought for falsehood." (Psalm 4:2)

SCAlma 8 11Alma 8 12Verses 11-12

SCAlma 8 11Alma 8 12We know that thou art Alma. Many of the people of Ammonihah had known Alma in Zarahemla during the early days of the Republic. They had founded Ammonihah to have a place far away from those who strictly kept the Law of Moses, and where they could revel, unmolested, in their queer belief that all men unmindful of their wicked ways would be saved. They rejoiced in what they called liberal doctrines, they forgetting that the doctrines of the Lord's Salvation are the most liberal of all, and the most forgiving of any.

SCAlma 8 11Alma 8 12The Ammonihahites readily recognized that Alma was the Presiding High Priest over his Church, which they said was founded upon tradition, and further they said, "We do not believe in such foolish traditions." When Alma, in obedience to his divine commitment, commanded them to repent, they took singular joy in declaring their freedom from his authoritative injunction by their proclaiming severance from Alma's Church, which was the Church of God, therefore, they said, "Thou hast no power over us." They also took malignant satisfaction because Alma had given up the Judgment-Seat to another, for that reason they further gloated, and in their ignorance and infatuation shouted, "Thou art not the Chief Judge over us."

SCAlma 8 11Alma 8 12But Alma had a message to bear them. He was not to be easily discouraged nor denied the right to deliver it. In "mighty prayer" he sought the help of Heaven's gracious ways. He implored God that the Holy Spirit might turn the hearts of the people from their wickedness, and that they would thereafter seek the Lord while there was yet time. Alma's great desire was not his own aggrandizement, but the advancement of truth and righteousness throughout the earth. He wanted no more than to add the people of Ammonihah to the great number of those who throughout the Nephite Commonwealth had been baptized unto repentance, and had had their sins remitted.

SCAlma 8 11Alma 8 12In spite of Alma's kindly manners and his direct appeal for their welfare, the Ammonihahites refused him sanctuary in their midst. Their hardened hearts became like granite, their ill will towards him was immeasurable, and they allowed the venom that is so often seen in apostates to be the sole judge of their seeming inexhaustible spite. They reviled him, they mocked him and spat upon him, and then cast him out of their sin-laden city.

SCAlma 8 11Alma 8 12Alma, grieving because of the wickedness of the Ammonihahites, wended his way "towards the City which was called Aaron."

SCAlma 8 11Alma 8 12Aaron, City of. It is natural to suppose that the City of Aaron was not far distant from Ammonihah; at any rate it was not on the other side of the continent. Yet the only other time when a city called Aaron is referred to it is spoken of as joining the Land of Moroni, which was the frontier district in the extreme southeast of the lands possessed by the Nephites. Our only explanation is to suggest that there were two cities called Aaron; not an unlikely thing when we reflect how important a personage Aaron, the son of King Mosiah, was among his people. When he was chosen to be king, he declined this great honor and the Nephite Republic was established. It requires very little imagination to believe that a free and grateful people would name more than one city in honor of this self-denying prince.

SCAlma 8 11Alma 8 12The only mention made of the first of these cities is that Alma bent his way "toward the city which was called Aaron," (82 B.C.) Of the second City of Aaron we learn that it was north of Moroni on the Atlantic slope; between these two places the Nephites built a third city (72 B.C.) and called it Nephihah. (Alma 50:14)

SCAlma 8 14Alma 8 15Alma 8 16Alma 8 17Verses 14-17

SCAlma 8 14Alma 8 15Alma 8 16Alma 8 17Behold an angel of the Lord appeared unto Alma. Weary in body and sick at heart because of the iniquity of the people of Ammonihah, after many fruitless efforts, fervent prayers and long fastings, Alma sought some other people who were more worthy of Salvation's priceless gifts. On his way to the City of Aaron whence he now journeyed, an angel of the Lord—that same angel that beforetime had been the agent in his conversion to God—stood before him and blessed him. The angel told Alma to lift up his heart and rejoice, for because of his faithfulness he had great cause to do so. The angel then directed him to return to the sin-cursed city which he had just left, and proclaim unto its citizens the awful message that except they repented, the Lord would destroy them.

SCAlma 8 14Alma 8 15Alma 8 16Alma 8 17The angel further warned Alma that at that very moment the wickedly guided people of Ammonihah were giving great consideration as to how they might "destroy the liberty of thy people." The angel declared that such taking away of the rights of the Lord's people was against God's commandments, for His statutes and judgments prohibited force in any behavior. Free agency, to be free to choose one's own actions had been decreed throughout eternity, and now the sin-stained people of Ammonihah worked to bring to naught God's holy purposes.

SCAlma 8 18Alma 8 19Alma 8 20Alma 8 21Alma 8 22Verses 18-22

SCAlma 8 18Alma 8 19Alma 8 20Alma 8 21Alma 8 22Alma returned speedily to the City of Ammonihah. Speedily the prophet obeyed the angel's words. By another road he drew near the doomed city, which he entered by its south gate. As he passed in he was faint with hunger, and asked a man whom he met, "Will ye give to an humble servant of God something to eat?" With joy the man—and, strange though it appears, he was a rich man—took him to his home and fed, clothed, and lodged him. For all these blessings Alma gratefully returned thanks to the Great Giver of all these things.

SCAlma 8 23Alma 8 24Alma 8 25Alma 8 26Alma 8 27Alma 8 28Alma 8 29Alma 8 30Verses 23-30

SCAlma 8 23Alma 8 24Alma 8 25Alma 8 26Alma 8 27Alma 8 28Alma 8 29Alma 8 30Alma went forth, and also Amulek, among the people, to declare the words of God unto them. Alma, after having partaken most thankfully of his newly found friend's hospitality, told Amulek, for that was his name, that he (Alma) was the Presiding High Priest of the Church of God and that the Holy Spirit had constrained him to go forth among the people of Ammonihah and declare unto them the Word of the Lord concerning their Salvation. But that they had cast him out of their city; they, like the Jews an hundred years later when they refused to receive the Lord, the Ammonihahites rejected Alma's word. Alma's patience had been almost exhausted; because of the hardness of their hearts Alma was about to leave the people of Ammonihah to their own evil inclinations, and, he told Amulek, "Set my back towards this land forever." But while carrying out his quickly made decision an angel of the Lord, whom Alma recognized as the same one who had stopped him on the way when he was bent upon persecuting the Saints, stood before him and blessed him because, the angel said, "For thou hast been faithful in keeping the commandments of God." The angel further commanded Alma to return to Ammonihah and bear witness of the Lord's displeasure with its citizens, and to warn them that if they did not repent of their iniquities the Lord would quickly destroy all of them. Alma obeyed the angel's instructions, and was determined to do fully as the angel commanded.

SCAlma 8 23Alma 8 24Alma 8 25Alma 8 26Alma 8 27Alma 8 28Alma 8 29Alma 8 30And now Amulek ... thou art blessed. Let us now return to verse 20 where we will read of another angelic visitation. When Alma returned to Ammonihah at the angel's command, he was "an hungered," and needed food to sustain his mortal body for he had fasted many days. Upon his begging for something to eat, Alma, for the first time, met a man who in the future would become his faithful co-laborer in the mission field. The man told Alma that he, too, was a Nephite. And further he said that Alma was the man an angel, in a vision, had commanded him to receive into his own home. Both men, overjoyed because of the fulfillment so far of the angel's blessings saluted each other in the holy bonds of brethren in the Priesthood, Alma, "I know that thou art a holy prophet of God," therefore, "go with me into my house and I will impart unto thee of my food; and I know that thou wilt be a blessing unto me and my house."

SCAlma 8 23Alma 8 24Alma 8 25Alma 8 26Alma 8 27Alma 8 28Alma 8 29Alma 8 30Amulek's prayer for himself and his family, for so it must be held, was quickly answered by God's High Priest who pronounced a heavenly benediction upon Amulek's entire household. "Amulek ... thou art blessed," was God's gracious promise through His servant, and we can think of no blessing greater than to labor and suffer in the cause of Christ as did Amulek who together with Alma were abused and tortured by all the fiendish inventions the powers of hell could achieve, or the evil hearts of men suggest.

SCAlma 8 23Alma 8 24Alma 8 25Alma 8 26Alma 8 27Alma 8 28Alma 8 29Alma 8 30Alma tarried many days with Amulek. While Alma enjoyed the hospitality which Amulek's house afforded him for many days, his rest there was not a lengthy one; the people of Ammonihah waxed greater in sin and bolder in the perversion of heavenly ways. Their cup of iniquity was nearly full.

SCAlma 8 23Alma 8 24Alma 8 25Alma 8 26Alma 8 27Alma 8 28Alma 8 29Alma 8 30"Go," came the word of the Lord to Alma, "and also say unto my servant Amulek, go forth and prophesy unto this people, saying—Repent ye, for thus saith the Lord, except ye repent I will visit this people in mine anger; yea, and I will not turn my fierce anger away."

SCAlma 8 31Alma 8 32Verses 31-32

SCAlma 8 31Alma 8 32Alma and Amulek went forth to declare God's Holy Word. Filled with the Holy Ghost, these servants of God went forth and valiantly delivered their terrible message. They were strengthened and preserved by power from On High. So greatly were they guarded by heavenly care, that by the grace of God "they could not be confined in dungeons; neither was it possible that any man could slay them." In spite of the extreme sufferings they endured, and the gentleness of their ways—they having sensibilities most keen and feelings most poignant—they shunned using their powers until, as a demonstration of God's fearsome strength, burst the bands that when in prison held them tight.

SCAlma 8 31Alma 8 32Thus armed with God's power and sustained by His might, Alma and Amulek went forth preaching and calling for repentance.

AMULEK

A Nephite prophet, son of Giddonah, who was the son of Ishmael, who was a descendant of Aminadi, a descendant of Nephi. Among the cities built by the Nephites in the northern part of South America was one named Ammonihah, which was situated near the land of Melek, which land lay on the west side of the river Sidon. In this city, eighty-two years before the coming of Christ, dwelt a Nephite named Amulek. He was a man of wealth and importance and was blessed with many relatives. One day, in the latter half of the year as he was journeying to see a very near relation, an angel of the Lord appeared unto him and told him to return to his home for he had to feed a holy prophet of God who was exceeding hungry, he having fasted many days on account of the sins of the people of Ammonihah.

This man of God, of whom the angel spoke, was Alma, the younger, the presiding High Priest of the Church of Christ. For some time past he had been laboring in the midst of the dwellers in Ammonihah but they had hardened their hearts against God's word and had cast the prophet out of their city. Sad at heart and bowed down with sorrow Alma journeyed from that city but on his way a holy angel met him and with words of encouragement bade him return. Alma was not a man to dally in keeping the word of the Lord. He at once retraced his steps and entered Ammonihah by its south gate. When not far from its portals, he was addressed by Amulek who recognized him as the man of whom the angel had spoken and took him to his house and nourished him for many days. After a time Alma, accompanied by Amulek, recommenced preaching the principles of life and holiness, but in the meantime the citizens of Ammonihah had grown even more wicked than they were before. No sooner did these brethren raise their voices in the midst of the Ammonihahites than they sought their destruction. They mocked, they ridiculed, they cross-questioned them. They perverted the meaning of their words, and cried out that they reviled against their laws that were just and also their judges whom they had chosen. But by the Spirit of the Lord Alma and Amulek made bare their evil intentions and severely rebuked their iniquity.

Ammonihah at that time was cursed with an abundance of lawyers who were very expert in the crooked ways of their profession. Among them was a man whose name was Zeezrom, who on account of his greater keenness had a large practice and especially made himself conspicuous in badgering and seeking to discomfit these two servants of God. But Alma and Amulek, by the power of the Lord, made his lying and perversion of their words manifest to all, to such an extent that Zeezrom himself felt the power of their words and began to tremble exceedingly. Many of the people also began to believe and to repent but the greater portion thereof, filled with rage because their sins were laid bare with such unsparing hands, bound Alma and his companion and hurried them before the chief justice and with many falsehoods accused them of having reviled their laws, their judges and indeed, the whole people. Zeezrom, now conscious of the evil he had done, vainly pleaded their cause, but the rabble turned upon him also and with many indignities cast him and others in whose hearts the germ of faith was planted out of the city and with stones strove to kill them.

Then followed a scene of horror which in after years had its counterpart in Rome and Smithfield. The infuriated mob, lost to all pity and humanity, dragged the wives and little children of those who had had the Gospel preached to them and in one great fire burned them to death. Not content with this, in savage spite, they took the copies of the Scriptures and hurled them into the flames and burned them also. To add to the refinement of their cruelty they dragged Amulek and his friend from prison and compelled them to witness the torture of the martyrs who had received the Gospel through their instrumentality. Among that throng of cruelly suffering men, women and children we have no record that one flinched or denied the Savior in whose cause they passed away to a glorious resurrection.

Amulek was exceedingly pained at the horrors of this awful scene and pleaded with Alma that they should exercise the power of God that was in them and save the innocent from their tortures. But Alma would not permit it, saying that the Spirit constrained him, for the Lord received those martyrs to Himself in glory.

Now it came to pass that while, Alma and Amulek were thus bound, the chief judge came and smote them on the face and jeered at them for not having delivered the martyrs from the flames; when he had finished he again consigned the prophets to prison. These indignities were repeated day after day, not only by the chief judge but by many others; added to which they treated the prisoners with great cruelty; they kept them without food and water that they might hunger and thirst and stripped them of their clothes and bound them naked in their prison. This continued for some time until one day the chief judge with others came and smote the brethren as before, and mocked and ridiculed them. Then the power of God came upon Alma and Amulek and they rose to their feet and broke the bands that bound them and cried mightily to the Lord, while their persecutors were stricken with terror. These latter, frantic with fear, attempted to flee from the presence of the prophets and in their haste fell one upon another and blocked up the way of escape. At this moment of terror an earthquake rent the prison walls which swayed and fell in a crumbling, suffocating mass upon the unholy throng within. Not one escaped; Alma and Amulek alone were preserved in the midst of this awful manifestation of the power of the Almighty.

The citizens, hearing the noise, rushed in crowds to learn of the disaster, but when they saw the ruined heaps of the prison, with the brethren in safety and confronting them, they fled like a flock of frightened sheep before two young lions. Still they would not permit the prophets to remain in their midst. So the latter left and went over into the Land of Sidom.

Such crimes as these could not go unpunished by divine justice. Ammonihah soon felt the force of the wrath of God. It was besieged, captured and made desolate by the armies of the Lamanites, and the very same men who rejoiced in the sufferings of the martyred Saints felt the same horrors fall with tenfold fury on their own heads and those of their wives and little ones, for the horrors of the spoiling of that city we have few counterparts in history.

In the Land of Sidom, Alma and Amulek found the Saints who had been cast out of Ammonihah. Zeezrom, the lawyer, was also there, sorely sick of a fever brought on by the anguish of his mind on account of his great sins. While prostrate on his bed, the prophets visited him, comforted him and having received a confession of his faith in Christ, administered to him, when he was immediately healed. Alma then baptized him and from that time forth he became a zealous servant of that God whom he had beforetime so often denied and blasphemed.

After Alma had established a prosperous Church in the Land of Sidom he took Amulek, who had given up all for the Gospel's sake, to the Land of Zarahemla. There Amulek dwelt with Alma, assisting him in his labors and ministry. The Lord abundantly blessed their efforts and the Book of Mormon informs us that they imparted the word of God, without any respect of persons, to the people continually; there was no inequality among them and the Lord did pour out his Spirit on all of the land that they might enter into his rest.

Amulek seems to have henceforth devoted his entire life to the preaching of the Gospel. We next hear of him (75 B.C.) being in the Land of Melek with Zeezrom, whence Alma took them and other brethren to preach to the Zoramites, a body of Nephite dissenters or apostates who laid inordinate stress upon the idea of their predestination to salvation. Here Amulek preached with great zeal and faith, as did the other elders, resulting in the repentance of many, who, by their more hardened fellow countrymen, were cruelly persecuted and driven into the Land of Jershon, whose inhabitants received them with great kindness and ministered to their wants. Here Alma and his fellow laborers still further instructed them in the principles of eternal life. The wicked Zoramites were highly incensed at the kindness shown to their persecuted brethren by the noble-hearted people of Ammon and made it a pretext for commencing a war of extermination. This war commenced about eight years after the expulsion of Amulek from Ammonihah.

Amulek has the honor of having some of his sermons handed down to us in detail in the Book of Mormon. From them we judge him to have been a man of liberal education, of great faith, of unswerving integrity and untiring zeal for the truth. He was, from the glimpses of his private life that we glean as we pass along, a man of tender and affectionate disposition, exceedingly found of his home and family, yet these and all else he readily and joyfully gave up for the riches and happiness of the Gospel of the Son of God. Of his later ministry and death we are not informed, as the Book of Mormon changes from the history of the labors of the servants of God to an account of the terrible wars between the Nephites and Lamanites, which immediately afterwards deluged the land with blood.
