Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 9

THE WORDS OF ALMA, AND ALSO THE WORDS OF AMULEK, WHICH WERE DECLARED UNTO THE PEOPLE WHO WERE IN THE LAND OF AMMONIHAH. AND ALSO THEY WERE CAST INTO PRISON, AND DELIVERERD BY THE MIRACULOUS POWER OF GOD WHICH WAS IN THEM, ACCORDING TO THE RECORD OF ALMA.

SCAlma 9 1Alma 9 2Alma 9 3Alma 9 4Alma 9 5Alma 9 6Alma 9 7Alma 9 8Alma 9 9Alma 9 10Alma 9 11Alma 9 12Alma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Alma 9 16Alma 9 17Alma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24Alma 9 25Alma 9 26Alma 9 27Alma 9 28Alma 9 29Alma 9 30Verses 1-30

SCAlma 9 1Alma 9 2Alma 9 3Alma 9 4Alma 9 5Alma 9 6Alma 9 7Alma 9 8Alma 9 9Alma 9 10Alma 9 11Alma 9 12Alma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Alma 9 16Alma 9 17Alma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24Alma 9 25Alma 9 26Alma 9 27Alma 9 28Alma 9 29Alma 9 30Alma began again to preach to the people of Ammonihah. Obedient to the divine command he had received Alma took with him his faithful benefactor and protector, Amulek, and once again began to declare the Word of the Lord to the apostate people of Ammonihah. To the righteous entreaties of the two missionaries the wicked denizens of that great city were, from the very first, antagonistic. They sought to contend with God's servants upon matters of fundamental doctrines, questioning Alma's authority, and asking him, "Who art thou?" and "Who is God?" They twisted and turned the prophet's words in an effort to ensnare him, as it were, in a fowler's net. They implied in their bitterness that the great and marvelous things of which Alma spoke, even the passing away of the earth, and the destruction, in one day, of their magnificent city, were not to be believed in upon the testimony of just one man, and especially of him who they said was a liar and an untrustworthy witness.

SCAlma 9 1Alma 9 2Alma 9 3Alma 9 4Alma 9 5Alma 9 6Alma 9 7Alma 9 8Alma 9 9Alma 9 10Alma 9 11Alma 9 12Alma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Alma 9 16Alma 9 17Alma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24Alma 9 25Alma 9 26Alma 9 27Alma 9 28Alma 9 29Alma 9 30Soon the enmity of the Ammonihahites towards Alma became a vehement ill will; so great was their hatred of him that they sought to do him bodily harm. They attempted to seize him forcibly that thereby they, by brutal strength, might end forever the terrible forebodings of coming woe which he pronounced upon their fair city. But, they could not lay their wicked hands upon him for the protecting power of the Great Jehovah was over him, and Alma stood forth boldly, and, being unafraid, once more testified to them of their iniquitous ways.

SCAlma 9 8Alma 9 9Alma 9 10Alma 9 11Verses 8-11

SCAlma 9 8Alma 9 9Alma 9 10Alma 9 11O ye wicked and perverse generation. When the ill-tempered throng that had gathered to do violence to Alma and his companion saw that the missionaries withstood their evil intentions, they were nonplussed, and Alma, himself, realizing that the might of the Holy One of Israel overshadowed him, at once stepped forward and began to deliver his urgent message.

SCAlma 9 8Alma 9 9Alma 9 10Alma 9 11The burden of that message was Repentance.

SCAlma 9 8Alma 9 9Alma 9 10Alma 9 11The people of Ammonihah had forgotten the Lord's commandments, and were working the works of darkness. In the perverse imaginations of their hearts they thought they saw the fulfillment of their wicked desires in the still more wicked abandonment of Him who had led their fathers out of peril when none but God could deliver. They gave little heed to the fact that a Divine Guidance had piloted their great ancestor, Lehi, across the ocean to the Land of Zion. They also forgot how many times their repentant brethren had been saved from destruction at the hands of the Lamanites through God's long-suffering and His mercy.

SCAlma 9 8Alma 9 9Alma 9 10Alma 9 11If it had not been that God had protected and preserved the Ammonihahites, in spite of their many abuses of His grace, Alma cautioned them, that they, too, might have suffered even unto death as had many others. Affliction and misery of all kinds would have been their justly deserved lot, but, instead of quickly punishing them, the almighty Father was slow to anger and sent His servants to warn them of coming disaster if they did not repent.

Alma 9 12Verse 12

Alma 9 12He commandeth you to repent. Not only did Alma put the Ammonihahites upon firm notice that Salvation's priceless gift, Eternal Life in God's Kingdom, came but to those who forsook evil and resolved forthrightly to sin no more, but he unreservedly declared unto them that the Lord commanded them now to repent. If they rejected His command, and continued their evil ways, then death and destruction were to be their portion. However, the Lord does not desire the death of the sinner, but that the transgressor live and return unto Him. It was for this very reason that Alma had been sent to Ammonihah. His message was Eternal Life, not death. He came to bring Salvation, not destruction. Only as a last resort would the prescribed penalties be meted out because of their iniquities; God's love for His children stayed His hand. But, none the less, if continued rebellion against His laws prevailed as in the past, then, Alma said that God would not turn away from His fierce anger.

Alma 9 12We must conclude that if the Ammonihahites had but striven to do His will, no matter how feebly, God would have fulfilled in their behalf the words of Isaiah:

Alma 9 12He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might He increaseth strength. (Isaiah 40:29)

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Verses 13-15

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Inasmuch as ye will not keep My commandments ye shall be cut off from the presence of the Lord. Alma reminded the forgetful Ammonihahites of the promise God gave unto Lehi and his children when first they settled in their new Land of Promise:

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Inasmuch as ye shall keep My commandments ye shall prosper in the land; but inasmuch as ye will not keep My commandments ye shall be cut off from My presence. (II Nephi 1:20)

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15The reminder to the people of Ammonihah of the Lord's promise to their fathers should have been sufficient to awake in them the desire to serve Him, but in their unbelieving hearts it infuriated them to a point of madness. They listened while Alma compared their fallen state to that of their brethren, the Lamanites; then, once more, their hatred of him became more bitter and malignant. They sought his life; but again, a Power more mighty than theirs shielded him from all harm.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Because the Lamanites gave no heed to thoughts of the Lord, thereby putting aside His holy name, their worship of Him was unknown. They, themselves, had cut the ties that bind the spiritually living and the dead. Without the light of His influence to guide them they had gone astray. They had become a dark and a loathsome people, delighting in bloodshed, and in all manner of wickedness. The Ammonihahites could see right before their eyes the degraded and desolate men and women who once were a "white and delightsome people," but, who, because of idleness and iniquity, were sunken to a place where God's Spirit cannot dwell. The Lamanites, they well knew, lived without God, and from the very first when they chose the paths of idleness and of treachery towards their brethren who were seeking diligently to serve the Lord, "They had been," Alma said, "cut off from His presence." The story told in the Book of Mormon of the righteousness and wickedness of the ancient inhabitants of America has undeniable proof written on every page thereof that God's promise of Lehi's descendants was verified in the many events that occurred in their then over 500 year history.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Alma waxed vehement in denouncing the evil practices of the people of Ammonihah, and in so doing pointed out to them that in the Day of Judgment, notwithstanding the wickedness of the Lamanites, the punishment meted out to them by the righteous Judge who should there and then preside would be less harsh upon the Lamanites than upon them; yea, upon them that have had revealed to them the Light of Christ, and yet have rejected its rays. "It will be more tolerable for them in the Day of Judgment," Alma said, "than for you." Moreover, he told the Ammonihahites that it will profit them little to wait until that day to repent; but now, even now, the Lord commands them to turn from their wicked ways which they deliberately seek, and trust in Him who is mighty to save. Alma told them, though not in these words, that they were putting the blessings of God to shame by partaking in sin of the gifts of His bounteous hands. They accepted reward for work they should, but did not do. They quickly received of His gifts, but gave no thanks to the Giver. In neglecting these things Alma said that they had just cause to repent as commanded, and he further warned that unless they did so immediately and honestly they would be swept from off the face of the earth, and their beautiful city of which they were increasingly proud also would be destroyed.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Throughout their entire history the righteous kings and rulers of the Nephites saw the Lamanites as brothers. They neither took delight in their fallen condition, nor sought they their destruction. The Nephites, rather than shed the blood of their brethren, strived at every opportunity to raise them to higher levels of goodness and of industry. They prayed unceasingly for the Salvation of the Lamanites in God's Kingdom; however, and notwithstanding that both were of the House of Israel, the Lamanites refused to worship its God, and sank deeper and deeper into a morass of loathsomeness and iniquity. They became a wicked and indolent race, often resorting to warfare just to satisfy the desire for the blood of their neighbors. The events of their history were not understood by the Lamanites, and the incidents surrounding their birth as a nation were by them willfully perverted so as to make them feel they were a nation of outcasts. Their annals by repeated telling were distorted and confused; their chronicles became diluted in oral transmission with stories of being wronged by Nephi and his followers.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15As early as when dissension breached the ranks of Lehi's children, or when Nephi and his followers separated from his brothers, Laman and Lemuel, to escape their unjust hatred, the children of Laman and Lemuel had been taught to despise, to deny, and deride, the true records that were kept by the Nephite historians. The Lamanites were taught by their leaders that they were driven out of the Land of Jerusalem, the land of their father's inheritance, because of the iniquity of their forebears. They contended that they were wronged in the Wilderness of Judea, and also while crossing the sea. They said they were imposed upon by Nephi while still at the place of landing after they arrived in their new home, and that he usurped the leadership of Lehi's colony upon Lehi's death, when, according to Hebrew custom, that calling rightly belonged to the elder brothers. Another of their vile traditions was that when Nephi led his sympathizers into the wilderness surrounding their habitation in the new Land of Promise, he took with him the Brass Plates which they had obtained from Laban, and also other sacred things. "Nephi robbed them," was their oft-repeated complaint, and that calumny was handed down from one generation to the next.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Thus, faulty memory bequeathed to the Lamanite children the wicked and abominable traditions of their fathers, which when repeated time and time again made it easy for wicked and ambitious rulers to lead them astray. We may imagine that with each telling, these unwritten memorials assumed greater and more evil proportions, and in this way, every passing generation of Lamanites inherited more and more which was but the invention of diseased and depraved hearts. Thus, again, their imperfect traditions delivered a treacherous blow to the Lamanites for they therein became the victims of their own degraded beliefs, and it was not long until the dark-skinned Lamanites were guided by corrupt leaders who cared little or nothing about sowing falsehood among them, or in urging further enmity between these two branches of the same family. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, pp. 114 ff.)

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15Now, the Lamanites knew nothing concerning the Lord, therefore they depended upon their own strength. Yet they were a strong people, as to the strength of men.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15They were a wild, and ferocious, and a bloodthirsty people, believing in the tradition of their fathers, which is this—Believing that they were driven out of the Land of Jerusalem because of the iniquities of their fathers, and that they were wronged in the wilderness by their brethren, and they were also wronged while crossing the sea;

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15And again, that they were wronged while in the land of their first inheritance, after they had crossed the sea, and all this because that Nephi was more faithful in keeping the commandments of the Lord—therefore he was favored of the Lord, for the Lord heard his prayers and answered them, and he took the lead of their journey in the wilderness.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15And his brethren were wroth with him because they understood not the dealings of the Lord; they were also wroth with him upon the waters because they hardened their hearts against the Lord.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15And again, they were wroth with him when they had arrived in the Promised Land, because they said that he had taken the ruling of the people out of their hands; and they sought to kill him.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15And again, they were wroth with him because he departed into the wilderness as the Lord had commanded him, and took the records which were engraven on the Plates of Brass, for they said that he robbed them.

SCAlma 9 13Alma 9 14Alma 9 15And thus they have taught their children that they should hate them, and that they should murder them, and that they should rob and plunder them, and do all they could to destroy them; therefore they have an eternal hatred towards the children of Nephi. (Mosiah 10:17)

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17Verses 16-17

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17There are many promises which are extended to the Lamanites. In His justice, the Lord has provided that Salvation will come to the Lamanites, who, in their ignorance and simplicity of mind, have been led astray by wicked, and crafty, and deceitful men. These men were their leaders, and had not only taught the Lamanites the false traditions of their fathers, but, besides, had denied them knowledge of the truth. Yet, in spite of their degraded past and the teachings which we so much abhor, we are told by Alma, and it is verified by Mormon, the abridger of Alma's record, that the Lamanites will receive of His mercy when in the great Day of Judgment they stand before Him who understandeth the hearts of all men. Then will the bowels of the Lord be filled with mercy and compassion for the Lamanites, and they will know the truth. The Gospel of Christ will be made known unto them, and in the spirit of repentance they will cry unto the Lord for a remission of their sins, and many, Alma said, "will be saved." The assurance is here given that the Lord will hear the cry of the Lamanites when they call, and in His loving-kindness will open up the floodgates of His mercy upon them.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17The blood relationship of the Nephites and Lamanites was not forgotten by either of the two branches of Lehi's family, and in spite of the hatred of the Lamanites towards them, the Nephites never ceased to pray for the welfare of their brethren—that they might turn from evil, and be saved at the last day. This was the devoted supplication of the Nephites for a thousand years.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17The prayers of the righteous Nephites prevailed before the throne of the Almighty Father, and the voice of Him who presides On High came to them, not once, but many times, promising Salvation to the benighted Lamanites, many of whom would otherwise perish in ignorance of God's Plan of Salvation were it not for His divine intervention.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And after I, Enos, had heard these words, my faith began to be unshaken in the Lord; and I prayed unto Him with many long strugglings for my brethren, the Lamanites.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And it came to pass that after I had prayed and labored with all my diligence, the Lord said unto me: I will grant unto thee according to thy desires, because of thy faith.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And now behold, this was the desire which I desired of Him—that if it should so be, that my people, the Nephites should fall into transgression, and by any means be destroyed, and the Lamanites should not be destroyed, that the Lord God would preserve a record of my people, the Nephites; even if it so be by the power of His holy arm, that it might be brought forth at some future day unto the Lamanites, that, perhaps, they might be brought unto Salvation—

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17For at the present our strugglings were vain in restoring them to the true faith. And they swore in their wrath that, if it were possible, they would destroy our records and us, and also the traditions of our fathers.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17Wherefore, I knowing that the Lord was able to preserve our records, I cried unto Him continually, for He had said unto me: Whatsoever ye shall ask in faith, believing that ye shall receive in the name of Christ, ye shall receive it.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And I had faith, and I did cry unto God that He would preserve the records; and He covenanted with me that He would bring them forth unto the Lamanites in His own due time.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And I, Enos, knew it would be according to the covenant which He had made; wherefore my soul did rest.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And the Lord said unto me: Thy fathers have also required of me this thing; and it shall be done unto them according to their faith; for their faith was like unto thine. (Enos 11-18)

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17The Lord will open the eyes of the Lamanites, and they shall see and recognize the truth; they shall have the Gospel of Jesus Christ preached unto them, and again they shall hear the voices of Alma, Benjamin, Mosiah, Nephi and Lehi, the sons of Helaman, also the four sons of Mosiah, and many of the Nephite prophets. Again these holy men of God will bear testimony to them of Christ's atoning blood, and again will declare Salvation to all "who believe on His name."

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17The Lamanites will seek the Lord, and will find Him! for "He hidest not His face from any generation of His children that feel after Him and seek His guidance," and "many of them," we repeat, "will be saved."

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17Alma's warning to the people of Ammonihah is greatly like the Old Testament account of King Hezekiah's call to all Israel and Judah, who lived in the lands of Ephraim, Manasseh, and Zebulun, to repent and observe a solemn Passover which was to be celebrated at Jerusalem. The same blessings were predicated upon heeding each.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17Hezekiah sent messengers, the Authorized Version of King James calls them posts, with letters he, himself, had written, carrying an urgent appeal for all to attend the sacred feast, "but they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them."

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17This is the account of King Hezekiah's proclamation:

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17So the posts went with the letters from the king and his princes throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye Children of Israel, turn again unto the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, and He will return to the remnant of you, that are escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And be not like your fathers, and like your brethren, which trespassed against the Lord God of their fathers, who therefore gave them up to desolation, as ye see.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17Now be ye not stiffnecked, as your fathers were, but yield yourselves unto the Lord, and enter into His sanctuary, which He hath sanctified for ever: and serve the LORD your God, that the fierceness of His wrath may turn away from you.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17For if ye turn again unto the LORD, your brethren and your children shall find compassion ... for the LORD your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away His face from you, if ye return unto Him. (II Chronicles 30:6-9)

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And now, I would prophesy somewhat more concerning the Jews and the Gentiles. For after the book of which I have spoken shall come forth, and be written unto the Gentiles, and sealed up again unto the Lord, there shall be many which shall believe the words which are written; and they shall carry them forth unto the remnant of our seed.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And then shall the remnant of our seed know concerning us, how that we came out from Jerusalem, and that they are descendants of the Jews.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And the Gospel of Jesus Christ shall be declared among them; wherefore, they shall be restored unto the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which was had among their fathers.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And then shall they rejoice; for they shall know that it is a blessing unto them from the hand of God; and their scales of darkness shall begin to fall from their eyes; and many generations shall not pass away among them, save they shall be a white and delightsome people. (II Nephi 30:3-6)

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17Behold, the Lamanites your brethren, whom ye hate because of their filthiness and the cursing which hath come upon their skins, are more righteous than you; for they have not forgotten the commandment of the Lord, which was given unto our fathers—that they should have it were one wife, and concubines they should have none, and there should be no whoredoms committed among them.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17And now, this commandment they observe to keep; wherefore, because of this observance, in keeping this commandment, the Lord God will not destroy them, but will be merciful unto them; and one day they shall become a blessed people.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17Behold, their husbands love their wives, and their wives love their husbands; and their husbands and their wives love their children; and their unbelief and their hatred towards you is because of the iniquity of their fathers; wherefore, how much better are you than they, in the sight of your great Creator?

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17O my brethren, I fear that unless ye shall repent of your sins that their skins will be whiter than yours, when ye shall be brought with them before the throne of God.

SCAlma 9 16Alma 9 17Wherefore, a commandment I give unto you, which is the word of God, that ye revile no more against them because of their darkness of their skins; neither shall ye revile against them because of their filthiness; but ye shall remember your own filthiness, and remember that their filthiness came because of their fathers. (Jacob 3:5-9)

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24Verses 18-24

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24If ye persist in your wickedness ... the Lamanites shall be sent upon you. His great heart attuned to heavenly things and his whole being filled to overflowing with a Christlike love for his fellow men, Alma, without further admonishing them was loath to pronounce upon the Ammonihahites, who were akin in their lineage to him, the awful consequences of rebellion against God and His laws. He hoped and prayed that they would repent of their sinful ways. Patiently and humbly he strove with all his might and strength to have them understand the eternal purposes of Heaven. He sought to lead them along the right way; he pleaded with them to leave the paths of iniquity which they trod and return to Him who had in times past protected their fathers when peril and disaster threatened them.

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24The people of Ammonihah were slow to believe the truth of Alma's words, but they remembered how Alma's father and his faithful followers had been delivered from Lamanitish servitude by a power and might beyond their own. They recalled that for many years the people of Zeniff had languished in sore bondage to their dark-skinned brethren, and that many of them had lost their lives in futile attempts to escape before the great and Omnipotent One who is His mercy rescued them.

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24But, notwithstanding the lessons experience had taught them, and in spite of the traditions of their fathers, the Ammonihahites gave little heed to Alma's righteous entreaties. In their ignorance and infatuation they reasoned that because of their prowess in arms and riches "it cannot happen here," and unmindful of Alma's high calling they again sought to take his life and also that of his faithful companion, Amulek.

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24With stiff necks that were held high in a false sense of pride, and blinded by the glare of self-conceit, the Ammonihahites denied the very existence of God. Deprived as they were of sound judgment because of their wicked intents, they claimed to have no need of Him! Their lives, beleaguered by foolish and wanton passions, were spent in seeking the things of the world which they preferred to the rewards of righteousness.

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24The two missionaries, Alma and Amulek, had been sent by Heaven's direct command to the people of Ammonihah, there to render unto them a service of love. That service was expressed by Alma, himself, wherein he recounted to them the many blessings which the Lord, their mighty King, had vouchsafed to their fathers even from the time the Patriarch Lehi had left Jerusalem. He assured them that these same gifts and God-given favors would follow obedience to the commandments of the Lord. However, Alma was deliberate in the words of the message he bore: he told them that if they persisted in evil-doing, not repenting of a sinful past, and also that if they did not cease putting the Word of the Lord to shame, "the Lamanites shall be sent upon you ... in a time when you know not," and in the fierce anger of the Lord "ye shall be visited with utter destruction."

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24Alma saw in the pitiable condition into which the people of Ammonihah had fallen an absolute surrender to Satan and his many wicked ways. To save them from the awful fate that therein awaited them was the paramount objective for which he labored.

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24We have noted that Alma rehearsed before the Ammonihahites many of the heavenly rewards their fathers had received through obedience to the commandments of the Lord their God. He spoke of how the prayers of the faithful had time and time again been answered in blessings upon their heads; how they had had revelations from Heaven to guide them; how angels had ministered unto them; how that they had prospered in material things, and how those among them who had diligently served the Lord had been benefited and blessed.

SCAlma 9 18Alma 9 19Alma 9 20Alma 9 21Alma 9 22Alma 9 23Alma 9 24It comforts us to hear Alma recall to his listeners' minds the bounteous gifts the Lord had bestowed upon the Nephites over two thousand years ago because of their faithfulness in serving Him. They are the same blessings which He vouchsafes to the Saints in these Latter-days. Reading between the lines of Alma's recorded summation, we observe these facts: That treasures from Heaven enriched the Nephites already glowing heritage; that "Waters from the Wells of Salvation" flowed down upon them in rivers of happiness; that every generation of faithful Nephites were fed with knowledge and understanding from On High. Also, golden-colored harvests rewarded their plantings; flocks of sheep, and herds of cattle grazed the lush uplands. But above the things of the world the gifts of the Spirit had provided strength to the strong, and even to the weakest of Nephite Saints, and together as one in praising the Lord the Nephites had waxed greater and even greater in His favor. (We might ask here, "How can we praise the Lord unless we keep His commandments?")

SCAlma 9 25Alma 9 26Alma 9 27Alma 9 28Alma 9 29Verses 25-29

SCAlma 9 25Alma 9 26Alma 9 27Alma 9 28Alma 9 29For this cause that ye may not be destroyed. To avert the awful consequences of sin into which they had fallen, the Lord in His magnanimity, sent an angel to many of his servants here below to go forth and cry: "Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." The warning voices of God's inspired teachers and evangelists have sounded this call to every generation of His children, and so it was with the Ammonihahites. Their iniquities had brought them near unto destruction. In the hardness of their hearts they refused to listen to the urgent message Alma delivered. But Alma, now unmoved by their denial of truth, and the derision heaped upon him, steadfastly proclaimed the commission whereunto the angel had appointed and authorized him. Their Salvation, not their destruction, was Alma's goal. He sought to save the people of Ammonihah from an end so completely fatal to them that to bring to naught their wickedness, their destruction was inevitable. Their fair city, and all that they possessed, came under this dictum.

SCAlma 9 25Alma 9 26Alma 9 27Alma 9 28Alma 9 29Alma's cry, "Repent ye, repent," was instantly important; mightily and with a loud voice, he called on the Ammonihahites for immediate attention to God's command. "Not many days hence," he cried, "the Son of God shall come in His glory." (See Mosiah 3:5; Alma 7:7) We understand His glory to mean His Body; the body which was begotten by God, himself. His body filled with such Divine qualities as grace, equity, and truth; overflowing with patience, mercy, and long-suffering, He would hear the "cries of His people," and would not scorn to answer their prayers, nor think them unworthy. (See Indices I-II, The Sacred Name, and Who is Jehovah? Dictionary of the Book of Mormon, Edition of 1954)

SCAlma 9 25Alma 9 26Alma 9 27Alma 9 28Alma 9 29Many other things which had been told Alma by an angel concerning the Son of God were by him transmitted to the Ammonihahites. Each one carried a lesson and a command which was not to be ignored. "He cometh to Redeem those who will be baptized unto repentance, through faith on His Name." That is a straightforward and complete answer to some who declare that repentance and baptism are separate and distinct from each other; and also that forgiveness of sin is not conditioned upon repentance. It is! The Redemption brought about by Christ was Alma's great theme. Prepare the Way of the Lord, and make ready His Paths, was the message he proclaimed. (See, Comments Alma Chapter 7, This COMMENTARY)

SCAlma 9 30Alma 9 31Alma 9 32Alma 9 33Alma 9 34Verses 30-34

SCAlma 9 30Alma 9 31Alma 9 32Alma 9 33Alma 9 34My beloved brethren, for ye are my brethren. After Alma bore the testimony of Christ which filled his bosom, he made a personal appeal to the people of the great City Ammonihah in which he was appointed to labor, calling them brethren. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, Chapter II: 9-15) In very deed, he was their brother. The cold fact that they had gone astray, nevertheless did not sever the consanguineous ties that bound them as brethren.

SCAlma 9 30Alma 9 31Alma 9 32Alma 9 33Alma 9 34Alma boldly told them that from the wonderful heritage they had, they ought to emulate their marvelous ancestors, equalling or excelling their good works. But, he said, the contrary, "your hearts have been grossly hardened against the Word of God," and you have become a lost and fallen people.

Alma 9 34Verse 34

Alma 9 34When Alma had finished speaking the multitude that had gathered about him became a mob of dissidents. All were angry with him because he termed them a "hardened and a stiffnecked people," and a "lost and fallen people." Some wanted to seize him and thrust him into prison, others sought his life. But as it was before, the Lord did not permit any harm to befall His servant. The power of the Great Jehovah was upon Alma, and none of his enemies could cope with his Heavensent aid.

Alma 9 34In the midst of the tumult which the adversary stirred up against the missionaries, Amulek stepped forth and began to preach to the Ammonihahites the Gospel of Christ. Here, Mormon, the abridger of the account of Alma and Amulek, again notes that only a part of Amulek's words are written in this abridgment.
