Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 10

SCAlma 10 1Alma 10 2Alma 10 3Verses 1-3

SCAlma 10 1Alma 10 2Alma 10 3I am Amulek. In these verses Amulek who was the Heaven-appointed missionary companion of Alma gives a brief account of his ancestry. In a very few words he traces his lineage from Joseph who was sold by his brethren to some Ishmaelitish merchants going down into Africa. Amulek's grandfather on his father's side was Ishmael, who was a descendant of Aminadi, "and it was the same Aminadi who interpreted the writing which was upon the wall of the temple, which was written by the finger of God." We have no record of the time Aminadi lived, but it must have been in the Land of Nephi before the Nephites migrated into Zarahemla, as he was at least four generations separated from Amulek. No other mention is made in the Book of Mormon of the writings that appeared upon the temple wall, nor of the interpretation thereof by Aminadi, but from the narrative we conclude that he was a righteous man, and one who held the Holy Priesthood of God.

Alma 10 2Verse 2

Alma 10 2Aminadi who interpreted the writing which was upon the wall of the temple. We know no more about this writing than what is stated here. But the fact to note is that the ancient Americans, as did the ancient Egyptians, recorded important historical events on the walls of their public buildings. At some time the Lord, himself, had written on the temple walls erected by Nephites, presumably, and Aminadi had been given the gift of interpretation. Is it impossible that this miraculous writing was the starting point of the strange American hieroglyphs, which were developed gradually and which survived after the records of the Nephites had been hidden and their alphabet and speech forgotten?

Alma 10 2We gather that the Ammonihahites, who otherwise were a godless and a selfseeking people, nevertheless, took great pride in telling of their progenitors. To them, from whom they sprang was a topic of keen delight, and a source of inexhaustible pride which established the weaker of them in the places of the strong. We have a likely counterpart in American tradition today. Sons and daughters of those who came to the New World in the Mayflower are held in high repute. Just so, we imagine it was among the Ammonihahites. Those who could trace their ancestry back to the noble sires who first begat their race were in no way to be cast out. Else, for why did Amulek declare his descent?

Alma 10 2This Aminadi whose interpretation of the writings made by the finger of God upon the temple wall was undoubtedly a singular person in the annals of the Nephites. Amulek needed only to mention the name of Aminadi as one of his forefathers, and thereby he expected, and probably received the acclaim of those who heard him so testify. Amulek's opening statement in his own behalf reminds one of Paul's defense before King Agrippa in Caesarea. There, the great Apostle noted to the king "my manner of life from my youth"; also that he had been brought up after the straitest sect of the Jews, the Pharisees. And besides that, Paul recognized all the time "mine own nation at Jerusalem." (Acts 26:1-26) Amulek's defense was in many respects comparable to Paul's notable one before the Roman rulers in Judea about 125 years later.

Alma 10 4Verse 4

Alma 10 4I am a man of no small reputation among all those who know me. To establish further himself as a man of truthfulness and sincerity, Amulek called upon his many friends to witness his straightforwardness and honesty. By his habitual diligence in pursuit of whatsoever he put his hand to, Amulek's industry brought him riches greater than many had who now derided and denied the words of his missionary companion.

Alma 10 4All these things, Amulek's lineage and his community standing, should have had a bearing upon the treatment accorded him by his fellow citizens of Ammonihah.

SCAlma 10 5Alma 10 6Verses 5-6

SCAlma 10 5Alma 10 6I have seen much of God's mysteries and marvelous power. Notwithstanding that he had many friends and relatives among the people of Ammonihah, and the further fact that he was blessed beyond measure in the things of the world, Amulek was inclined a forget the hand of the Lord in all these things. But on second thought he reasoned quite readily that it was the Lord whose marvelous power had made him the possessor of it all. Like a panorama, illumined by light from Above, Amulek saw the many events in his people's history pass before him in retrospect. Scenes, he thought were forgotten, yet he remembered; he saw them in contrast with each other and quickly they appeared to him full of meaning. Time and time again Amulek knew the Ammonihahites had been preserved from bitter Lamanitish hatred when the peril of destruction awaited them. In all the comings and goings of his people Amulek saw the great mysteries of God unfold before him.

SCAlma 10 5Alma 10 6But in spite of all the evidence of God's goodness and mercy that had been shown to him in the experiences of the past, Amulek said that to them he had been blind. He had refused to listen to the Holy Spirit's promptings. He knew what was true, yet he remained unconvinced of its power. In short, Amulek rebelled against the good and that which was holy. In the past, like many of his neighbors, his thoughts were upon the world and the things of the world. He found joy in worldly goods. But now, all was changed! His head, his heart, and his whole being had suddenly been awakened to thoughts of God's Kingdom. What, only a short time before, he had been indifferent to, now became the things he loved most. What once he loved, he now despised. Love for God's children and patience under trial were qualities that emerged from Amulek's great heart as the Sun emerges from eclipse. Even Amulek noted to his listeners the exact time when this change came about. It was in about the middle of the tenth year of the Reign of the Judges.

SCAlma 10 7Alma 10 8Verses 7-8

SCAlma 10 7Alma 10 8Amulek, return to thine own house, for thou shalt feed a prophet of the Lord. After, as it were introducing himself to the hostile throng that had gathered there, Amulek, in a straightforward manner, told them of the incident wherein an angel of the Lord appeared unto him, and in a commanding tone of voice, bade him return to his own house and give meat and drink to a prophet of the Lord whom he should find on the way.

SCAlma 10 7Alma 10 8The angle then commanded Amulek to receive the prophet under the hospitality of his own roof; there care for his wants because the prophet was almost completely famished for want of food. The heavenly messenger added to the Divine commitment he transmitted to Amulek from the Throne on High saying that the holy prophet whom thou shalt meet is an hungered and almost worn out "for he has fasted many days because of the sins of this people." The further assurance was given Amulek that—not if he obeyed, but in doing so—he and his whole household would be blessed. We may understand the blessing the angel pronounced upon Amulek when we remember the words of the Lord to His disciples in the Land of Jerusalem: "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these My brethren, ye have done it unto Me." With a heart filled with gratitude, Amulek sought out this holy man and found him even as the angel had said.

SCAlma 10 7Alma 10 8Now, Amulek said to the assembled numbers who crowded about Alma and himself, that he did just as the angel had admonished him to do; he fed and clothed and otherwise gave this poor wayfaring man succor according to the hour and power of his great need. All the time while doing so, he remembered the angel's words, "He is a holy man." "Wherefore," said Amulek, "I know he is a holy man because it was said by an angel of God. And behold," he continued, "it was this same man who has been speaking unto you concerning the things of God."

SCAlma 10 10Alma 10 11Verses 10-11

SCAlma 10 10Alma 10 11I know that the things whereof he has testified are true. While Alma dwelt under the watchful care of Amulek within the walls of Amulek's own house, angels from Heaven ministered daily unto Amulek teaching him the truth of Alma's words. Amulek was not left in doubt, nor to wishful thinking. Heavenly manifestations made richer his already bounteous fare. Treasures from the great Storehouse Above rewarded him with the joy of being in the service of God.

SCAlma 10 10Alma 10 11Not alone was Amulek blessed by harboring God's holy servant within his home, but his unselfishness in so doing brought a heavenly benediction on all others who dwelt under its favored shelter. Amulek's family, his whole household, his women and children, his father and kinfolk, were all blessed far beyond our poor power to describe or to imagine. Not only in things of the spirit were they blessed, but in things temporal as well. They were, we can conceive, prospered in their various callings and occupations, they were helped in their trials and guided in their difficulties. Altogether, their home was a happy, holy, place in which to dwell.

SCAlma 10 10Alma 10 11Amulek's mention of "my women" in verse 11, indicates to us that the Nephites of that age were polygamists.

SCAlma 10 12Alma 10 13Verses 12-13

SCAlma 10 12Alma 10 13The people began to be astonished. When the people of Ammonihah heard from the mouth of Amulek the same scathing denunciation of their wickedness as that which had characterized the bitter rebuke they had received from Alma, they were amazed. From the mouths of two witnesses they now heard the identical testimony. The words of Amulek confirmed the words of Alma; inspired with prophetic utterance, their thoughts were one. Like thieves caught with stolen goods, the Ammonihahites were not only astonished, but some of them were sore afraid. To allay one another's fears, and to bolster their morale, the bravest among them strove with exceeding cunning to twist and turn the words of Alma and Amulek so that they might, as it were, "catch them in their words." As the fowler sets his net to ensnare the birds, the Ammonihahites for their own delight, sought to entrap God's servants in meshes of their own making.

SCAlma 10 12Alma 10 13The Ammonihahites, to rid themselves of these unwanted messengers of doom, these heralds of disaster, these whom they said were self-appointed priests who prophesied to them of certain destruction if they did not repent, tried to find some way by which both Alma and Amulek could be brought before their courts, there to be accused of false crimes by witnesses suborned for that purpose. The people, themselves, aided in the cause of evil. They became the servants of sin. They mocked, they ridiculed, they spat upon, and they smote God's holy servants. But, undaunted by the hard hearts of the Ammonihahites, and also notwithstanding their spite which was keen and inexhaustible, Alma and Amulek met with courage and fortitude all their wicked designs.

SCAlma 10 14Alma 10 15Alma 10 16Verses 14-16

SCAlma 10 14Alma 10 15Alma 10 16They began to question Amulek. Certain men who saw an end to the lucrative practice in which they were engaged if the things whereof Alma and Amulek spoke were accepted by the people and therein guided their relationship one with another, were the leaders of those who sought the destruction of God's servants. They were lawyers who were trained in all the artifice of make-believe. They were those who were hired as paid protectors of those accused of crime. Sophistry and guile were their major implements of trade. Often they conspired with the judges to defeat the truth and reward the wicked. Cunningly devised fables enabled the skillful practice of their profession which was predicated upon wit and prevarication.

SCAlma 10 14Alma 10 15Alma 10 16Armed with all the verbal paraphernalia of their trade these so-called defenders of truth and justice began to question Amulek about the things the truth of which he had testified. They hoped that they could embroil him in contradicting his own or Alma's words. In this they were mistaken. They knew not the Ways of the Lord.

SCAlma 10 17Alma 10 18Alma 10 19Alma 10 20Alma 10 21Alma 10 22Alma 10 23Verses 17-23

SCAlma 10 17Alma 10 18Alma 10 19Alma 10 20Alma 10 21Alma 10 22Alma 10 23They knew not that Amulek could know of their designs. As they began to question him, Amulek perceived their intentions. The Spirit of the Lord was with him, and immediately he parried their thrusts. He turned their questions into barbed retorts in which he showed their iniquities. Boldly, and with a cause that was just, Amulek again called the wicked to repentance. He testified that Christ, himself, had said by the voice of His angels, "I will come down among My people, with equity and justice in My hands." Therefore, Amulek said, as also had angels, "Repent ye, repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand."

SCAlma 10 17Alma 10 18Alma 10 19Alma 10 20Alma 10 21Alma 10 22Alma 10 23That the Ammonihahites, to excuse their ways of darkness, could not plead ignorance of God's Laws, Amulek warned them that if they persisted in evil-doing, casting out from them the righteous, entering the secret pay of Satan thereby defiantly repelling God's Holy Spirit, and therein boasting of unrighteousness, "they would be ripe for destruction." Of all these things the people of Ammonihah were guilty. They chose iniquity; the righteous traditions of their fathers were by them obscured. In the case of Alma and Amulek, they sought to make it a crime, punishable by death, to preach God's Holy Word.

SCAlma 10 17Alma 10 18Alma 10 19Alma 10 20Alma 10 21Alma 10 22Alma 10 23By the trumped-up charges of which the lawyers accused the missionaries, the lawyers, themselves, the Sacred Record says, "Are laying the foundation of the devil; for ye are laying traps and snares to catch the holy ones of God." In short, the lawyers together with the judges who perverted their callings were thus building upon an unfirm foundation the superstructure of which would sooner or later crumble under the weight of sin, "and bring down the wrath of God upon your heads, even the destruction of this people."

SCAlma 10 17Alma 10 18Alma 10 19Alma 10 20Alma 10 21Alma 10 22Alma 10 23Amulek, now more so than before, withstood the wrath of their disappointed pride—and we know of no more bitter and malignant passion that occupies the human heart than disappointed pride—as he told the Ammonihahites that if it were not for the prayers of the righteous among the Nephites, "ye would even now be visited with utter destruction," not destruction by a flood of water "as were the people in the days of Noah, but it would be by famine, and by pestilence, and by the sword." Amulek spoke with prophetic knowledge; there can be nothing so sure as that. Again he repeated it is through the prayers of the righteous that this thing has not already come to pass, and you are spared from destruction. But, he added to his Heaven-inspired warning, that unless repentance was their immediate goal the fierce anger of the Lord would "come out against you," and as he previously told them, that you shall be smitten.

SCAlma 10 24Alma 10 25Alma 10 26Alma 10 27Alma 10 28Alma 10 29Alma 10 30Verses 24-30

SCAlma 10 24Alma 10 25Alma 10 26Alma 10 27Alma 10 28Alma 10 29Alma 10 30Now when the people heard him, they were more angry with Amulek. As Amulek pressed his charges against their corruption, the Ammonihahites grew more and more angry because of his insistence that they walked in crooked paths. They reviled at him, and mocked his warning words. In spite of the threats they made against him, he, nevertheless, remained clam and patient under trial. He neither reviled against the reviler, nor did he smite the smiter. But Amulek was firm in his pronouncement. "O ye wicked and perverse generation, why hath Satan got such great hold upon your hearts?" he said. In their ignorance and infatuation, their pride and folly, the people of Ammonihah did not understand the things of God. They refused to acknowledge guilt. Their hearts were set upon the things of the world.

SCAlma 10 24Alma 10 25Alma 10 26Alma 10 27Alma 10 28Alma 10 29Alma 10 30By his answers to their questions, the lawyers knew that Amulek understood their thoughts. They hoped to stir up strife and angry passions, and thereby add to their crafty profession the opportunity they laid in wait for. The lawyers urged the people to remember whereof Amulek spoke that they might entrap him in their courts. In all their murmurings against them, Alma and Amulek boldly and fearlessly delivered their warnings. The missionaries valiantly proclaimed their terrible message.

SCAlma 10 31Alma 10 32Verses 31-32

SCAlma 10 31Alma 10 32There was one among them whose name was Zeezrom. One of those who most bitterly opposed Alma and Amulek was a lawyer named Zeezrom. He was the first and foremost among them that thought to harm the servants of God. Zeezrom, by his wit and cunning had become expert in the art of jurisprudence. He was widely known among those whose had cuase of litigate, any by others through reputation. He was a man of considerable influence among all who knew him, "having much business to do among the people."

SCAlma 10 31Alma 10 32The lawyers then were motivated by the same desire as many now are, merely mercenary. The guilt or innocence of their client was secondary; "the object of these lawyers was to get gain; and they got gain according to their employ."

ZEEZROM

Zeezrom was a distinguished lawyer in the corrupt City of Ammonihah, at the time Alma and Amulek ministered to its unrepentant people (82 B.C.). Zeezrom led the opposition to the servants of God, and by his subtlety, ingenuity, and boldness, endeavored to make it appear that the missionaries had contradicted themselves in their preaching, and had also spoken disrespectfully of their country's laws.

At last, however, he began to feel the power of God, and when he did so he was not so hardened that he was not willing to acknowledge it. At this, his former admirers turned against him and having reviled and mistreated him, drove him out of the city with other converts. The fugitives fled to another City called Sidom, where Zeezrom, overwhelmed with the realization of his iniquities, fell sick of a fever. Not long after this terrible experience the glad tidings reached his ears that Alma and Amulek were safe for he had feared that through his own wickedness they had been slain. No sooner had Alma and Amulek reached Sidom than Zeezrom sent for them for at this glorious news he began to take courage. When they entered Zeezrom's presence he imploringly stretched forth his hands and besought them to heal him of the fever. Alma questioned him regarding his faith in Christ, and finding that the good seed which had been planted in Ammonihah had germinated in his bosom and brought forth fruit, this mighty High Priest cried unto the Lord, "O Lord our God, have mercy on this man and heal him according to his faith, which is in Christ." When Alma had said these words, Zeezrom leaped upon his feet and walked, to the great astonishment of all who witnessed it. Alma then baptized the repentant lawyer, who from that time forth preached the glorious message of Eternal Life and Salvation. Zeezrom's energy, his wisdom, his learing, all his talents, were now used towards the upbuilding of the Kingdom of God. He labored for Christ with as much zeal as he had beforetime worked for corruptible riches and worldly fame. From now on, all the days of his life of which we have record, Zeezrom became a preacher of righteousness, laboring under the direction of Alma, who then presided over the Church of Christ throughout all the land. We next hear of Zeezrom ministering to the people in the Land of Melek. In later years he accompanied Alma on Alma's mission to the Zoramites. After this we are told no more of his personal history, but his name and teachings are more than once referred to by later servants of God.
