Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 12

SCAlma 12 1Alma 12 2Alma 12 3Alma 12 4Alma 12 5Alma 12 6Verses 1-6

SCAlma 12 1Alma 12 2Alma 12 3Alma 12 4Alma 12 5Alma 12 6The words of Amulek silenced Zeezrom. Alma, perceiving that Zeezrom had been silenced by the words of Amulek, and that Zeezrom was caught in the trap he had set for Amulek, and further that the lies of Zeezrom seeking to destroy the missionaries were brought to naught by the Holy Spirit, began more fully to explain to Zeezrom the Scriptures pertaining to the Atonement of the Son of God, His Resurrection, and Salvation in God's Kingdom. Amulek had opened new vistas to Zeezrom's vision, and now Alma enlarged Zeezrom's prospect by quoting the words of other prophets about whom Zeezrom already knew.

SCAlma 12 1Alma 12 2Alma 12 3Alma 12 4Alma 12 5Alma 12 6While Alma spoke directly into Zeezrom's ears, his words were heard by numbers of the multitude who had gathered about them. Not in anger, nor in the spirit of reprisal, but, for a moment Alma, whom Zeezrom accused, became the accuser. Alma let the great throng that clustered around them know that Zeezrom had misled them by his lying, and had not only lied to them, but to God who knew all his innermost thoughts. Alma drew to Zeezrom's attention, and thus to that of the multitude, the fact that Zeezrom's thoughts were made known to the missionaries by God's Spirit which was in them. Zeezrom could not hide his thoughts and his designs against the servants of God by covering up his intentions in robes of public service which he attempted so to do.

SCAlma 12 1Alma 12 2Alma 12 3Alma 12 4Alma 12 5Alma 12 6Zeezrom hoped to entrap Alma and Amulek in a labyrinth of inconsistent and opposing doctrines. He had craftily designed a plan of questioning which he thought would confuse the Lord's servants. But his visionary scheme backfired! It cleared a way in front of the missionaries that by their answers to his questions they were able to proclaim the Word of the Lord without let or hindrance from him. His mental acuteness and physical strength made Zeezrom a bold and ingenious advocate of whatsoever cause he espoused. But, however, in publically denouncing Alma and Amulek his utmost strength was proved to be absolute weakness, and his greatest wisdom but foolishness.

SCAlma 12 1Alma 12 2Alma 12 3Alma 12 4Alma 12 5Alma 12 6That the artful design of Zeezrom—who was ready at all times to invent a cause celebre and who was skilled in gaining an end—when compared with Satan's, both were found as to the same manner born. Each was begotten by the father of all lies. "Thy plan was a very subtle plan," Alma declared, "as to the subtlety of the devil." That Zeezrom might deceive this people and lead them farther astray, lies, and more lies, he said, were Zeezrom's stock in trade. To incite the Ammonihahites to riot against him and his companion and then cast them out was Alma's fierce arraignment of Zeezrom. What Alma said to Zeezrom was meant for all who heard his voice. In spite of the fact that Alma knew the people standing before him were prejudiced, and that the court, as it were, was packed against him, he appealed to his listeners for them to escape the snare "of the adversary, which he has laid to catch this people, that he might bring you into subjugation unto him ... according to the power of his captivity."

SCAlma 12 7Alma 12 8Verses 7-8

SCAlma 12 7Alma 12 8Zeezrom began to inquire of them diligently. We have already noted (Chapter 11) that Zeezrom began to fear and tremble because the missionaries were able to tell his very thoughts. The manner of his life was laid bare before him, and in it he saw the duplicity of his motives and the blackness of his heart. He became sore afraid, for we imagine he had hidden there some follies which he would fain forget, and in trepidation lest Alma or Amulek should reveal them, he trembled more and more at the prospect. Also, we have noted that although Zeezrom had sunk to a depth of moral turpitude from which men seldom rise, he was not the base creature who revels in filth because his comrades are unclean. He saw and realized that the light that surrounded Alma and Amulek was the Light of Truth, and the power he was combating was the Power of God. His heart began to acknowledge its guilt.

SCAlma 12 7Alma 12 8In this frame of mind and spirit, Zeezrom commenced to inquire of the missionaries of things pertaining to the Kingdom of God. Not now in mockery, nor did he revile the warnings of Alma and Amulek, but in solemn earnestness, he sought to know the meaning of Amulek's words that all, both the just and the unjust, shall rise from the dead, "and are brought to stand before God to be judged according to their works."

SCAlma 12 7Alma 12 8The answers to the questions he asked were like a two-edged sword, piercing to his innermost soul, bringing to him a terrible sense of his awful position before God, and encompassing him with the pains of hell which in his case was remorse. Zeezrom realized that he had been a leader in inquity, that his lyings and deceptions had greatly contributed to dragging the people down to their existing state of corruption, and that he was among those most responsible for the hardness of their hearts.

Alma 12 9Verse 9

Alma 12 9It is given unto many to know the mysteries of God. When we understand fully His Plan of Salvation we will know all the Mysteries of God. The Creation of the Earth, the Fall of Adam, Christ's Atonement, His Resurrection, and Faith on His Name, Repentance, Baptism, the Forgiveness of sin, Prayer and its answer, and many more, are all great Mysteries that will be unfolded to the faithful if they endure to the end. Beginning with the first of these, Faith, yea, even a desire to believe, is a Mystery the power of which encompasses everything. To forsake sin is a Mystery only God and our hearts can explain. How He forgives us our trespasses and answers our prayers we do not know, but we know He does. Baptism opens the gate to God's Kingdom, why it does only He can tell. However, some day we shall understand all these things. We shall grow in grace and in the knowledge of God and His Mysteries as we grow in years. To repeat what we have already said, "We will wait until that day when what we know not now we will know hereafter (See John 13:7); we can rely on a Wisdom we cannot fathom and we can lean upon an Omnipotence we cannot grasp."

Alma 12 9It is not given to man to know the Mysteries of God except through trial by faith. Faith readies us to step forward and upward. We become stronger by partaking of the simpler things of life. Just so, spiritually, we get wisdom and understanding by keeping, first, those things we do comprehend. Little by little, God in His wise Providence has provided that we grow in His nurture and admonition. With patience we wait for the Lord. He being a wise Father, gives to us only that which is good. He withholds what is beyond our understanding until that time comes when we, by our actions, show a keener and fuller appreciation of His goodness and mercy. After this manner will He "grant unto the children of men, according to the heed and diligence which they give unto Him."

Alma 12 10Verse 10

Alma 12 10It is given unto man to know the Mysteries of God until he knows them in full. God has promised through His holy servants that if we, His sons and daughters, keep His commandments and have faith on His Name that the eternal purposes of Heaven shall all be made known unto us. The strong in spirit shall become stronger, and the weak and those who do wickedly shall become weaker. The strong, as is said, "Shall go on from faith to faith," until all the purposes of God are fulfilled.

Alma 12 10The first verse written in the Book of Mormon refers to the Mysteries of God:

Alma 12 10I, Nephi, having been born of goodly parents, therefore I was taught somewhat in all the learning of my father; and having seen many afflictions in the course of my days, nevertheless, having been highly favored of the Lord in all my days; yea, having had a great knowledge of the goodness and the Mysteries of God, therefore I make a record of my proceedings in my days. (I Nephi 1:1)

Alma 12 10Later Nephi said:

Alma 12 10And it came to pass that I, Nephi, being exceeding young, nevertheless being large in stature, and also having great desires to know of the Mysteries of God, wherefore, I did cry unto the Lord; and behold He did visit me, and did soften my heart that I did believe all the words which had been spoken by my father; wherefore, I did not rebel against him like unto my brothers. (Ibid., 2:16)

Alma 12 10Again Nephi said:

Alma 12 10For he that diligently seeketh shall find; and the Mysteries of God shall be unfolded unto them, by the power of the Holy Ghost, as well in these times as in times of old, and as well in times of old as in times to come; wherefore, the course of the Lord is one eternal round. (Ibid., 10:19)

Alma 12 10When King Benjamin called all his people to meet in a conference which was held in Zarahemla, 125 years B.C., among other things he said, he being the High Priest of the Church or its President:

Alma 12 10My brethren, all ye that have assembled yourselves together, you that can hear my words which I shall speak unto you this day; for I have not commanded you to come up hither to trifle with the words which I shall speak, but that you should hearken unto me, and open your ears that ye may hear, and your hearts that ye may understand, and your minds that the Mysteries of God may be unfolded to your view. (Mosiah 2:9)

Alma 12 10When Alma grew old and appointed his son, Helaman, to succeed him in the high office he then held, among the instructions Alma gave unto Helaman were these:

Alma 12 10Now ye may suppose that this is foolishness in me; but behold I say unto you, that by small and simple things are great things brought to pass; and small means in many instances doth confound the wise.

Alma 12 10And the Lord God doth work by means to bring about His great and eternal purposes; and by very small means the Lord doth confound the wise and bringeth about the Salvation of many souls.

Alma 12 10And now, it has hitherto been wisdom in God that these things should be preserved; for behold, they have enlarged the memory of this people, yea, and convinced many of the error of their ways, and brought them to a knowledge of their God unto the Salvation of their souls.

Alma 12 10Yea, I say unto you, were it not for these things that these records do contain, which are upon these plates, Ammon and his brethren could not have convinced so many thousands of the Lamanites of the incorrect traditions of their fathers; yea, these records and their words brought them unto repentance; that is, they brought them to a knowledge of the Lord their God, and to rejoice in Jesus Christ their Redeemer.

Alma 12 10And who knoweth but what they will be the means of bringing many thousands of them, yea, and also many thousands of our stiffnecked brethren, the Nephites, who are now hardening their hearts in sin and iniquities, to the knowledge of their Redeemer?

Alma 12 10Now these mysteries are not yet fully made known unto me; therefore I shall forbear.

Alma 12 10And it may suffice if I only say they are preserved for a wise purpose, which purpose is known unto God; for He doth counsel in wisdom over all His works, and His paths are straight, and His course is one eternal round. (Alma 37:6-12)

Alma 12 10Now my son, here is somewhat more I would say unto thee; for I perceive that thy mind is worried concerning the resurrection of the dead.

Alma 12 10Behold, I say unto you, that there is no resurrection—or, I would say, in other words, that this mortal does not put on immortality, this corruption does not put on incorruption—until after the coming of Christ.

Alma 12 10Behold, He bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead. But behold, my son, the resurrection is not yet. Now, I unfold unto you a Mystery; nevertheless, there are many Mysteries which are kept, that no one knoweth them save God himself. But I show unto you one thing which I have inquired diligently of God that I might know—that is concerning the Resurrection.

Alma 12 10Behold, there is a time appointed that all shall come forth from the dead. Now when this time cometh no one knows, but God knoweth the time which is appointed. (Alma 40:1-4)

Alma 12 10Mormon, who abridged the record of Christ's ministry among the Nephites which was recorded upon the Plates of Nephi caused these words to be written:

Alma 12 10And now there cannot be written in this book even a hundreth part of the things which Jesus did truly teach unto this people;

Alma 12 10But behold the Plates of Nephi do contain the more part of the things which He taught the people.

Alma 12 10And these things have I written, which are a lesser part of the things which He taught the people; and I have written them to the intent that they may be brought again unto this people, from the Gentiles, according to the words which Jesus hath spoken.

Alma 12 10And when they shall have received this, which is expedient that they should have first, to try their faith, and if it shall so be that they shall believe these things then shall the greater things be made manifest unto them.

Alma 12 10And if it so be that they will not believe these things, then shall the greater things be withheld from them, unto their condemnation.

Alma 12 10Behold, I was about to write them, all which were engraven upon the Plates of Nephi, but the Lord forbade it, saying: I will try the faith of My people.

Alma 12 10Therefore I, Mormon, do write the things which have been commanded me of the Lord. And now I, Mormon, make an end of my savings, and proceed to write the things which have been commanded me. (III Nephi 26:6-12)

Alma 12 10Near the end of the Book of Mormon, Moroni, who abridged the record of the Jaredites, gives in a few words the reason why the Lord should withhold some of the many Mysteries of which He is now the sole possessor:

Alma 12 10And the Lord commanded the brother of Jared to go down out of the mount from the presence of the Lord, and write the things which he had seen; and they were forbidden to come unto the children of men until after that he should be lifted up upon the cross; and for this cause did king Mosiah keep them, that they should not come unto the world until after Christ should show himself unto his people.

Alma 12 10And after Christ truly had showed himself unto his people he commanded that they should be made manifest.

Alma 12 10And now, after that, they have all dwindled in unbelief; and there is none save it be the Lamanites, and they have rejected the gospel of Christ; therefore I am commanded that I should hide them up again in the earth.

Alma 12 10Behold, I have written upon these plates the very things which the brother of Jared saw; and there never were greater things made manifest than those which were made manifest unto the brother of Jared.

Alma 12 10Wherefore the Lord hath commanded me to write them; and I have written them. And he commanded me that I should seal them up; and he also hath commanded that I should seal up the interpretation thereof; wherefore I have sealed up the interpreters, according to the commandment of the Lord.

Alma 12 10For the Lord said unto me: They shall not go forth unto the Gentiles until the day that they shall repent of their iniquity, and become clean before the Lord.

Alma 12 10And in that day that they shall exercise faith in me, saith the Lord, even as the brother of Jared did, that they may become sanctified in me, then will I manifest unto them the things which the brother of Jared saw, even to the unfolding unto them all my revelations, saith Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of the heavens and of the earth, and all things that in them are.

Alma 12 10And he that will contend against the word of the Lord, let him be accursed; and he that shall deny these things, let him be accursed; for unto them will I show no greater things, saith Jesus Christ; for I am he who speaketh.

Alma 12 10And at my command the heavens are opened and are shut; and at my word the earth shall shake; and at my command the inhabitants thereof shall pass away, even so as by fire.

Alma 12 10And he that believeth not my words believeth not my disciples; and if it so be that I do not speak, judge ye; for ye shall know that it is I that speaketh, at the last day.

Alma 12 10But he that believeth these things which I have spoken, him will I visit with the manifestations of my Spirit, and he shall know and bear record. For because of my Spirit he shall know that these things are true; for it persuadeth men to do good.

Alma 12 10And whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do good is of me; for good cometh of none save it be of me. I am the same that leadeth men to all good; he that will not believe my words will not believe me—that I am; and he that will not believe me will not believe the Father who sent me. For behold, I am the Father, I am the light, and the life, and the truth of the world. (Ether 4:1-12)

Alma 12 11Verse 11

Alma 12 11That which is meant by the chains of Hell. In the text given by the abridger of Alma's record, Mormon, the word faith is not used, but instead hardness of heart is given which connotes not only a refusal to believe, but also a dereliction of duty. We have already noted the words of Nephi, the son of Lehi, spoken to his hardhearted brothers, Laman and Lemuel,

Alma 12 11And He said unto the children of men: Follow thou Me. Wherefore, my beloved brethren, can we follow Jesus save we shall be willing to keep the commandments of the Father? (II Nephi 31:10)

Alma 12 11In the annals of those who followed Laman and Lemuel in the blindness caused by the hardness of their hearts, or in their lack of faith in the Lord's Word, we can see the truth exemplified of Alma's statement:

Alma 12 11And they that will harden their hearts, to them is given the lesser portion of the word until they know nothing concerning His Mysteries.

Alma 12 11Having no hope to which they could tie, and no deliverer to whom they then could appeal, the hardhearted were an easy prey to the devil who would take them captive and according to his will destroy them. The chains of Hell means one's inability because of lack of knowledge to do for himself what in God's mercy had been freely provided. It means just this, that the spirit of man is bound by chains made in the foundry of Hell which chains are death and the grave. Hardheartedness, coupled with a refusal to gain knowledge which results in ignorance, is the elemental stuff of the chain's making.

Alma 12 12Verse 12

Alma 12 12And Amulek hath spoken plainly concerning death, and being raised from this immortality to a state of immortality. (See Chapter 11:45)

Alma 12 13Verse 13

Alma 12 13If our hearts have been hardened. If in hardness our hearts have become as granite, and we refuse to let the Holy Spirit's promptings enter there to take up an abode, thereby depriving us of that which will lead and guide us, "then will our state be awful," and our actions will condemn us because we have no place to go except downward.

SCAlma 12 14Alma 12 15Verse 14-15

SCAlma 12 14Alma 12 15He is just in all His works. Not only will our action here upon Earth condemn us, but even our thoughts. When we shall be called to stand before God to be judged for all our works, and we remember our shortcomings as if they were yesterday, our wicked desires and our follies, all of which will be crushing, they, in contrast to falling rocks and mountains which would cover us from His view, would be more painful to our hearts.

SCAlma 12 14Alma 12 15But notwithstanding our desire to be hid from Him, we, every one, must "stand before Him in His glory, and in His power, and in His might, majesty, and dominion, and acknowledge to our everlasting shame that all His judgments are just." We then will see that our God has power that in His mercy, He not only can but will save to Life Everlasting and Light all them that have faith on His Name and bringeth forth fruit fit for one who has truly repented. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, Mosiah, Chapter 16)

Alma 12 16Verse 16

Alma 12 16Then cometh a death, even a second death. We will let Jacob, the brother of Nephi the son of Lehi, and Samuel, the Lamanite, comment on this verse:

Alma 12 16O my brethren, hearken unto my word; arouse the faculties of your soul; shake yourselves that ye may awake from the slumber of death; and loose yourselves from the pains of Hell that ye may not become angels to the devil, to be cast into that lake of fire and brimstone which is the second death. (Jacob 3:11)

Alma 12 16But behold, the Resurrection of Christ redeemeth mankind, yea, even all mankind, and bringeth them back into the presence of the Lord.

Alma 12 16Yea, and it bringeth to pass the condition of repentance, that whosoever repenteth the same is not hewn down and cast into the fire; but whosoever repenteth not is hewn down and cast into the fire; and there cometh upon them again a spiritual death, yea, a second death, for they are cut off again as to things pertaining to righteousness.

Alma 12 16Therefore repent ye, repent ye, lest by knowing these things and not doing them ye shall suffer yourselves to come under condemnation, and ye are brought down into this second death. (Samuel the Lamanite, Helaman 14:17-19)

SCAlma 12 17Alma 12 18Verses 17-18

SCAlma 12 17Alma 12 18Their torments shall be as a lake of fire and brimstone. It is well to note that the Sacred Record makes what is a notable distinction here and in the generally accepted version of the Bible. In the Sacred Record it says that their punishment shall be as a lake of fire and brimstone, not in a lake of fire and brimstone. The pain caused by their wicked acts will cause the unrepentant ones to suffer even as a burn caused by sticky, smouldering sulphur.

SCAlma 12 17Alma 12 18In the remorse the wicked have, yet who will not repent, they will be cast out to dwell with the devil and his angels. For them there is no Redemption, and furthermore, they cannot become extinct because there is no provision made for them that remain corrupt thus to escape their follies.

Alma 12 19Verse 19

Alma 12 19The people began to be more astonished. Awakened to a sense of their fallen condition, the people could not hide their amazement at Alma's words. To one another they offered all sorts of excuses and pretexts. They sought for someone among them who could carry the burden of their astonishment which amounted to self-incrimination.

SCAlma 12 20Alma 12 21Verses 20-21

SCAlma 12 20Alma 12 21There was one Antionah who ... came forth. A man named Antionah who was a chief ruler among the Ammonihahites sought to quell his people's disquietude by asking Alma what he thought were unanswerable questions. His inquiry regarding the Resurrection and the Immortality of the Soul afforded Alma an opportunity to explain these and other vital principles of the Everlasting Gospel. From the manner in which the questions were put we imagine Antionah was, like a majority of the Ammonihahites, a corrupt man—the probabilities are that he would not have been elected to his high office if he had not been—or at most one who was very ignorant of the teachings of the servants of God. Whether he repented because of Alma's preaching or was destroyed with the unrepentant Ammonihahites when their city was wiped out by the Lamanites shortly thereafter is not made clear by the Sacred Record.

SCAlma 12 20Alma 12 21Antionah thought he would make an irrefutable argument by asking Alma concerning the cherubim with a flaming sword which God placed on the east of the Garden of Eden to guard the Tree of Life. What Antionah made to appear as conflicting evidence when compared to Scripture was Alma's forthright declaration that through the Atonement of Christ all men, both righteous and wicked, would gain immortality and therefore live forever. Antionah quoted scripture to show that the reason God sent guardians to watch the Tree of Life was that our first parents should not enter Eden and partake of its fruit and live forever.

SCAlma 12 20Alma 12 21The thing Antionah urged upon his listeners in his rebuttal of Alma's testimony was that it varied from scriptural fact. He implied that Alma confirmed what scripture denied. Alma promised immortality to the soul, Antionah pointed out that God had refused man that eternal gift. But what Antionah failed to add to his harangue was the further revealed truth that the Almighty, in his mercy, would not have it that man should live forever in his sins, or in his fallen condition. Antionah failed to see and recognize the great purpose in God's Plan of Salvation. The object of that Plan is Eternal Life in His Kingdom.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24Verses 22-24

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24Alma said to Antionah, this is the thing which I was about to explain. Beginning at the first or with the Fall of Adam, through which according to Scripture, "mankind became a lost and fallen people," Alma rehearsed to Antionah and thus to all the people, the Plan of Salvation which would bring Eternal Life to all God's children.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24Alma recalled Amulek's testimony wherein his missionary companion had expounded the transgression of Father Adam. In a few wards he reminded his listeners that Adam fell by partaking of the Forbidden Fruit.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24The Fruit which God had commanded Adam not to eat of grew in the Garden of Eden. Nearby was the Tree of Life which also flourished in the Garden. Adam broke God's commandment and partook of the Fruit. At the same time that God gave Adam that commandment He admonished him saying, "If thou eat thou shalt surely die." Adam was no doubt in a quandary, he had partaken of that which was forbidden. He had brought upon himself and his children the penalty of disobedience. If he now should eat of the Fruit of the Tree of Life he would live forever in his fallen state thereby making the Word of God to no effect; making "God a liar," Alma said.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24God promised death to the transgressor; the Tree of Life offered one who partook of its Fruit a never-ending existence in his sins, subject to pain, sweat, and tears, and all the infirmities that attend mankind, except he could not escape them through death because for him there would be no death. The penalty pronounced by God upon Adam that "Thou shalt surely die," conflicted with the Tree's inviting assurance, "Thou shall live forever."

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24To prevent Adam and his wife, Eve, from partaking of its Fruit, which in so doing they would live forever in their fallen condition, the Lord put guards between the man and the Tree.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24As Amulek had noted in his previous sermon, the temporal body of man is destroyed by death. Death is a separation of the body of flesh and blood from the spirit of man. Before that separation occurs, there is a time appointed wherein man can prepare to meet his God. That time is now! This mortal life is a probationary state wherein man can make himself ready to enjoy a life in the presence of God, which is that endless state of which we have spoken, Alma said. That endless state is after the resurrection of man, or after the reuniting of the soul has taken place.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24About eight years after Alma's and Amulek's notable mission to the Ammonihahites, or about 74 B.C., they again went on another tour of duty, this time among the Zoramites, there to proclaim the Name of Christ. As they had preached to the people of Ammonihah that now is the time for repentance, and that this life of mortality is the appointed season in which to prepare oneself to enter God's presence, so they in like manner declared it unto the Zoramites:

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24And now, my brethren, I would that, after ye have received so many witnesses, seeing that the Holy Scriptures testify of these things, ye come forth and bring fruit unto repentance.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24Yea, I would that ye would come forth and harden not your hearts any longer; for behold, now is the time and the day of your Salvation; and therefore, if ye will repent and harden not your hearts, immediately shall the great Plan of Redemption be brought about unto you.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24For behold, this life is the time for men to prepare to meet God; yea, behold the day of this life is the day for men to perform their labors.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24And now, as I said unto you before, as ye have had so many witnesses, therefore, I beseech of you that ye do not procrastinate the day of your repentance until the end; for after this day of life, which is given us to prepare for Eternity, behold, if we do not improve our time while in this life, then cometh the night of darkness wherein there can be no labor performed.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24Ye cannot say, when ye are brought to that awful crisis, that I will repent, that I will return to my God. Nay, ye cannot say this; for that same spirit which doth possess your bodies at the time that ye go out of this life, that same spirit will have power to possess your body in that Eternal World.

SCAlma 12 22Alma 12 23Alma 12 24For behold, if ye have procrastinated the day of your repentance even until death, behold, ye have become subjected to the spirit of the devil, and he doth seal you his; therefore, the Spirit of the Lord hath withdrawn from you, and hath no place in you, and the devil hath all power over you; and this is the final state of the wicked. (Alma 34:30-35)

SCAlma 12 25Alma 12 26Alma 12 27Verses 25-27

SCAlma 12 25Alma 12 26Alma 12 27If it had not been for the Plan of Redemption ... there could have been no Resurrection. Had it not been for a kind and wise Heavenly Father, who seeth all things and who knoweth all things both present, past, and things yet to come, and who in addition provides for the needs of His children, there could have been no resurrection, no Plan of Redemption.

SCAlma 12 25Alma 12 26Alma 12 27God, knowing that Adam would fall into sin, therefore, even before the incidence of his transgression, made plans to rehabilitate him, and redeem him from the consequences of his guilt.

SCAlma 12 25Alma 12 26Alma 12 27Redeem means, (1) To buy again something that has been sold, by paying back the price that bought it (Lev. 25:25; 27:20). (2) To deliver and bring out of bondage those who were kept prisoner by their enemies (Deut. 7:5; 32:6). Cruden's Concordance of the Bible. By sin came death; sin, it may be said, purchased it. The Plan of Redemption provided that the price which was paid for it be given back. What was that price? Demand was made for death to deliver up all those who were in its bondage, or in its relentless grasp. The ransom was high; only God, himself, could pay it. He alone could meet the prescribed terms. The Plan of Redemption provided beforehand that He would pay the price, even death, to loose the bands of Hell. The blood which was shed on Calvary's Hill was the price that He paid, the Redemption brought about by Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews.

SCAlma 12 25Alma 12 26Alma 12 27Notwithstanding the evil designs of Satan, the Plan of God triumphed. Lucifer, the enemy of Christ and all that is good, struggled vainly to bring the purposes of God to naught. He it was who sought to frustrate God's Plan of Salvation. He would have all the children of God dwell forever in misery, being subject to the will of the devil. But in spite of Satan's cunning the purposes of God rolled on. God's word was sure! It did not fail.

SCAlma 12 25Alma 12 26Alma 12 27And so, death came upon all mankind. God decreed that after death and the resurrection therefrom, all men must stand before a Higher Judge than man, and there answer for what he did while on Earth, or when in that probationary state of which Alma and Amulek testified.

SCAlma 12 28Alma 12 29Verses 28-29

SCAlma 12 28Alma 12 29God sent angels to converse with men. After God had appointed that death should come to all mankind, and that, likewise, a resurrection of the bodies of men held captive by the grave, He decreed a Day of Judgment in which we, in our resurrected condition, should stand before His Bar and make an accounting of our actions while in mortality.

SCAlma 12 28Alma 12 29So that man should be fully informed concerning God's purposes in establishing death, the Resurrection, and a Day of Judgment, in which all men take part, in His wisdom, He saw that it was wise for them to know the reason therefore, and sent holy angels to converse with them.

SCAlma 12 28Alma 12 29The Sacred Record says "that it was expedient" that man should know of these things. At the time Joseph Smith translated the Plates of Nephi by the gift and power of God, the word expedient was in good usage as in the sense here. Now, more than formerly, it is used to connote policy, and is used with a derogatory implication, having some motive in view.

SCAlma 12 28Alma 12 29These Heavenly Messengers, sent from God's presence, were commissioned by Him to minister unto the children of men, making known unto them the Power and Authority of God, the Plan of Redemption, and His great love. From that moment man began to see the greatness of God, the glorious majesty of His presence, and the wisdom of His Word.

Alma 12 30Verse 30

Alma 12 30And they began from that time forth to call upon His Name. Heavenly manifestations were man's constant guide. Men were taught to pray to God, to rely on His justice and mercy, to do His will; and inasmuch as they did so, they were rewarded with greater knowledge of the Plan of Redemption.

SCAlma 12 31Alma 12 32Verses 31-32

SCAlma 12 31Alma 12 32Wherefore, He gave commandments unto men. Man having transgressed the Laws of God by partaking of the Forbidden Fruit thereby became as Gods "knowing good from evil." They were empowered by committing that same act to tell right and wrong and to choose the good. Discretion, to this end, increased within them. Not only did they see and recognize the truth, but they also had power to act "according to their wills and pleasures, whether to do evil or to do good."

SCAlma 12 31Alma 12 32God, seeing their mental and spiritual growth, gave men commandments with which they were bidden to comply. Obedience brought forth the blessings of Heaven, neglect or refusal to obey, the wrath of God. Gradually he that chooses iniquity, or to do evil without repentance, loses the firm grasp he once had on things righteous. Slowly, but surely, he finds it easier to choose the evil way. He becomes oblivious of God's commandments, and sees darkness where there is light. The penalty of such willful disobedience is death. Not death to the body of flesh and blood, for that came by the transgression of our first parents, but death, a second death, "which was an everlasting death as to things pertaining unto righteousness." Such a man prefers darkness to light, because, we are told, his deeds are evil. No evil can enter God's presence, and the doer thereof is equally banned. Of him there is no Redemption, the justice of God cannot be thus violated. The supreme goodness of God cannot be made an excuse for evil, or any of its component parts.

SCAlma 12 33Alma 12 34Alma 12 35Verses 33-35

SCAlma 12 33Alma 12 34Alma 12 35But God did call on men, in the Name of His Son. The Father does all things in the Name of His Son. His promise of forgiveness is entirely predicated upon repentance with first a belief in His Only Begotten Son. Through Him, and Him alone, "will I have mercy upon you." This is an integral part of the Plan of Redemption. Whatsoever ye do, do it in My Name, was the commandment of Jesus. (III Nephi 27:7)

SCAlma 12 33Alma 12 34Alma 12 35All them that repent, having a sincere heart and a steadfast spirit, can claim and will receive mercy through Mine Only Begotten Son, and will find rest with Me in My Kingdom, thus saith the Lord who is God over all the Earth.

SCAlma 12 36Alma 12 37Verses 36-37

SCAlma 12 36Alma 12 37And now my brethren ... Alma now closed his sermon, to take it up again in the next chapter, with an appeal to the people of Ammonihah to prepare themselves to enter into the rest of the Lord. Do not harden your hearts against His Word that therein you become servants of evil, and bring down upon you the wrath of Him who is mighty to save. As you see, Alma reminded them, death of the mortal body came upon man through disobedience to God's Laws; do not provoke Him by further disobedience to send upon you a second death which is the "everlasting destruction of your souls," from which there can be no redemption made. Alma thus concluded.
