Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 13

SCAlma 13 1Alma 13 2Verses 1-2

SCAlma 13 1Alma 13 2The Lord ordained priests, after His Holy Order. After a much needed rest, or it may have been on the following day, Alma again began to exhort the people of Ammonihah to repentance by declaring unto them the authority of the Priesthood which he held, and which he said was after the Holy Order of the Son of God.

SCAlma 13 1Alma 13 2When the Lord God saw that the children of men were capable in and of themselves to distinguish between truth and error, right and wrong, and also that they had the power or ability to choose good or evil, He gave unto them certain commandments which by keeping they would be benefited and blessed. The Lord ordained priests after His Holy Order whose duty it was to instruct, in the things of God, those over whom they were called to preside. Another duty of the priests was to keep their charges continually stirred up unto obedience to the laws and commandments which God had given them. In this way, by preachment and by example, the priests so set apart were able to guide and direct their brethren aright, and always to hold before them the proper manner by which they were "to look forward to His Son for Redemption."

SCAlma 13 3Alma 13 4Verses 3-4

SCAlma 13 3Alma 13 4And this is the manner after which they were ordained. Here Alma gave in outline what is perhaps one of the most informative statements in all Holy Writ concerning men both before and after they came to dwell upon this earth as mortal beings. We must agree from his recital of events that occurred even from the foundation of the world that he not only referred to this life, but to man's premortal existence as well. From the foundation of the world we understand to mean the starting point from which all things pertaining to this mortal habitation had a beginning. The Atonement of Christ and the whole Plan of Salvation were, indeed, part of that source from which all things sprang. King Benjamin, who ruled the Nephites about a jubilee previous to Alma's time, or about 125 years before Christ, solemnly noted in his last great sermon delivered to his people at a conference held in Zarahemla: "I say, that this is the man who receiveth Salvation, through the Atonement which was prepared from the foundation of the world for all mankind."(See Mosiah 4:6-7)

SCAlma 13 3Alma 13 4First, let us consider briefly, the preparation made by man in the world before he came here for him to assume more and greater responsibilities in the succeeding step of his eternal progression. In Alma's explanation of the manner in which some spirits became greater, or more in authority, than did others, he went into quite some detail. From it we can see that, like this terrestrial abode in which we live, the premortal dwelling place was a preparatory realm where the spirits which were to inhabit bodies of flesh and blood made themselves ready to take upon themselves the joys and sorrows of earth-life which according to the Plan of Redemption would follow. Also, by inference, we note that the essential characteristics, or the distinguishing qualities that guided the very existence of the spirits were not unlike human nature is today. Integrity to righteous principles was in man's premortal life, as it is today, the crowning point by which he was raised to higher levels of accountability and trustworthiness.

SCAlma 13 3Alma 13 4Faith and good works were the criteria, or standards, by which the spirits in the spirit-world were judged according to the foreknowledge of God. (See v. 3) The Holy Father had seen His spirit-children grow up from the very first; He could not but notice that some of them were slothful, others were unmindful of His presence in every experience of their lives—they were at last cast out from the dwelling place of Light—while still others proved to be firm and steadfast in doing His will, always they sought for that which was greatest for His glory.

SCAlma 13 3Alma 13 4The eternal principle of Free Agency was their portion, and God's Spirit was their constant and faithful counselor. The spirits of men had power to know right from wrong, and to choose good or evil, the satisfaction of which was concordant with their desires. They were taught the truth, and many of them followed its precepts. In so doing, the faithful and those who loved righteousness, received strength, as also it made them leaders of others. God magnified their strength and summoned them into His service. In short, certain spirits who had been faithful to Him and His cause were called of God to be His Rulers here upon Earth, and were further instructed in His ways. By their exceeding great faith in His Omnipotence and Omniscience, they made themselves ready to perform whatsoever mission God, in His wisdom, required at their hands.

SCAlma 13 3Alma 13 4Now the Lord had shown unto me, Abraham, the intelligences that were organized before the world was; and among these there were many of the noble and great ones;

SCAlma 13 3Alma 13 4And God saw these souls that they were good, and He stood in the midst of them, and He said: These will I make My rulers; for He stood among those that were spirits, and He saw that they were good; and He said unto me: Abraham, thou art one of them; thou wast chosen before thou wast born. (P. of G. P., Abraham 3:22-23)

SCAlma 13 3Alma 13 4It is most important for us to remember that those who were called into His service were they that had established themselves in His favor by bringing forth good works through faith on His Name. Others, who by pride and infatuation had cast aside the Law of the Lord and rejected His Word, became more and more estranged to the promptings of His Spirit. Thus they separated themselves from those who were diligent in keeping the Lord's commandments. We may surmise that if it had not been for their lack of perseverance in applying themselves to observing His laws, the indolent and those who chose evil might too have been privileged, as were their brethren, to hold office in the Holy Priesthood of God and minister unto the children of men. And thus we see that it was then in the world of spirits the same as here below, a pattern, or better still, a type was established which fashioned the faithful and true. They, we might say, were advanced along the Path of Redemption, while others who chose evil and loitered along the way were hampered in their advancement by their folly and foolishness.

Alma 13 5Verse 5

Alma 13 5In the first place they were on the same standing with their brethren. In the beginning all spirits were created equal. There were none more privileged than were others. All were nurtured at the side of our Heavenly Father. All were blessed with the capability of learning. Heaven gave them love, and they, themselves, developed understanding. Wisdom came with understanding, while knowledge preceded them both. Knowledge, quickly followed by understanding, and then by wisdom, made strong the just and true. To the just and true, strength was added upon strength, justice upon justice, faith upon faith. The strong became stronger. As the strong became stronger, the Light of Christ illumined their way and in it they saw the reality of His Atonement. We are here reminded of certain words of Isaiah: "O House of Jacob, come ye and let us walk in the Light of the Lord." (II Nephi 12:5). For, said David, the Psalmist, "In Thy Light shall we see light," (Psalm 36:9). We cannot refrain from quoting the Sweet Singer of Israel as he continued his song of praise to God because what he expressed therein is just what the Holy Father did with His faithful children both here and before they came here: "O continue Thy loving kindness unto them that know Thee; and Thy righteousness to the upright in heart."

Alma 13 5As we have noted a type of righteousness and integrity to its principles was established in the world from which man came; that same type conditions us here. As the spirits grew in the knowledge of that which is just and true, they also grew in the knowledge of the glory of Him that created them. In that knowledge, which is the Light of Christ, many, in all ages of the world, have been sent to declare to their fellow men here on Earth the Redemption brought about by the Holy One of Israel.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9Verses 6-9

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9Thus they become High Priests forever. As God is eternal, so also are all His works. They are without beginning of days or end of years, they having been prepared from everlasting to everlasting. The High Priesthood of God, by which He rules all things both in Heaven and upon the Earth, is eternal. It cannot and will not end. This High Priesthood, which is God's Holy Order, was conferred upon good and righteous men; some were made Elders, some Seventies, and others High Priests. As God, himself, is a High Priest worlds without end, the High Priests so ordained were thereafter High Priests forever.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9There are, in the Church, two Priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9Why the first is called the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great High Priest.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood, after the Order of the Son of God.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9But out of respect or reverence to the Name of the Supreme Being, to avoid the too frequent repetition of His name, they, the Church, in ancient days, called that Priesthood after Melchizedek, or the Melchizedek Priesthood. (Doctrine and Covenants 107:1-4.)

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And the sons of Moses, [^1] according to the Holy Priesthood which he received under the hand of his father-in-law, Jethro;

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And Jethro received it under the hand of Caleb;

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And Caleb received it under the hand of Elihu;

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And Elihu under the hand of Jeremy;

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And Jeremy under the hand of Gad;

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And Gad under the hand of Esaias;

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And Esaias received it under the hand of God.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9Esaias also lived in the days of Abraham, and was blessed of him—

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9Which Abraham received the Priesthood from Melchizedek, who received it through the lineage of his fathers, even till Noah;

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And from Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers;

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother, who received the Priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam, who was the first man—

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9Which Priesthood continueth in the Church of God in all generations, and is without beginning of days or end of years.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And the Lord confirmed a Priesthood also upon Aaron and his seed, throughout all their generations, which Priesthood also continueth and abideth forever with the Priesthood which is after the holiest Order of God.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And this greater Priesthood administereth the Gospel and holdeth the Key of the Mysteries of the Kingdom, even the Key of the knowledge of God. (Doctrine and Covenants 84:6-19)

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And the Lord ordained Noah after His own Order, and commanded him that he should go forth and declare His Gospel unto the children of men, even as it was given unto Enoch. (Pearl of Great Price, Moses 8:19.)

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9And, finding there was greater happiness and peace and rest for me, I sought the blessings of the fathers, and the right whereunto I should be ordained to administer the same; having been myself a follower of righteousness, desiring also to be one who possessed great knowledge, and to be a greater follower of righteousness, and to possess a greater knowledge, and to be a father of many nations, a prince of peace, and desiring to receive instructions, and to keep the commandments of God, I became a rightful heir, a High Priest, holding the right belonging to the fathers.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9It was conferred upon me from the fathers; it came down from the fathers, from the beginning of time, yea, even from the beginning or before the foundations of the Earth to the present time, even the right of the firstborn, on the first man, who is Adam, our first father, through the fathers unto me. (Ibid., The Book of Abraham 1:2-3)

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9Alma not only pointed to the calling of High Priests, but he also noted that men were ordained to that Priesthood by a holy ordinance. We do not know just what that holy ordinance was, but the Laying on of Hands by which the Priesthood of God is conferred and office in that Priesthood is given is a Holy Ordinance which is upheld by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. How different from any self-appointed calling practised in many of the churches of the world today is the endowment of the Priesthood by this Holy Ordinance.

SCAlma 13 6Alma 13 7Alma 13 8Alma 13 9The purpose for which High Priests were ordained, or the duty that devolves upon one who has the Priesthood conferred upon him, is to preach God's Holy Word, and also to teach others less enlightened than he, Heaven's exalted Plans concerning his Salvation, that "he also might enter into the rest of the Lord."

SCAlma 13 10Alma 13 11Alma 13 12Verses 10-12

SCAlma 13 10Alma 13 11Alma 13 12They could not look upon sin save it were with abhorrence. In these verses, Alma emphasized by way of repetition, that the many who were ordained High Priests were so set apart to that high and holy calling because of their great faith and on account of their willingness to repent which, after all, is the never-failing sign of humility. Such a one renders himself amenable to the promptings of that "still small voice" which comes from the Father "to lead, and to direct, and to warn of things to come." He is ready, at all times, to submit, or yield without hesitation to the demands of the Holy Spirit although he may not understand its purpose. He chooses to walk in the ways of righteousness rather than work the works of darkness.

SCAlma 13 10Alma 13 11Alma 13 12Therefore, Alma said that they were sanctified, or made holy. Their sins, because of their righteousness were forgiven; through the Atonement of Christ they stand spotless and pure before God's throne, and in robes that are made white through the Blood of the Lamb they have entered into the rest of the Lord their God.

SCAlma 13 10Alma 13 11Alma 13 12Speaking of the Sanctified, we are reminded that they were healed of their iniquity, which also reminds us of the words of God's holy Prophet, who spoke for the Lord, "I, even I, am He that blotteth out thy transgressions for Mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins." (Isaiah 43:25)

Alma 13 13Verse 13

Alma 13 13That ye may also enter into that rest. This verse is the epitome of Alma's exhortations to the Ammonihahites. It expresses in a few words the sum and substance of his missionary message, or a brief statement which represents the whole of his divinely inspired errand and the tidings he and Amulek bore. "That ye may also enter into that rest," into which the righteous of every people have entered, was the reward offered those who humbled themselves and truly repented of their transgressions.

SCAlma 13 14Alma 13 15Alma 13 16Alma 13 17Alma 13 18Alma 13 19Verses 14-19

SCAlma 13 14Alma 13 15Alma 13 16Alma 13 17Alma 13 18Alma 13 19Yea, humble yourselves even as the people in the days of Melchizedek. Melchizedek was the great High Priest who was the King of Salem, and to whom Abraham paid tithes, which the Sacred Record says was "one-tenth of all he possessed." The Book of Mormon gives many details of his life not mentioned in the Bible.

SCAlma 13 14Alma 13 15Alma 13 16Alma 13 17Alma 13 18Alma 13 19Salem is supposed to be the ancient name of the City of Jerusalem, and many students believe it to mean peace. As Melchizedek established peace in his kingdom that lasted all the days of his life, he was called the Prince of Peace. We can better understand why this name was given him when we remember the royal position which he held in addition to him being the High Priest of God's Church. He reigned as King of Salem under his father, who we may imagine was king of the whole land whose capital city was Salem. Thus Melchizedek being a prince by birth and reigning in the City of Peace we can readily see why he was given that name, Prince of Peace. We have a like circumstance recorded in the Sacred Record of the Nephites. A prince reigned as king over the Land of Ishmael under his father. Lamoni, the son of the supreme ruler of all the Lamanites whose court was in the City of Lehi-Nephi, exercised sovereign authority by imperial mandate. (See Alma, Chapter 20)

SCAlma 13 14Alma 13 15Alma 13 16Alma 13 17Alma 13 18Alma 13 19Abraham, as he beheld in Melchizedek a real prince of peace, desired that he also should be like him, a Prince of Peace. (See, Book of Abraham 1:2)

SCAlma 13 14Alma 13 15Alma 13 16Alma 13 17Alma 13 18Alma 13 19This Melchizedek, as we have noted, received the High Priesthood, or God's Holy Order, through a Holy Ordinance administered at the hands of his fathers even from Noah down to his day. "And from Noah till Enoch, through the lineage of their fathers; And from Enoch to Abel, who was slain by the conspiracy of his brother, who received the Priesthood by the commandments of God, by the hand of his father Adam, who was the first man," (Doctrine and Covenants 84:14-15).

SCAlma 13 14Alma 13 15Alma 13 16Alma 13 17Alma 13 18Alma 13 19Thus we see a direct line of succession in the High Priesthood which followed the faithful even from Father Adam down to Melchizedek who was a High Priest in God's Holy Order. The Church of God in those days kept, as it does now, a complete record of them that hold the High Priesthood. In this way, or through it, we see that there are always those who in every dispensation of the Gospel, bear witness of Jesus Christ and of His Atoning Sacrifice. Through the testimony of these High Priests, men in every age of the world have been taught to glorify the Holy Name of God by repentance and continual faith in Him, whereby they might gain a remission of their sins. Before the Savior's birth in the Land of Jerusalem, the inhabitants of the Earth looked forward to His coming, we look back. Both views are equally efficacious, and in them men can see the right way to "enter into the rest of the Lord."

SCAlma 13 14Alma 13 15Alma 13 16Alma 13 17Alma 13 18Alma 13 19Among the many things which are made known to us in the Book of Mormon concerning Melchizedek and which the Bible makes no mention is that "his people had waxed strong in iniquity and abomination; yea, they had all gone astray; they were full of all manner of wickedness." But, King Melchizedek who also was, as we believe, the Presiding High Priest of God's Church, implored his people to abandon their wicked ways, and turn from all evil unto God who was ready at all times to forgive the truly repentant sinners. The Sacred Record says, "They did repent," and from their righteous behavior thereafter Melchizedek "did establish peace in all his days."

Alma 13 19Verse 19

Alma 13 19There were none greater than Melchizedek. From the text of the Book of Mormon we judge that much of what the Holy Scriptures contained in ancient times, or before the records of the sacred historians passed through the hands of many different editors, was written upon the Brass Plates of Laban. Upon these Plates was written the untampered-with Scriptures of the Jews. The Nephites possessed these Plates, and were taught to read them. The brief passages in the Bible concerning Melchizedek when compared with the greater statement made in the Book of Mormon confirms our belief that a more detailed account of him was purposely, or at least carelessly, left out of the Scriptures by the teachers and leaders of the Jews who many years later came into positions of prominence and power.

Alma 13 19There were none greater or more wise than Melchizedek, although there were many both before and after him who occupied his exalted office. Yet little is said in the Bible of his greatness, his goodness, or his wisdom. As High Priest and earthly king he honored God by leading, not driving, his people along the proper paths of righteousness and therefore peace.

Alma 13 19In view of what little is said of Melchizedek in the Bible, we feel that we are not far mistaken when we suggest that nearly all that pertains to him has been omitted from the Scriptures by scribes who were suborned for that very purpose. It is not unthinkable that members of the Great Sanhedrin, the tribunal which made the laws and interpreted the doctrines by which the Jews were governed, were, themselves, co-conspirators. Suffice it to say that Melchizedek was the greatest of all human princes, for he ruled his people in righteousness and brought them peace, God's most precious gift.

Alma 13 19They had all gone astray. This statement (v. 17) is singularly like the unhappy conclusion of Isaiah when speaking of the Jews in his day, "All we, like sheep, have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way." (Isaiah 53:6) But Melchizedek, filled with a mighty faith in God and His righteousness, led his people on to peace as did the shepherds of his day lead their sheep into pastures that were greener and where the still waters slaked their thirst.

Alma 13 19In the Book of Mormon is recorded an appeal by Alma, who also was as was Melchizedek, a High Priest:

Alma 13 19O ye workers of iniquity; ye that are puffed up in the vain things of the world, ye that have professed to have known the ways of righteousness nevertheless have gone astray, as sheep having no shepherd, notwithstanding a Shepherd hath called after you and is still calling after you, but ye will not hearken unto His voice!

Alma 13 19Behold, I say unto you, that the Good Shepherd doth call you; yea, and in His own Name He doth call you, which is the Name of Christ; and if ye will not hearken unto the voice of the Good Shepherd, to the Name by which ye are called, behold, ye are not the sheep of the Good Shepherd. (Alma 5:37-38)

Alma 13 19The genealogy of God's Priesthood. We have noted the direct line of succession in which the Holy Priesthood was transferred from father to son. We quote a passage of Scripture from the Bible concerning the Priesthood of God in which Priesthood, Melchizedek was a High Priest, and which passage has caused great misunderstanding among students of, and believers in, the Word of God:

Alma 13 19Without father, without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God; abideth a priest continually. (Hebrews 7:3)

Alma 13 19There are many who think that passage refers to Melchizedek. But it does not! It speaks of God's Holy Priesthood.

Alma 13 20Verse 20

Alma 13 20The Scriptures are before you. After Alma's recital to the Ammonihahites of the great rebirth of righteousness that characterized the people in the dominion of Melchizedek, King of Salem, bringing them peace, he implied that the same blessings would come to the people of Ammonihah if they would repent as did Melchizedek's people.

Alma 13 20We find here another instance recorded where the Nephites undoubtedly had the Hebrew Scriptures to guide them in their difficulties. The Ammonihahites were thus familiar with the account of Melchizedek, and also with the trials of his people. The Ammonihahites had before them the Scriptures which told of these things. Now, if in their hardheartedness and wilfulness they should twist and turn the meaning of the Scripture doctrine to suit their own wayward purposes, only suffering and eventual death would be their lot. Alma bluntly told the Ammonihahites, "If ye will wrest them it shall be to your own destruction."

Alma 13 21Verse 21

Alma 13 21Now is the time to repent. Alma's injunction, to repent, and its urgent fulfillment by the people of Ammonihah was of instant importance, because, he said, "The Day of Salvation draweth near." There is a lesson here, we all may learn. Now is the time to repent. Today! Tomorrow is too late. It is folly to put repentance off from day to day, or until, perhaps, our backs are bent with the weight of years. Our determination to sin no more and be firm and steadfast in keeping the commandments of God is presently of great consequence to us. Therefore, let us make up our minds and say as did the prophet of old, that from now on, henceworth and forever, I will serve the Lord and keep his commandments. (Joshua 24:15) We have heard that procrastination is the thief of time. It also deprives us of the ability to act for ourselves. However, those of us upon whose backs has rested the burden of carrying forth for so many years the word of the Lord, "let not our years be a reason for relaxing our efforts; let it be the reverse." If the candlelight is almost extinguished, let us work the harder ere it go out. If the sun of our lives is deep in the western sky, let us hasten our footsteps lest night overtake us, and we find our mission here below is unended. In all events, let our loins be gird and our lamps burning as men waiting for their lord. Above all else, the contrary notwithstanding, this is the Day of Salvation; this is the time for us to prepare to meet our Lord. We repeat Alma's warning, "Now is the time to repent."

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26Verses 22-26

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26Yea, and the voice of the Lord...doth declare it unto all nations. In all parts of the Earth, holy angels sent from God and commissioned by Him, have in every age of the world declared Salvation to all men through Jesus Christ our Lord. The people of every nation have been admonished to look up to Him for a remission of their sins. But, however, it may be asked, "How can we look up to Him for a forgiveness unless we repent of our sins and do them no more? (see II Nephi 31:10)

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26Glad Tidings of Salvation have been sounded to all His people, everywhere. There are none that were forgotten, none omitted. Even as Christ was preached to Judah in ancient Jerusalem, also to Joseph in Nephite America, and to His people upon the islands of the sea, even so, all were free from inequality. All heard His voice, and angels from His presence taught them His Word. Alma notes, "Wherefore they have come unto us."

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26Great as was the message of Salvation through Jesus Christ, that message was not proclaimed except in words that all might understand. None need err! The Nephites were exceedingly blessed in this because, as Alma noted, they were "wanderers in a strange land," and therefore Heavenly ministrations were their constant guide. The Prophet Nephi, Lehi's son, when his people were yet young, said, when he spoke of the Prophet Isaiah, "But behold, I proceed with mine own prophecy, according to my plainness; in the which I know that no man can err..." (II Nephi 25:7) Also Nephi's brother, Jacob, noted,

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26Behold, my brethren, he that prophesieth, let him prophesy to the understanding of men; for the Spirit speaketh the truth and lieth not. Wherefore, it speaketh of things as they really are, and of things as they really will be; wherefore, these things are manifested unto us plainly, for the Salvation of our souls. But behold, we are not witnesses alone in these things; for God also spake them unto prophets of old.

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26The Lord, by the mouth of angels, doth declare it. (V. 22) The plainness with which the Gospel of Christ was proclaimed to the Nephites is vividly shown in reading Chapter 3, Book of Mosiah. Therein is recorded a visit to King Benjamin by an angel of God, who was sent down from Heaven to declare the coming of the Messiah, Jesus Christ, to dwell in the flesh with man on earth. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Vol. II, pp. 53 ff.)

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26King Benjamin, however, was not the only one recorded in the sacred volume, the Book of Mormon, to whom angels proclaimed Glad Tidings concerning the birth of our Lord. Alma noted that there were many similarly favored. The Nephites, themselves, were blessed beyond measure in having had declared unto them the Joyful News of His coming. The pure in heart among them, and the poor in spirit, were ministered to by holy beings from God's Eternal Home. Manifestations of His grace, mingled with the promised satisfaction of His long-awaited presence, was the reward of the faithful. Providential care brought meat and drink to the souls of the worthy. Divine help came to those in need. Celestial tutors came to guide the humble and true. The rich harmonies of the Gospel of Christ were heard by all who had, within them, the Spirit of God. Thus, Alma noted, men's hearts were prepared to receive the Joyful News that the Lord of all, the Messiah for Whose coming they had long waited, was now born of woman, and that He had come to Redeem His people. With joyful hearts, they looked forward to that time.

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26At the time of His coming in His glory. (V. 24) We chose to believe this means, at the time of His birth. His glory was His mortal body, the Only Begotten of the Father. By the testimony of angels men were made ready to receive His Word when that glorious event should come to pass.

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26We are strengthened in that belief by a number of remarkable instances recorded in Holy Writ, and whether they come to us from the prophets of old, or through the seers of our own time, they make plain the meaning of the phrase, His glory.

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26Shortly after the famous exodus of Israel from Egypt, and as a rebuke to Israel because they proved unfaithful to Jehovah, who was the Lord their God, in worshiping the Golden Calf, the tent wherein religious ordinances were performed, and which had hitherto stood in the center of their camp, was removed a long distance from it. The cloudy pillar, in which the angel of Jehovah manifested his presence, rested there.

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26We repeat what we have previously said: A remarkable interview between Moses and Jehovah took place at that tent, away from the camp. Moses reminded Jehovah, that although He had commanded him to be the visible leader of the people, He had not instructed him regarding the journey which lay ahead. "Show me now," Moses said, "Thy way." Jehovah answered, "My presence shall go with thee." (Exodus 33:14) That was to say, Jehovah would not entirely abandon the people. He would be near, just as Jesus promised to be near His Apostles, even after He departed. In the same sense Jehovah would be present and manifest Himself from time to time, as circumstances required. This promise was fulfilled throughout the entire journey in the wilderness.

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26After having obtained this promise, Moses said, "I beseech Thee, show me Thy glory." In answer to that prayer, Jehovah explained to him that he could not see His face, but that He (Jehovah) would show him all His goodness, and proclaim, or explain, His Name to him, and also permit him to see His back as He was passing by a certain place.

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26This last expression is in all probability a misunderstanding by the translators of the Hebrew word. The word may here mean, behind in point of time; afterwards, and in that case we may understand the meaning to be that Moses was given the privilege of seeing Jehovah in the form in which He afterwards would appear in the flesh. This human form, we know was His glory, for John says: "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld His glory), [His body] the glory as of the Only Begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." (John 1:14) If we understand the text in Exodus the same way, it is clear. Moses saw Jehovah, all but His face just as John saw the bodily form of the Word. (Exodus 33:20-23)

SCAlma 13 22Alma 13 23Alma 13 24Alma 13 25Alma 13 26This agrees perfectly with the beautiful narrative in the Book of Ether concerning the interview of the Brother of Jared with the Lord. The Lord showed Himself unto him in "the body of My Spirit," in the likeness of which He, Jesus Christ, had created man (Ether 3:14), and He further said: "The time cometh that I shall glorify My Name in the flesh." (V. 21) That was His glory, and that was, we may feel sure, the glory which Moses, as well as the Brother of Jared, saw. (We recommend that the whole Chapter 3, Book of Ether be studied. Also, See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume I, pp. 198 ff.)

SCAlma 13 25Alma 13 26Verses 25-26

SCAlma 13 25Alma 13 26By the mouth of angels, His coming shall be made known unto just and holy men. With hearts prepared by the glorious manifestations of God's love, and themselves alive to His holy purposes, the righteous among the Nephites were, at this time, waiting "to hear the Joyful News declared unto us by the mouth of angels, of His coming." Just and holy men had, before time, foretold the coming of the Lord, angels from Heaven had proclaimed the Glad Tidings. Many were now ready to hear the great and long-awaited pronouncement: "God himself" has "come down among the children of men, and shall Redeem His people."

SCAlma 13 25Alma 13 26Alma, in verse 25, expresses the divine hope that Christ would come "in my day." That His coming be near at hand, was the inspired prayer of the faithful. But, Alma said, "Let it be sooner or later, in it I will rejoice." This again reminds us of the visit of the angel to King Benjamin; we can do no better than to repeat here the words which the heavenly visitor said unto him: "Awake"; and I awoke, said King Benjamin, and behold he stood before me. "Awake, and hear the words which I shall tell thee; for behold, I am come to declare unto you the Glad Tidings of Great Joy. For the Lord hath heard thy prayers, and hath judged of thy righteousness, and hath sent me to declare unto thee that thou mayest rejoice; and that thou mayest declare unto thy people, that they may also be filled with joy. For behold, the time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power, the Lord Omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, shall come down from Heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men, working mighty miracles, such as healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases....And He shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of Heaven and Earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and His mother shall be called Mary. And lo, He cometh unto His own, that Salvation might come unto the children of men even through faith on His name...." (Mosiah 3:2-5; 8-9)

Alma 13 27Alma 13 28Alma 13 29Alma 13 30Alma 13 31SCVerses 27-31

SCAlma 13 27Alma 13 28Alma 13 29Alma 13 30Alma 13 31And now, my brethren, I wish...that ye would hearken unto my words. In making a personal appeal to the Ammonihahites that they would hearken unto his words, Alma brought his great sermon to a glorious close. Alma was filled with an unquenchable zeal to lift up his fallen brethren, and to lead back to the right path those who had lost their way. No rant or rancor stifled his entreaties. He offered no apologies, pretexts, or excuses, for coming among them. He knew that the Lord had called him into His service, and Alma strove to be found worthy to be His witness. Alma's patience under trial, his faithfulness in every sphere of duty, his compassion for the sinful, proved the strength of the mission to which he was dedicated. He proclaimed the truth in earnestness, yet his zeal in doing so found charity not lacking. He knew that charity is the pure love of God, and on his lips was found the Law of Love.

SCAlma 13 27Alma 13 28Alma 13 29Alma 13 30Alma 13 31Alma's salutation, "And now, my brethren," shows his humility, also his willingness to forgive. Christ's grace which in Alma was abundant, cast aside all bitterness, even the suggestion of reprisal, for the abuse the Ammonihahites had heaped upon the missionaries. Calling them "My brethren" showed that the Lord whom Alma proclaimed, was "the God of all goodness, the Father of all men, that to serve Him is perfect freedom and to worship Him the soul's purest happiness."

SCAlma 13 27Alma 13 28Alma 13 29Alma 13 30Alma 13 31In closing his testimony of what the Lord required of them, Alma offered a prayer in behalf of the people of Ammonihah. Their wickedness was painful to his heart (v. 27), and in anxiety that they might procrastinate the day of their repentance, Alma bowed in humble supplication before the Majesty on High and implored the Great Giver of All Good to grant them repentance "that," Alma said, "ye may not bring down His wrath upon you, that ye may not be bound down by the chains of hell, that ye may not suffer the second death."

SCAlma 13 27Alma 13 28Alma 13 29Alma 13 30Alma 13 31Mormon, who abridged Alma's record, notes that Alma spoke many more words than are herein written. No doubt it was difficult for Mormon to engrave all that he found written upon the numerous plates that had fallen into his hands. In fact Mormon's son, Moroni, so states. Moroni was the last to write in the Sacred Record, Nephi was the first. About a thousand years separate their times. Moroni was commanded of the Lord to include in the record he was making somewhat concerning the promise his fathers had received that a knowledge of Christ should come unto their brethren [the Lamanites] through the Gentiles.

SCAlma 13 27Alma 13 28Alma 13 29Alma 13 30Alma 13 31Moroni did as he was commanded, but, nevertheless, he felt incapable of fully complying with the Lord's requirements. He sought the help of the Lord, and in his prayer to the Almighty Father, Moroni said: "And I said unto Him: Lord, thou hast made us mighty in word by faith, but Thou hast not made us mighty in writing; for Thou hast made all this people that they could speak much, because of the Holy Ghost which Thou hast given them. And Thou hast made us that we could write but little, because of the awkwardness of our hands. Behold, Thou hast not made us mighty in writing like unto the brother of Jared, for Thou madest him that the things he wrote were mighty even as Thou art, unto the overpowering of man to read them. Thou hast also made our words powerful and great, even that we cannot write them; wherefore, when we write we behold our weakness, and stumble because of the placing of our words; and I fear lest the Gentiles shall mock at our words. (Ether 12:23-25)

Footnotes

And the sons of Moses and of Aaron shall be filled with the glory of the Lord, upon Mount Zion in the Lord's House, whose sons are ye; and also many whom I have called and sent forth to build up My Church.

For whoso is faithful unto the obtaining these two Priesthoods of which I have spoken, and the magnifying their callings, are sanctified by the Spirit unto the renewing of their bodies.

They become the sons of Moses and of Aaron and the seed of Abraham, and the Church and Kingdom, and the elect of God. (Ibid., 84:31-34)

---
Notas:
[^1] See, also, the entire discussion between Amulek and Zeezrom, contained in Alma 11:21-46.
