Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 14

Alma 14 1Verse 1

Alma 14 1... many of them ... began ... to search the Scriptures. An important item in the religious legacy inherited by the Nephite people was the Holy Scriptures. By way of illustration, the words "Scriptures" and "Holy Scriptures" appear forty-one times in the Book of Mormon. The name of the Prophet Isaiah, who was such a favorite of the Prophet Nephi, (See 2 Nephi 25:5) is mentioned therein twenty-three times; and nineteen chapters from his celebrated book, which bears his name, are likewise set forth, in full. These, and many other portions of the Old Testament, including all of the Pentateuch, (See 1 Nephi 5:11) were available to the Nephites. Nephite Scriptures also included the writings of their own prophets, from Nephi down to the time of their own contemporaries.

Alma 14 1Reverence for these Scriptures, moreover, had been inculcated upon the Nephites from the beginning of their history. It was Nephi, himself, who declared: "And upon these I write the things of my soul, and many of the scriptures which are engraven upon the Plates of Brass. For my soul delighteth in the Scriptures, and my heart pondereth them, and writeth them for the learning and the profit of my children." (2 Nephi 4:15)

Alma 14 1The Ammonihahites, likewise, had their copies of the available Nephite sacred literature. This treasury of truth apparently had not been seriously consulted by them, however, or its precepts would not have been so outrageously violated. In these very Scriptures the Ammonihahites would have found abundant refutation of the doctrines of Nehorism, whose most basic tenet was that of non-responsibility for individual sin. (See Alma 15:15, and the commentary thereon.) [^1] There was scarcely a precept more firmly rooted in Jewish thought, nor more wholeheartedly accepted by early Christian theology, than that of absolute responsibility in the eyes of God for improper exercises of one's free agency.

Alma 14 2Verse 2

Alma 14 2... for they were angry with Alma, because of the plainness of his words unto Zeezrom. It is difficult for those who have been oriented to the traditions of free speech and tolerance for others' beliefs to understand why the Ammonihahites became so infuriated, as shown by their conduct throughout all of Chapter 14, over the words of Alma and Amulek. (See, for example, the macabre incident related in verse 8.) It is true that they had been personally attacked; but even wicked people do not customarily display such violent sensitivity to criticism.

Alma 14 2The Book of Mormon, however, throws its own light on the answer to this question. Verse 20 of the 11th Chapter tells us that the judges of Ammonihah had a very special reason for stirring up the people to all manner of riotings and disturbances. Inasmuch as the amount of their professional emolument was in direct proportion to the number of cases which they tried, it was profitable for them to keep the legal pot continually boiling. In the furtherance of this unprofessional and unethical objective, the judges apparently found the people willing accomplices.

Alma 14 2Pursuing the matter a little further, however, we might make the observation that they to whom Alma's and Amulek's words had been spoken mirrored the attitude, not only of the judges and lawyers, but also of the priests and teachers, all of whose evil alliance had brought their land into such a state of abject spiritual degradation. Apparently the administration of justice, learning, and of all matters of the spirit in Ammonihah had become the monopoly of this exclusive band of corrupt intellectuals, whose professional standing among the people demanded the latter's unquestioned subservience.

Alma 14 2There are two evils whose presence has always had a tendency to corrupt the clergy. The first is the accepted proposition that men should preach to become popular, i. e., that being acceptable is more important than being right. The second is the advocacy of the proposition that preaching is a profession, whose practitioners are entitled to monetary compensation.

Alma 14 2The Ammonihahite clergy was steeped in both these evils. With regard to the first, it will be recalled that Nehor had taught that "... every priest and teacher ought to become popular; ..." (Alma 1:3) Of all the sins committed by the guardians of Divine Truth, scarcely none is more frequent, nor more insidious, than this. Paul foresaw the day when Christian preachers would be more interested in popularity than in truth, and that such an attitude would lead their listeners down the desolate road to apostasy.

Alma 14 2"For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears; and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables." (2 Tim. 4:3-4)

Alma 14 2With regard to the second evil above mentioned, reference is made to the fact that Nehor had also taught that priests and teachers "... ought not to labor with their hands, but that they ought to be supported by the people." (Alma 1:3) Nehor had apparently forgotten that the Prophet Nephi had said: "But the laborer in Zion shall labor for Zion; for if they labor for money they shall perish." (2 Nephi 26:31)

Alma 14 2In addition to the above two errors, it would appear that the priests and teachers of Ammonihah had committed that other cardinal sin, which also constitutes the great sin of so many contemporary teachers: that of teaching the things of God according to the wisdom of men. It was the Prophet Jacob, Nephi's brother, who had solemnly declared that: "... to be learned is good if they hearken unto the counsels of God." (2 Nephi 9:29)

Alma 14 2To this counsel the Ammonihahite priests, it would seem, had given little heed. For that reason the Spirit of God had withdrawn itself, and their doctrines and their organization had become fused into a kind of priestcraft of the most obnoxious variety. [^2]

Alma 14 2In chapters 9 through 14 we find these men engaged in the spinning of an evil web intended to entrap the less discerning minds of their countrymen. Their manifest intent was to preserve the strands of this web in a whole and unbroken state, lest a small break therein produce a rent, and the whole fabric be torn asunder. It followed, therefore, that they could not tolerate any form of intellectual opposition. Such has been the eternal and universal pattern of priestcraft.

Alma 14 2This evil agglomeration of corrupt intellectuals had undoubtedly indoctrinated the multitudes in their way of thinking, and had taught them to advance unwittingly their dark designs. This explains the otherwise inexplicably violent reaction of Alma's and Amulek's tormentors.

Alma 14 2It should be recalled that a certain other combination of high priestly officials once incited the Jewish populace to clamor for the death of history's most innocent Sacrificial Victim: the Savior Himself, just five days after the latter's triumphant entry into Jerusalem. (Luke 19:37) There is sinister meaning in the brief words: "But the chief priests and elders persuaded the multitude that they should ask Barabbas, and destroy Jesus." (Mat. 27:20)

Alma 14 2History has proved all too often that when the Church evolves into an instrument for political or personal aggrandizement, the pure clear voice of prophecy is muted, and in its place is heard the strident jangling of scheming opportunists. It is for this very reason, no doubt, that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints advocates the separation of Church and State, and the sustaining of its ecclesiastical hierarchy upon a non-professional basis.

Alma 14 2Returning, for a moment, to the text, it should also be added that men ordinarily fight hardest when their life is threatened. The Ammonihahite priestly group, as we see in Chapter 14, apparently felt that its existence had been placed in jeopardy by the defiant words of these two dangerous men, one of whom was considered by them to be a traitor. They had no other alternative, therefore, than to join issue with them in a "fight to the finish."

Alma 14 2It must not be forgotten, moreover, that it was this same Alma who, about nine years before, had pronounced the death sentence upon Nehor, (See Alma 1:14) the father of the Ammonihahite ideology. In that unpleasant episode the Ammonihahites found additional reason for wanting to settle accounts with this great man.

Alma 14 3Verse 3

Alma 14 3... they sought to put them away privily. The word privily here signifies "privately," "in secret," or "clandestinely." The passage suggests either that they were ashamed of what they were about to do, or else, for strategic reasons, that they thought it best to accomplish their murderous designs with as little publicity as possible.

Alma 14 4Verse 4

Alma 14 4But ... they did not. Apparently they changed their minds. Presumably it was for the reason that they had been assured by the officials that their two celebrated prisoners would be adequately "dealt with" through official channels.

SCAlma 14 4Alma 14 5Verses 4-5

SCAlma 14 4Alma 14 5... and took them before the chief judge of the land. It is difficult to avoid comment on the obvious parallelism between the events here related, and the appearance of the Savior of Men before Pontius Pilate. The two episodes abound in similarities. In each case, for example, wickedness had prejudged and foredoomed innocence, and was seeking only a legal pretext to accomplish its unholy purpose. In each case the accusers, in their ardor to establish their case, shamefully misquoted the words which had previously been spoken by the accused. Jesus, for example, was accused of "perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar," (Luke 23:2) notwithstanding his previous public admonition to: "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's." (Mat. 22:21)

SCAlma 14 4Alma 14 5In the instant case Alma and Amulek were accused of preaching that the Son of God should "not save" his children. What they had actually said, of course, was that the Son of God should not save His children "in their sins," i. e., without repentance. (Alma 11:34) Between these two statements there is a world of difference, indeed. It would appear, however, that after evil men have decided upon the murderous destruction of him who thwarts the accomplishment of their aims, truth becomes expendable, and is willingly sacrificed upon the bloody altar of their ambition.

Alma 14 6Verse 6

Alma 14 6... his soul began to be harrowed up ... The power of repentance is wondrous to behold. It is like the miracle of spring, ablaze with glory, inside the human heart. The hard incrustations deposited around Zeezrom's soul by a lifetime of sin were being dissolved away by the corrosive, cleansing power of repentance. The story of Zeezrom's conversion is one of the truly remarkable stories in all sacred literature. [^3]

Alma 14 7Verse 7

Alma 14 7... and they did cast them out, and sent men to cast stones at them. The black ignorance into which these people had sunk had now robbed them of all spiritual perception. In the degradation of their condition they considered no other alternative than the destruction of the men who had stripped them of their tattered shreds of self-justification, and exposed their shameful wickedness. For that same reason was Stephen, one of the most persuasive of all early Christian preachers, stoned by the infuriated Jewish mob. (Acts 7:57-60)

Alma 14 7The Ammonihahite converts who were thus cast out proceeded to Sidom, where they apparently gathered together, under Zeezrom's subsequent leadership. (Alma 15:1)

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Verses 8-11

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11... and cast them into the fire. Verse 8 probably qualifies for the designation as the most 'painful" passage in the Book of Mormon. Human agony is always hideous. The agony of baby-innocence, in particular, is one of those spectacles, from the witnessing of which all men pray that they may be spared. Who can read the sickening account of this holocaust of living beings, and hear the screams of tortured women and children, and contemplate the diabolical perversion of those human monsters who perpetrated this unsurpassed outrage, without pleading that the very memory of it be blotted out. Nevertheless, the incident presents to us some of the profoundest lessons to be found in all sacred or profane literature. The reflective mind may well find therein material for countless hours of profitable meditation.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11It is beyond the scope of this commentary to undertake extensive treatment of the ultimate philosophical problem of good and evil, which problem is so dramatically called to our attention in these verses. Religious philosophers have been debating this question ever since man's curiosity first drove him into the realm of speculative thought. It is quite likely that not one thinking man has ever lived who has not asked himself the question: "Why must the innocent suffer?" More great and constructive thinking has been devoted to the answering of this single question than to probably any other question with which the mind of man is tormented. It is possible that in this life, this supreme mystery may never be solved to humanity's entire satisfaction. The problem of good and evil is, in a sense, the mother of all other religio-ethical problems, and out of the effort put forth by great minds to comprehend it, there have sprung the supreme artistic and spiritual masterpieces of the ages.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Aware, as we are, of the failure of the human mind to solve the ultimate mystery of mysteries, we must nevertheless acknowledge that clear light has illuminated many of the shadowy areas in this field of thought, and that such light has emanated exclusively from the Revealed Word of God.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11We may peruse the literature of agnosticism or skepticism indefinitely, but will search in vain therein for any ray of convincing hope or comfort which may serve to cheer us in the troubled hours of life. The classical Greeks, for example, whose philosophical achievements represent the apogee of all non-inspired human intellectual effort, were fundamentally pessimistic. For them, man had been, from the beginning, foredoomed to failure, and those whom the gods loved, died young. It is apparent that their monumental, though non-inspired, minds were powerless to cope with this, the ultimate mystery of life.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11How grateful the Christian world is, on the other hand, for the light shed upon this question by the following famous words from the Book of Hebrews: "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered; and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him." (Heb. 5:8-9)

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11One of the most celebrated passages in the Book of Mormon further deals with this very question, and does it with such clarity and forthrightness as to rank it among the greatest passages of all literature:

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And to bring about his eternal purposes in the end of man, after he had created our first parents, and the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air, and in fine, all things which are created it must needs be that there was an opposition; even the forbidden fruit in opposition to the tree of life; the one being sweet and the other bitter.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Wherefore, the Lord God gave unto man that he should act for himself. Wherefore, man could not act for himself save it should be that he was enticed by the one or the other.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And I, Lehi, according to the things which I have read, must needs suppose that an angel of God, according to that which is written, had fallen from heaven; wherefore, he became a devil, having sought that which was evil before God.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And because he had fallen from heaven, and had become miserable forever, he sought also the misery of all mankind. Wherefore, he said unto Eve, yea, even that old serpent, who is the devil, who is the father of all lies, wherefore he said: Partake of the forbidden fruit, and ye shall not die, but ye shall be as God, knowing good and evil.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And after Adam and Eve had partaken of the forbidden fruit they were driven out of the garden of Eden, to till the earth.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And they have brought forth children; yea, even the family of all the earth.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And the days of the children of men were prolonged, according to the will of God, that they might repent while in the flesh; wherefore, their state became a state of probation, and their time was lengthened, according to the commandments which the Lord gave unto the children of men. For he gave commandment that all men must repent; for he showed unto all men that they were lost, because of the transgression of their parents.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And now, behold, if Adam had not transgressed he would not have fallen, but he would have remained in the garden of Eden. And all things which were created must have remained in the same state in which they were after they were created; and they must have remained forever, and had no end.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And they would have had no children; wherefore they would have remained in a state of innocence, having no joy, for they knew no misery; doing no good, for they knew no sin.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11But behold, all things have been done in the wisdom of him who knoweth all things.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Adam fell that men might be; and men are, that they might have joy.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And the Messiah cometh in the fulness of time, that he may redeem the children of men from the fall. And because that they are redeemed from the fall they have become free forever, knowing good from evil; to act for themselves and not to be acted upon, save it be by the punishment of the law at the great and last day, according to the commandments which God hath given.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Wherefore, men are free according to the flesh; and all things are given them which are expedient unto man. And they are free to choose liberty and eternal life, through the great mediation of all men, or to choose captivity and death, according to the captivity and power of the devil; for he seeketh that all men might be miserable like unto himself. (2 Nephi 2:15-27.)

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11In addition to the above two passages, the reader is referred to another, which, measured by its sublimity and prophetic grandeur, is unsurpassed. It consists in what is known as the 121st and the 122nd Sections of the Doctrine and Covenants. In these literary passages, which should be read as one consecutive whole, a heavenly dialogue is conducted between God and man. The voice of the Prophet Joseph Smith, which represents the voice of all despairing men, is heard to ask the eternal question: "Why?" Why must the righteous stand by helplessly and watch the purposes of God be trampled and crushed by the evil machinations of conspiring men? The answers to this question, which come rolling in, like the eternal tide of truth upon that shore which marks the limits of man's understanding, are wonderful beyond the powers of human vocabulary to express. The three verses which conclude this remarkable heavenly discourse are set forth as follows:

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11And if thou shouldst be cast into the pit, or into the hands of murderers, and the sentence of death passed upon thee; if thou be cast into the deep; if the billowing surge conspire against thee; if fierce winds become thine enemy; if the heavens gather blackness, and all the elements combine to hedge up the way; and above all, if the very jaws of hell shall gape open the mouth wide after thee; know thou, My son, that all these things shall give thee experience, and shall be for thy good.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11The Son of Man hath descended below them all. Art thou greater than he?

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Therefore, hold on thy way, and the Priesthood shall remain with thee; for their bounds are set, they cannot pass. They days are known, and thy years shall not be numbered less; therefore, fear not what man can do, for God shall be with you forever and ever. (D. & C. 122:7-9.)

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Against the background of the above, and other comparable passages of scripture, we must try to understand the meaning of Verses 8-11 of the 14th Chapter of Alma. It is here strongly inferred that in some way, partially but not fully understood by man, suffering plays an indispensable role in the progress of the human soul through the valley of mortality. We must not conclude, because we pray for the alleviation of suffering, and yet suffer on, that our prayers have gone unheard. In such a posture, it is better to wrap about us more securely the reassuring garment of our faith, for it is precisely then that it can do us the most good.

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11These same verses teach us rather convincingly that the answering of our prayers and petitions to Almighty God must be made conditional upon His will. "If it be possible," said the Savior in Gethsemane, "let this cup pass from Me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou wilt." (Mat. 26:39) What right do we have to expect to fathom the inscrutable depths of the Divine Will, and to superimpose our petty desires upon His majestic purposes?

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Who can improve upon Isaiah's expression of the great truth implicit in the above question?: "My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord. For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts." (Isaiah 55:8-9)

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11Jacob, the brother of Nephi, gave further expression to this thought in the following unforgettable language: "O that cunning plan of the evil one! O the vainness, and the frailties, and the foolishness of men! When they are learned they think they are wise, and they hearken not unto the counsel of God, for they set it aside, supposing they know of themselves, wherefore, their wisdom is foolishness and it profiteth them not. And they shall perish." (2 Nephi 9:28)

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11In Verse 11 we are specifically told that in this instance, at least, the innocent women and children were required to suffer agony in order to provide a basis for the passing of a righteous judgment, and for inflicting righteous penalty, upon those who had so egregiously violated the universal laws of decency and human brotherhood. As terrible as was the plight of these wretched innocents, it must not be forgotten that their suffering lasted but for an instant. Immediately thereafter, they were received into their glory. (Verse 11) It is so human for mortals to place an exaggerated emphasis on the importance of "staying alive," and of escaping death at any cost. Were our perspective truer, we would realize that the matter of prolongation of mortal life is not nearly as important as other things which, through our mortal eyes, now seem unimportant. Our understanding of the lessons contained in verses 8-11 is greatly encircled by the following two passages:

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11"And fear not them which kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell." (Matt. 10:28)

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11"If thou wilt do good, yea, and hold out faithful to the end, thou shalt be saved in the Kingdom of God, which is the greatest of all the gifts of God; for there is no gift greater than the gift of Salvation." (D. & C. 6:13)

SCAlma 14 8Alma 14 9Alma 14 10Alma 14 11If we can catch a glimpse of the entire sweep and grandeur of God's purposes, the events recounted in Verse 8 should cause no undue disconsolation. Even in its most painful passages, the message of the Book of Mormon is always bright with hope to all who render themselves worthy to enjoy the same. Behind the pall of gloom occasioned by man's sinfulness, there radiates the splendor of God's mercy, His forgiveness, and His everlasting love.

SCAlma 14 12Alma 14 13Verses 12-13

SCAlma 14 12Alma 14 13... our work is not finished; therefore they burn us not. The Lord was safeguarding these two missionaries for their further work. Both Alma's and Amulek's missionary careers had many illustrious years ahead. Similarly Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, and countless other great ones of the Old and New Testaments were miraculously preserved. If it be true, as we are taught in Verse 8, that there are occasions when God does not intervene in the affairs of men, it is likewise true, as we are taught in Verse 13, that there are occasions when God does not intervene in the affairs of men. Too many men in life allow the pessimism of Verse 8 to overshadow the optimism of Verse 13. The one typifies life's disappointments; the other, life's promise. In neither one, considered separately, do we find the full portrayal of life's controlling realties.

SCAlma 14 14Alma 14 15Alma 14 16Alma 14 17Verses 14-17

SCAlma 14 14Alma 14 15Alma 14 16Alma 14 17And it came to pass that Alma and Amulek answered him nothing. One of the most difficult feats of self-subjugation is that of holding one's tongue when righteous judgment otherwise requires one to speak. To stand unmoved and mute while facing wicked accusations is the supreme test of self-control. Just as God had withheld the hand of Justice during the burning of the innocent women and children, (Verse 8) so He now constrained Alma to withhold his hand a little longer, in order that iniquity's cycle might run its full course.

SCAlma 14 14Alma 14 15Alma 14 16Alma 14 17It is out of the impact of evil upon good, like sledge upon anvil, that the qualities of saintliness are forged, and hammered into shape. Alma was being tried as have few of history's other saints, but the result of the impact of these frightful experiences upon this great man "were good."

Alma 14 18Verse 18 ..

Alma 14 18there came many lawyers, and judges, and priests, teachers, who were of the profession of Nehor. [^4] Here we see the professional hierarchy, performing in unholy combination. The Law and the Church had joined together their infamous hands to weave a steel net from which no dissenter could escape.

SCAlma 14 19Alma 14 20Alma 14 21Verses 19-21

SCAlma 14 19Alma 14 20Alma 14 21And many came forth, also, and smote them... It is easy to torment a man in his helplessness—easy to make a show of strength against the impotent. The persecution of the minority by the majority is a familiar pattern of behavior. The Ammonihahites would probably have killed their prisoners immediately, as they did the wives and children of their converts, but they wanted to make more sport of them. The reader will recall to mind that comparable episode related in the Book of Judges. "Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand. ... And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set him between the pillars." (Judges 16:23, 25)

Alma 14 23Alma 14 24Alma 14 25SCVerses 23-25

Alma 14 23Alma 14 24Alma 14 25SC... the power of God was upon Alma and Amulek ... This is the dramatic turning point in the story. The cup of Divine wrath was now overflowing, and spilling down the sides. Iniquity had run its evil course, and justice demanded retribution.

Alma 14 23Alma 14 24Alma 14 25SCFoul jails and prisons have furnished the stage-setting for many dramatic moments in sacred history: the Apostles released from prison by the power of an angel, (Acts 5:19) Paul imprisoned, converting his jailer, (Acts 16:30) and the Prophet Joseph Smith facing death in the Carthage Jail. (D. & C. 135:1)

Alma 14 26SCVerse 26

Alma 14 26... according to our faith which is in Christ ... Miracles accomplished by the power of Christ must be performed in the Name of Christ. "And these signs shall follow them that believe; In My name shall they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; ... they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." (Mark 16:17-18)

Alma 14 27Verse 27

Alma 14 27... and the earth shook mightily, and the walls of the prison were rent in twain... Every person in the prison, save those two righteous ones alone, was killed. The power of the Lord cannot be stayed, and his enemies shall be scattered. (Psalm 68:1) This truism constituted the inspiration for Lord Byron's celebrated poem "The Destruction of Sennacherib," which is based upon the events related in II Kings, chapters 18 and 19. It will be recalled that the Assyrian King, Sennacherib, had defied the God of Israel, for which impiety his vast army and glittering array were smitten to the dust. Byron's great poem ends with the following lines, whose spirit is strongly reminiscent of the events of which we speak in verse 27:

Alma 14 27And there lay the rider distorted and pale, With the dew on his brow, and the rust on his mail: And the tents were all silent, the banners alone, The lances unlifted, the trumpet unblown. And the widows of Ashur are loud in their wail, And the idols are broke in the temple of Baal; And the might of the Gentile, unsmote by the sword, Hath melted like snow in the glance of the Lord!

Alma 14 27Does this mean that the wicked are invariably punished by the hand of Divine Justice? Eventually, yes; immediately, not necessarily. No doubt there have been many wicked men in the world whose lives have been most generously prolonged, and whose storehouse and coffers have been filled with the good things of the world until the day of their death. Health, fame, and fortune seem to have been theirs throughout mortality. Are such examples inconsistent with the demands of Heavenly Justice? Not necessarily. There is nothing in sacred writ to suggest that retribution must be immediate. In this regard, only one thing do we know: eventually we shall be held accountable for our every act and thought, because the judgments of God are inexorable. (See John 5:28-29, and Revelation 20:12-15)

Alma 14 29Verse 29

Alma 14 29... and thus did they flee from the presence of Alma and Amulek. Panic had now set in. Paralyzing fright replaced bravado. The divine forces of destruction, now fully unleashed, were to reach their frightful climax in the events related in Verse 9 of Chapter 16.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See also Alma 14:6
[^2] Compare Mosiah 27:24-29
[^3] Acts 3:6
[^4] D. & C. 84:68
