Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 16

Alma 16 1Verse 1

Alma 16 1... there having been no wars nor contentions for a certain number of years. ... The war which preceded this one had been fought in the fifth year of the reign of the judges, (Alma 3:25) which meant that the Nephites had enjoyed some six years of tranquility. This period of respite was not long, but for a people who had often felt the heavy hand of war, six years of peace were worthy of particular mention.

Alma 16 2Verse 2

Alma 16 2... even into the city of Ammonihah ... From what we can discern of the geography of this region, Ammonihah must have been removed from the center of population, and, being thus located on the country's outer fringe, would of necessity have been the first city attacked by the invading hordes. (See Alma 8:6)

Alma 16 3Verse 3

Alma 16 3... they had destroyed the people who were in the city of Ammonihah ... Years of wickedness had rendered them effete and unprepared, for apparently they could not find the strength to put up even token opposition. Divine retribution had now struck, and with the sudden devastation of a mighty earthquake. (See commentary on Alma 16:9-11.)

Alma 16 5Verse 5

Alma 16 5... (and his name was Zoram, and he had two sons, Lehi and Aha) ... We are told nothing about Zoram except that he had been appointed to the position of chief captain. Today, he would be designated "commanding general." We may safely infer that he was a righteous man because of his willingness to recognize, and to hearken to, Alma's prophetic counsel. It is not often that a man who has been reared in the traditions of rugged army discipline will subordinate his judgment, on military matters, to that of an ecclesiastical official. The fact that he did, furnishes ample evidence of Zoram's greatness. This Zoram is mentioned only twice in the entire Book of Mormon, (verses 5 and 7) and is not to be confused with Zoram, the servant of Laban, (I Nephi 4:35) nor with Zoram the Nephite apostate who founded the sect of the Zoramites. (Alma 30:59)

Alma 16 5Aha is not mentioned elsewhere in the Book of Mormon. If the man Lehi here mentioned is the same as the Lehi mentioned in connection with those military exploits whose account commences at Alma 43:35, and extends intermittently throughout the remainder of the Book of Alma, and into the Book of Helaman, (Helaman 1:28) then his record shows him to be one of the great Nephite military commanders of his time. If the two men are not identical, then the Lehi here mentioned disappears completely from our story, as does his brother, following this brief reference.

Verse 5

Alma 16 5... knowing that Alma was high priest ... There are many other references to Alma's, and his father's having held this exalted position in the Nephite Christian Church. (See Mosiah 23:16; Mosiah 29:42; Alma 4:4, 18, 20; Alma 5:3, 44, 49; Alma 6:8; Alma 8:11, 23; Alma 13:1-20; Alma 30:21, 22, 23, 29; Alma 43:2; Alma 46:6, 38; Alma 49:30; Helaman 3:25.)

Alma 16 5It will be remembered, in addition, that Alma had held the position of Chief Judge, and as such, had also held, ex officio, the position of commander-in-chief of the Nephite armies in the field. (Alma 2:16) Later he had resigned from all nonecclesiastical positions (Alma 4:18) in order that he might more unreservedly devote himself to the work of the ministry.

SCAlma 16 4Alma 16 5Alma 16 6Alma 16 7Alma 16 8Verses 4-8

SCAlma 16 4Alma 16 5Alma 16 6Alma 16 7Alma 16 8... and the Lamanites were scattered, and driven into the wilderness ... (verse 8) The story of this brief but decisive military rescue operation is so clearly told that further explanation could add nothing. It is not often that the Lord directly intervenes in military operations. There have been occasions in sacred history, however, where he has chosen so to do. Among the most interesting of such, in the Old Testament, are the capture of Jericho, (Joshua 6) and the overpowering of the Midianites by the brave Gideon and his select warriors. (Judges 7)

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11Verses 9-11

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11... and the carcasses were mangled by dogs and wild beasts of the wilderness (Verse 10) These brief verses tell the grisly story of the end of this great city. So it had been prophesied, (Alma 9:10) and so it now had come to pass. The rotten stench of death was everywhere. The laughter of the little children, the hubbub of the market place, and the endless tramping of human feet—all these familiar sounds were now replaced by brooding silence, broken only by the cries of prowling scavengers.

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11Even to contemplate such horror sets into motion deep within the searching mind a train of unavoidable questions, such as: Why do death and desolation constitute a necessary part of God's great plan? What forces caused this miserable ending to the story of this wretched city? What crimes and sins had been committed by these people to bring upon their heads this sudden desolation?

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11As in all other affairs of life, the causes were multiple, and intertwined; and the Book of Mormon itself does not leave us without clues as to what they were. The Ammonihahites had become a "hard-hearted and a stiff-necked people." (Alma 9:5) They had become cruel and sadistic, as evidenced by the orgiastic exhibition of human depravity depicted in Alma 14:8. They had condoned and nurtured a corrupt judiciary, which thrived on the unethical practice of stirring up unwarranted litigation. (Alma 11:20) Every word picture of these people depicted in the text, shows them to have been wallowing in the last stages of corruption. The most spiritually contaminating feature of their entire religious philosophy was the precept that everyone would be saved, and that there was therefore no need for individual repentance. This had been the teaching of the man Nehor, (Alma 1:4) and Nehor, we are told, had sired their evil doctrines. (Alma 16:11) [^1] As a result of all this "Satan had gotten great hold upon the hearts of the people of the city of Ammonihah; therefore they would not hearken unto the words of Alma." (Alma 8:9)

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11Conceding, therefore, as we must, that these people had retrograded faster and farther, along the downward path to spiritual destruction than have almost any other people in recorded history, one still might find it profitable to ponder for a moment the question as to why they were destroyed. Have not other wicked cities been spared, one might ask? Did not the Savior, moreover, declare that men should forgive seventy times seven? (Matt. 18:22) Did He not say: "... They that are whole need not a physician; but they that are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance"? (Luke 5:31, 32)

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11Moreover, one asks, why were the babes and children killed? Surely they weren't tainted with the sins committed by their parents, for, as the Book of Mormon itself declares: "... I am filled with charity, which is everlasting love; wherefore, all children are alike unto me; wherefore, I love little children with a perfect love; and they are all alike and partakers of salvation." (Moroni 8:17)

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11These forthright questions are, perhaps, unfathomable. In searching for their answers, one can never overlook the fact that the greatest intellectual impertinence man is capable of committing is the imputation of finite motives to an infinite Creator. Realizing, as we do, the limitations of the human mind, which in this life will never have capacity to grasp the total breadth and sweep of Heaven's purposes, a thought or two might nonetheless be offered, in an effort to cast a ray of light upon these seemingly insoluble questions.

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11In the Doctrine and Covenants we read the following verse: "I, the Lord, will forgive whom I will forgive, but of you it is required to forgive all men." (D. & C. 64:10)

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11Apparently there are some situations in which Divine judgment and punishment must be summarily rendered. Presumably this is for the reason that since men do not act in a vacuum, their evil acts usually prove injurious to others as well as to themselves. There have been numerous instances, therefore, when God has visited destruction on the heads of wicked kings and rulers, armies, cities, and entire nations, for He no longer could permit their sinfulness to thwart fruition of His plans. Listen, again, to the lamentation of the Savior over the impending destruction of Jerusalem, which was to result from the Jews' willful rejection of their King, and their persecution of the citizens of His Kingdom: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate." (Matt. 23:37, 38)

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11History records that in the year 70 A.D. the Savior's predicted desolation became a reality in the awful destruction of the Great City by the conquering sword and battering-rams of Roman legions. The story of this destruction, and of the hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of its inhabitants who were massacred, or sold into slavery, or who starved to death, is an event whose historicity is undisputed. That this destruction came upon the Jews as an expression of God's disapproval, seems, according to able Bible scholars, to be strongly suggested by the Gospel writer Matthew, as well as others.

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11In the case of the Ammonihabites, the question as to why God did not see fit to grant them longer time in which to repent is not for mortal minds to resolve. By way of conjecture, however, it may be said that if a people ever attain such a degree extreme wickedness that the continuation of their life would bring more tragedy upon themselves and their posterity than would its termination, then it is not meet that their earthly life should be continued. Manifestly, there are many things in life which are worse than death. (Luke 12:4, 5)

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11Consideration must be further given to the fact that all human beings are participants in a great partnership with their Creator, in which they share the privileges of bringing souls into the world. There may come a time, however, when parents-to-be descend so low that to be born of them is no longer counted a blessing. Such parents may well find that they have forfeited their right to parenthood, and that their sacred partnership with Heaven must be forthwith dissolved. Carrying the conjecture one step further, one may conclude that such was the condition of the Ammonihahites. It is true that many other wicked cities in the world's history have been spared, or at least have managed to escape such frightful and dramatic death. One fact which weighed particularly heavy against the Ammonihahites, however, and which distinguished them from most of the exceedingly wicked cities of the world, was that they had once enjoyed such wealth of knowledge and of light, and that they had subsequently sinned against that light. (Alma 9:19) This consideration may well have tipped the scales of Divine retribution against them.

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11What about the babes and infants, one might inquire? Why were they punished? Wherein was manifest in their destruction the mercy constituting one of God's essential attributes?

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11Primarily it must be emphasized that, indisputably, God will not impute the sins of parents to their offspring. Children are pure, and are saved by the blood of Jesus Christ, without the necessity of baptism. (Moroni 8:18-22)

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11From that fact, however, it does not follow that children do not suffer from the iniquities of their parents. That they do so cannot be seriously denied by anyone who has given even casual observation to the human pageant passing in review.

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11It is the great and beautiful mystery of life that the members of the human race which constitute our Father's children should be so marvelously joined together by bonds of mutual interdependence. From their parents, children receive such blessings, on the one hand, as the bodies which are theirs, and all their early love and training, their education, their mental conditioning and prejudices, their culture, and their faith. Parents receive such blessings from their children as affection and emotional security, and even, to use the expressive French term, a raison d'Ãªe. Moreover, under certain circumstances, parents are dependent upon their offspring for the blessings of such genealogical and temple work as may be necessary for their exaltation.

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11But blessings and sorrows are but two edges of the same sword, and enjoying the former presupposes the possibility of suffering the latter. Parents and children cannot benefit from each other's blessings, and rejoice vicariously in their happiness, without also suffering from their wrongs, and grieving vicariously in their sorrows. To accept the interdependence of the human race as an undeniable fact, is to acknowledge the necessity for vicarious suffering; and to repudiate the principle of vicarious suffering, is to disacknowledge man's interdependence, and therefore the fact of his universal brotherhood.

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11It is undeniably true, therefore, that the Lord visits "the iniquity of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generation." (Numbers 14:18) Nothing in this statement is meant to imply that God holds children morally culpable for their progenitors' delinquency, for we are expressly told that "men will be punished for their own sins ..." (2nd Article of Faith) All that is meant by the above statement in Numbers is that living is suffering, and that this suffering is sometimes inflicted by our own parents, even though they love us most.

SCAlma 16 9Alma 16 10Alma 16 11If, among the Ammonihahites, it so happened that there was a certain number who, in spite of purest innocence, were called upon to taste the pain unleashed by wicked men, then of them it may be said that God "... receiveth them up unto himself, in glory ..." (Alma 14:11), and that their agony will eventually be indemnified in full measure according to the laws of Heaven's justice. To them it may be said, as it was said to the Prophet Joseph Smith, in the midst of his affliction: "My son, peace be unto thy soul; thine adversity and thine afflictions shall be but a small moment; and then, if thou endure it well, God shalt exalt thee on high; thou shalt triumph over all thy foes." (D. & C. 121:7, 8)

Alma 16 13Verse 13

Alma 16 13... temples, and in their sanctuaries, and also in their synagogues ... The words "temple" and "temples" are mentioned thirty-nine times in the Book of Mormon, the first of which reference occurs in 2 Nephi 5:16: "And I, Nephi, did build a temple; and I did construct it after the manner of the temple of Solomon save it were not built of so many precious things; for they were not to be found upon the land, wherefore, it could not be built like unto Solomon's temple. But the manner of the construction was like unto the temple of Solomon; and the workmanship thereof was exceeding fine."

Alma 16 13Subsequent references to temples among the Nephites indicate that they were used for purposes of worship, and as a place for making official ecclesiastical pronouncements. Their precincts were vested with a particular sanctity which made them stand apart from other places of worship. To what extent the Nephite temples were used for sacred ordinance work comparable to that performed in modern temples of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, we are not informed.

Alma 16 13Synagogues and sanctuaries are also mentioned with some frequency in the Book of Mormon. Whether these two words are intended to be more or less synonymous, or whether they refer to two essentially different structures, is not specifically stated. The inference is rather clear, however, that there were essential differences. The text is careful to point out that the Nephite synagogues were patterned after their Jewish prototype, with which the Nephites were familiar.

Alma 16 14Verse 14

Alma 16 14...unto them they did impart the word of God... Missionary zeal has always been associated with acceptance of the true Gospel of Jesus Christ. Although not all major religious organizations in the world have practised universal proselytism, it is difficult for true Christians to understand why any Church professing to have the truth should not be everlastingly engaged in active missionary work. No thinking person could question the fact that nothing worth-while is really enjoyed until it is shared.

Alma 16 14The last words which the Savior pronounced at the close of his mortal ministry consisted in admonition to carry the Gospel message forth to all the world.

Alma 16 14"Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and, lo, I am with with you alway, even unto the end of the world. Amen." (Matt. 28:19-20) [^2]

Alma 16 15Verse 15

Alma 16 15And the establishment of the church became general throughout the land. ... This was a Christian Church in the true sense of the word, inasmuch as it was founded upon a correct understanding of the redeeming mission of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, and was founded under direction from on High, and by the power of the Priesthood. The name "Christian," as applicable to the Nephite Church during the so-called pre-Christian era, is mentioned four times in the Book of Mormon.

Alma 16 16Verse 16

Alma 16 16And there was no inequality among them... Equality in temporal things has always been a characteristic of God's Kingdom. Relative to the economic equality of the Nephite Saints following the personal visitation of the Savior, we read: "And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift." (4 Nephi 1:3) In the Book of Acts a similar reference is made to the equality of the early Christians on the Eastern Hemisphere: "And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that aught of the things which he possessed was his own; but they had all things common." (Acts 4:32)

Alma 16 16Finally, in the Doctrine and Covenants we find expressed the will of the Lord to His modern-day Saints, which is in the same vein as that given to them of ancient times: "Nevertheless, in your temporal things you shall be equal, and this not grudgingly, otherwise the abundance of the manifestations of the Spirit shall be withheld." (D. & C. 70:14) And again, we read: "For if ye are not equal in earthly things ye cannot be equal in obtaining heavenly things. ..." (D. & C. 78:6)

Alma 16 17Verse 17

Alma 16 17... and as a branch be grafted into the true vine ... Of the many analogies and parallelisms which make their appearance in the Scriptures, perhaps none is more frequent than that of the tree or vine, which represents Christ, or the Church, or the source of all truth and authority. Thus in John 15:1-4 we read:

Alma 16 17"I am the true vine, and My Father is the Husbandman. Every branch in Me that beareth not fruit He taketh away; and every branch that beareth fruit, He purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruit. Now ye are clean through the word which I have spoken unto you. Abide in Me, and I in you. As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in Me."

Alma 16 17Probably the most elaborate and extended analogy developed anywhere in the Scriptures is that of the olive tree, as expounded in Chapters 5 and 6 of the Book of Jacob.

SCAlma 16 18Alma 16 19Alma 16 20Alma 16 21Verses 18-21

SCAlma 16 18Alma 16 19Alma 16 20Alma 16 21... and this the people did hear with great joy and gladness. (Verse 20) These verses describe what might be characterized as a little oasis of pure, righteous joy, in the midst of the arid desert of surrounding tribulation. If there is one message which the Book of Mormon brings out more than any other it is the message that "wickedness never was happiness," (Alma 41:10) or, as Lehi expressed it: "And if there be no righteousness, there be no happiness." (2 Nephi 2:13) Where the Saints of God obey His commandments, then the inexorable law of Heaven decrees that they shall be partakers of heavenly joy. In these four verses (compare 4 Nephi 1:16) we are given a foretaste of Heaven. There is no reason for the cynic to declare that "it doesn't make any difference what you do." Here is positive proof that it does make a difference. These good people, in one of those rare moments in the Earth's history, managed to get together, and unite their individual acts of goodness into one monumental righteous effort. As a result, God made good his promises. (D. & C. 82:10) The windows of heaven were opened, and blessings were poured out, that there was not even room enough to receive them. (Malachi 3-10) For that brief moment in history, the Nephites were supremely happy.

ZORAM

Zoram was a righteous, God-fearing Nephite General in the days of the Judges. He was appointed Chief Captain of the Nephite Armies at the time of the Lamanite capture of Ammonihah (81 B.C.) Knowing that Alma, the younger, the High Priest, had the spirit of revelation, he and his sons, Lehi and Aha, went and inquired the mind and will of the Lord as to the direction the Nephite forces should take in their endeavor to rescue the prisoners captured by the invaders. Alma inquired of the Lord and received an answer that the Lamanites would cross the River Sidon in the south wilderness beyond the Borders of Manti. Alma then told Zoram, "There shall ye meet them, on the east of the River Sidon, and there will the Lord deliver unto thee thy brethren who have been taken captive by the Lamanites."

Following these instructions, Zoram and his sons led the Nephite Armies across the Sidon and marched into the south wilderness on the east side of that river. There they came upon the enemy, scattered them and drove them farther into the wilderness. They also rescued all the Nephite prisoners and restored them to their own lands. We read nothing more of Zoram after this campaign.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] See Commentary on Alma 15:15.
[^2] Compare: Mark 16:15-20; Acts 1:8
