Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 17

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4Verses 1-4

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4Alma meets the sons of Mosiah. As Alma, apparently in the performance of his duties as the Presiding High Priest of God's Church, journeyed southward from the Land of Gideon, where he had been preaching the Gospel of Christ, to the Land of Manti, the most southernly of all the Nephite Lands, he was astonished to meet the sons of King Mosiah II returning from the Land of Nephi where they had been preaching to the Lamanites the wonderful Ways of the Lord.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4The meeting of Alma and Mosiah's sons brought to each one of them recollections of those never-to-be-forgotten days when as youths they joined a group that went about persecuting the Saints in and around Zarahemla. Those memories stirred up within Alma the highest joys and the greatest satisfaction when he realized that the work his erstwhile companions had done in the mission field was well done.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4Alma contrasted the follies of their youth with the wisdom that comes throughout the years. He remembered his own weaknesses and faults. Thoughts of the time when he, accompanied by them, journeyed forth from place to place bent upon grievously annoying the members of God's Church, and to destroy, they thought, the Work of the Lord. He also remembered how little they had cared for the pleadings of their fathers—their father who was king and his own who was the Presiding High Priest. He thought of the day when they went on their way fomenting troubles in which they took delight, and of the angel from Heaven which stood in their way, and stopped their blasphemous gaiety with a voice of thunder, the reverberations of which shook the solid earth beneath their feet. Alma remembered the rebuke of the angel and it filled his soul with sorrow, sorrow because of his misdeeds, yet thanksgiving and joy because the Lord had interceded to stop their wilful behavior. He thought of how he had fallen to the ground, unable to speak or to move. He had wished that he was dead, and therein become extinct. So terrible were the holy promptings of the angel, and so exquisite were the pains they brought, that Alma languished, it seemed in hell, for three days. The prayers of his father and the combined faith of the Saints restored Alma to his proper health and strength, and he arose from his bed of affliction praising God and thanking Him for His mercy in saving him from a justly deserved, though ignominious end.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4Alma remembered, too, that it was Mosiah's sons who tenderly carried him to his father and explained to him just what had happened. He remembered hearing about how his father humbly rejoiced at the condition of his greatly beloved son, and how he declared it to be the power of God acting in answer to his prayers. These same men now stood gloriously before him. They had experienced a change within their hearts, therefore there was a change without. They sought no more to hinder the Lord's Work nor His righteousness, but His Kingdom upon the earth was their sole desire. Ever since the angel's visit they had courageously sought to atone for the wrongs they had done.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4Alma, in retrospect, saw these same men as they were then, and as he saw them now. O what a gap between them! What they once loved they now despise, and what they were once indifferent to had now become the thing for which they most greatly strived. To bring Salvation in the Kingdom of God to the benighted Lamanites was the goal to which they trod, and the satisfaction of which was their highest ideal. Alma's thoughts of them were many and his conclusions bold: they would not rest from their labors, nor slacken their zeal, until the last effort of human wickedness was subdued; they would follow the path of duty and loyalty to its end, even though it cost all they held dear. In the resolve they made they would neither flinch nor fear any onslaught of evil because they knew the Lord was with them.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4The names of Mosiah's sons were, beginning at the eldest: Aaron, Ammon, Omner, and Himni. The four had other companions who had gone on the mission with them, and whom they had chosen because of their faith in Christ and their devotion to His cause. When the brothers first decided upon their noble, but perilous venture to convert the Lamanites they had sought help from Above, and companions equal to the task were given to them. The names of two of these missionary co-laborers were Muloki and Ammah. If there were others, the Sacred Record gives no account of them, and it is only by incidental mention of Muloki and Ammah that we have any recital at all of their work. It is only in the account of the mission of Mosiah's sons that mention is made of them in the Book of Mormon.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4The meeting of Alma and Mosiah's sons was unarranged and totally unexpected by them. However, it added joy to their satisfaction that they had accomplished much in their labors among the Lamanites. It appears to have been the crowning event of their missions. For them to meet the Presiding High Priest of the whole Church as they were returning from the Land of Nephi to their homes in Zarahemla, was in itself a benediction, sanctifying unto the Lord all those things, which with his help divine they had been able to accomplish. Alma blessed each one of them and pronounced as crowns upon their heads their joys and their sorrows, their long hours in dungeons for the Gospel's sake, their successes and failures, but above all he sealed upon them the Gift of Eternal Life in God's Kingdom, for had they not, to the honor and glory of God, led many through its gates?

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4Alma saw that the companions of his youth had become men of great understanding. By much prayer and fasting they had gained the spirit of prophecy and of revelation; by their diligence in seeking the Lord they had grown in His grace and in the knowledge of Him who created all things; they had received the Gift of Discernment that they now could discern right from wrong, and had power to choose good or evil. They also knew that which was just and true.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4Alma rejoiced with them in the great measure of success their venture had produced. He listened to them while they rehearsed before him the wonderful events that surrounded every effort which they had made to dispel the darkness that enshrouded those to whom the "Lamp of Truth" had been denied. They had "by the power of their words" brought many to a knowledge of God.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4Truly, Alma saw that the pains the missionaries had endured, their imprisonments, their rewards and pleasures, were not merely what he might have called "the accidents of man" but instead, were the inspirations of God; he perceived, as he silently thanked The Great Giver of All Good that the incidents of their fourteen year exile were not just chance, but were the leadings and the guidings of Him whose servants they had chosen to be.

SCAlma 17 1Alma 17 2Alma 17 3Alma 17 4In considering their long service among God's children who had lost their way, they remembered the words of their grandfather, King Benjamin, which were written upon the Plates of Nephi, "... when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:17)

Alma 17 5Verse 5

Alma 17 5These are the circumstances which attended them in their journeyings. Notwithstanding their high purpose in serving the Lord by taking the Gospel Message to the untutored and savage Lamanites, He, through His wise and timely judgment permitted the missionaries to undergo a period, as it were, of divine preparation. We often think that He has forgotten us, or is unmindful of our tasks when He, in His greater understanding, allows us to be almost overwhelmed by the storms of life. But, He has not, nor is He! The hardships and the tribulations through which they passed in their journey to the Lands of the Lamanites served but to prepare them for greater trials which were to follow. Their trials seemed to multiply in their way; their minds as well as their bodies suffered from the effects of hunger, thirst, and fatigue; they pondered in the spirit whether to continue on or return to lives of plenty which awaited them in their father's house in Zarahemla. At times they thought their resolve seemed rash. However, they pressed forward.

SCAlma 17 6Alma 17 7Verses 6-7

SCAlma 17 6Alma 17 7Now these were their journeyings. The missionaries began their journey into the southern wilderness during the last year of King Mosiah's reign, or 91 B.C. They took along with them their bows and arrows and other instruments of destruction, not to force their way into the Lamanitish stronghold, but that they might obtain food while in the wilderness.

SCAlma 17 8Alma 17 9Alma 17 10Alma 17 11Alma 17 12Verses 8-12

SCAlma 17 8Alma 17 9Alma 17 10Alma 17 11Alma 17 12The Lord did visit them, and said unto them, "Be comforted." And they were comforted. Their journey to the Land of Nephi where the head ruler of the Lamanites had his headquarters was a tedious one. They wandered for many days in the trackless wilderness; they evidently lost their way, and almost lost heart. Time and time again their burdens bore heavily upon their spirits. But they continued steadfastly in prayer, and with fastings they sought the help of the Lord. In all their sufferings the assurance never abandoned them that "they were only in the service of their God." Their prayers were not that they be delivered from harm, or from trial and tribulation, but for strength equal to their allotted tasks. To this end they sought His Spirit to sustain them when their cares and loads seemed more than they could carry. But the thing that was greatest in their minds, in spite of affliction, and the thing which they made most the burden of their supplications, was that they might be "instruments in the hands of God to bring, if it were possible, their brethren, the Lamanites, to the knowledge of the truth, to the knowledge of the baseness of the traditions of their fathers, which were not correct."

SCAlma 17 8Alma 17 9Alma 17 10Alma 17 11Alma 17 12The Lord answered their prayers, and abode with them by His Spirit. He comforted them with the assurance of ultimate success in their heartfelt desire to extend His Kingdom among the Lamanites, who then were "a wild and a hardened and a ferocious people." (V. 14)

SCAlma 17 8Alma 17 9Alma 17 10Alma 17 11Alma 17 12But the Lord, who made the desire of the missionaries His command, cautioned them against high-mindedness. That the Lord was their ever-present companion should do nought but humble them. That by their lives they should prove to the Lamanites the strength of their belief in the truths they would proclaim. That they should be patient and long-suffering under trial, showing thereby that the Lord whom they served was in very deed the Father of all men. That to serve His children offers life's greatest compensation and its purest happiness, for in serving them the laborer renders a sacrifice of love which in the end is a service rendered unto their very Father. In enumerating the blessings He pronounced upon their heads, the Lord gave the missionaries grace that with wisdom they would fulfill their duties, and promised Mosiah's sons and their companions that "I will make an instrument of thee in My hands unto the Salvation of many souls." (V. 11)

SCAlma 17 8Alma 17 9Alma 17 10Alma 17 11Alma 17 12Urged on by the assurance of the Lord, and earnestly relying upon His goodness, the missionaries continued their wanderings, and before long reached the end of their protracted journey, the Land of Nephi, where the main body of the Lamanites dwelt.

SCAlma 17 8Alma 17 9Alma 17 10Alma 17 11Alma 17 12Upon reaching the land where they prayed their hopes would be fulfilled, we may well believe that the words of a Jewish prayer expresses the thoughts that filled the missionaries' hearts:

SCAlma 17 8Alma 17 9Alma 17 10Alma 17 11Alma 17 12Look with compassion upon Thy children and grant us strength of love and purity of purpose that we may live together in unity and work together in peace and concord, so that the well-being of all may be promoted, and Thy name, O God, be glorified in all the earth. Amen. (Union Prayer Book.)

SCAlma 17 13Alma 17 14Alma 17 15Alma 17 16Alma 17 17Verses 13-17

SCAlma 17 13Alma 17 14Alma 17 15Alma 17 16Alma 17 17When they had arrived at the borders of the Lamanites, they separated themselves and departed one from another. The missionaries had no sooner reached the territory occupied by the Lamanites than they began to plan their future labors.

SCAlma 17 13Alma 17 14Alma 17 15Alma 17 16Alma 17 17Commending themselves to God, and trusting in His wisdom, they separated into groups and departed for their different fields of labor, all the time beseeching the Lord to guide them to the place where they could accomplish the purposes of Heaven. The weight of their calling rested heavily upon the missionaries, for the Spirit continually whispered into their ears that the work they had undertaken was indeed great. Therefore they approached it with prayerful hearts, and thereupon resolved that all success with which they should meet would thereafter be attributed to God, whose servants they were.

SCAlma 17 13Alma 17 14Alma 17 15Alma 17 16Alma 17 17Mosiah's sons, brought up in a home of plenty and therein protected from the assaults of the wicked, nevertheless were not ignorant of the hatred the Lamanites had for the Nephites. They knew that the Lamanites were a "wild and a hardened and a ferocious people"; that they took delight in murdering and plundering the Nephites whenever fancy took a notion, and that because silver and gold and other precious goods had become the things for which they sought, the Lamanites, not caring how they obtained them, often instead of working for them committed the worst of sins.

SCAlma 17 13Alma 17 14Alma 17 15Alma 17 16Alma 17 17The Lamanites, throughout many generations of indolence and its many evil ways, had grown further and further away from the worship of the True and Living God whom their first fathers had known in ancient Jerusalem. Some of them even worshipped idols, and because of their wickedness and loathsomeness God had cursed them with a dark skin to make them undesirable as helpmeets for the Nephite men and women. However, the Kingdom of God was not beyond the reach of the Lamanites if they repented of their evil ways. Salvation was for all God's children. It was for this reason that the missionaries risked their lives and all the worldly things they held dear to declare to the darkened Lamanites the love of God and the many precious gifts that awaited them if only they would forsake the traditions of their fathers, and return to God who giveth to all men liberally.

SCAlma 17 13Alma 17 14Alma 17 15Alma 17 16Alma 17 17Therefore as we have noted the missionaries separated one from another, and went forth among the Lamanites, each of Mosiah's sons alone, listening we may be sure, to the whisperings of that still small voice which cometh from the Father to lead, and to guide, and to warn of things to come.

SCAlma 17 18Alma 17 19Alma 17 20Alma 17 21Verses 18-21

SCAlma 17 18Alma 17 19Alma 17 20Alma 17 21And thus they took their several journeys throughout the land. The missionaries were presided over by Ammon, who was the second son of King Mosiah, Aaron was the first. It appears that Ammon held the highest office in the Priesthood, but of this we are not sure. However, under his guidance the several rites of the Church were administered unto his fellow co-laborers. After blessing each one of them he departed and went to the Land of Ishmael. The Land of Ishmael was named after the sons of Ishmael, which Ishmael was the father of Laman's and Lemuel's wives, and who accompanied Lehi in his exodus from Jerusalem 500 years previously. Lehi's sons, Laman and Lemuel, together with Ishmael's sons and daughters, were the progenitors of those whom we call original Lamanites. Since that time many Nephite apostates went over to, and became Lamanites. Also, Lamanites who accepted the Gospel thereafter were numbered as Nephites. The sons of Ishmael followed Laman and Lemuel when Lehi's family separated into two groups.

SCAlma 17 18Alma 17 19Alma 17 20Alma 17 21In the Land of Ishmael, Lamoni was the chief ruler under his father who was the king of all the Lamanites. Ammon was no sooner discovered among them than he was taken, bound with cords, and conducted into the presence of Lamoni. It was the custom of the Lamanites so to use every Nephite whom they captured, and it rested with the whim of the king whether the captive should be slain, imprisoned, or sent out of the country. The king's will and pleasure appear to have been the only law on such matters.

SCAlma 17 22Alma 17 23Alma 17 24Alma 17 25Verses 22-25

SCAlma 17 22Alma 17 23Alma 17 24Alma 17 25King Lamoni was much pleased with Ammon. Through God's grace Ammon found favor in the eyes of Lamoni, and learning from Ammon that it was his desire to reside among the Lamanites, the king offered him one of his daughters to be his wife. Ammon courteously declined this intended honor and begged to be accepted as one of the king's servants, which arrangement pleased Lamoni, and Ammon was placed in that part of the royal household that had charge of the monarch's flocks and herds. Lamoni was rich in livestock, probably the result of taxes which he burdened his people with, but even the king's property was not secure from theft. Marauding bands of thieves and robbers would watch for his numerous cattle as they were approaching their watering places. Then with a yell and other prolonged shouts they would stampede the herds and then drive away all they could, beyond the reach of the king's servants. The servants would gather up what few animals, if any, they found and return to the king in the full expectancy of being made to pay with their lives for the loss of his flocks and herds. They were seldom disappointed, for Lamoni or some of his predecessors had established a somewhat unique criminal code with regard to stealing the royal cattle. They had adopted the idea that it was easier and cheaper to make the herdsmen responsible for the losses and punish them, therefore, than to hunt out and capture the thieves. It had at least one virtue, it prevented collusion between the servants, but it produced much dissatisfaction among Lamoni's subjects.

SCAlma 17 26Alma 17 27Alma 17 28Alma 17 29Alma 17 30Alma 17 31Alma 17 32Alma 17 33Alma 17 34Alma 17 35Alma 17 36Alma 17 37Alma 17 38Alma 17 39Verses 26-39

SCAlma 17 26Alma 17 27Alma 17 28Alma 17 29Alma 17 30Alma 17 31Alma 17 32Alma 17 33Alma 17 34Alma 17 35Alma 17 36Alma 17 37Alma 17 38Alma 17 39After Ammon had been in the king's service for three days. On the third day of Ammon's service, one of these raids was made upon the king's cattle as they were being taken to the Waters of Sebus, the common watering place. The cattle fled in all directions, and the dispirited servants, with the fear of death before them, sat down and wept instead of attempting to stay them. Ammon perceived that this was his opportunity. He first reasoned with the servants, then he encouraged them, and having sufficiently aroused their feelings, he led them in an attempt to head off the fleeing herds. With much exertion they succeeded. The cattle were all gathered in one place, but the robbers still waited at the watering place to renew the attack when they drew near enough. Ammon perceiving this, placed the servants at advantageous points on the outside of the flocks and he, himself, went forward to contend with the robbers. Though they were many, Ammon knew that he was more powerful than all of them because God was with him. The idea of one man withstanding so many was supremely ridiculous to the robbers. But as one after another fell before his unerring aim they were astonished and dreaded him as something more than human. Enraged at the loss of six of their number they rushed upon him in a body determined to crush him with their clubs. Ammon, undaunted, drew his sword and awaited the onslaught. Their leader fell dead at his feet, and as one, then another, raised their clubs Ammon struck off their arms until none dared to approach him, but instead retreated afar-off.

SCAlma 17 26Alma 17 27Alma 17 28Alma 17 29Alma 17 30Alma 17 31Alma 17 32Alma 17 33Alma 17 34Alma 17 35Alma 17 36Alma 17 37Alma 17 38Alma 17 39It was a strange procession that returned to the palace of the king. The fears of the herdsmen had been turned to joy, and they marched in triumph into his presence. They carried the arms of the robbers with them as testimonials of the truth of their story, and also of Ammon's prowess. Doubtless, they did not diminish the telling points in the narrative; the numbers of the band, and the courage and strength of the Nephite were each dilated upon with the vividness which their superstitious minds invented.

NOTES

Alma 17 36Verse 36

Alma 17 36Cast stones at them with his sling. The sling was formerly a favorite weapon of the Hebrews. Even the shepherds became experts in the use of it. (1 Samuel 17:40, 49, 50) Ammon seems to have inherited their skill from his ancestors.

Alma 17 36The Lamanites of later times are known to have been using the sling in an improved form, with great effect. They had some form of catapult at the beginning of the 11th Century, when the Icelanders explored the coasts of America (Markland and Vinland). It appears that Karlsefni and his companions at one time were attacked by a large number of Lamanites (Skraellinger, they called them, a word meaning weaklings, or poor trash.) They came in boats. On the end of a pole they raised a big ball resembling a sheep's paunch. This ball was swung from a pole over the heads of the supposed enemy, and it fell with a horried noise. It also appears that the Indians in this same manner protected an attacking force by a barrage of stones thrown by this kind of weapon. The Icelanders report their own landing party retreated, bewildered, toward higher ground where they rallied and met the attackers.

Alma 17 36Schoolcraft corroborates both the Book of Morman and the Icelandic saga regarding the sling. He says the Algonquins in New England and other places made use of a big ball, which he calls bilista, but which the Indians, themselves, call the demon's head. It was a large, round boulder, sewed up in a sack of skin which was daubed with grotesque devices in various colors. Plunged upon a boat or canoe it was capable of sinking it. Brought down upon a group of men on a sudden, it produced consternation and death. (Schoolcraft, Archives of Aboriginal Knowledge, Philadelphia 1860, Vol. I, p. 89)

Alma 17 37Verse 37

Alma 17 37He smote off their arms with his sword. This detail of the narrative may be read in connection with Deut. 33:20. In this verse and the following verses, Moses prophesied concerning the Tribe of Gad, among other things, "He dwelleth as a lion and teareth the arm with the crown of the head." That means, according to Hebrew commentators, that the warriors of that Tribe had learned to disarm, and kill an antagonist by smiting the crown of his head and his arm with one stroke, or one movement of the sword's blade.

Alma 17 37Ammon seems to have learned this manner of swordsplay, in which the warriors of Gad excelled, and which inspired Moses to compare that Tribe to a lion having its lair in the wilderness.

Alma 17 37For the arms of the wicked shall be broken: but the LORD upholdeth the righteous.

(Psalm 37:17)

AARON

Aaron was a son of King Mosiah II, generally supposed to have been the eldest as it was said that the Sovereignty of the people rightly belonged to him on the death of his father. However, when offered it, he refused that great honor on purpose to fulfill a mission to the Lamanites upon which he and his brothers had set their hearts.

Aaron was born in the Land of Zarahemla probably not earlier than 125 B.C., as his father would then have been about thirty years old. During his youth he was wayward and uncontrollable and joined with those who persecuted the people of God. In fact, he and his brothers and the younger Alma, were leaders among those who harassed the Church members. The conduct of the young princes in this regard cannot be ascribed to the corrupting influence of lives of pomp and luxury spend at their father's court for that was a model of simplicity and frugality, and the king, himself labored with his own hands to lighten the burdens of the people. But it may be more justly attributed to the lack of proper thinking, to the self-conceit and stubbornness so frequently shown in the lives of the young, until maturer years and wider experience teach them humility and reverence.

From the evil course of life Aaron and his associates then pursued they were rescued by the direct interposition of Heaven. He was in the traveling company of young men who were stopped on their way to persecute the Saints in a nearby community. An angel of the Lord who, in tones of thunder which caused the solid earth under their feet to tremble, reproved its members for their sins and commanded them to molest the Saints no more.

From this moment Aaron was a changed man; he gave to God and Heaven his undivided life. Where he had done evil he sought to make amends, and where he had incited to turbulency he became a peacemaker.

Shortly afterwards he and his brothers commenced to labor as missionaries among the Nephites. They next determined to lay their lives upon the altar of sacrifice and go up to the Land of Lehi-Nephi into the midst of the Lamanites and bear to them the message of God's condescension and love. From this seeming rash resolve most of their friends sought to dissuade the young princes. They pictured to them the perils of the venture, and the hopelessness of such a task. But it availed not. The Spirit of the Lord was burning within them; they were oppressed with the thought of the value of human souls that were perishing for lack of knowledge. The king, himself, had scarcely the fervor of his sons. He hesitated to give his consent to their plans, for he doubted, as from past experience he had good cause to doubt, that they would be able to reclaim from their savage ways the benighted children of Laman. However, he inquired of the Lord.

The answer to his prayers concerning his son's desires was full of assurances of success and of Divine protection. Thus strengthened, he sent them forth with his blessings. But as he was growing old the question of who should succeed him on the Nephite throne filled Mosiah's mind. He sent among the people to inquire who would be their choice. The people answered Aaron. But Aaron would not accept the kingly offer, his mind was on other objects which he deemed more worthy of his providentially inspired calling. He had solemnly given up all desires for worldly honors and resolve to serve God the remainder of his days. Lest Aaron should ever change his mind and demand the kingly authority as his right, his father, Mosiah II, decided, with the consent of the people, to change the form of government of the nation from a Monarchy to a Republic. The change in the form of government was made with the unanimous consent of all the people.

When the young men left Zarahemla (91 B.C.) they departed into the wilderness that divided the possessions of the Nephites from the Lamanites, and amidst its discouragements they almost lost heart, but were animated to renewed endeavor by Divine manifestations.

When they reached the borders of the Lamanites the missionaries separated. Aaron journeyed towards a land called Jerusalem in which was built a great city of the same name; it was people largely and was controlled by Nephite apostates of the order of Nehor. Aaron entered into their synagogues and preached; he proclaimed the Word wherever he had opportunity. But the people of Jerusalem would not accept it. Finding his efforts in their behalf useless, after a time of futile work he left them and went over to a village called Ani-Anti. There he found some of his brethren zealously ministering, but the people hardened their hearts against the Gospel Message. So they all departed and journeyed to the Land of Middoni.

In Middoni they preached to many, though but few believed. The hardened unbelievers treated the missionaries with extreme cruelty so that some of them fled, while the rest, among whom was Aaron, were taken and cast into prison. They were there tortured and abused by every mode which their savage captors could suggest, or evil power achieve. Their lives were saved by the power of God alone. They remained in prison until they were delivered therefrom by Ammon, Aaron's brother, and King Lamoni. The latter had influence enough with Antiomno, the king of Middoni, to secure the release of the imprisoned missionaries. Some time after his release Aaron left the Land of Middoni, and was led by the Spirit to the Land of Lehi-Nephi where was the abode of the Chief King over all the Lamanites save it be in Ishmael. Aaron and his brethren went almost immediately to the palace of the king where they bowed before him and recognized his sovereign power. In addition to telling the king who they were they thereupon offered to be his servants. To this the king would not consent. He had already heard something of the Gospel from Ammon and now desired to hear more. At his request, Aaron explained to him the many things relating to the nature of God and the Plan of Salvation, for, though he recognized the power and might of a Great Spirit, he was altogether ignorant of things concerning the Deity of whom Aaron preached.

The Gospel Truths were gratefully received by the king who besought Aaron to teach him how he might obtain the Eternal Life of which he spoke. Aaron instructed the king to bow down before the Lord in prayer, and then, in faith, ask for the blessings he desired. The aged king did so. He prostrated himself on the ground and cried mightily to the Lord, promising to give away all his sins if he could know Him, and be raised from the dead and be saved at the Last Day.

So great was the king's emotion that when he had finished his prayer he was struck as if he were dead. When the king thus fell his servants ran and told the queen what had happened. She at once came into the room where he lay and seeing Aaron and his brethren standing by, she became exceeding angry as she supposed that they were the cause of the evil that had, in her opinion, befallen her husband. She, without hesitation, ordered the king's servants to take and slay the brethren. This, they refused to do because they were afraid of the power which was in Aaron. The queen was also afraid, but she seemed to think that the best way to get rid of the trouble was to destroy those who brought it. As the king's servants refused to obey her command she ordered them to go out upon the streets and call upon the people to come in and kill Aaron and his companions. When Aaron saw the temper of the queen he feared lest the multitude, in the hardness of their hearts, would raise a great commotion and cause the hindering of the Work of God which had so auspiciously commenced. Therefore, he put forth his hand and raised the monarch from the earth, and at the same time commanded him to stand. The king at once received his strength and stood upon his feet, at the sight of which the queen and her servants wondered greatly and were filled with fear.

Then the king began to explain to them what he had learned with regard to God and the Gospel, and he spoke with such power that his whole household was converted. Also the multitude that had gathered at the call of the queen were pacified by his words, and when he saw that their hearts were softened he caused that Aaron and his companions should teach them the Word of God. After the king was converted he sent a proclamation throughout the whole land forbidding any and all from persecuting Aaron and his fellow missionaries, giving them liberty to preach anywhere they desired. Our readers may be sure this privilege was not neglected. Nor were their labors trifling, but glorious in the saving of many thousand souls; for unto the Lord were converted the people of the Lamanites who dwelt in the Lands of Ishmael, Middoni, Shilom, and Shemlon, and also those who lived in the cities of Nephi, Lemuel, and Shimnilon. All of them in after-life became a righteous, peaceful, God-serving people and from faithful obedience to His laws they never fell away.

But the various bodies of Nephite apostates who dwelt among the Lamanites universally rejected the Gospel Message with the exception of one single Amalekite. The renegade Amalekites, Amulonites, and others who did not believe in the testimony of the missionaries were not willing to be ruled by a Christian monarch. They had rejected Christianity altogether and would not have it as the ruling power either in Zarahemla or Lehi-Nephi. With the old sophistries and falsehoods they raised a mutiny in the hearts of their associate Lamanites and urged them on to rebellion against the rightful king and his believing subjects.

But the converted Lamanites made no preparation to resist them; they felt that in times past with unholy hands they had spilled blood as water on the land, blood that they could never atone for, but they would do it no more. Passive non-resistance would be their policy in the future, but the blood of a fellow-being they would never again shed no matter how great the peril, or how intense the aggravation. As a witness of the completeness of this resolution they took their weapons of war and buried them deep in the earth with an oath and covenant that they would never dig them up. Their integrity was soon put to the test for the unconverted Lamanites, incited and led by the Nephite apostates, fell upon them, and with sword and spear massacred 1,005 of their innocent, unresisting fellows. No opposition was offered, no vain struggling occurred, the victims calmly but resolutely bowed before the assassins' blows and rejoiced in the opportunity to show their devotion to God, even unto death.

The sacrifice of so many of their unresisting brethren brought a deep change of feeling in many of the rude Lamanites; they refused to be any longer the murderers of their kindred, and they strove to emulate so noble an example and because of it more were added to the Church than those whose spirits had ascended to the Great White Throne, and whose blood smoked up to Heaven as a testimony against traitors and apostates.

The intriguing apostates who hated the Nephites with a fiercer hatred than the Lamanites, not being able to incite the people to fresh atrocities against their Christian brethren, managed to get up a Nephite invasion. Its results were most disastrous to them, and while smarting under the shame of ignominious defeat, incited by the Amalekites, they again fell upon the unoffending people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi, as the Christian Lamanites were then called, and again stained their hands with the blood of unresisting innocence. It is probable that the apostate bodies would have eventually destroyed all the persecuted people of Lehi-Nephi had these not been led to leave their homes and under the Heaven-inspired sons of Mosiah guided safely to other possessions far to the northward.

Under the watchful care of Aaron and Ammon these faithful Lamanites threw themselves upon the generosity of the Nephites, who joyfully received them and set apart the Land of Jershon for their inheritance.

After the return of the sons of King Mosiah II to Zarahemla we have little account of Aaron except incidental reference to his virtues, nor do we know anything of his death. He was alive in the year 75 B.C., for in that year he accompanied Alma to the Land of Antionum on his mission to the Zoramites, and there labored with faithfulness and zeal. When that mission was ended he appears to have accompanied the rest of the missionaries to the Land of Jershon, after which we hear no more of him or his labors.

AMMON

Ammon was the most conspicuous of Mosiah's sons, and the ruling spirit in the great mission undertaken by them to convert the Lamanites.

He was born in the Land of Zarahemla, probably about 120 B.C. Like his brothers, he was, in early life, headstrong and disobedient, and a persecutor of the Saints. He was brought to an understanding of his perilous position by the intervention of an angel of the Lord who appeared to a company of young men who were going about molesting the members of the Church of Christ, among whom were Alma, the younger, and King Mosiah's four sons. This heavenly manifestation had the effect of entirely changing the course of life of these young men. From this time they bent all the energies of their youth and the experience of their riper years to the reparation of the wrongs that they had done and to spread the principles of the Gospel. First, they ministered among the Nephites in the Land of Zarahemla, and then they determined on the more hazardous task of carrying those same truths to the benighted Lamanites in the Land of Nephi.

At first there was much opposition to this venture, but Mosiah, their father, having received by revelation assurances of Divine protection, the young men started on their perilous journey (91 B.C.) into the southern wilderness. They carried with them their bows and arrows, not to wage war but to kill game for their food. Their journey was a tedious one; they lost their way and almost lost heart, and indeed were on the point of returning home when they received the comforting promise of God's grace, together with His Word of ultimate success in their missionary work. Nerved by this assurance, and with much fasting and prayer, they continued their wanderings and before long they reached the borders of the Lamanites. Commending themselves to God, there they separated, each one trusting to the Lord to guide him to the place where he could best accomplish the Eternal Purposes of Heaven.

Ammon entered the Lamanite territory at a land called, Ishmael. Here King Lamoni was the chief ruler under his father who was king of all the Lamanites. Ammon was no sooner discovered than he was taken, bound with cords, and conducted into the presence of Lamoni. It was the custom of the Lamanites so to use every Nephite they captured, and it rested with the king whether the captive should be slain, imprisoned, or sent out of the country. The king's will and pleasure appear to have been the only law on such matters.

Through God's grace, Ammon found favor in the eyes of Lamoni, and the king, learning that it was Ammon's desire to reside among the Lamanites, offered him one of his daughters to wife. Ammon courteously declined this intended honor and begged to be accepted as one of the king's servants. This arrangement pleased Lamoni, and Ammon was placed in that part of the royal household that had charge of the monarch's flocks and herds. Lamoni was rich in livestock, probably the result of the taxation of the people which he caused to be imposed on them. But, even the king's property was not secure from theft. Marauding bands would watch for his numerous cattle as they approached their watering places. Then with a yell and other prolonged shouts they would stampede the herds and drive away all they could beyond the reach of the king's servants. These would gather what few animals remained, if any, and would return to the king with the full expectancy of being made to pay for the loss by the forfeit of their lives. They were seldom disappointed for Lamoni, or some one of his predecessors, had established a somewhat unique criminal code with regard to stealing the royal cattle. They had adopted the idea that it was easier and cheaper to make the herdsmen responsible for the losses and punish them therefore than to hunt out and capture the thieves. It had at least one virtue, it prevented collusion between the robbers and the servants, but it produced much dissatisfaction among Lamoni's subjects.

On the third day of Ammon's service, one of these raids was made on the king's cattle as they were being taken to the Waters of Sebus, the common watering place. The cattle fled in all directions, and the dispirited servants, with the fear of death before their eyes, sat down and wept instead of attempting to stay them. Ammon perceived that this was his opportunity. He first reasoned with the servants, then encouraged them, and having sufficiently aroused their feelings he led them in the attempt to head off the flying herds. With much exertion they succeeded. The cattle were all gathered, but the robbers still waited at the watering place to renew the attack when they drew near enough. Ammon perceiving this, placed the servants at various points on the outside of the flocks, and he, himself, went forward to contend with the robbers. Though they were many, he knew that he was more powerful than all of them because God was with him. The idea of one man withstanding so many was supremely ridiculous to the robbers. But as one after another fell before his unerring aim, they were astonished and dreaded him as something more than human. Enraged at the loss of six of their number, they rushed upon him in a body, determined to crush him with their clubs. Ammon, undaunted, drew his sword and waited the onslaught. Their leader fell dead at his feet, and as one after another raised their clubs, Ammon struck off their arms until none dared to approach him, but instead, retreated afar off.

It was a strange procession that returned to the palace of the king. The fears of the herdsmen had been turned to joy, and they marched in triumph into his presence. They carried the arms of the robbers with them as testimonials of the truth of their story, and also of Ammon's prowess. Doubtless, they did not diminish the telling points in the narrative; the numbers of the band, and the courage and strength of the Nephite were each dilated upon with a vividness their superstitious imaginations invented. When the king heard their marvelous story, his heart was troubled and he came to the conclusion that Ammon must be the Great Spirit of whose existence he had an undefined idea. He trembled at the thought that perhaps this Spirit had come to punish him because of the number of his servants whom he had slain for permitting his cattle to be stolen.

Notwithstanding his misgivings, Lamoni desired to see Ammon, who, acting as though nothing particular had happened, was preparing the king's horses and chariots as the servants had been instructed. When Ammon entered the royal presence the king was too much filled with emotion to speak. More than once Ammon called the king's attention to the fact that he stood before him, as he had been commanded and wished to know what were the king's further wishes. But Ammon elicited no response. At last, perceiving the monarch's thoughts, he began to question Lamoni regarding sacred things and afterwards to expound to him the principles of Life and Salvation. Lamoni listened and believed. He was conscience-stricken, and with all the strength of his new-born faith he humbly begged that the Lord would show that same mercy to him and his people that had been shown to the Nephites. Overcome with the intensity of his feelings the king sank to the ground as in a trance. In this state he was carried to his wife, who, with her children, anxiously watched over him for two days and nights awaiting his return to consciousness. There was great diversity of opinion among his retainers as to what troubled Lamoni. Some said the power of the Great Spirit was upon him, others that an evil power possessed him, yet others asserted that he was dead and with remarkable acuteness of smell, affirmed, "He stinketh." At the end of this time they had resolved to lay him away in the sepulchre when the queen sent for Ammon and pleaded with him in her husband's behalf. Ammon gave her the joyful assurance, "He is not dead, but sleepeth in God, and tomorrow he shall rise again." Then he asked her, "Believeth thou this?" She answered, "I have no witness save thy word and the word of our servants; nevertheless I believe it shall be according as thou hast said." Then Ammon blessed her, and told her that there had not been such great faith among all the people of the Nephites.

So the queen lovingly continued her watch by the bedside of her husband until the appointed hour. Lamoni then arose as Ammon had foretold. His soul was filled with Heavenly joy. The king's first words were praise to God, his next were blessings on his faithful wife, whose fidelity he felt, or knew. He testified to the coming Redeemer, of whose greatness, glory, power, and mercy he had learned while in the spirit. His body was too weak for the realities of Eternity that filled his heart. Again he sank, overpowered, to the earth, and the same spirit also overcame his wife. Ammon's rejoicing heart swelled within him as he heard and witnessed these things. He fell to the earth, and upon bended knees he poured out his souls in praise and thanksgiving, until he also could not contain the brightness of God's glory which he beheld and the completeness of the joy that overwhelmed him. Unconscious of all earthly things he sank beside the royal pair. The same spirit of unmeasured joy then fell upon all present with the same results. There was but one exception, a Lamanitish woman, named Abish, who had been converted to the Lord many years before but kept the secret in her own bosom. She comprehended the why and wherefore of this strange scene. She saw the workings of the Almighty through which the untutored minds of the Lamanites could be brought to an understanding of the Plan of Salvation. From house to house she went calling the people to witness what had occurred in the palace of the king. The people gathered at her call, but, as might be expected, their impressions were quite conflicting. Some said one thing, some another; some argued for good, some for evil; to some Ammon was a god, to others a demon. One man, whose brother was slain at the Waters of Sebus, drew his sword and attempted to slay Ammon, but was struck dead by an unseen power before he could carry his rash intent into action. So fierce was the contention, so angry grew the controversy, that Abish, fearing greater trouble, by an inspiration, took hold of the queen's hand who thereupon arose to her feet. The queen's first thought was of her husband. She took his hand and raised him up, and ere long all who had been reposing in the spirit stood upon their feet. The king, the queen, the servants, all rejoiced with joy unspeakable. They all bore testimony to God's abundant love and goodness, and some declared that holy angels had visited them. Still the contention was not entirely appeased until Lamoni stood forth and explained to them the Divine mysteries of which they were so ignorant. Many believed, others did not, but Ammon had the indescribable happiness of shortly after establishing a Church to the Lord in the midst of the people of Ishmael. Ammon's humility, faith, and patience, were bringing forth their fruit; while his soul gathered faith and strength in the fulfillment of the promises of the great Jehovah in answer to the pleadings of his faithful and loving father, King Mosiah, in Zarahemla.

When the Church was satisfactorily established in the Land of Ishmael, Lamoni arranged to pay a visit to his father, the great king of all the Lamanites, who lived in the Land of Lehi-Nephi. Lamoni was desirous to introduce Ammon to him. However, the voice of the Lord warned his servant, Ammon, not to go, but to proceed directly to the Land of Middoni where his brother, Aaron, and some of the other missionaries were suffering in prison. When Lamoni heard of Ammon's intention and the cause thereof, he decided to accompany him. Lamoni felt that he could be of service in delivering the prisoners, as Antiomno, the king of Middoni, was one of his special friends and likely to grant any favor he might ask.

Ammon and Lamoni accordingly started on their errand of mercy, but on their way they were surprised to meet Lamoni's father who grew exceedingly angry when he found Ammon in the company of his son. All the hatred born and nurtured of false tradition boiled up in the great king's breast. He listened impatiently to Lamoni's story of Ammon's visit and of its fruits and, when it was finished he broke out in a torrent of abuse towards the Nephite "son of a liar," as he ingraciously styled Ammon and ordered Lamoni to slay him. Lamoni, at once refused to become the murderer of his most loved friend, whereupon the old monarch, in the blind fury of his anger, turned upon his own son and would have killed him if Ammon had not interposed. Little used to controversy, much less to direct opposition, the king was not softened in his determination to slay his son by Ammon's interference. Savagely, he turned upon Ammon, but youth, strength, dexterity, and above all, the protecting care of the Lord were with Ammon and he struck the king's sword arm so heavy a blow that it fell useless at his side. Realizing he was now in the power of the man he had so foully abused, he made abundant promises, even to half of his kingdom, if his life were spared. This boon Ammon immediately granted, asking only favors for Lamoni and his own imprisoned brethren. The king, unused to such generosity and brotherly love, granted all Ammon's requests, and when the king proceeded on his way his mind was filled with reflections regarding Ammon's courage and great love for his son. He was also troubled in his heart concerning certain expressions of Ammon's on doctrinal points which opened up ideas that were entirely new to his mind.

Lamoni and Ammon continued their journey to Middoni, where, by God's grace, they found favor in the eyes of King Antiomno, and by his command, the missionaries were released from the horrors of their prison house.

After his release, Aaron, with the other brethren, visited the old king. Their visit ended in the king's conversion, and the issuance of a royal proclamation granting full religious liberty to all dwelling within the borders of his dominions. This was followed by the rebellion of the unconverted Lamanites, egged on by the Nephite apostates. This uprising of the disbelieving among the Lamanites resulted in two series of massacres of the Christian Lamanites, who unresistingly fell victims to the rage and hate of their unbelieving fellow countrymen. During this period the old king died, and his son, Anti-Nephi-Lehi was made ruler of the Christian Lamanites.

Ammon and his brethren were not willing to have the converted Lamanites continually harrassed and eventually destroyed; they judged that the Lord, having so thoroughly tried the faith of this devoted people, would provide some way of escape from that awful fate. Ammon counseled with Anti-Nephi-Lehi and it was thought better to forsake their all so far as worldly possessions were concerned, than to remain and sacrifice their lives in a fearsome prospect. But first they would inquire of the Lord. Ammon did so and the Lord said, "Get this people out of this land, that they perish not, for Satan has great hold of the hearts of the Amalekites, who do stir up the Lamanites to anger against their brethren to slay them; therefore get thee out of this land; and blessed are the people of this generation, for I will preserve them."

The word of the Lord thus received was joyfully obeyed. The Ammonites gathered up their flocks and herds and departed into the wilderness that lay between the lands of Lehi-Nephi and Zarahemla. There they rested while Ammon and his brethren went forward and treated with the Nephites in behalf of the persecuted hosts they had left in wait. The people, by united voice, gladly welcomed their co-religionists and set apart the Land of Jershon as their inheritance. Thither the Ammonites, with happy feet, repaired (77 B.C.) and there Ammon established his home, and became their local Presiding High Priest.

In later years we have occasional reference to Ammon. In 75 B.C., Korihor, the anti-Christ, endeavored to intrude his soul-destroying doctrines upon the people of Ammon. However, they quickly took him, bound him, and carried him before Ammon who expelled him beyond the borders of Jershon. Later in that same year he accompanied Alma on his memorable mission to the Zoramites, an apostate group of Nephites who had taken up their abode in the Land of Antionum. After that mission was completed, Ammon returned to the Land of Zarahemla after which we lose sight of him as nothing is said in the Sacred Record of his further labors or death.

Ammon was one of the greatest, most lovable characters of Nephite history. Full of zeal, faith, charity, disinterestedness and love, yet withal a man of good judgment and great wisdom, he left a broad, bright mark in the history of his people that lasted until the Messiah came and established more completely the Perfect Law of the Gospel.

OMNER

Omner was a son of King Mosiah II. From the Sacred Record, we think he was the third. With his brothers, in early life, he appears to have been an unbeliever in the Gospel, and an enemy to the people of God's Church. With them he was brought to an understanding of his position by the appearance of an angel. He then, with the rest who witnessed this heavenly manifestation, went abroad among the Nephites, endeavoring, by his diligence, zeal, and self-abnegation to atone for the wrongs he had beforetime committed. In 91 B.C., he formed one of the party who went to the Land of Lehi-Nephi to convert the Lamanites, and remained in that mission until its close, suffered all its privations and persecutions, and rejoiced abundantly in its triumphs. Like Omner's brother, Himni, little is said in the Sacred Record of his individual labors, however, the inference may be drawn that he spent a considerable portion of the time with and assisted his brother, Aaron, in his labors and ministrations. He returned with his fellow missionaries to Zarahemla in 78 B.C. In later years (75 B.C.) he accompanied Alma and others to the Land of Antionum to minister among the apostate Zoramites.

HIMNI

One of the four sons of King Mosiah II, apparently the youngest, who went up to the Land of Lehi-Nephi to minister among the Lamanites (91 B.C.). With the rest of his brothers he was faithful in the performance of the labors of this great mission, and with them he returned at its close to his home in Zarahemla. Of his individual labors, or in which particular lands he ministered, we have no account. After he returned to Zarahemla, he still continued a zealous and devoted servant of the Lord, and in 75 B.C. when Alma, the High Priest of the Church, took his brothers to the Land of Antionum to preach to the Zoramites we are told that he left Himni with the Church in Zarahemla. This is the last notice we have in the Book of Mormon of this God-fearing and virtuous prince.

MULOKI

When the missionaries, after committing themselves to God, separated on the borders of the Lamanites, Ammon went to the Land of Ishmael, Aaron to Jerusalem. Where Muloki went we have not been informed. When Aaron was driven out of the Land of Jerusalem by reason of the wickedness of its people, he passed over to a neighboring village styled Ani-Anti, where he found Muloki and other laboring with great zeal but with little success.

Finding their labors there unavailing, Aaron, Muloki, Ammah, and their companions departed from Ani-Anti and went over to the Land of Middoni, where Antiomno was the king. Here they labored zealously, though but few hearkened unto their words. Before long the wicked raised the standard of persecution, and the three brethren above-named were cast into prison, while their companions fled to the regions round about.

The prisoners were treated with what was extreme cruelty; they were bound with strong cords which cut into their flesh; they were deprived of proper food, drink, and clothing, and otherwise made to suffer many different afflictions.

After many days' confinement, they were set at liberty by Antiomno, who, through King Lamoni and Ammon, acted in their behalf. Their unfortunate condition had been revealed to Ammon by the Lord with instructions for him to go and set his brethren at liberty. When Ammon met these faithful co-laborers, he was greatly grieved because of their wretched, naked, wounded, and starved condition. After a season of mutual joy, thanksgiving, and congratulations, the elders again separated again to renew their labors in the ministry, but to what particular land Muloki went, or among whom he sojourneyed we have no information.

AMMAH

We first hear of Ammah preaching to the inhabitants of Ani-Anti, and when rejected by them, he, with Aaron and others, went over to the Land of Middoni where he was cast into prison, and with his fellow laborers suffered all the hardships and indignities that were there inflicted upon the servants of God. After many days of imprisonment, he was, as were Aaron and Muloki, delivered through the intervention of King Lamoni and Ammon, who had interceded with Antiomno, king of Middoni. When the missionaries commenced their labors again, the regions in which certain ones labored are stated, but no mention is made of Ammah, or his ministrations; yet there is no doubt but that he continued his faithful labors to the end of his lengthy and most important mission.
