Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 19

SCAlma 19 1Alma 19 2Alma 19 3Alma 19 4Alma 19 5Verses 1-5

SCAlma 19 1Alma 19 2Alma 19 3Alma 19 4Alma 19 5The queen sent and desired Ammon to come. According to the Lamanite custom, which undoubtedly was accompanied by wailing and incantation—the use of verbal charms, spoken or sung—the wife of King Lamoni, his sons and daughters, watched over the bedside for two days and two nights while in the outer chamber his servants mourned so as to satisfy the demands of their superstitious minds.

SCAlma 19 1Alma 19 2Alma 19 3Alma 19 4Alma 19 5To them it seemed an unending period of time, waiting, and guarding what appeared to be the remains of their father and king. The hours were long, yet there was no change in his countenance. Some thought him dead, others that the power of the Great Spirit was upon him. Still others affirmed that an evil power possessed him. All were confused. But at the end of two days they resolved to lay him away in a sepulchre that had been prepared to bury the dead.

SCAlma 19 1Alma 19 2Alma 19 3Alma 19 4Alma 19 5Despair and anguish took possession of the queen. She hovered over the bed where her monarch lay motionless. To and fro she came and went, looking for some sign that he was not dead. At last, when nearly all hope had vanished, she remembered hearing of Ammon, of his lofty reputation and of his great renown. Her servants had told her of a strange God, and that Ammon was His prophet, acting for Him and doing marvelous works in His name. She sent for him that he might come and bring help when all else had failed. Ammon did not fail. He immediately obeyed her command, and listened to her woes with all the humility of her lowest subject.

SCAlma 19 1Alma 19 2Alma 19 3Alma 19 4Alma 19 5The queen told Ammon what had happened and what was still happening, that some of the king's retainers said he was dead, and attempted to prove their assertion by further saying that he stinketh. "He ought to be placed in the sepulchre," she told Ammon they said unto her. But the queen was not as yet ready to believe the end of her beloved husband had come. In the hot climate where the body quickly yields to the severe demands of death, we may well imagine that that course had taken its place with the king in the minds of some when with an acute sense of smell, they affirmed, "He stinketh." But to the queen who was nearest to the king during his hour of travail, and who could easily discern it, said, "to me he doth not stink." Go into his chamber wherein the king is abed, see him for yourself, then tell me what I should do, the queen pleaded with Ammon.

SCAlma 19 6Alma 19 7Verses 6-7

SCAlma 19 6Alma 19 7Now this was what Ammon desired. All the time that Ammon listened to the queen's tale of woe, he knew her fears were groundless. The spiritual darkness that had enshrouded the king was giving way to the Light of God's Glory. Ammon rejoiced that in the king all darkness was being dispelled by the light of Truth and Everlasting Life. He knew the king was reposing in the Glory of God and would awaken unto Him when his rendezvous in the realm of light was complete. O what joy filled Ammon's great heart when he mused upon these things, for it was what he by God's grace most desired.

SCAlma 19 6Alma 19 7It was not necessary for Ammon to see the king for he knew the king was not dead, yet in obedience to the queen's will, he went to his bedside. He saw the king lying there. Ammon realized that the time was near when the Glory of God would be made manifest in the king's recovery. That all the king's subjects would then and there be brought to the knowledge of the true God, and last, but not least, he recognized the hand of God in fulfilling His promise to himself and his brothers that "I will make an instrument of thee in My hands unto the Salvation of many souls." (Chapter 17:11)

SCAlma 19 8Alma 19 9Alma 19 10Verses 8-10

SCAlma 19 8Alma 19 9Alma 19 10He is not dead, but he sleepeth in God. After spending some time in the king's chambers, which to the queen were many anxious moments, Ammon came out rejoicing in the Lord. Be comforted was his message to the queen, your husband is not dead, "but he sleepeth in God." On the morrow he shall rise from his bed where now he is ridden; therefore, heed not those who say the king is dead, and "bury him not."

SCAlma 19 8Alma 19 9Alma 19 10Ammon sought now to impress upon the mind of the queen the truth of his words. There is no doubt that they brought light to a mind overwhelmed with darkness; they brought solace to a heart full of anguish; they brought peace to a troubled soul. His words were like dew on a desert waste; they were as water to the famished soil. They sustained her when grief and affliction flowed deeply over her. The light of God's countenance began to illumine the queen's face.

SCAlma 19 8Alma 19 9Alma 19 10"Believest thou this?" Ammon inquired of her faith in his words as he beheld a change in the queen's aspect. There was a change without, therefore he knew there had been a change within her heart. Almost timidly for her station in life, certainly humbly, the queen gave answer that in spite of the counsel others had given her about the king's death, and in spite of their many dubious opinions concerning his good or bad condition, she believed "that it shall be according as thou hast said."

SCAlma 19 8Alma 19 9Alma 19 10As in songs of praise, Ammon's heart was lifted to God on High for His blessings to this dark-skinned Lamanitish woman. Dark was her skin, but the light that shone through her eyes made bright her whole being. Ammon called down the blessings of Heaven upon her because of her faith. Among all the people of the Nephites, Ammon noted, there had not been such great faith as was shown by this woman; this woman who was a daughter of rebellious Laman and Lemuel.

Alma 19 11Verse 11

Alma 19 11The queen watched over the bed of her husband. Showing her great faith in the words of Ammon, the queen continued her close watch over the bed of the king. She did not leave his side, but remembered the exact time "Ammon had appointed that he should arise."

Alma 19 12Verse 12

Alma 19 12The king arose as Ammon had said. When the king arose from the bed where he had lain for two days, unconscious to those about him, he was filled with heavenly joy. His first words were of praise to God, his next were blessings upon his faithful wife whose fidelity he felt or knew. With outstretched arms he acclaimed the greatness of God, and the goodness of her whose loyalty to him had not wavered.

Alma 19 13Verse 13

Alma 19 13I have seen my Redeemer. The king, overjoyed at the expression of Divine love which he had received, anxiously testified of Christ. I have seen my Redeemer, and He shall come forth, be born of a woman, and all that believe on His name shall be redeemed. Lamoni was so filled with thoughts of what he had seen that the greatness of them overpowered his weakened condition. The greatness of God and the nothingness of man overwhelmed him. His joy was so complete that followed by his own relapse to the realm of light and glory, the queen also sank to the ground, "being overpowered by the Spirit."

Alma 19 14Verse 14

Alma 19 14Ammon also sank to the earth. Ammon's joy in his work was now almost complete. His prayers had been many, his supplications unending, that the Lord would not forget His promise of Eternal Life to many who sat in darkness, and who had no light. He remembered the times when the iniquities of the Lamanites had filled the hearts of the faithful Nephites with pain and sorrow, how the wicked traditions of the Lamanite fathers had prevented both peoples from living together in peace and happiness. Ammon now saw things were changing. He fell upon his knees, and with prayer and thanksgiving poured out his soul to the Great Giver of all these things. Ammon's heart swelled within him. He, like the king and queen, could not contain the brightness of the glory that encircled them, nor the completeness of the joy that rebounded time and time again in their hearts; Ammon also sank down to the ground at the side of the king and queen, overcome by the Majesty of Him who reigns on High.

Alma 19 15Verse 15

Alma 19 15Now, when the servants of the king saw that not only the king had fallen, but also the queen and Ammon, too, the fear of the Lord came upon them. The Lord moves in a mysterious way. In the childlike minds of the benighted Lamanites, the fear of the Lord, as if it were a burning fire, consumed their almost barbaric inclinations. At first they thought to flee from the impending disaster. They wanted to leave behind scenes so unprecedented; they apprehended danger. But the servants of the king who had been with Ammon at the Waters of Sebus, saw again the wonderful powers he had shown there. In their simple way, they called upon Ammon's God to save them from a destruction which they felt was near. The Lord hears the cry of any generation of His children who call upon Him in truth, and the cries of these dark-skinned, misguided, Lamanite children were not in vain. Peace, the Lord's peace, came down upon them as gentle rain. Disabling fear, the most despised of all human frailties, now was turned into the fear of the Lord.

SCAlma 19 16Alma 19 17Verses 16-17

SCAlma 19 16Alma 19 17A Lamanitish woman, whose name was Abish. The dread and the fright that almost overcame the king's servants were now, themselves, overcome by an assurance of well-being. Unendingly, they called upon Ammon's God in mighty prayer until all, like the king and queen, and also Ammon, had fallen to the ground.

SCAlma 19 16Alma 19 17There was one exception to those who in the ecstasy of their emotions had fallen to the ground. She was a Lamanitish woman, named Abish. Many years before the events recorded here, she had been converted to the Lord through a remarkable vision had by her father.

SCAlma 19 16Alma 19 17Abish, although this story shows her faith in the Lord, nevertheless, kept the secret of her conversion in her own bosom. However, when she saw that all the king's servants had undergone what she recognized to be the power of God, and that they, together with the king, the queen, and Ammon, himself, had fallen to the earth as if in a trance, she supposed that seeing what had happened would convince others beside herself of God's great power. She accordingly ran forth from house to house, making known to the people the wonderful works of the Lord.

Alma 19 18Verse 18

Alma 19 18The people began to assemble together. A great multitude answered the summons of Abish, and many rushed to the house of the king. Some were curious others imagined that an unheard-of tragedy had, like a canopy of evil, fallen upon the king's household. Still others, not knowing what had happened, conjured up all manner of weird connotations. All were astounded when they saw the king and queen lying on the ground as if dead. Their amazement knew no bounds when they saw a Nephite was also lying there.

SCAlma 19 19Alma 19 20Alma 19 21Alma 19 22Verses 19-22

SCAlma 19 19Alma 19 20Alma 19 21Alma 19 22Those who had gathered there began to murmur among themselves. We, ourselves, may imagine what was said and done by these simple, unsophisticated, and superstitious people whose ideas of the Great Spirit were not only unguided by rational thinking, but whose decisions upon the natural or the supernatural were based upon ignorance and unreasoning fear.

SCAlma 19 19Alma 19 20Alma 19 21Alma 19 22Each one who gathered at the king's house had his own explanation of what had occurred there. Some said one thing, some another. Some argued for good, some for evil. To some, Ammon was a god; others said that a great calamity had visited the king because he permitted a Nephite to remain in the land when the stranger should have been expelled, or put to death.

SCAlma 19 19Alma 19 20Alma 19 21Alma 19 22Those who argued that point were sharply reproved by others who reasoned that the king had slain many of his servants, who through no fault of their own, had had his flocks scattered at the Waters of Sebus. Therefore, the king himself, they said, "hath brought this evil upon his house."

SCAlma 19 19Alma 19 20Alma 19 21Alma 19 22Among them that thronged the king's chambers were some of the men who had scattered the king's flocks. They were angry with Ammon because he had slain so many of their robber-brethren while protecting the royal livestock. One man, who had a brother slain at the Waters of Sebus, drew his sword and attempted to slay Ammon as he lay on the ground, but he was struck dead by an unseen power before he could carry his rash intent into action.

SCAlma 19 23Alma 19 24Verses 23-24

SCAlma 19 23Alma 19 24And now we see that Ammon could not be slain. Here Mormon, who was the abridger of this record, adds one of his frequent observations in explanation of data recorded. He now interpolates the information, evidently to impress us with the fact, that the Lord's promise to Ammon's father, King Mosiah, was not forgotten in the maze of quickly occurring events, and that because of that promise Ammon could not be slain. That promise is again revealed to us in Mormon's reference to Mosiah's faith.

SCAlma 19 23Alma 19 24You will remember that to the appeals of his sons that they might be permitted to go on missions to the savage Lamanites, Mosiah was at first greatly opposed. He knew the bloodthirsty character the Lamanites had inherited from their forefathers, and what were the beliefs of the dark-skinned sons and daughters of Laman. He supposed, also, that little or no good would come from what he thought was such an ill-advised venture. But to his sons' earnest desire he wanted to place no obstacle in their way that might discourage their holy resolution. Mosiah inquired of the Lord. He wanted to know what course to pursue in this ever-increasingly, pertinent matter.

SCAlma 19 23Alma 19 24The answer came from the Lord, "Let them go up." (Mosiah 28:7) And Mormon further records other words of the Lord concerning Mosiah's request: " 'I will spare him [Ammon], and it shall be unto him according to thy faith,' therefore, Mosiah trusted him unto the Lord."

SCAlma 19 23Alma 19 24Let us remember in contemplating this wondrous story that no one ever perished who trusted in the Lord.

SCAlma 19 25Alma 19 26Alma 19 27Verses 25-27

SCAlma 19 25Alma 19 26Alma 19 27Many said Ammon was the Great Spirit. The more that gathered to the king's house, the more bitter became the contention. What at first seemed friendly discussion turned into strife and angry passions, and soon into violent quarrels and wrangling. Many said that Ammon was the Great Spirit, while others that he had been sent by Him.

SCAlma 19 25Alma 19 26Alma 19 27Still others wanted none of such ideas, but contended that Ammon was a monster, or a horrible thing whom the Nephites had sent to torment them.

SCAlma 19 25Alma 19 26Alma 19 27Not a few among them expressed the idea that perhaps Ammon, because of their iniquities, had been sent by the Great Spirit to afflict them. They also, after witnessing the wonderful scene before them, concluded that the Great Spirit had in times past delivered the Nephites from the grasp of the Lamanites when their seizure was most iminent. In the experience of both peoples, this minority of the king's subjects saw wherein the Great Spirit always "attended the Nephites."

Alma 19 28Verse 28

Alma 19 28The contention began to be exceeding sharp among them. Abish, seeing the sharp contention among them, and fearing greater trouble, was moved almost to tears because she had spread the alarm that caused them to gather at the house of the king.

Alma 19 28Already a member of God's Church, Abish was attuned to the whisperings of that "still small voice which cometh from the Father to lead, and guide, and to warn of things to come"; thus her feelings were most poignant, her sensibilities ready at all times to receive the impressions of the Holy Spirit.

SCAlma 19 29Alma 19 30Alma 19 31Verses 29-31

SCAlma 19 29Alma 19 30Alma 19 31Abish took the queen by the hand. As by an inspiration, Abish, the Christian Lamanitish woman, reached over the queen and took her by the hand, thinking perhaps that by so doing she might raise the sufferer up. The queen immediately rose to her feet.

SCAlma 19 29Alma 19 30Alma 19 31Being filled with the heavenly joy that comes to one who has partaken of God's glory, the queen shouted praises to His Holy Name, at the same time bearing witness of Christ and of Salvation. She also implored God, whose blessings she so abundantly had received, to "have mercy on this people." The gifts of the Spirit, promised to the true believers in Christ, were not lacking when this marvelous outpouring of God's Spirit was manifested. The queen spoke many things that could not be understood by those around her; in the joy of the knowledge she had received, Abish "took the king, Lamoni, by the hand, and behold he arose and stood upon his feet."

SCAlma 19 29Alma 19 30Alma 19 31When the king arose to his feet he beheld the contention that divided his people into different groups. He went among them and rebuked them for their folly, and furthermore taught them those things of which he had heard Ammon speak. There were many who believed what he said, and took upon themselves the Name of Christ, being converted unto the Lord.

Alma 19 32Verse 32

Alma 19 32There were many who would not hear his words. As may be expected, there were some among them who did not believe in the words of the king and queen, the Sacred Record says of them, "They went their way." There are always those who reject the counsel of God, relying upon their own strength. These, sacred history shows, are destroyed; those who accept His Word with thanksgiving and praise are benefited and blessed.

Alma 19 33Verse 33

Alma 19 33They all declared that they had no more desire to do evil. In the midst of the rapport that the converted now enjoyed, Ammon raised up and began also to administer to them. The queen, Ammon, and all the king's servants, joined together in joy, unspeakable. They all bore testimony to God's abundant love and His goodness, and some declared that holy angels had visited them.

SCAlma 19 35Alma 19 36Verses 35-36

SCAlma 19 35Alma 19 36They did establish a Church among them. Still the contention was not entirely appeased until Lamoni stood forth and explained to them the Divine mysteries of which they were so ignorant. Many believed, others did not, but Ammon had the indescribable happiness of shortly thereafter establishing a Church to the Lord in the midst of the Land of Ishmael. Ammon's humility, faith, and patience, were bringing forth their fruit; while his soul gathered faith and strength in the fulfillment of the promises of the great Jehovah in answer to the pleadings of his faithful, and loving father.

ABISH

Abish was a Lamanite woman of the Land of Ishmael, and who was a servant-maid to the queen of King Lamoni at the time that Ammon, the son of King Mosiah of the Nephite, carried the Gospel to the Lamanites in the Land of Lehi-Nephi, (91 B.C.)

Abish, herself, had been converted to the Lord many years previously through a remarkable vision which had been granted to her father, but of this conversion she had never spoken. When Lamoni and all his court, including Ammon, were so overcome by the power of God that they fell to the earth, Abish understood by what power they were affected. In the hope of convincing the people of the divinity of Ammon's message, she joyously ran from house to house and told all she met what had happened. While she was thus engaged, a multitude gathered at the palace of the king. They viewed with many conflicting emotions the fallen monarch, the queen, and his servants, all lying on the ground as if dead, and Ammon, the Nephite, also lying in their midst. A great dispute arose; some argued for good, some for evil, and the contention would doubtless have ended in bloodshed had not Abish returned when she did. She was greatly grieved at the turn matters had taken. In the hope of raising the queen from the ground, Abish took her by the hand. No sooner did she do so than the queen revived and arose. The queen uttered many expressions of love and gratitude to the Savior, and pleaded for His mercy towards her subjects. She next took her husband by the hand, when he then arose also, and seeing the contention, he rebuked the people for it, and began to teach them the Truths of the Gospel. Here commenced the great work of conversion among the Lamanites which eventually terminated in the Salvation of many thousand souls. Abish is mentioned in the Book of Mormon only in connection with this incident.
