Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 21

SCAlma 21 1Alma 21 2Verses 1-2

SCAlma 21 1Alma 21 2When the missionaries separated themselves into ministering units, intent upon preaching the Gospel to the Lamanites, Aaron went to a land which was called Jerusalem. When the sons of King Mosiah, together with the companions they had chosen to accompany them, arrived at the borders of the Land of Nephi where the main body of the Lamanites dwelt, Aaron, the eldest of the sons, went to a land which the Lamanites called Jerusalem after the place in Judea from which their fathers had come.

SCAlma 21 1Alma 21 2The Land of Jerusalem to which Aaron now journeyed was not far from the Waters of Mormon where Alma, the elder, about sixty years previously, gathered with a faithful few to worship the Lord unhindered by King Noah and his wicked priests. It was probably north and a little east of the City of Lehi-Nephi. Here, the Lamanites, Amulonites, Amalekites, and various Nephite apostates, had built a large and thriving city. (About 100 B.C.) The wickedness and abandonment of its people quickly reached their maximum; a little later, both the city and all its inhabitants were engulfed in the bowels of the earth in the dire calamities that attended the Crucifixion of our Lord. Waters came up in the place of this proud city, and a stagnant sea, akin to that which hides Sodom and Gomorrah, occupied the place where its grand palaces and rich synagogues had previously stood.

Alma 21 3Verse 3

Alma 21 3The Lamanites of themselves were sufficiently hardened, but the Amalekites and the Amulonites were still harder. Brought up on traditions which were untrue besides being most wicked, the Lamanites, Mormon in his abridgment notes, were in and of themselves a hard and ungracious people. But many Nephites who had become dissatisfied with their own people and had aligned themselves with the Lamanites were still harder. The venom so often seen in apostates was in them deeply infused. By stories of Nephite atrocities and Nephite intentions towards them, the Lamanites were goaded on to seek revenge on them for injustices never perpetrated. Under the constant urging of the Amalekite and Amulonite apostates the Lamanites grew more and more in the wicked intents of their hearts; the Sacred Record says, "that they should wax strong in wickedness and their abominations."

Alma 21 3The Amalekites were a sect of Nephite apostates whose origin is not given. Very early in the days of the Republic they had affiliated with the Lamanites, and with them, as we have noted, built a large city which they called Jerusalem. They were exceedingly crafty and hard-hearted. They, a short time afterward, led in the massacres of the Christian Lamanites, or people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi. In later years, the Lamanite commanders were in the habit of placing them in high positions in their armies, evidently because of their greater force of character, their intense hatred of their former brethren, and also their more wicked and murderous disposition. In the Sacred Record they are generally associated with the Zoramites and Amulonites.

Alma 21 3The Amulonites were the descendants of Amulon and his associate wicked priests of King Noah. They were Nephites on their father's side, and Lamanites on their mother's, but by association and education, were of the latter race.

Alma 21 3Many of them, however, were displeased with the conduct of their fathers and took upon themselves the name of Nephites, and were considered among that people ever after. Of those who remained Amulonites, many became followers of Nehor and were scattered in the Lands of Amulon, Helam, and Jerusalem, all of which appear to have been districts in the same region of country. It is recorded of them that not one repented and received the Gospel Message that was preached by the sons of King Mosiah; on the contrary, they became leaders in the persecution carried on against the suffering people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi, and were those who, with the Amalekites, slew the greater number of that unoffending people who thus suffered martyrdom.

Alma 21 3In the succeeding war with the Nephites (81 B.C.), when Ammonihah was destroyed, nearly all the Amulonites were killed in the battle in which Zoram, the Nephite commander, defeated the Lamanites. The remainder of the Amulonites fled into the East Wilderness where they usurped power over the people of Laman, and in their bitter hatred of the truth, caused many of the latter to be burned to death because of their belief in the Gospel. These outrages aroused the Lamanites, and they in turn, began to hunt the Amulonites to put them to death. This was in fulfillment of the words of the Prophet Abinadi, who, as he suffered martyrdom by fire at the hands of Amulon and his associates, told them, "What ye shall do unto me, shall be a type of things to come"; by which he meant that many should suffer death by fire as he was suffering.

Alma 21 3And he said unto the priests of Noah that their seed should cause many to be put to death in the like manner as he was, and that they should be scattered abroad and slain, even as a sheep having no shepherd is driven and slain by wild beasts; and now behold, these words were verified, for they were driven by the Lamanites, and they were smitten. (Alma 25:12.)

Alma 21 4Verse 4

Alma 21 4Aaron came to the City of Jerusalem. After journeying for just a few days, Aaron reached the City of Jerusalem where his heart inclined him to tarry, there to preach the Gospel. He lost no time in the commencement of his labors, nor did he leave a thing undone which might hasten the day when the glorious message he bore would bring forth its fruits.

Alma 21 4Almost immediately, Aaron began to preach to the Amalekites in the synagogues they had erected. It was not an uncommon practice among nearly all the early American peoples to permit strangers the freedom of their pulpits. How long they extended this courtesy, or to what limits they allowed the speaker to go, we do not know. However, often, even before their would-be benefactors could express the particulars of their calling, they would be driven out and made the objects of scorn and abuse. This was the lot of Aaron and his companions.

Alma 21 4The first Nephite annals disclose a worthy comment upon the tolerance exhibited by them when they were a struggling people, intent upon serving the Lord. Jacob, who was a brother of Nephi, the leader of the little colony that bore his name, in a sermon recorded upon the Smaller Plates of Nephi, both asks and answers the question herein involved:

Alma 21 4Behold, doth He cry unto any, saying: Depart from Me? Behold, I say unto you, Nay; but He saith: Come unto Me all ye ends of the earth, buy milk and honey without money and without price.

Alma 21 4Behold, hath He commanded any that they should depart out of the synagogues, or out of the houses of worship? Behold, I say unto you, Nay. (II Nephi 26:25-26.)

Alma 21 4Not to turn them away, any who sought the sanctuary of the meetinghouses to declare their own beliefs, was a fundamental or sacred right rigidly adhered to by the Nephites. Even Nephite apostates who affiliated themselves with the Lamanites, perpetuated the observance thereof in their various forms of worship. Thus we have the many synagogues the Amalekites had erected, and into which Aaron went to preach. Also, 500 years after, or about 78 B.C., Jacob uttered his never-forgotten words. We read:

Alma 21 4And Alma and Amulek went forth preaching repentance to the people in their temples, and in their sanctuaries, and also in their synagogues, which were built after the manner of the Jews.

Alma 21 4And as many as would hear their words, unto them they did impart the word of God, without any respect of persons, continually.

Alma 21 4At this same time, or thereabouts, Ammon, after finishing the great mission among the Lamanites which the sons of Mosiah had entered upon, in rejoicing because of the Lord's blessings upon their work, said:

Alma 21 4And we have entered into their houses and taught them, and we have taught them in their streets; yea, and we have taught them upon their hills; and we have also entered into their synagogues and taught them ... (Alma 26:29.)

Alma 21 4We can see and understand the Lord's purpose in Jacob's words when we read His instructions to the Saints in Bountiful:

Alma 21 4Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out from among you, but ye shall minister unto him and shall pray for him unto the Father, in My name; and if it so be that he repenteth and is baptized in My name, then shall ye receive him, and shall minister him of My flesh and blood.

Alma 21 4* * * * * * * * *

Alma 21 4Nevertheless, ye shall not cast him out of your synagogues, or your places of worship, for unto such shall ye continue to minister; for ye know not but what they will return and repent, and come unto Me with full purpose of heart, and I shall heal them; and ye shall be the means of bringing Salvation unto them. (III Nephi 18:30, 32.)

SCAlma 21 5Alma 21 6Verses 5-6

SCAlma 21 5Alma 21 6As Aaron was preaching to the Amalekites, one of them arose and began to contend with him. A custom probably inherited by the Book of Mormon peoples through their Jewish ancestry was that a hearer of his words could interrupt the speaker with questions usually that concerned the matter being discussed. Often, Jesus or His Apostles experienced this same generally accepted convention; it was the usual course of action among the Jews to propound questions. When Jesus preached to the great multitude that followed Him to Capernaum, many of the Jews that surrounded Him plied the Savior with questions concerning His lineage. The method of question and answer brought forth many truths that otherwise might have been passed over without complete justification. From the Savior's answers, which in themselves were sermons, we obtain an understanding of God's purposes which in the orderly procedure of question and answer were clearly unfolded by Him. (John 6:24-71) Again, on the Day of Pentecost, when many devout Jews from all parts of the Earth were gathered in Jerusalem to celebrate the Feast of the Passover, more than 3,000 pious worshipers united in inquiry concerning the new faith about which the Apostles spoke. "Men and brethren, what shall we do?" was their concluding question as they appealed for truth. Here, again, we are indebted to this custom for the complete and forthright answer which the Apostles gave and which Luke records in the 2nd Chapter of the Acts of the Apostles.

SCAlma 21 5Alma 21 6In this same manner, as Aaron was preaching the Truths of Christ's Gospel to the unbelieving Amalekites, one of them stood up and in a mocking temper of mind, possibly of strife, asked him to repeat his assertion that he had seen an angel. Aaron, no doubt, had told them that he and his companions were rebuked by an angel when together they went forth to persecute the Saints of God. How the heavenly messenger had stopped them in the wicked course they then pursued; and that only by the power of the Almighty God were they preserved from a dire and ill-boding fate of which the angel foretold if they did not return to Him who was mighty to save. Aaron told the Amalekites that unless they should repent and worship God according to the traditions of their fathers, which his questioner called foolish, they, too, would be destroyed in the like manner as that of which the angel prophesied to him and his erstwhile companions. We imagine that this brought forth the further inquiry: "If, as you say we 'have need to repent' and that our desires are not for righteousness, why do not angels appear to us and show us what is right?" "Behold, are not this people as good as thy people?" In other words, "Is God a respecter of persons?" To this question, we might answer to ourselves, "Is God not mindful of the hearts of men?"

SCAlma 21 5Alma 21 6Aaron's opponent, among the questions he asked, asserted that the Amalekites had built many holy places, or sanctuaries, in which they assembled to worship God; that they, themselves, were good and holy; that they had no cause to repent, but that God would save all men no matter what or what not they did. The old doctrine of Nehor again raised its ugly head, that notwithstanding their actions, nary a man would be lost.

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Verses 7-9

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Believeth thou that the Son of God shall come to redeem mankind from their sins? All the old sophistries preached by Nehor to the dissident among the Nephites found new expression in the apostate Amalekites. They denied the spirit of prophecy, and called it foolishness to believe that any man knows what is to come. They denounced as folly the traditions of their fathers, and mocked as proceeding from ignorance the so-called revelations of God.

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Now Aaron, in spite of his listener's animosity and notwithstanding their threatened hostility, took the Scriptures wherein Jacob, the Prophet Nephi's brother, foretold the coming of Christ who should redeem all mankind by His Atoning Blood:

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Yea, I know that ye know that in the body He shall show Himself unto those at Jerusalem, from whence we came; for it is expedient that it should be among them; for it behooveth the great Creator that He suffereth Himself to become subject unto man in the flesh, and die for all men, that all men might become subject unto Him.

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9For as death hath passed upon all men, to fulfill the merciful plan of the great Creator, there must needs be a power of resurrection, and the resurrection must needs come unto man by reason of the Fall; and the Fall came by reason of transgression; and because man became fallen they were cut off from the presence of the Lord.

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Wherefore, it must needs be an infinite Atonement—save it should be an infinite Atonement this corruption could not put on incorruption. Wherefore, the first judgment which came upon man must needs have remained to an endless duration. And if so, this flesh must have laid down to rot and to crumble to its mother earth, to rise no more. (II Nephi 9:5-7.)

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Aaron also quoted the Prophet Abinadi who labored in the same land wherein Aaron now ministered, even the Land of Nephi:

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9For behold, did not Moses prophesy unto them concerning the coming of the Messiah, and that God should redeem His people? Yea, and even all the prophets who have prophesied ever since the world began—have they not spoken more or less concerning these things?

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Have they not said that God Himself should come down among the children of men, and take upon Him the form of man, and go forth in mighty power upon the face of the Earth?

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Yea, and have they not said also that He should bring to pass the resurrection of the dead, and that He, Himself, should be oppressed and afflicted? (Mosiah 13:33-35)

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Again Aaron quoted Abinadi:

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9I would that ye should understand that God Himself shall come down among the children of men, and shall redeem His people.

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9And thus God breaketh the bands of death, having gained the victory over death; giving the Son power to make intercession for the children of men—

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9* * * * * * * * *

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9But behold, the bands of death shall be broken, and the Son reigneth, and hath power over the dead; therefore, He bringeth to pass the resurrection of the dead.

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9* * * * * * * * *

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9But behold, and fear, and tremble before God, for ye ought to tremble; for the Lord redeemeth none such that rebel against Him and die in their sins; yea, even all those that have perished in their sins ever since the world began, that have wilfully rebelled against God, that have known the commandments of God, and would not keep them. (See Chapter 15. Book of Mosiah.)

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9This latter verse was particularly appropriate in the preaching of Aaron to the Amalekites because they had openly rebelled against God and His laws.

SCAlma 21 7Alma 21 8Alma 21 9Aaron called upon many other prophets to establish the coming of Christ so that the Amalekites might understand. However, they would not hearken to his words as one by one he brought before them not only the Nephite servants of God, but also many Jewish prophets who lived in Jerusalem even before the time of Lehi.

SCAlma 21 10Alma 21 11Alma 21 12Verses 10-12

SCAlma 21 10Alma 21 11Alma 21 12As Aaron expounded these things unto the Amalekites they became angry with him. Aaron was not to be confounded by the bickerings of the Amalekites, nor was he to be turned from delivering the message which he bore. Unmindful of their threats and undaunted in following the course he set out to pursue, Aaron, calmly, and even joyously, proclaimed the Salvation of the Lord to the unbelieving people of Jerusalem.

SCAlma 21 10Alma 21 11Alma 21 12Aaron boldly declared Christ, his atoning blood; the resurrection of the dead, and the Redemption of mankind. But the Amalekites, so strongly entrenched in the doctrines of Nehor, would not hear his words. They mocked, they ridiculed, they reviled and smote God's holy servants. But, the missionaries, patient under trial and imbued with righteous faith, withheld blow for blow, refusing to revile the reviler. They thought of the sufferings foretold of Him, whose servants they were.

SCAlma 21 10Alma 21 11Alma 21 12At length, seeing their words turned into mockery and their appeals into scorn, their testimonies rejected by the Amalekites whose sole rebuttal was to deny and deride, Aaron "departed out of their synagogue, and came over to a village called Ani-Anti."

SCAlma 21 10Alma 21 11Alma 21 12In Ani-Anti, Aaron found Muloki, Ammah, and his brethren, preaching the word of the Lord. It was not difficult to engage the people there in arguments concerning their preachments; the Sacred Record says, "They contended with many about the Word." But, nevertheless, and notwithstanding the truthfulness of their words and the purity of their purpose, the harder the missionaries worked, the harder became the hearts of the people there. Again, the Sacred Record notes that the missionaries departed and sought others who would listen more attentively to the promptings of the Holy Spirit.

SCAlma 21 10Alma 21 11Alma 21 12Not far from Ani-Anti was the Land of Middoni. Aaron and his brethren entered there, and preached the Glad Tidings of the Gospel unto many. There were a few who believed their words and who took upon themselves the name of Christ. Others became more bitter and malignant.

Alma 21 13Verse 13

Alma 21 13Aaron and a number of his brethren were cast into prison. Notwithstanding that the labors of Aaron and of the missionaries here met with a greater degree of success than did their efforts elsewhere, the wicked among the people of Middoni soon raised a cry against them. Some, including Aaron, of the brethren, were cast into prison. Their companions fled into the regions around about. In prison they were treated with great cruelty; they were bound with strong cords which cut into their flesh; they were deprived of proper food, drink, and clothing. In addition to all this the missionaries suffered nameless afflictions.

Alma 21 14Verse 14

Alma 21 14Aaron and his brethren delivered from prison. Through the intercession of King Lamoni and Ammon, the imprisoned missionaries were released from their wretched confinement. They were immediately clothed and fed, and all their wants ministered to by Ammon and Lamoni.

Alma 21 14Middoni was a Lamanite Land where Aaron, Muloki, and Ammah, were imprisoned and treated with great cruelty by its sin-hardened inhabitants. Directed by the revelations of God, Ammon, then in the Land of Ishmael, determined to go and deliver his brethren from prison. Lamoni, the converted king of that land, decided to accompany him there, as he believed he had sufficient influence with Antiomno, King of Middoni, to effect the release of the imprisoned brethren. (86 B.C.)

Alma 21 14On their way, Ammon and Lamoni met the latter's father, who was the supreme ruler of all the Lamanites, as he journeyed from the Land of Nephi to Ishmael, one of its provinces. From the circumstances of this meeting, it is to be presumed that Middoni lay somewhere between Ishmael and Nephi, and as it is spoken of as down, it was probably situated in some of the lower valleys, or north towards the wilderness that separated the Lands of Nephi and Zarahemla. On their arrival at the Land of Middoni, Ammon and Lamoni found favor with Antiomno and procured the release of Aaron and the other missionaries from the dungeons in which they were immured. Though they had at first so cruelly treated the Nephite missionaries the Lamanites of this land were among those who were converted to the Lord by their ministrations. (Alma 23:10)

SCAlma 21 15Alma 21 16Verses 15-16

SCAlma 21 15Alma 21 16They went forth again to declare the Word. After a short period of mutual rejoicing and thanksgiving, the brethren, praising the Lord that He had raised up friends to minister unto their needs, lost no time in again declaring the Gospel Plan. Forgetting the pains they had suffered and the indignities they had endured while in prison, they commenced once more to deliver the faithful message for which they had come. Relying upon the promptings of the Holy Spirit, they preached the Word of God in every synagogue of the Amalekites, and every place where else they could get the Lamanites to listen to their words. Upon every hill, upon the streets, in their homes, and in all the assemblies into which the Lamanites gave consent, the missionaries testified of God's goodness.

SCAlma 21 15Alma 21 16Unmindful of the many times their words had been rejected, and their testimonies scorned, again and again, Aaron and his fellow laborers preached Christ and His mission here below. Disdaining the injustice of their imprisonment and the soreness of the afflictions therein suffered, they forgave all those to whom the Light of Christ had been denied, and in their labors sought to dispel the darkness that had overtaken their fallen brethren.

SCAlma 21 15Alma 21 16The missionaries were, as the Lord admonished them at the beginning of their labors, patient under trial, and thereby they showed to the sons and daughters of Laman and Lemuel that the Lord whom they served was indeed the Father of all men and that He despised none.

Alma 21 17Verse 17

Alma 21 17They brought many to a knowledge of the truth. Comforted by the Lord, and sustained by His power, the missionaries, headed by Aaron, began to reap a plentiful harvest of them that loved the Lord. They labored unceasingly to bring souls to their Maker, and in following inspiration's lead they were able to make plain to the savage mind the unfathomable will of God. In humility, they guided the erring along the paths of justice and truth. Many of the Lamanites, because of the missionaries' long-suffering and self-abnegation, saw in the demeanor of the brethren proof of their worthy cause. Gradually the Spirit of the Lord brought many to see wherein the traditions handed down to them by their fathers had led them into sinful paths. They resolved that no longer would they be slaves of the unrestrained lives they had led, lives in which falsehood and deceit had been an important part in nourishing cleavage between them and their brethren, the Nephites.

Alma 21 17A large number of the Lamanites saw and recognized their sins; they became convinced that the missionaries spoke the truth, and as future records make known, they, with great numbers of their dark-skinned brethren, never wavered in the knowledge of Christ which they had, even when death was their lot. They remained faithful to the end. (Alma 24:16-19)

SCAlma 21 18Alma 21 19Alma 21 20Verses 18-20

SCAlma 21 18Alma 21 19Alma 21 20Ammon and King Lamoni returned to Ishmael. When Ammon and King Lamoni saw the auspicious beginning of Aaron's renewed ministry, they, giving thanks to God and blessing His Name forevermore, left for the home of King Lamoni in the Land of Ishmael. Both the king and his subject-friend, Ammon, thought of Ishmael as the Land of their Inheritance. The Land of Ishmael was part of the greater Land of Lehi-Nephi, more often called simply the Land of Nephi.

SCAlma 21 18Alma 21 19Alma 21 20In the Land of Nephi the fathers of the Nephites settled quite some time before (between 544 B.C. and 421 B.C.), and built a large and thriving community. There the Nephites prospered until wickedness again caused the righteous to move ever farther northward. When the Nephites abandoned their homes in the Land of Nephi, the Lamanites, whose ruler now was Lamoni's father, immediately repossessed them and held them as their own.

SCAlma 21 18Alma 21 19Alma 21 20Evidently, when King Lamoni and Ammon reached the Land of Ishmael, Ammon again proffered his services as a servant to the king. But Lamoni would not! He, filled as he was with the knowledge and influence of the eternal worlds, wanted his people to have them also. Lamoni did not shrink from the cause he had espoused. After but a little delay, the king ordered that synagogues wherein his people could hear the Word of the Lord spoken by the servants of God, should be built throughout the Land of Ishmael where he now reigned supreme.

SCAlma 21 18Alma 21 19Alma 21 20To further the Work of the Lord, Lamoni called all his subjects to assemble themselves that they, too, might hear the glorious things that had been made known to him.

Alma 21 21Verse 21

Alma 21 21King Lamoni did rejoice over his people. In its final analysis, the word king means father. In patriarchal days the king ruled by right of his fatherhood. This idea was imbedded in the thinking of all the Hebrews, and the descendants of Father Lehi retained it in nearly all the annals that have been preserved by the Sacred Record unless it was during the Reign of the Judges. Father Lehi was the head and the leader and the ultimate appeal of his little colony. May we say, "He was their king." This custom held fast when Mosiah I appointed his son, Benjamin, to be king of the Nephites. Benjamin, in turn, at God's command, ordained his own son, Mosiah, "to be a king and a ruler over this people, whom the Lord our God hath given us." (Mosiah 1:10) The chronicles of these times show the fatherly interest these great and good kings had for the welfare of their subjects.

Alma 21 21Later on we shall learn that when wickedness usurped the place of goodness and purity among the Nephites, the people, themselves, dissatisfied with the way their government was administered by ruthless and scheming men, divided themselves into tribes, every man leading his kindred and friends. This move disrupted the plans of the enemies of organized conduct in the affairs of state, and completely disorganized their republican form of government which had for ninety years been presided over by Chief Judges. Some men had larger families and more relatives and friends than did others, therefore some tribes were larger than were others. However, each tribe appointed its leader or chief who was their ruler or king. His special duty was to see that the laws which they adopted were properly carried out. (III Nephi 7:1-4)

Alma 21 21We are not surprised to find that the father-king relationship was carried out by the sons of Laman and Lemuel, because they also had inherited this idea of government from the Hebrews, the ancestors of both the Nephites and the Lamanites.

Alma 21 21Thus, we find implanted in Lamoni's heart, a fatherly concept, beforetime quite dormant, of his duty as king over the inhabitants of the Land of Ishmael, whom, we imagine he now regarded as his children.

Alma 21 21Lamoni grew increasingly anxious in the work he had undertaken. He could not rest from his labors, nor slacken his zeal. The cause of the Lord and the satisfaction of its blessed requirements was the goal for which he strived. With strength made greater by Ammon's watchful care, Lamoni fearlessly wrestled with every obstacle which confronted him. He rejoiced because his people were now free to act according to their own desires. No longer would his father in the Land of Nephi seek to oppress them. No longer would the ties that bound them to the throne there by tyrannical or burdensome. The great king of all the Lamanites, whose seat of government was in the land of Nephi, had granted autonomy to the Land of Ishmael, and thus Lamoni was the supreme ruler of all who dwelt therein. (Alma 20:26)

Alma 21 21With scarcely a pause to attend to the affairs of his kingdom, Lamoni taught his people the Way of the Lord. To their astonished ears he declared that they might now worship as they chose, and wherever they were at if it were in the land over which he reigned. Liberty to worship the Lord God no matter the form thereof or its expression was allowed to all.

Alma 21 23Verse 23

Alma 21 23Ammon did preach unto the people of King Lamoni. Not only was King Lamoni diligent in preaching and teaching the Word, but Ammon likewise, at every opportunity proclaimed his glorious message. He taught Lamoni's people what was right and what was wrong, what was good and what was not. Ammon showed them how to choose the good and pure, and how to eschew all evil. He taught them to pray, and to serve each other. But above all else Ammon taught them of Christ; how He was the Lord God, and that He would come down from His abode On High and dwell with mortal man. He explained to their simple understanding the mission of our Lord, the Fall of Adam, and the Sacrifice Christ should make to redeem all mankind from its effects.

Alma 21 23Daily, and with one accord, King Lamoni and Ammon went about among the people, teaching them the righteous Ways of Heaven's gracious Plan. Lamoni's people gave heed to their words. They listened to the truths of the Gospel as they were told by God's servants; they were zealous in keeping the Lord's commandments. Later on we shall learn that with others of the Lamanites who accepted the Gospel Plan, fire and even death could not tempt them to deny the truths the missionaries had taught them.
