Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 22

SCAlma 22 1Alma 22 2Alma 22 3Alma 22 4Verses 1-4

SCAlma 22 1Alma 22 2Alma 22 3Alma 22 4Aaron was led by the Spirit of the Lord to the Land of Nephi. As Ammon, together with Lamoni, was strengthening the Church in the Land of Ishmael by adding those who believed in their words to its numbers, Aaron and his brethren left the Saints in the newly established Church in Middoni into the care of the priests and teachers whom they had undoubtedly ordained there. Aaron was guided by the Holy Spirit's promptings to go to the Land of Nephi where Lamoni's father, who reigned as king over all the Lamanites except those who dwelt in Ishmael, lived. Aaron was even led to the house of the king, himself.

SCAlma 22 1Alma 22 2Alma 22 3Alma 22 4Unafraid, but nevertheless fearful that the king would not receive them, Aaron and his companions, with great trepidation, approached his royal highness. We imagine that they were not dismayed by the splendor of the king's court for Aaron's father also was a king; neither were they overcome by his many servants. When they were ushered into the king's presence, they said: "Behold, O King, we are the brethren of Ammon, whom thou hast delivered out of prison."

SCAlma 22 1Alma 22 2Alma 22 3Alma 22 4Aaron, in respect for the exalted ruler's dignity, bowed before him and offered to be his servant. He also pledged his brethren's fealty.

SCAlma 22 1Alma 22 2Alma 22 3Alma 22 4Like Lamoni, who was now the supreme ruler in the Land of Ishmael, did unto Ammon, his father who reigned in Lehi-Nephi, did unto Aaron and his brethren. The aged king not only granted their lives to the missionaries, but also, for reasons known only unto himself, refused to let them serve him as bondmen.

SCAlma 22 1Alma 22 2Alma 22 3Alma 22 4However, subsequent to his meeting with Ammon, as the king journeyed to the Land of Middoni, the king was troubled in his heart because "of the generosity and the greatness of the words of" Ammon. The king wanted Aaron to explain the meaning of Ammon's words. He also desired of Aaron to know why Ammon had not come with his brethren to visit him as the king had requested him so to do. The king, because of Ammon's absence, grew more perplexed than ever, but he was firm in his determination that Aaron and his companions should abide with him and thereby minister unto him the things whereof Ammon spoke.

SCAlma 22 1Alma 22 2Alma 22 3Alma 22 4Aaron, seeking to comfort the old king and to assuage any misgivings he might have, explained the reason why Ammon was not with them. "Behold," Aaron said, "the Spirit of the Lord has called him another way." Aaron assured the old monarch that Ammon was with the latter's son, Lamoni, in the Land of Middoni, teaching the people there all things pertaining to righteousness.

SCAlma 22 5Alma 22 6Verses 5-6

SCAlma 22 5Alma 22 6What is this that ye have said concerning the Spirit of the Lord? Although Lamoni's father recognized the existence and power of the Great Spirit, he was altogether ignorant of things concerning the attributes and benign qualities of the True and Living God. (See Alma 18:5-6)

SCAlma 22 5Alma 22 6The king, notwithstanding its simple phrases, did not understand the meaning of Aaron's statement that Ammon had been led to go elsewhere by the Spirit of the Lord. The king thought of the Great Spirit, known to the Lamanites only in an indefinite way. The Great Spirit lived, they believed, in many things, and made Himself manifest in many ways. We may presume that like many other semi-savage races, they imagined that He could be seen in fire, in water, in the red lightnings of the sky, in thunder when He was angry, in Sun and Moon and stars. But, mostly they saw Him in human feats of daring as was shown by Ammon at the Waters of Sebus. However, the Spirit of the Lord, the king knew not. "Behold," he said, "this is the thing which doth trouble me."

SCAlma 22 5Alma 22 6Also perplexing to the king were certain words spoken by Ammon when that Nephite servant of God rebuked the great ruler of the Lamanites as each journeyed, the king to Ishmael and Ammon with Lamoni to the Land of Middoni.

SCAlma 22 5Alma 22 6Ammon had spoken to the king of repentance of which the aged monarch knew nothing. To be saved at the Last Day or to be cast off evoked a feeling of consternation in his troubled breast. Not only were Ammon's words perplexing to the king's mind, but to his heart, they were painful. The words and conduct of Ammon had reached the royal person's innermost thoughts, and although he was king, yet he humbly sought their meaning. "What is this that Ammon said," was the thing the king wanted most to be explained.

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11Verses 7-11

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11Believeth thou that there is a God? To believe in Him, is an eternal principle in the worship of the True and Living God. It matters not what one's estate may be, be he high as was this great king of the Lamanites, or low as were his servants, there comes a time when faith in His Holy Name lifts a burden of care from backs that already may be bent under the weight of years. Faith in Him spreads over us a canopy of peace, and fills our hearts with a joyous hope of Life Everlasting.

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11A belief in God renews in the strong a steadfast spirit. In the weakest it instills courage and hope. It implants an upright heart in all them that love the Lord. Aaron remembered the teachings of his forebears, "Trust ye in the Lord, for in His strength is Everlasting Life."

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11Thoughts such as these prompted Aaron to ask the old monarch, "Believeth thou that there is a God?" The aged ruler, somewhat bewildered, replied to Aaron's almost abrupt interrogation, "I know that the Amalekites say there is a God."

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11The Amalekites were a sect of Nephite apostates who lived in the Lamanitish Kingdom. Of their origin we know but little. They had prevailed upon the king for permission to erect synagogues and other sanctuaries wherein they might worship God. Their worship, we may imagine, was a mere form. They paid divine honor to a Deity whom they knew not. They had twisted and turned, and otherwise wrested the Holy Scriptures to suit their own depraved hearts. The king, not knowing the requirements of the Law of Moses, gave little heed to the Amalekites' beliefs or their teachings. He endured their presence in his kingdom because of the taxes they paid and the revenue he otherwise exacted from them.

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11But, however, things seemed to be changing. To the king, what beforetime had been only a vagrant conclusion of the Amalekites—that there is a God—now became to him a world of wonderment. What would Ammon say if he were here? the king marvelled. What does Aaron now say? The king asked no proof, he demanded no further authority. "If now," he said to Aaron, "thou sayest there is a God, behold I will believe."

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11Aaron's heart rejoiced that the king was not bound by the old and wicked traditions of unbelief that had enslaved so many of the king's brethren. The king, just emerging from the darkness that had covered the children of Laman like a cloud, began to see the wonderful light that encircled the Nephite missionaries. "Behold, assuredly as thou liveth, O King, there is a God!" Aaron not only said, but in the strength of the Lord, he proclaimed.

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11Evidenced by the narrative, Aaron had outlined to the king the events in the history of his people, beginning at the first. The king remembered Aaron's resume and recalled that Lehi had been led by the Great Spirit to the land wherein his people now lived. He recalled, too, that the first fathers of his race dwelt in the Land of Jerusalem. He remembered that shortly after their arrival in the new land whereunto they were led, that because of internal strife, Lehi's little band of colonists separated into two groups, the one followed Nephi and the other remained with Laman and Lemuel. The latter group became the direct ancestors of his people. The king remembered hearing from Aaron how that the Nephites had prospered, and how his own people had become indolent and crafty. The king listened to Aaron's terrible indictment of his people and saw their oppression. The king offered no excuses, but we imagine he saw their deliverance in the light and might of the Lord which was beginning to dawn in their midst. The king, still bewildered by Aaron's question, now turned the questioner, himself. He wanted to know if the Great Spirit which brought our fathers out of Jerusalem was the God of whom Aaron spoke.

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11Inspired by the Lord's Spirit, and further inspirited by the king's anxious desire to know the truth, Aaron affirmed the conclusion of the king which the old monarch had put as a question. They were the One and the same God! Aaron did not stop with the mere declaration of this wonderful truth; solemnly he told the king of God's greatness and His power in that He created all things in Heaven and upon the Earth. The Sun, the Moon, and stars were made by Him, and everything that graces the land in which the king lived. "Believeth thou this?" Aaron asked.

SCAlma 22 7Alma 22 8Alma 22 9Alma 22 10Alma 22 11The king could not resist Aaron's testimony had he wanted to. There was something in the old monarch's breast that responded to Aaron's direct and enthusiastic approach to the question he asked. The Spirit of the Lord was with them both, Aaron to present the truth, and the king to receive it with joy. "Yea, I believe that the Great Spirit created all things, and I desire that ye should tell me concerning all these things," the king said, "and I will believe thy words."

SCAlma 22 12Alma 22 13Alma 22 14Verses 12-14

SCAlma 22 12Alma 22 13Alma 22 14Aaron began reading the Scriptures to the king. Aaron, seeing the faith of Lamoni's father, was filled with joy at this fresh expression of the Holy Spirit's promptings. Aaron, by degrees, explained to the king the principles of the Everlasting Gospel. He commenced with the creation of man, showed how Adam fell that man might be, and how the Plan of Redemption through the Savior's sufferings was devised even before the world was; and how man, by obedience to the Gospel's precepts, would triumph over death and hell.

Alma 22 15Verse 15

Alma 22 15What shall I do that I may have Eternal Life? Aaron's words were gratefully received by the king, who besought Aaron to teach him how he might obtain this Eternal Life of which Aaron had spoken.

Alma 22 15The questions asked by the ruler definitely depict the course taken by Aaron in proclaiming the Gospel to the old monarch. It also portrays in words that we, too, may understand more fully the gifts and blessings that come to us through the Atonement of Christ.

Alma 22 15The king, in whose veins ran the Blood of Israel, immediately recognized the truth when he heard it, and made ready to receive it. He was, at once, prepared to sacrifice all, that the great blessing of Eternal Life should be his. The things the king held most dear, his kingdom and its power, all worldly goods, he was willing to forsake, if he could receive that great joy of which Aaron had told him.

Alma 22 16Verse 16

Alma 22 16Bow down before God. Aaron's answer to the king's profession of faith is one which we all can take to our hearts. It is not only the key to all righteousness, but is the foundation upon which we may build the superstructure of good works. Bow down before God, repent of all sin, call upon His Name in faithful prayer, believe that what you ask will be given you, were the terms of Aaron's inspired injunction.

Alma 22 16If you will do these things, Aaron said, "Then shalt thou receive the hope which thou desirest."

Alma 22 16Aaron's promise of Eternal Life and the joy that comes through humbly recognizing not only God's power, but His love and goodness, prompts us to remember a like blessing bestowed by the Presiding High Priest of God's Church, King Benjamin, upon the Nephites who dwelt in his domain. King Benjamin was Aaron's grandfather who reigned in Zarahemla about 125 B.C.

Alma 22 16I say, that this is the man who receiveth Salvation, through the Atonement which was prepared from the foundation of the world for all mankind, which ever were since the Fall of Adam, or who are, or who ever shall be, even unto the end of the world.

Alma 22 16And this is the means whereby Salvation cometh. And there is none other Salvation save this which hath been spoken of; neither are there any conditions whereby man can be saved except the conditions which I have told you.

Alma 22 16Believe in God; believe that He is, and that He created all things, both in Heaven and in Earth; believe that He has all wisdom, and all power, both in Heaven and in Earth; believe that man doth not comprehend all the things which the Lord can comprehend.

Alma 22 16And again, believe that ye must repent of your sins and forsake them, and humble yourselves before God; and ask in sincerity of heart that He would forgive you; and now, if you believe all these things see that ye do them.

Alma 22 16And again I say unto you as I have said before, that as ye have come to the knowledge of the glory of God, or if ye have known of His goodness and have tasted of His love, and have received a remission of your sins which causeth such exceeding great joy in your souls, even so I would that ye should remember and always retain in remembrance, the greatness of God, and your own nothingness, and His goodness and long-suffering towards you, unworthy creatures, and humble yourselves even in the depths of humility, calling on the Name of the Lord daily, and standing steadfastly in the faith of that which is to come, which was spoken by the mouth of the angel.

Alma 22 16And behold, I say unto you that if ye do this ye shall always rejoice, and be filled with the love of God, and always retain a remission of your sins; and ye shall grow in the knowledge of the glory of Him that created you, or in the knowledge of that which is just and true. (Mosiah 4:7-12.)

SCAlma 22 17Alma 22 18Verses 17-18

SCAlma 22 17Alma 22 18The king did bow down before the Lord. Without any hesitation the king bowed himself before the Lord. On his bended knees, and even prone—with his face to the ground—the king, humbly, but with a loud voice, cried unto God for the blessings of which Aaron had spoken. The king, not unlike the Prophet Joseph Smith in these Last Days, lacked knowledge. He asked God. God answered his prayer! So great were the emotions of the repentant king that with his supplication ended, "he was struck as if he were dead."

SCAlma 22 17Alma 22 18The Sacred Record says, "he did prostrate himself upon the earth." When King Benjamin, part of whose address we have just read, finished speaking to his people concerning the coming of our Lord, Jesus Christ, he cast his eyes upon the multitude who had heard his mighty sermon, and observed that they had "all fallen to the earth." This same phenomenon seized the king of the Lamanites unto whom Aaron proclaimed the Gospel. To prostrate oneself, or fall to the earth, before The Majesty on High is an act of humble devotion. It recognizes the greatness of God and the nothingness of man. It expresses the soul's deepest humility. With a great desire to do away with pride and arrogance, to do good all the rest of his days, and with a great love for the coming Redeemer in his heart, the great ruler of the Lamanites fell down before the Lord, and cried mightily for the blessings of obedience.

SCAlma 22 19Alma 22 20Alma 22 21Verses 19-21

SCAlma 22 19Alma 22 20Alma 22 21The servants of the king ran and told the queen all that had happened to the king. When the king thus fell, his servants ran and told the queen what had happened to the king. She at once came into the room where he lay, and seeing Aaron and his brethren standing by, she became angry with them. She supposed that they were the cause of the evil that had, in her opinion, befallen her husband. She, without hesitation, ordered the king's servants to take the missionaries and slay them. But the servants dared not! They feared the power which was in Aaron. "Why commandest thou that we should slay these men, when, behold, one of them is mightier than us all," they pleaded with the queen. The queen also was afraid, but she seemed to think that the best way to get rid of the trouble was to destroy those who she fancied brought it. As the king's servants refused to obey her command, she ordered them to go out into the streets and call upon the people to come in and kill Aaron and his companions.

SCAlma 22 22Alma 22 23Alma 22 24Alma 22 25Alma 22 26Verses 22-26

SCAlma 22 22Alma 22 23Alma 22 24Alma 22 25Alma 22 26The king stood upon his feet, receiving his strength. When Aaron saw the temper of the queen, he feared lest the multitude, in the hardness of their hearts, would raise a great commotion, and be the cause of hindering the work of God which had so auspiciously begun with the conversion of the king. Therefore he put forth his hand and raised the monarch from the earth, saying to him as he did so, "Stand." The king arose at once and received back his strength. At the sight of this great showing of superhuman power, the queen and the king's servants greatly wondered, and they were filled with exceeding great fear. They did not know the purposes of the Lord in this mighty exhibition of His tender care.

SCAlma 22 22Alma 22 23Alma 22 24Alma 22 25Alma 22 26Then the king began to explain to them what he had learned with regard to God and His Gospel, and he spoke with such great power that his whole household was converted thereto. The multitude that had gathered at the queen's call were also pacified by his words, and when the king saw that their hearts were softened, he caused that Aaron and his brethren should stand forth and teach them the Word of God.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34Verses 27-34

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34The king sent a proclamation throughout all the land. In these verses many find what they consider to be the key to Book of Mormon geography. However, this passage was written to furnish important information concerning the missionary travels of the elders and priests, and also to indicate the vast extent of territory over which the Nephites and Lamanites had spread.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34From the limited information they give, a number of maps have been prepared. No two seem to agree. But, from the beginning of our prayerful studies of the Book of Mormon, when the beauties of the Sacred Record first became known to us, we have counseled against mapmaking. We believe that any attempt to pinpoint the locale of Book of Mormon cities and lands is guesswork, and represents only the opinion of the mapmakers, themselves. Such a course, we believe, is fraught with peril both to the narrative and to the teachings therein contained. Time has not changed our conclusions.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34The trouble in mapping an unfamiliar area is that the amateur cartographer seeks to employ in his survey any and all points that he imagines will favor his peculiar notion, no matter how honestly intended. He, consciously or unconsciously, wrests divinely translated passages to substantiate a certain thesis. Thus, in presenting his conjectures, he gives a deceptive appearance to some plausible, but, nevertheless, unprovable theory. In the exploits of many novice mapmakers, this procedure had proved to be the case.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34Then, too, there are many of our readers who permit others to do their thinking; they need to remember that it is easy to present an unreal and misleading inference and then to palm it off as reasoned judgment.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34The Book of Mormon is not a geography. The writers of the Sacred Record gave little space, or much effort, to describe the physical features of the regions wherein took place, the events they recorded. It is not a record of borders and boundary lines, of rivers and highways, of areas of population and industry, but as is repeatedly shown, the Book of Mormon is a book of doctrine, intended to convince ... "the Jew and Gentile that Jesus is the Christ, the Eternal God, manifesting Himself unto all nations." (Inspired Preface)

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34But the modern-day attempts that are constantly being made to identify the cities and lands of the Book of Mormon with the old and obscure ruins found in Mexico and points farther south, will end in failure; this is the opinion of many reliable scholars who have made it an object of search and research. Certainly, such attempts will produce little good. It is folly to associate oneself with any peculiar notion and say of some particular ruin, "This is the City of Zarahemla," or "There is the Land Bountiful." Such ventures in thought are merely guesses, and such speculation leads to confusion.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34There is a way the student of the Book of Mormon may avoid the distractions and pitfalls caused by mixed-up theories and selfish opinions of geography—that is to shun all speculation.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34It does not matter one iota whether Lehi landed near the 30th Degree of South Latitude, where the Prophet Joseph Smith is alleged to have said that he did, or somewhere in Central America where others speculate his landing. What does matter, however, is whether or not we obey the voices of God's Nephite servants. The Doctrines they proclaimed, the Path to which they point, and the sureness of the Way, reveal a vivid picture of our Father's Plan of Salvation; too, they have a permanent authority about them that all may recognize who desire to know His holy mind and will. These doctrines are meat and drink to our souls, and the mysteries surrounding the Nephites' geography can wait until that day "when what we know not now, we will know hereafter." There is enough to establish beyond any doubt the hope in Christ which the Nephite Prophets proclaimed, and we can leave the solution of the geographic mysteries to Him whose wisdom we cannot fathom; "we can lean upon an Omnipotence we cannot grasp."

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34In this connection a statement made in 1890 by George Q. Cannon will be sufficient:

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34There is a tendency, strongly manifested at the present time among some of the brethren, to study the geography of the Book of Mormon. We have heard of numerous lectures, illustrated by suggestive maps, being delivered on this subject during the present winter, generally under the auspices of the Improvement Societies and Sunday Schools. We are greatly pleased to notice the increasing interest taken by the Saints in this holy book. It contains the fullness of the Gospel of Christ, and those who prayerfully study its sacred pages can be made wise unto salvation. It also unravels many mysteries connected with the history of the ancient world, more particularly of this Western Continent, mysteries which no other book explains. But valuable as is the Book of Mormon both in doctrine and history, yet it is possible to put this sacred volume to uses for which it was never intended, uses which are detrimental rather than advantageous to the cause of truth, and consequently to the work of the Lord.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34We have been led to these thoughts from the fact that the brethren who lecture on the lands of the Nephites or the geography of the Book of Mormon are not united in their conclusions. No two of them, so far as we have learned, are agreed on all points, and in many cases the variations amount to ... thousands of miles. These differences of views lead to discussion, contention, and perplexity; and we believe more confusion is caused by these divergences than good is done by the truths elicited.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34How is it that there is such a variety of ideas on this subject? Simply because the Book of Mormon is not a geographical primer. It was not written to teach geographical truths. What is told us of the situation of the various lands or cities of the ancient Jaredites, Nephites, and Lamanites is usually simply an incidental remark connected with the doctrinal or historical portions of the work; and almost invariably only extends to a statement of the relative position of some land or city to contiguous or surrounding places, and nowhere gives us the exact situation or boundaries so that it can be definitely located without fear of error.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34It must be remembered that geography as a science, like chronology and other branches of education, was not understood or taught after the manner or by the methods of the moderns. It could not be amongst those people who were not acquainted with the size and form of the earth, as was the case with most of the nations of antiquity, though not with the Nephites. Their seers and prophets appear to have received divine light on this subject.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34The First Presidency have often been asked to prepare some suggestive map illustrative of Nephite geography, but have never consented to do so. Nor are we acquainted with any of the Twelve who would undertake such a task. The reason is, that without further information they are not prepared even to suggest. The word of the Lord or the translation of other ancient records is required to clear up many points now so obscure that, as we have said, no two original investigators agreed with regard to them. When, as is the case, one student places a certain city at the Isthmus of Panama, a second in Venezuela, and a third in Guiana or northern Brazil, it is obvious that suggestive maps prepared by these brethren would confuse instead of enlighten; and they cannot be thus far apart in this one important point without relative positions being also widely separate.

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34For these reasons we have strong objections to the introduction of maps and their circulation among our people which profess to give the location of the Nephite cities and settlements. As we have said, they have a tendency to mislead, instead of enlighten, and they give rise to discussions which will lead to division of sentiment and be very unprofitable. We see no necessity for maps of this character, because, at least, much would be left to the imagination of those who prepare them; and we hope that there will be no attempt made to introduce them or give them general circulation. Of course, there can be no harm result from the study of the geography of this continent at the time it was settled by the Nephites, drawing all the information possible from the record which has been translated for our benefit. But beyond this we do not think it necessary, at the present time, to go, because it is plain to be seen, we think, that evils may result therefrom. [^1]

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34From this we may feel sure that if, ever, the time comes, or that it is expedient for the Saints to have this information, it will come to them through the regularly established source, the prophet, seer, and revelator, the Presiding High Priest of the Church and no one else. However, the authors do not hesitate to urge upon all students of the Book of Mormon a further, prayerful, study of the Sacred Record, and leave all else to "Him who knoweth all things," for "God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place thereof." (Job 28:23)

SCAlma 22 27Alma 22 28Alma 22 29Alma 22 30Alma 22 31Alma 22 32Alma 22 33Alma 22 34In the brief outline that follows, we give only what we think to be the facts as they are recorded in the Sacred Record, and leave to a minimum any supposition concerning the location of its cities and lands.

THE LANDS OF THE NEPHITES

PART I

The Lands of the Nephites—Mulek and Lehi—Zarahemla and Nephi—The Wilderness—The Land of First Inheritance—The Journeys Northward—The Waters of Mormon—Lehi-Nephi.

To the ancient Nephites the whole of North America was known as the Land of Mulek, and South America as the Land of Lehi; or, to use the exact language of the Book of Mormon, "the land south was called Lehi and the land north was called Mulek."

The reason why these names were so given, was that the Lord brought Mulek into the land north, and Lehi into the land south, when he led them from Judea to this greater land of promise.

From the days of Mosiah I to the era of Christ's advent, South America was divided into two large divisions. These were the Land of Zarahemla and the Land of Nephi. During this period, except in times of war, the Lamanites occupied the Land of Nephi, and the Nephites inhabited the Land of Zarahemla.

That these two lands occupied the whole of the southern continent is shown by the statement of the sacred writer: "Thus the land of Nephi and the land of Zarahemla were nearly surrounded by water, there being a small neck of land between the land northward and the land southward." The width of this narrow neck of land that connected the two continents is in one place said to have been the distance of a day and a half's journey for a Nephite. In another place it is called a day's journey. Perhaps the places spoken of are not identical, but one may have been slightly to the north of the other along the line of the Isthmus of Panama.

Both the Lands of Nephi and Zarahemla were subdivided, for governmental purposes, into smaller lands, states or districts. Among the Nephites, these lands, in the days of the Republic, were ruled by a local chief judge, subject to the Chief Judge of the whole nation; and among the Lamanites by kings, who were tributary to the head king, whose seat of government was at the City of Lehi-Nephi or Nephi.

The Land of Nephi covered a much larger area of country than did the Land of Zarahemla. The two countries were separated by the wilderness which extended entirely across the continent from the shores of the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific. The northern edge of this wilderness ran in a line almost due east and west, and passed near the head of the River Sidon. The Sidon is generally interpreted to be the river in modern days called the Magdalena.

All north of this belt of wilderness was considered the Land of Zarahemla; all south of it was included in the Land of Nephi. We are nowhere told its exact breadth, and can only judge thereof from casual references in the narrative of the Book of Mormon.

The River Sidon flowed through the center of the Nephite civilization during the days of the Republic. After the convulsions that attended the Crucifixion of the Holy Messiah, the physical and political geography of the continent was greatly changed, and the new conditions are very vaguely defined by the inspired historians.

On the western bank of the River Sidon was built the City of Zarahemla. From the time of its first occupancy by the Nephites, to the date of its destruction by fire at the Crucifixion, it was the capital or chief city of the nation, the center of commercial activities, and the seat of government. It was the largest and oldest city within their borders, having been founded by the people of Zarahemla before the exodus of the Nephites, under Mosiah I, from the Land of Nephi.

When the Nephites, by reason of increasing numbers, the exigencies of war, or for other causes founded new cities, the cities so built were generally called after the name of the leader of the colony or some illustrious citizen, and the land immediately surrounding, contiguous, or tributary to the new city was called by the same name. As an example we will cite the example of the City or Land of Ammonihah, regarding which it is written: "Now it was the custom of the people of Nephi to call their lands, and their cities, and their villages, yea, even all their small villages, after the name of him who first possessed them; and thus it was with the land of Ammonihah." (Alma 8:7)

Some of these lands appear to have been relatively small, more resembling a county, or possibly a township, than any other division at present prevailing in this country. Such we suppose to have been the Lands of Helam and Morianton. Others, such as the Lands of Bountiful and Desolation, embraced wide, extended tracts of country.

The exact place where Lehi and his little colony first landed on this continent is not stated in the Book of Mormon, but it is generally believed by the Latter-day Saints to have been on the coast of Chile in thirty degrees south latitude.

We do not think it possible, without divine revelation, to determine with accuracy the identical spot where Lehi and his colony landed. We believe that the coast line of that region has entirely changed since those days. Even if we do not take into consideration the overwhelming convulsions that took place at the Crucifixion of our Lord, which changed the entire face of nature, there remains the general elevation or subsistence of the land which is continually taking place the world over. Some are falling. The land in South America, on its Pacific shores, has long been rising, some think for ages.

If this be so, the rise of an inch a year would entirely change the configuration of the seashore, and give this generation shallows and dry land, where but a few centuries ago there were deep waters. But so far as the results growing out of the terrible earthquakes that occurred at the death of the Savior are concerned, we can form no conclusions, for they were variable. In some regions the waters usurped the place of the land; in others the land encroached upon the waters. Which way it happened near the place where Lehi landed, we have no record, and consequently can say nothing. For all we know a huge mountain may now cover the spot, or it may be hidden beneath the blue waters of the Pacific, scores of miles away from any present landing place.

In the region that Lehi landed, there he also died. Soon after his death, Nephi, and those of the colony who wished to serve the Lord, departed for another country. They did so by direct command of heaven. The reason for this command was the murderous hatred shown by Laman and Lemuel towards Nephi and his friends. These vicious men determined to kill Nephi, that he might not be a king and a ruler over them. Their hearts were wicked; they loved sin and were resolved that they would not be governed by their virtuous and heaven-favored younger brother.

Nephi and his company journeyed in the wilderness for many days. By the expression "the wilderness," we understand the inspired writer to mean the uncultivated and uninhabited portion of the land. This word appears to be frequently used in later years, with this signification. At other times it is applied to the desert and uninhabitable regions, the tropical forests, and jungles infested with wild beasts. The journey of the Nephites was northward, as is shown by their later history; but Nephi, in his very brief account of this migration, says nothing with regard to the direction in which they traveled.

At the end of many days a land was found which was deemed suitable for settlement. There the company pitched their tents and commenced the tillage of the soil. In honor of their leader, it was called the Land of Nephi; or to use the modest language of Nephi, "My people would that we should call the name of the place Nephi; wherefore we did call it Nephi."

No doubt the choice of location was made by divine inspiration. It was a highly-favored land, rich in mineral and vegetable productions, and yielded abundant crops to the labors of the husbandman.

In this happy country the Nephites dwelt, prospered and increased until they again moved northward. Perhaps not once nor twice they migrated, but several times, for we hold it to be inconsistent with the story of the record and with good judgment to believe that in their first journey they traveled as far north as they were found four hundred years afterwards, when they again took up their line of march, and finally settled in the Land of Zarahemla.

In the first place there was no necessity for Nephi and his people taking such a lengthy, tedious and hazardous journey; in the second place, in their weak condition, it was nigh unto an impossibility. To have taken a journey of a few hundred miles would have placed them out of the reach of the Lamanites; there was no need for them to travel thousands. Again, in a few years the Lamanites had followed and come up to them; it is altogether inconsistent to think that that people, with its racial characteristics, would in so short a time have accomplished so marvelous a triumph as to follow, hunt up and attack their late brethren if the latter had placed all the distance from Chile to Ecuador between them and their pursuers. When we consider the difficulties of travel through the trackless wilderness, the obstacles interposed by nature, the lack of all roads or other guides to indicate where the Nephites had gone, it seems out of the question to imagine that in twenty years or so, the shiftless, unenterprising Lamanites had accomplished such a feat. To the contrary, we believe that Nephi and those with him traveled until they considered themselves safe, then settled down in a spot which they deemed desirable. By and by the Lamanites came upon them; the Nephites defended themselves as long as could, and when they could do so no longer, they again moved northward. Their early history was one of frequent wars; and as the Lord used the Lamanites as thorns in their sides when they turned from Him, we judge for this reason, and that they were found so far north in the days of Amaleki and Mosiah, that the savage descendants of Laman had frequently defeated them and driven them farther and farther away from the land of their first possession.

The inquiry will naturally arise, as a result of these suggestions: "In what portion of the South American continent lay the home of the Nephites in the days of Mosiah?" This cannot be answered authoritatively. We are nowhere told its exact situation. Still, there are many references in the Book of Mormon from which we can judge, to some extent, of its location. Elder Orson Pratt suggests that it was in the country we now call Ecuador. These writers entirely agree with Elder Pratt's suggestion. Other brethren have placed it considerably farther south, but in our reading of the Book of Mormon we have found no evidence to confirm their suppositions, but much to contradict them.

We believe that the lands occupied by the Nephites before they went down into the Land of Zarahemla were situated among the tablelands or high valley of the Andes, much as Utah is located in the bosom of the Rocky Mountains and parallel chains. For these reasons:

First—They were lands rich in minerals, which all through the American continents are found most abundantly in mountain regions. We may (so far as mineral proximity is concerned) compare the country east of this portion of the Andes—the unexplored, alluvial silvas of the Amazon—to the great plains or prairies east of the Rocky Mountains. These silvas, stretching from the Andes to the Atlantic, we regard as the great wilderness south of Zarahemla so often spoken of in the annals of the Judges.

Second—The climate of the torrid lowlands, almost directly under the equador, would be intolerable for its heat, and deadly in its humidity; while the country in the high valleys and tablelands would be excellently adapted to human life, especially (we may presume) before the great upheavals and convulsions that marked the death of the Redeemer. As the Nephites spread over the country they shunned regions where fevers were common, possibly in those parts rendered unhealthy by the overflowing of the rivers, which, when they receded, left large bodies of stagnant water covering the surface of the ground for the greater portion of the year.

It is probable that in their journeys the Nephites would follow the most available route, rather than plunge into the dense, untrodden, primeval forests of the wilderness, the home of all manner of savage animals, venomous snakes and poisonous reptiles, where a road would have to be cut every foot of the way through the most luxuriant and gigantic tropical vegetation to be found on the face of the globe. Therefore we regard its accessibility as another reason for believing that the Nephites did not leave the great backbone of the continent to descend into the unexplored depths of the region whose character they aptly sum up in one word, wilderness.

Our readers must not forget that there were two Lands called by the name of Nephi. The one was a limited district immediately surrounding the City of Lehi-Nephi or Nephi. There Mosiah and other Land of Nephi occupied the whole of the continent south of the great wilderness. This wilderness formed its northern boundary, and its frontier thereon ran in a straight course from the east to line from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean.

As this wilderness, though of great length east and west, was but a narrow strip north and south, and its northern edge ran close to the head waters of the River Sidon (or Magdalena), it is evident that the Land of Nephi covered by far the greater portion of South America. Within its wide boundaries was situated the original Land of Nephi, as well as many other lands called by various local names, just in the same way as there are many states in these United States, all together forming one great nation.

It is very obvious how there grew to be these two Lands of Nephi. At first, the small district around the capital city comprised all the territory occupied by the Nephites. As they spread out, throughout valleys and plains, whatever they reclaimed from the wilderness was considered a part of that land; and thus, year by year, its borders grew wider and wider, while for convenience sake or governmental purposes, the newly built cities and the land surrounding were called by varied names, according to the wishes of the people, most frequently after the leader of the outgoing colony or founder of the city. Thus we have a Land of Nephi within the Land of Nephi; just as we have nowadays Utah County within Utah State; and the City of New York and the County of New York within the State of New York. To distinguish the smaller Land of Nephi from the whole country, it is sometimes called the Land of Lehi-Nephi.

We have stated that the small Land of Nephi was a very limited district. We think this is easily proved. It was so limited in extent that we are told King Noah built a tower near the temple so high that he could stand upon the top thereof and overlook not only the Land of Lehi-Nephi where it was built, but also the Land of Shilom and the Land of Shemlon, which last named land was possessed by the Lamanites. No matter how high the tower, these lands must have been comparatively small (or that at any rate the Land of Lehi-Nephi was) to have enabled a man to overlook the whole three from the top of one building.

It was on the borders of this land, at the outer edge of its cultivated grounds, in the forest (or thicket) of Mormon, that Alma used to hide himself in the daytime, from the searches of the king, while he ministered among the people when the shades of evening gave him security. It was there he gathered the believers in his teachings, baptized them in the waters of Mormon, and organized the Church of Jesus Christ. From the waters of Mormon to Zarahemla it was twenty-two days' actual travel for an emigrant train.

Alma having been warned of the Lord that the armies of King Noah would come upon his people, the latter gathered together their flocks, and took of their grain and departed into the wilderness which divided the Lands of Nephi and Zarahemla. They fled eight days' journey into the wilderness when they rested and commenced to build a city, which they called Helam. Being afterwards compelled to leave this city, on account of the persecutions of the Lamanites and Amulonites, they again took their journey northward, and reached the homes of the main body of the Nephites in Zarahemla in about fourteen days.

Here we have a people encumbered and delayed by flocks and herds, heavily laden with grain, making the journey (in two separate stages) in twenty-two days. It is scarcely supposable that they traveled in a direct line; mountains, rivers and swamps would render the journey somewhat circuitous or winding. But even supposing that they did advance in an almost direct line from point to point, it would only make the distance between Nephi and Zarahemla 220 miles if they traveled ten miles a day; 330 if they traveled fifteen miles; and 440 if they journeyed twenty miles a day.

Our readers must decide for themselves which distance per day is the most likely that a company, driving their flocks and herds before them, would advance through an unexplored wilderness, full of natural hindrances, and without roads, bridges, ferries and other helps to the traveler.

Zarahemla was located on the Sidon, certainly a considerable distance from its headwaters, as other lands and cities (such as Minon and Manti) are mentioned as lying far above it. If we measure the distance from such a point southward, either 200, 300 or 400 miles, all these measurements will bring us into the country now called Ecuador.

We are of the opinion that the Land of Lehi-Nephi was situated in one of the higher valleys, or extensive plateaus of the Andes. In the first place, admitting it was in Ecuador, it would lie almost immediately under the equator, and the lowlands, as before suggested, would be unbearable for an industrious population because of the great heat, as well as exceedingly unhealthy by reason of chills, and fever, and similar illnesses.

Again, the crops of which the Nephites raised most abundantly—barley and wheat—are not those that flourish in a tropical climate, but can be grown most advantageously in a temperate region such as could be found in these higher valleys.

It was also a land rich in mineral wealth which is not probable would have been the case if it had been situated among the widespreading alluvial plains east of the Andes.

It is likewise spoken of as a hilly or mountainous country. The hill north of the land of Shilom is frequently mentioned in the historical narrative. For instance:

Ammon came to a hill, which is north of the land of Shilom. (Mosiah 7:5)

King Limhi caused his guards to go to the hill which was north of Shilom. (Mosiah 7:16)

King Noah erected a great tower on the hill north of the land of Shilom. (Mosiah 11:13)

For another reason, the expression "up" is almost always used when reference is made to persons going towards the Land of Nephi. Not only did they travel from Zarahemla up the Sidon and across the wilderness to Nephi, but also up from the Land of Ishmael and other portions of the Land of Nephi to the City of Nephi and its surroundings. In contradistinction to this, persons leaving Nephi went down to the Land of Zarahemla and other places.

The only time in which the word down is used, when referring to persons going towards Nephi, is when certain persons came down to the city from the hill mentioned above.

Some of our readers may object to the statement that the City of Nephi and the City of Lehi-Nephi were one and the same place, and that the land round about was sometimes called the Land of Lehi-Nephi, and sometimes the Land of Nephi only. But we think that a careful perusal of the record of Zeniff, in the Book of Mormon, will convince them of the fact; especially if they will compare it with the last few verses of the book of Omni. Zeniff in one place speaks of possessing, by treaty with the Lamanites, the Land of Lehi-Nephi (Mosiah 9:6), and a few verses later on (verse 14), he talks of the thirteenth year of his reign in the Land of Nephi.

If we mistake not, the name Lehi-Nephi occurs only seven times in the Book of Mormon; everywhere else the name of Nephi is used when referring to this land.

In the second generation the Nephites began to grow numerous, and iniquity made its appearance among them. It was then that Jacob, their priest (the younger brother of Nephi), prophesied: "The time speedily cometh, that except ye repent, they [the Lamanites] shall possess the land of your inheritance, and the Lord God will lead away the righteous out from among you." This prophecy was completely fulfilled, if not on previous occasions, about 300 years or so afterwards, when Mosiah, by the command of God, led the righteous Nephites out of the land of their inheritance—the Land of Nephi—down into the Land of Zarahemla.

From that time the Land of Nephi was possessed and ruled by the posterity of Laman, Lemuel and Ishmael; or by Nephite apostates, who, with superior cunning, worked themselves on to the Lamanitish throne.

During the era that the Nephites dwelt in the Land of Nephi they built several cities. These the Lamanites eagerly took possession of them when Mosiah and his people vacated them. We are not told when and by whom these cities were founded; such particulars, doubtless, appear on the plates of the kings. It is only incidentally that we learn anything regarding them; reference to them is found in the record of Zeniff's return from Zarahemla, and re-occupancy, by treaty with the Lamanites, of a portion of the old Nephite home.

The Lamanites of that age were a wild, ferocious, bloodthirsty and nomadic race, who did not build cities, for the simple reason that they had neither the inclination nor the skill. But when they found the Nephite cities deserted by their inhabitants they immediately occupied them. Even then, they did not enlarge or repair them, but let them fall into gradual decay.

No sooner had the Lamanites surrendered the Cities of Lehi-Nephi and Shilom to Zeniff than his people set to work to build buildings and to repair their walls. In the next generation King Noah caused many fine buildings and towers to be built in both the Lands of Lehi-Nephi and Shilom.

The two cities mentioned above are the only ones directly spoken of in the Book of Mormon up to this time. There was most probably a city built in the contiguous Land of Shemlon, which was held by the Lamanites, but it is never mentioned by name.

We judge Shilom lay to the northward of Lehi-Nephi, and in the same valley or plateau, otherwise it could not have been so completely viewed from King Noah's tower. Its relative position to Lehi-Nephi appears from the fact that those who went to or from the Land of Zarahemla, generally did so by way of Shilom; it seems to have lain in the direct route between the two capital cities. Ammon, the Zarahemlite, and his company entered in that way, and Limhi and his people escaped in the same direction.

The next city that we read of it called Helam. It was located eight days' journey from Nephi towards Zarahemla, and was founded by Alma, the elder, and his followers, when they fled from the murderous persecutions of King Noah. This city and the surrounding country were called after the first man baptized by Alma in the waters of Mormon. His name was Helam, and he was doubtless a leader among that people.

In the same direction from Nephi as Helam, and apparently adjoining thereto, lay the land of Amulon. It was first peopled by the fugitive priests of Noah, when they fled from the vengeance of the justly incensed Nephites. The leader of this band of wicked men was named Amulon, and in his honor the land was so called. The king of the Lamanites afterwards made Amulon the tributary king or chief local ruler over the Lands of Helam and Amulon. From this we judge that they lay side by side, their boundaries extending indefinitely into the great wilderness.

Our next information regarding the condition of the Land of Nephi is gleaned from the history of the mission of the sons of King Mosiah to the Lamanites in that region. This mission commenced 91 B.C., and lasted fourteen years.

We find the Lamanites of that age considerably advanced in civilization, many of them inhabiting populous cities. The country was divided into several distinct kingdom, each ruled by its own king, but all subject to the head monarch whose court was at Nephi.

The lands specially mentioned in connection with his mission are those of Nephi, Middoni, Ishmael, Shilom, Shemlon, Helam, Amulon and Jerusalem.

Shilom and Shemlon we have already shown to be in the neighborhood of Lehi-Nephi; Helam, eight days' journey for located teams to the north, and Amulon not far distant therefrom. We may next inquire what can be learned of the Lands of Jerusalem, Ishmael and Middoni.

The location of the Land of Jerusalem is clearly stated. It was away joining the borders of Mormon, that is, on the other side, probably east or north from Nephi. There, somewhere about 100 B.C., the Lamanites, with Amulonites and other apostate Nephites, built a great and thriving city, which they called Jerusalem, after their father's ancient home in Judea.

There Aaron, the son of Mosiah, unsuccessfully preached the Gospel. Its apostate citizens were to sin-hardened to accept the message he bore. This city was afterwards destroyed on account of its great wickedness and persecution of the Saints, in the terrors that attended the Crucifixion of the Savior, and waters came up in the place thereof. A stagnant sea, akin to that which covers Sodom and Gomorrah, occupies the place where once its proud places and rich synagogues stood.

The first land visited by the missionary prince, Ammon, was Ishmael: its situation is not clearly stated. It was down from Nephi. This leads to the thought that it lay in the alluvial plains considerably east of the Andes. It does not seem compatible with the narrative of Ammon's mission to believe it was situated in the narrow strip of wilderness that lay between the mountains and the Pacific Ocean. Its relative position to other lands precludes this idea.

Near the highway that connected Ishmael and Nephi lay the Land of Middoni. This is shown by the fact that when Ammon and king Lamoni were traveling from Ishmael towards Middoni, they met Lamoni's father, the head king of all the land, coming from Nephi. This leads to the conclusion that the same road from Ishmael led to both Nephi and Middoni.

Nephi is called up from both lands; we, therefore, suggest that, like Ishmael, Middoni occupied a portion of the lower lands on the eastern borders of the Andes, but somewhat nearer the capital city.

PART II

As there were two "Lands of Nephi," the greater and the lesser, so, also, were there two "Lands of Zarahemla." The same reasons determined the boundaries of each. The larger of the latter occupied all the South American Continent from the great wilderness which formed its southern border, northward to the Land Bountiful. The other, or smaller of the two, was, like the larger, called Zarahemla, and comprised the district immediately surrounding the Nephite Capital City, which, too, was called Zarahemla.

Both the Lands of Nephi and Zarahemla were subdivided, for governmental purposes, into smaller lands, states, or districts. When the Nephites were in possession of them in the days of the Judges, known as the Republic, they were ruled by a local chief who was subject to the Chief Judge of the entire nation. When the Lamanites were successful in wresting them from the Nephites, who almost invariably had established them, there lands were subject to kings who were tributary to a head king whose government was in the original city of the Nephites, Lehi-Nephi. (See p. 14, v.2)

That there was a Zarahemla within another Zarahemla is shown by various passages in which persons are spoken of as journeying to the "Land" of Zarahemla, when they were already within the borders of the greater land of that name. For instance, Minon, on the River Sidon, is said to have been above the Land of Zarahemla (Alma 2:24); again, from Sidom, Alma took Amulek and come over to the Land of Zarahemla. (Alma 15:18)

In many other places, notably where the boundaries of Nephite possession are given, the name, Zarahemla, is applied to all of their lands, even, sometimes, including Bountiful which is generally spoken of as being separate.

In the days of Mosiah I and his son, Benjamin, the greater part of the Nephites appear to have been located in, and immediately around the City of Zarahemla. King Benjamin, when he was about to resign the royal authority and give it to his son, Mosiah, commanded Mosiah to gather his people together. "For," he said, "on the morrow I shall proclaim unto this my people out of mine own mouth, that thou art a king and a ruler over this my people." (Mosiah 1:10) While on the morrow does not mean specifically the next twenty-four hours, yet, it may designate that particular period of time. (See Vol. II, p. 34, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON) It is reasonable to suppose that Benjamin meant that as soon as possible, or, the nearest day when the people could be summoned together, he would make such an announcement. It does, however, indicate the restricted area in which the people of Nephi dwelt. The proclamation was sent forth as Benjamin requested, and the people gathered in an unnumbered host. If the habitants of the people were widely scattered over an extended territory, this could not have occurred in twenty-four hours, or even in any short time, as tomorrow.

During the reign of Mosiah II the people grew rapidly in numbers, and their colonies extended in every direction, and some were settled in far distant regions. This vigorous colonization policy was continued, only in a much larger scale, during the days of the Judges.

We suggest that the lands or cities (which in Nephite geography nomenclature appear to be frequently used interchangeably) included, at the time of the Republic, the following:

In the extreme north, the Land of Bountiful which extended southward from the Isthmus of Panama. On its southern frontier lay the land of Jershon.

On the River Sidon, the cities of Zarahemla, Minon, Gideon, and Manti.

In the interior, eastward of the Sidon, Antionum, Siron, and probably Nephihah.

On the shores of the Atlantic Ocean and the Caribbean Sea, Mulek, Morianton, Lehi, Omner, Gid, Aaron, and Moroni.

In the interior, west of the River Sidon, Melek, Noah, Ammonihah, and Sidom.

Between the upper water of the Sidon and the Pacific Ocean, or in the extreme southwest, Cumeni, Antiparah, Judea, and Zeezrom.

In addition, the following cities are named only in connection with their destruction at the time of the Savior's Crucifixion at Jerusalem: The great City of Moronihah which was covered with earth; the cities of Laman, Gad, Josh, and Kishkumen, which were burned with fire; Gilgal, Gadiandi, Gariomnah, Jacob, and Gimgimno, were sunk in the depths of the earth; and Onihah and Mocum, in whose place waters came up.

We imagine that from the names of some of these cities they were built by the Lamanites or the Gadianton Robbers. This, however, is mere conjecture as the Sacred Record is entirely silent on this point.

Here briefly are some of the more important division of Book of Mormon lands.

JERSHON: This was the name given to the regions set apart by the Nephites (78 B.C.) as the home of the Ammonites, or Christian Lamanites. It was situated far to the north, and was evidently chosen for the reason that the strength of the Nephite Nation might lie between the fugitives and their former countrymen, the Lamanites, who then thirsted for their blood. It was bounded by the Caribbean Sea and the Land Bountiful on the north and east, and by the Land of Antionum on its south. Its western boundary is not defined, but we are inclined to believe, from the context, that it was the River Sidon. Its geographical situation is partly described in Alma 27:22, thus: "We will give up the land of Jershon, which is on the east by the sea, which joins the land Bountiful." With regard to its southern boundary, Alma 31:3 states that Antionum lay to the south of it.

ANTIONUM: The land where the Zoramite apostates gathered (75 B.C.) was an extensive and thinly settled region, extending from the Land of Jershon to the great southern wilderness. Its boundaries are defined in Alma 31:3, thus: "Antionum, which was east of the land of Zarahemla, which lay nearly bordering upon the seashore, which was south of the land of Jershon, which also bordered upon the wilderness south, which wilderness was full of Lamanites." By this we understand that it stretched north from the great wilderness south, which passed by the head of the River Sidon, almost to the Atlantic Ocean; that its western boundary was the Land of Zarahemla, and Jershon its northern limit. Nothing is said of its eastern borders for the simple reason that at the time this passage was written, the country east was yet uninhabited, except by a few wandering Lamanites. At its extreme southern or southeastern corner, "among the borders of the Lamanites" or the wilderness, was the outlaying Land of Siron. This place is mentioned but once in the Book of Mormon. (Alma 39:3)

MANTI: During the days of the Republic, Manti was a district of great importance to the Nephites. It was situated contiguous to the wilderness at the headwaters of the River Sidon (Alma 16:6), and lay on the line of march generally taken by the armies of the Lamanites when they sought to invade Zarahemla. Its exact boundaries are not stated or defined; indeed, it is altogether probable that they varied considerably at different periods of Nephite history. However, it is evident that it was the most southerly of all the lands inhabited by the Nephites, in the western half of the South American continent after they had moved from the Land of Lehi-Nephi.

GIDEON: In a valley on the east of the River Sidon there was built, during the early days of the Republic, an important city which was named after the martyr, Gideon. The valley, itself, was also known by that same name, and is frequently called the Land of Gideon. We find no evidence to lead to the conclusion that the Land of Gideon extended beyond the valley. Nearly all we know of this region is contained in a single passage (Alma 6:7) which states that Alma left Zarahemla and went over upon the east of the River Sidon into the Valley of Gideon. "There having been a city built, which was called the city of Gideon, which was in the valley that was called Gideon, being called after the man who was slain by the hand of Nehor with the sword."

From the references in the historical narrative we incline to the opinion that this valley lay either directly east, or somewhat to the south of the City of Zarahemla. Travelers coming from the north are never mentioned as passing through it on their way to Zarahemla unless they had a purpose in so doing as in the case where Moroni marched from the northeast to the relief of Chief Judge Pahoran. (Alma 62)

PART III

Minon—Melek—Ammonihah—Noah—Sidom—Aaron—Lehi—Mulek—Bountiful—The Southwest Border.

MINON is mentioned but once in the Book of Mormon. Its location is then directly stated. It is spoken of as the Land of Minon, above the Land of Zarahemla, in the course of the Land of Nephi. (Alma 2:4) Elder Orson Pratt, in a note to this chapter, places Minon about two days' journey south of the capital city, Zarahemla. This is the obvious conclusion to be drawn from the details contained in the chapter referred to. From these details we judge it to have been on the western bank of the River Sidon and in the direct road between Nephi and Zarahemla. At this date (91 B.C.) it was inhabited by an agricultural population, who, at the approach of the Lamanites, fled before them into the capital city.

As the course of the River Sidon was from south to north, it is but reasonable to conclude that when the words above and below are used, when reference is made to places on its banks or in its neighborhood, that above means south and below, north. This is a very common mode of expression in such cases.

MELEK: The boundaries of this land are very indistinctly stated by the inspired writer of the Book of Alma, for it is in that book alone that it is mentioned. However, two things are positively stated (Alma 7), namely, that it was west of the River Sidon, and that it extended westward as far as the narrow strip of wilderness which ran north and south between the mountains and the Pacific Ocean. We imagine that its eastern borders touched the Land of Zarahemla, and from thence it stretched out as far as the country seemed habitable. It appears to have had a large population, judging from the account given of Alma's ministrations. (82 B.C.) That it embraced a large district of country is proved by the fact that when Alma had finished his labors in the City of Melek, he traveled three days' journey on the north of the Land of Melek before he came to the City of Ammonihah. (Alma 8:6) In later years, when it was considered unsafe for the Ammonites to remain longer in Jershon, they removed to Melek, the proximity of which to the City of Zarahemla, as well as its remoteness from the lands of the Lamanites, rendered it admirably adapted as a place of safety for that persecuted people.

AMMONIHAH: When Alma had made the three days' journey spoken of in Alma 8:6, he reached Ammonihah, the country around which city was called by the same name. From the text of the passage referred to, some conclude that Alma traveled northward from Melek, but to us it conveys the idea that the prophet journeyed three days westward along or near the northern boundary of that land. We are confirmed in this opinion by the statement that is made in another place regarding Ammonihah's proximity to that portion of the Wilderness which ran along the seashore. (Alma 22:27) In Alma 16:2, it is stated, "The armies of the Lamanites had come in upon the wilderness side, into the borders of the land, even into the city of Ammonihah." If Ammonihah had been situated three days' journey north of Melek, we suggest that it could not have been near that portion of the wilderness which the Lamanites so easily reached without discovery; for a march due north would have taken them close to, or actually though the Lands of Minon, Noah, Melek, and Zarahemla, the most thickly populated portions of the country. To have avoided these, they must have taken a circuitous route of immense length and great danger. Then when they attempted to retire, their retreat, owing to their great distance from Lehi-Nephi, would have most assuredly been cut off, as was the case with the Lamanite general, Coriantumr, under these same conditions.

NOAH: Of this land we simply know two things: First, that it was west of the River Sidon; second, that it was not far distant from Ammonihah and Melek.

SIDOM: The Land Sidom is mentioned only in Alma, Chapter 15. When the persecuted members of the true Church were driven out of Ammonihah by its vicious citizens, they fled to Sidom. It is not supposable that these persecuted people were in a condition to travel far. They would necessarily gather to the first available place of refuge. It is, therefore, reasonable to conclude that Sidom was not far distant from Ammonihah.

AARON: When Alma was first cast out of Ammonihah he turned his face towards a city called Aaron. (Alma 8:13) It is natural to suppose that Aaron was not far distant from Ammonihah; at any rate, not on the other side of the continent. Yet the only other place or time when a city called Aaron is referred to, it is spoken of as adjoining the Land of Moroni, which was the frontier district in the extreme southeast of the lands possessed by the Nephites. Our only way out of this difficulty is to suggest that there were two cities called Aaron; not at all an unlikely thing when we reflect on how important a personage Aaron, the son of King Mosiah II, was among the people. When chosen to be king, he declined this great honor, and the Republic was established. It requires no stretch of the imagination to believe that a free and grateful people would name more than one city in honor of this self-denying prince.

When we consider how many places there are in the United States called Washington or Lincoln, our only wonder is that we do not find more than two cities called Aaron.

This same difficulty exists with regard to Nephihah. We fancy there were two cities of this name; one situated on the southern frontier, some distance east of Manti and the River Sidon (Alma 56:25); the other on the Atlantic seaboard, north of the City of Moroni. (Alma 50:14) Of this latter city it is written that in the year 72 B.C., the Nephites began a foundation for a city between Moroni and the City of Aaron, joining we are told the cities of Moroni and Aaron, and they called the city or land, Nephihah. This is the region again referred to in Chapters 51, 59, and 62 of the Book of Alma. Elder Orson Pratt, in a footnote to Chapter 56, draws attention to the fact that the Nephihah there mentioned is not the one spoken of in the other chapters.

THE ATLANTIC SEABOARD: It appears, though it is not altogether certain, that the lands and cities of the Nephites on the Atlantic seaboard were situated in the following order, commencing at the north: Mulek, Gid, Omner, Morianton, Lehi, Aaron, Nephihah, and Moroni. (Alma 51:26)

MORONI was situated by the seashore, on the borders of the great wilderness, it being the farthest from the City of Zarahemla of all the settlements of the Nephites in the southeast. Or, to use the language of the inspired historian. "It was by the east sea; and it was on the south by the possessions of the Lamanites." (Alma 50:13) The wilderness ran in a straight line from east to west, and the Sidon rose near its northern border, on which border Moroni was also situated. If the convulsions at the time of the Crucifixion of our lord did not alter the face of the country so as to change the locality where the river took its rise, then Moroni was in the country now called Guiana, or in the extreme north of Brazil.

The City, Moroni, now lies covered by the waters of the Atlantic Ocean. (3 Nephi 8:9) In Guiana, there is a river still called Moroni, or, as it is generally printed on the maps, Maroni. As the Maroni River enters French Guiana its spelling is changed to the French way, Marouini. There is also a river Morana in Ecuador. (In spelling we must remember that the vowels mean nothing.)

LEHI: The Land of Lehi on the Atlantic Coast must not be confused with the whole of South America which was also called Lehi by the Nephites. This lesser Land of Lehi was the district surrounding the City of Lehi, and immediately adjoining the Land of Morianton, whose people indeed claimed, though unjustly, a part of its territory.

MULEK: Mulek was the most northerly of the settlements of the Nephites which were south of the Land Bountiful, close to the borders of which it was built. It is positively stated to have been located on the east sea. (Alma 51:26) West of Mulek was a wilderness, or uninhabited region. (Alma 52:22)

BOUNTIFUL: We believe that there is an idea held by some that the City Bountiful was situated on the Pacific shore. This opinion is not warranted by the statement in the Book of Mormon. Mulek was on the Atlantic, or east sea; Bountiful was northward of Mulek. When Teancum retreated before the hosts of the Lamanites, who poured out of the City of Mulek to capture his small force, he began to retreat down the seashore northward. (Alma 52:23) This course brought him to Bountiful. From the details contained in this chapter we are forced to the conclusion that he and his soldiers reached that city on the same day that they started from outside Mulek. Now, unless the configuration of the coastline has been entirely and completely changed, no march of one day, or indeed of any length of time along "the seashore northward" would bring a person to the Pacific Ocean.

Our only conclusion can be that Bountiful was situated on the seashore on the east side of the Isthmus of Panama, if on the Isthmus at all. Other passages than the one quoted show that Mulek and Bountiful lay in close proximity.

We suppose the reason why some contend the City of Bountiful lay on the west coast is that Hagoth built his shipyards there. But the record does not say he built them in or near the City Bountiful. What is stated is that Hagoth went forth and built him an exceeding large ship on the borders of the Land Bountiful, by the Land Desolation, and launched it forth into the west sea, by the narrow neck of land which led into the wilderness northward. (Alma 63:5)

This narrow neck of land was the dividing line between the Land of Desolation on the north and Land Bountiful on the south. We think it is evident from the above that the City Bountiful and Hagoth's settlement lay at entirely opposite extremes of this land, the first, in the southeast near Mulek, the second, in the northwest near Desolation.

Before the Land Bountiful was settled by the Nephites, it was a wilderness filled with all manner of wild animals of every kind; a part of them had come from the land northward for food. (Alma 22:31) But, the Nephites, to prevent the Lamanites creeping up through the wilderness along the coasts, east and west, and thus gain a foothold in the land northward, at as early a date as possible inhabited the Land Bountiful, even from the east to the west sea. (Alma 22:33)

The city called Bountiful is not mentioned until 64 B.C. (Alma 52:17), though the land of that name is frequently referred to at earlier dates.

THE SOUTHWEST BORDER: All we know of the cities and lands in the southwest is contained in Helaman's report to Moroni of the military operations in that area. (Alma 56, 58) Four cities are mentioned west of Manti: Judea, Antiparah, Zeezrom, and Cumeni. Of these, Antiparah appears to have been situated nearer the coast than Judea, while there was yet another city still nearer the ocean, and apparently to the north of Antiparah. But we can simply guess at their relative positions, no positive information is given.

Besides the foregoing, there was a land called DESOLATION. Before the time of the Nephites it was thickly inhabited by the Jaredites. In the days of the latter people, Bountiful formed its southern border. The two lands apparently joined at the Isthmus of Panama. At first, like most frontier districts, it extended indefinitely into the uninhabited regions. When other lands were colonized, its boundaries became more definitely fixed. It is generally supposed to have embraced within its borders the region known to moderns as Central America. Its capital was a city of the same name—Desolation—probably built in later years as it is never mentioned except by Mormon in the account of the long series of wars in which he took so prominent a part.

PART IV

The Lands of Antum, Teancum, Joshua, David, etc.—Cumorah—The Hills of the Nephites—The River Sidon.

In the history of the final wars between the Nephites and Lamanites, lands and cities are mentioned that are nowhere else spoken of. It is presumable that most of them were built during the blessed Sabbatic era that followed the visit to the Nephites of the Risen Lord. Most of these places were located in North America, but the exact locality can, in scarcely any instance, be determined.

Among those which are named are the lands or cities of Antum, Angola, David, Joshua, Jashon, Shem, Teancum, Boaz, Jordan, Cumorah, Sherrizah, and Moriantum.

ANTUM: Antum was a Land of North America in which was situated a Hill called Shim. In this hill, Ammaron deposited the Sacred Records. Mormon, afterwards, by Ammaron's direction, obtained the Plates of Nephi from this hiding place and continued the record thereon.

JASHON: The Land of Jashon appears to have bordered on the Land of Antum, as the City of Jashon is said to have been near the land where Ammaron deposited the Records.

TEANCUM: The City of Teancum was situated by the seashore, near to, and apparently north of, the City Desolation.

JOSHUA: The Land of Joshua was on the borders west by the seashore, but whether in the northern or southern continent is not clear.

DAVID: The Land of David appears to have been located between Angola and Joshua.

CUMORAH: One of the most noted places in ancient American history is the land in which was situated the Hill known to the Jaredites as Ramah, and to the Nephites, as Cumorah.

In its vicinity two great nations were exterminated; for it was there that the last battles were fought in the history of both peoples. There, also, were the Sacred Records of the Nephites placed for a final resting place, there to remain until the Prophet Joseph Smith exhumed them. When iniquity began to increase in the midst of the Nephites, Ammaron hid the holy things in the Hill Shim. (A.D. 321) About fifty-five later (circa A.D. 376), Mormon, seeing that his people were fast melting away before the Lamanites, and fearing that the latter would get possession of the records and then destroy them, removed all that had been placed in his care by Ammaron who had delegated to Mormon the responsibility of further engraving upon the plates the future history of the people. Mormon hid up in the Hill Cumorah all the records which the Lord, through Ammaron, entrusted into his care, save a few plates which he gave to his son, Moroni. Moroni afterwards concealed the treasures committed to his keeping in the same hill, where they remained until they were, by heaven's permission, brought forth for our guidance and our edification. We presume that all our readers are acquainted with the fact that this hill is situated about three or four miles from Palmyra, in the State of New York.

THE HILL CUMORAH

"The Hill Cumorah is situated in western New York, between the villages of Palmyra and Canandaigua, about four miles from the former. It is celebrated as the ancient depository of the sacred plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated. Cumorah was the name by which the hill was designated in the days of the Prophet Moroni, who deposited the plates about 420 years after the birth of Christ. The Prophet Mormon, the father of Moroni, had been entrusted with all the sacred records of his forefathers, engraved on metallic plates. New plates were made by Mormon on which he wrote, from the more ancient books, an abridged history of the nation, incorporating therewith many revelations, prophecies, the Gospel.

"These new plates were given to Moroni to finish the history, and all the ancient plates Mormon deposited in Cumorah, about 384 years after Christ. When Moroni, about thirty-six years after, made the deposit of the book entrusted to him, he was without doubt, inspired to select a department of the hill separate from the great, sacred depository of the numerous volumes hid up by his father. The particular place in the hill, where Moroni secreted the book, was revealed by the angel to the Prophet Joseph Smith, to whom the volume was delivered in September, 1827. But the grand depository of all the numerous records of the ancient nations of the Western Continent, was located in another department of the hill, and its contents under the charge of holy angels, until the day should come for them to be transferred to the sacred temple of Zion.

"The Hill Cumorah, with the surrounding vicinity, is distinguished as the great battlefield on which two powerful nations were concentrated with all their forces, men, women, and children, and fought until hundreds of thousands on both sides were hewn down and left to moulder upon the ground. Both armies were Israelites; and both had become awfully corrupt, having apostatized from God. The Nephites, as a nation, became extinct; the Lamanites alone were left. This happened, according to their faithful records, near the close of the Fourth Century of the Christian Era. The American Indians are remnants of the once powerful nation of Lamanites.

"The Hill Cumorah is remarkable also as being the hill on which and around which a still more ancient nation perished, called Jaredites. This unparalleled destruction is recorded in the Book of Ether, and happened about six centuries before Christ. The Jaredites colonized America from the Tower of Babel. After about sixteen centuries, [according to the computations of others, nearer nineteen], during which they became exceedingly numerous, through their terrible was they destroyed themselves. The Hill Cumorah, by them, was called Ramah. Millions fought against millions, until the Hill Ramah and the land round were soaked with blood, and their carcasses were left in countless numbers to moulder back to Mother Earth." (Orson Pratt, Millennial Star, Vol. 28, p. 417)

A GREAT NUMBER OF PLATES. That which follows answers the question frequently asked, "What became of the Book of Mormon Plates?" It also should lay to rest any statement regarding the location of the Hill Cumorah being in Mexico or Central America. President Brigham Young, at a special conference held at Farmington, Utah, June 17, 1877, on which occasion the Davis Stake of Zion was organized, said:

"When Joseph got the plates, the angel instructed him to carry them back to the Hill Cumorah, which he did. Oliver Cowdery says that when Joseph and he went there, the hill opened, and they walked into a cave, in which there was a large and spacious room. He says that he did not think, at the time, whether they had the light of the sun or artificial light, but it was as light as day. They laid the Plates on a table. It was a large table that stood in the middle of the room. Under this table there was a pile of plates as much as two feet high, and there were altogether in this room more plates than many wagon loads. They were piled up in the corners and along the walls. The first time they went there, the Sword of Laban hung upon the walls, but when they went again, it had been taken down and laid upon the table across the Gold Plates. It was unsheathed, and on it was written these words, "This Sword will never be sheathed again until the kingdoms of this world become the Kingdom of our God and His Christ." (Journal of Discourses, Vol. 19, p. 38)

President Young, in the same discourse, said that he had this from Oliver Cowdery, himself, and from others familiar with the incident related. "Don Carlos Smith," he said, "was a witness to these things."

Besides Cumorah, several other hills come prominently to the foreground in Nephite history. There were the Hills Riplah and Amnihu, near the River Sidon, in the neighborhood of which desperate battles were fought in the days of Alma, resulting, in both instances, in victory to the hosts of the Nephites. Again, there was the Hill Manti. It also was near the Sidon; on its top, Nehor was executed for the murder of the aged Gideon. Then there was Mount Antipas, on whose summit Lehonti and the recalcitrant Lamanites gathered when they refused to give heed to their king's war proclamation. It was situated somewhere within the borders of the Lamanites, near Onidah, the place of arms. There was also a Hill Onidah in the Land of Antionum upon which Alma preached to the Zoramite apostates.

When perusing the Book of Mormon we have inclined to the opinion that before the time of the Crucifixion of Christ, the Andes and other ranges of mountains existed in a much more modified form than at present. We have been led to this conclusion from the fact that no high mountains or stretches of rugged mountain country such as at present exist in Chile, Peru, Ecuador, and the United States of Columbia, are even suggested by the narrative. Individual hills such as we have drawn attention to are occasionally mentioned, showing that the country was of diversified altitude; but we have little or nothing to lead our minds to the contemplation of the stupendous peaks and everlasting hills that characterize this region nowadays. It is also somewhat singular that no reference is made to any rivers in the regions where the Orinoco and Amazon Rivers now course in their vast volume to the Atlantic Ocean. Our only answer is that the Book of Mormon is primarily a religious record, that the geographical and topographical references are only incidental, and consequently no special importance can be placed on what is not mentioned. Perhaps, also, these rivers, as suggested in the case of the Sidon, ran in different channels, and with possibly less volume of water then than now.

RIVER SIDON: One of the most important places in Nephite history for four or five hundred years was the River Sidon. It was their great highway, more to them than the Mississippi is to this country or the Thames is to England. Along its banks were situated their capital and other prominent cities. Its valleys were the most densely populated parts of the land. It was also the grand trunk road to the Land of Lehi-Nephi, and down its banks poured the hosts of the dark-skinned invaders when they forced their way into the Land of Zarahemla. To tell all that took place on its borders would be to rewrite the history of the Judges, and to include much of the annals of the kings, and the story of the Messianic dispensation.

As stated in other places in this book it is understood by most students of Book of Mormon history that the Sidon of the Nephites is the Magdalena of today; but it is open to question if its course was not considerably changed during the convulsions that attended the death of the Savior. We incline to the opinion that in the ages before those terrible upheavals of the lands, the River Sidon was a far nobler, more placid river than the Magdalena is now. Nor do we think it emptied into the ocean at the same spot as at present. The coastline, we believe, has much changed and with that change the point of outflow of this river has been moved.

While journeying through Arabia, Lehi and his party gave such names to the localities they passed, or at which they rested, as they pleased. The Red Sea is the only place we can distinguish by the name of it. At their first temporary abiding place on its borders, Lehi, in honor of his elder sons, called the valley where they camped, the Valley of Lemuel, and the river that coursed through it, the River Laman. As they proceeded on their journey we read of Shazer, Nahom, and Bountiful. The last named must not be confounded with the Bountiful in the northern part of South America where the Savior, more than 600 years afterward, appeared and taught the Nephites. It was a part of Arabia Felix, or Arabia the Happy, so called in contradistinction of Arabia, the Story, or Arabia the Desert, on account of its abundant productiveness and great fertility. It was in this blessed region, on the shores of the Arabian Sea, that Nephi built the ship that carried the colony to the newly Promised Land. To the sea, itself, they gave the name of Irreantum, meaning "many waters."

The course taken by Lehi and his people has been revealed with some detail. We have been told by the Prophet Joseph Smith what the line was of the journey of Lehi in his travels from Jerusalem: He traveled nearly a south-southeast direction until he came to the 19th degree of North Latitude; then nearly east to the Sea of Arabia; he then sailed in a southeast direction and landed on the Pacific shores of South America.

Just where the colony of Lehi landed in America, the Sacred Record does not state. The preponderance of evidence points to a region located about the 30th degree south latitude. Some assert that the Prophet Joseph Smith made such a statement. Many of the first elders of the Church believed such to be the case. Lehi and his followers did not, however, remain long at the place of landing. It is clear from I Nephi 18:24-25, that, as soon as the colonists had raised a crop and obtained the necessary provisions, they continued their journey "in the wilderness" until they came to a part of the country where animals of various kinds roamed the hills and grazed in the forests. They also found in that new region, "all manner of ore," and especially gold, silver, and copper.

Orson Pratt [^2] who divided the Book of Mormon into chapters and verses, and who was an intimate associate of the Prophet, definitely stated where the landing place was, as also did Frederick G. Williams. [^3] Elder Franklin D. Richards expressed the same view in his Ready References.

All this is evidence that must be weighed when the question of the landing place of Lehi is considered. It cannot be set aside by any amount of a priori reasoning.

In the Times and Seasons of which the Prophet Joseph was editor, and which was published in Nauvoo, Illinois, an editorial appeared, stating that Lehi landed somewhere a little south of the Isthmus of Darien. But there is no evidence available to show that Joseph Smith, himself, wrote it. (Italics are the editor's.)

One cannot be consistent with the narrative of the Book of Mormon, and believe Lehi landed anywhere but south of what we now call Ecuador.

With regard to the course of Mulek and his company we are left entirely in the dark; all we know is that they landed in the northern continent. There is an understanding among the Latter-day Saints that this party traveled westward from Jerusalem. Some think they went first to Egypt under the guidance of the Prophet Jeremiah, then by the Mediterranean Sea either to Spain or Morocco, thence by ship across the Atlantic Ocean. Others fancy they went directly from Palestine by ship.

Reference is made in the Book of Mormon to many lands, places, and cities on the eastern continents. Among the best-known lands mentioned are Assyria, Babylon, Egypt, Ophir, Cush, Elam, Syria, Basham, Galilee, Samaria, Palestine, Edom, and Moab. Among cities, Jerusalem, Nazareth, Damascus, Sodom, and Gomorrah. Also Mounts Sinai, Horeb, and Lebanon; the Red Sea or the Egyptian Sea; and of peoples, the Medes, Chaldees, Midianites, and Arabians.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Orson Pratt held that view. In his Remarkable Visions, the first edition of which, we understand, was published in 1840, consequently some time before the martyrdom of the Prophet, he says that Lehi "landed upon the western coast of South America," and in 1874, when he was the Church Historian, in an article written for an encyclopedia, he expressed the same thought more fully, stating that the landing took place, "as is believed, not far from the 30th degree south latitude." (See Mill. Star, Vol. 38, pp. 691-2.) The expression, "as is believed," we take to mean, "that Orson Pratt did not advance a theory of his own on this question, but stated what was held to be true among his associates, or some of them, as well as by himself."
[^2] In the library connected with the office of the Church Historian, Salt Lake City, there is a sheet of paper on which the statement is written that the landing was in 30 degrees south. That would be in Chile, about where the city of Coquimbo now is situated. The statement is in the handwriting of Frederick G. Williams at one time counselor to the Prophet, and it is found on a sheet on which a revelation, Section 7 in the Doctrine and Covenants, also has been copied. That revelation was given in the year 1829. The presumption, therefore, is that the lines relating to the landing of Lehi were also penned at an early date, and certainly before the year 1837, when Frederick G.Williams was removed from his position as counselor. If this is correct, the statement of Williams would undoubtedly reflect the views of the Prophet Joseph on that question.
[^3] Elder Cannon was a member of the First Presidency when he wrote this editorial which was first published in the Juvenile Instructor, January 1, 1890.
