Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 24

SCAlma 24 1Alma 24 2Alma 24 3Alma 24 4Alma 24 5Verses 1-5

SCAlma 24 1Alma 24 2Alma 24 3Alma 24 4Alma 24 5The Anti-Nephi-Lehites were the objects of the hatred of the Lamanites which in turn was stirred up by the Amalekites and the Amulonites, Nephite apostates. Not long after the Lamanite King and a great portion of his people were converted unto the Lord, the Amalekites together with the Amulonites, by lies and deceit, fomented much trouble among their Lamanitish brethren who dwelt throughout the Land of Nephi. This trouble was stirred up between the Lamanites and the converted ones of their race; it soon turned into hatred which in itself is akin to murder. The Lamanites, instigated by the apostate Nephites, rebelled against the king. The apostates had refused to be governed by a Christian ruler in Zarahemla, and now they equally protested a like ruler in the Land of Nephi.

SCAlma 24 1Alma 24 2Alma 24 3Alma 24 4Alma 24 5The King of the Lamanites was now getting old. He had seen much of the degradation into which his people had fallen, and now that new life and new energy had entered into their blood he very courageously and unselfishly abrogated his rights as their king, and appointed his son whom he called Anti-Nephi-Lehi to succeed him on the throne. The old monarch, whose name we do not know, undoubtedly felt that one who the years had not enfeebled should be the head of the government now in view of the new conditions that had rent his kingdom asunder. His choice of a successor at this time proved to be a wise and timely move on his part, because the aged king died that "selfsame" year.

SCAlma 24 1Alma 24 2Alma 24 3Alma 24 4Alma 24 5The intense preparations that were made by the Lamanites to destroy their brethren the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi, were no doubt heralded throughout the whole land. News of it brought the sons of Mosiah hurrying to the land of Midian to discuss together the awful plight into which the believers in Christ had fallen. In their deliberations, they sought the help of the Lord. In Midian they could do nothing except blindly to plan, so they went over to the Land of Ishmael where they met with Lamoni and Anti-Nephi-Lehi, and with them held "council" as to what "they should do to defend themselves against the Lamanites."

SCAlma 24 6Alma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14Alma 24 15Alma 24 16Alma 24 17Verses 6-17

SCAlma 24 6Alma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14Alma 24 15Alma 24 16Alma 24 17Now there was not one soul among all the people who had been converted unto the Lord that would take up arms against their brethren, the Lamanites. Anti-Nephi-Lehi, their new king, commanded his subjects not even to make any preparations to meet the oncoming warfare, which he regarded as one in which brother would challenge brother in a struggle for life or death. Among all his people there was not one who disobeyed his mandate. They, as well as he, were filled with a righteous zeal which their new-found faith inspired. They truly loved their brothers. Not one, we repeat, would take up arms even to defend himself.

SCAlma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14Verses 7-14

SCAlma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14These are the words which he said unto the people concerning the matter. In these verses Anti-Nephi-Lehi is reported by Alma to have given his converted people several good and forthright reasons why they should not take up arms to destroy the lives of their brethren. These reasons are clear, and we intend to show under these selfsame verses that similar reasons, probably handed down by former generations, moulded the way of life in which the American Indians banded together to preserve peace and to keep intertribal harmony before it was all disrupted by European conquest. A form of such a submissive or patient quality is evidenced by the people of Asiatic India, and known as Passive Resistance. In Asia or America, now or in the remote past, the idea is the same. It connotes, not weakness, but strength. It cannot be defeated. Men's unbridled passions succumb to its powers. It means, briefly, receiving or enduring harm without resistance or emotional reaction.

SCAlma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14Without repetition, many volumes could be written concerning the different reasons for not going to war with their brethren as Anti-Nephi-Lehi outlined them. From what, only a short time before was a savage beast, came forth a proclamation of pure Christian love. Never before or since has mortal man even suggested such a Christlike sacrifice in the face of danger as did the Lamanite King at that time. Only the Spirit of the Lord, whose cause they had espoused, could lead a whole people, as they were led, to rejoice in His Name. Martyrdom, in the cause of peace, was to be preferred by them to shedding the blood of their brethren. They, at last, had been awakened unto God, and no provocation, no matter how grievous, could put them back to sleep. They were united as one in the determination to sin no more. Their lofty ideals were the gift of God, and He sustained them when all the powers of Hell sought their destruction.

SCAlma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14Anti-Nephi-Lehi showed his great faith in attributing to the Lord, the Great Giver of All Good, the many blessings his people had so recently received; to Him he ascribed all goodness. To God, whom he affectionately called my God, he gave thanks that the Nephites had come to declare unto them the truth concerning their birthright. "I thank my God, my beloved people," said Anti-Nephi-Lehi, "that our great God has in goodness sent these our brethren, the Nephites, unto us to preach unto us, and to convince us of our wicked fathers." He praised God that their hearts had been softened by His Holy Spirit that therein his people, who were called after his own name, had been able to carry on an intimate correspondence with the Nephites who were so greatly blessed because God, himself, was their ruler as He also had become theirs. Anti-Nephi-Lehi looked forward to the time when his people would share with the Nephites the gifts God, with a bounteous hand, would spread among all His children. In this expectation the king was not mistaken, for, as we will learn, the Nephites took them under their protection, and soon the blessings of the Lord were had by them in rich abundance.

SCAlma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14The ruler of these converted Lamanites readily admitted the errors they had committed in the past, also the sins that had so easily beset them, and the "many murders" that in their savage glee they had perpetrated, but of all these they had repented, and thank "My God," he said, "... that He hath forgiven us of those our many sins "... and taken away the guilt from our hearts, through the merits of His Son."

SCAlma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14Anti-Nephi-Lehi saw, in retrospect, the lives of his people, and in meditation thereof reached the awful conclusion that "We were the most lost of all mankind." He remembered that they had been born to lives of idleness and shame, and that therefore it was not easy for them to cast aside the habits formed of many past generations. For God, he reasoned with his converted brethren, to take away their sins and for Him to remember their transgressions no more put burdens of restraint upon every back. He saw their past that it was stained with the blood of their fellow men, but from now on, he likewise reasoned, their swords would be bright with a celestial fire as a testimony to God that His children were forever free from any harm done by them, and that their brethren's lives were sacred in their sight.

SCAlma 24 7Alma 24 8Alma 24 9Alma 24 10Alma 24 11Alma 24 12Alma 24 13Alma 24 14Continuing his song of praise to God for his many blessings, Anti-Nephi-Lehi warned his people: "Behold, I say unto you, Nay, let us retain our swords that they be not stained with the blood of our brethren; for perhaps, if we should stain our swords again they can no more be washed bright through the blood of the Son of our great God, which shall be shed for the Atonement of our sins." "That we might not perish," the great God has made these things and many more known unto us; He loves us well, and He loves our children too. In His mercy He has provided that holy angels from His presence have made known unto us His glorious Plan of Salvation so that not only we, but all our children who are yet unborn may also learn of His wondrous ways.

SCAlma 24 15Alma 24 16Verses 15-16

SCAlma 24 15Alma 24 16Now, that we, concluded Anti-Nephi-Lehi, have done all we could, or at least that which lies within our power, to amend the past by accepting God's Holy Word and living thereby, also let our swords remain unstained with the blood of our brethren. Now our swords are bright, not spotted nor corrupted. We have not taken from our brethren that which we cannot give, neither have we robbed them. We must remain, forever, clean as He has made us, so when, in the Lord's own due time, we are called to stand before Him to be judged for our works here below, our swords, unsullied and unsoiled, will appear before that Great Tribunal as a witness to our God that "We have not stained our swords since He imparted His Word unto us and has made us clean hereby." "Oh, how merciful is our God." That sentiment coming from deep in the Lamanite King's breast, discloses to our senses the reality of his conversion. In the hour of his greatest need, Anti-Nephi-Lehi trusted in the Lord for help, and relied on His goodness and mercy.

SCAlma 24 15Alma 24 16The king's reliance upon a merciful Father who as a fond Parent continually watches over His children added to his already strong convictions the assurance "If our brethren destroy us, behold, we shall go to our God and shall be saved." But, first, Anti-Nephi-Lehi reasoned, "We will hide away our swords, yea, even we will bury them deep in the earth, that they may be kept bright, as a testimony that we have never used them."

Alma 24 17Verse 17

Alma 24 17They took their swords ... and did bury them deep in the earth. All the king's converted subjects heard his plan to bury their implements of war, and also saw with their own eyes, his determination to stand aloof from the threatened struggle. With one accord, and together, "they took their swords, and all the weapons which were used for the shedding of man's blood, and they did bury them deep in the earth."

Alma 24 17In the historical portions of the Book of Mormon, there are two outstanding features that deserve special study. One is the determination of the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi not to defend themselves with arms against the attacking Lamanites, but rather to meet death as martyrs for the cause of peace. The other is the long era of millennial harmony that prevailed among the people here after the appearance of our Lord and the establishment of His Church.

Alma 24 17Concerning the first of these features, the facts of this self-sacrificing resolution in which the Christian Saints of Anti-Nephi-Lehi entered are recorded in the preceding verses now under perusal.

Alma 24 17The evident lesson of this remarkable historical incident is this, that the Doctrine of Non-resistance, when carried out in practice, even in the face of death, is a conquering, regenerating, and irresistible, force. It is a doctrine which our Lord and His Apostles proclaimed.

Alma 24 17"Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: but I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. Give to him that asketh of thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou away. (Matthew 5:38-42.)

Alma 24 17Recompense to no man evil for evil. Provide things honest in the sight of all men.

Alma 24 17If it be possible, as much as lieth in you, live peaceably with all men.

Alma 24 17Dearly beloved, avenge not yourselves, but rather give place unto wrath: for it is written, Vengeance is mine; I will repay, saith the Lord. Therefore if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head.

Alma 24 17Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. (Romans 12:17-21.)

Alma 24 17It is all the more remarkable to find this distinctively Christian doctrine set forth so forcibly and clearly in the Book of Mormon. At the time when this sacred volume was published in 1830, there were very few advocates of the cause of the Prince of Peace in the world, and it is very unlikely that the youthful Prophet Joseph, in his rural home, had even heard of such a doctrine as "disarmed patriotism." If he had heard of the stand taken by the Quakers, he had heard it denounced as an error of one of the sects, all of whom had gone astray, and not as something pleasing in the sight of God. It is quite certain that he, at that time, knew nothing of the views of Erasmus, of Grotius, of Immanuel Kant, or Henry IV, on peace and arbitration, and as for peace societies, they were unknown at that time. The Prophet Joseph could not have invented the story in Alma.

Alma 24 17And yet, it is a natural, necessary part of the narrative. The Book of Mormon would not have contained "the fulness of the Gospel of Jesus Christ" if this part of it had been absent, for the problem of which it suggests the solution, is one inseparably connected with the salvation of the world through the Gospel. [^1]

Alma 24 17An Indian Peace Society. Is there in Indian history any evidence that the American aborigines ever were peacefully disposed, as the Anti-Nephi-Lehis are represented to have been? is a question both interesting and important. Were not the Indians always and everywhere a cruel, bloodthirsty race?

Alma 24 17For a striking answer to that question, let us turn to a page of the history of the Iroquois.

Alma 24 17At the time of the first white men's explorations of the country, the Iroquois inhabited the shores of the St. Lawrence River in the vicinity of the present sites of Quebec and Montreal, and the state of New York, except the lower Hudson Valley. They were known as the "Five Nations." The Cherokees, the Hurons or Wyandots, the Mohawks, the Neutral Nation, the Senecas, the Susquehannas and the Tuscaroras belonged to this famous stock, which, according to Dr. Daniel G. Brinton, is not surpassed, in physical qualities, by any in America, while, at the same time, it stands very high intellectually.

Alma 24 17In the 16th Century, five tribes of Iroquois Indians formed a league for the purpose of putting an end to bloodshed and establishing lasting peace on the basis of justice and righteousness. [^2] Where did that idea have its root, if not in the traditions of their fathers?

Alma 24 17The chief actors in this drama. Three men and one woman were the leading actors in the events that culminated in the attempted league for peace. They were Deganawida, Hiawatha, Djigonsasen, and Atotarho. Much of what is known of these characters is myth, but the historical facts are clear.

Alma 24 17The legend of Deganawida tells that his birth was announced to his grandmother in dreams and visions and attended by many wonders. But, as the old woman had been told in a dream that the child when grown up would destroy the nation, it was decided to have him done away with at birth. He was, therefore, thrust into the water of a frozen stream and left to perish. But the next morning, the mother and grandmother found the child unharmed between them. The attempt to destroy the child was repeated, but without avail. He was then permitted to live.

Alma 24 17When grown up, he informed the women that he must leave them, because he had a great mission to perform in the lands south of the Great Lakes. So he left and became a prophet, a statesman and a lawmaker

Alma 24 17The Hiawatha of this narrative was, according to one tradition, a cannibal. One day he had brought home a human corpse for food, but was struck with the horrible enormity of the habit. Deganawida had climbed to the top of the lodge and was peering through the smoke hole. His face was reflected in the pot, and when Hiawatha saw those noble features, he was struck with remorse. Deganawida then descended, went to meet him, and preached his message of peace and righteousness to him. Hiawatha became a loyal and enthusiastic disciple of Deganawida. He undertook several important missions and labored with great success.

Alma 24 17Djigonsasen was chieftainess of the Neutral nation (or tribe), which was then very powerful and warlike. She was the first convert to the doctrine of peace of Deganawida, and became a powerful help to his remarkable cause.

Alma 24 17Atotarho (also spelled Watototarho) is described as a wizard and a sorcerer, and an Onondaga chief, who was feared far and near. He became the bitter opponent of Deganawida and Hiawatha. He is said to have murdered Hiawatha's children.

Alma 24 17But, thanks to the efforts of Deganawida, Hiawatha, and Djigonsasen, the league was formed. It was a peaceful revolution in the methods, the scope, the form, and the purpose of the governments of the peoples that joined, which might have had great future possibilities.

Alma 24 17The description of the construction and scope of this remarkable organization is best given in Mr. Hewitt's own words:

Alma 24 17The dominant motive for the establishment of the League of the Five Iroquois Tribes was the impelling necessity to stop the shedding of human blood by violence through the making and ratifying of a universal peace by all the known tribes of men, to safeguard human life and health and welfare. Moreover, it was intended to be a type of model of government for all tribes alien to the Iroquois. To meet this pressing need for a durable universal peace these reformers proposed and advocated a constitutional form of government as the most effective in the attainment of so desirable an end.

Alma 24 17The founders of the league, therefore, proposed and expounded as the requisite basis of all good government three broad "double" doctrines or principles. The names of these principles in the native tongues vary dialectically, but the three notable terms expressed in Onondaga mean: First (a) sanity of mind and the health of the body; and (b) peace between individuals and between organized bodies or groups of persons; second (a) righteousness in conduct and its advocacy in thought and in speech; and (b) equity or justice, the adjustment of rights and obligations; third (a) physical strength or power, as military force or civil authority; and (b) the orenda or magic power of the people or of their institutions and rituals, having mythic and religious implications. Six principles in all. The constructive results of the control and guidance of human thinking and conduct in the private, the public, and the foreign relations of the peoples so leagued by these six principles, the reformers maintained, are the establishment and the conservation of what is reverently called the Great Commonwealth, the Law of Equity and Righteousness and Well-being, of all known men. It is thus seen that the mental grasp and outlook of these prophet-statesmen and stateswomen of the Iroquois looked out beyond the limits of tribal boundaries to a vast sisterhood and brotherhood of all the tribes of men, dwelling in harmony and happiness. This was a notable vision for the Stone Age of America.

Alma 24 17Some of the practical measures that were put in force were the checking of murder and bloodshed in the ferocious blood-feud by the legal tender of the prescribed price of the life of a man or a woman—the tender by the homicide and his clan for accidentally killing such a person was 20 strings of wampum, 10 for the dead man and 10 for the forfeited life of the homicide; but if the dead person were a woman, the legal tender was 30 strings of wampum, because the value of a woman's life to the community was regarded as greater that of a man. And Cannibalism, or the eating of human flesh, was legally prohibited. Even Hiawatha foreswore this abominable practice before taking up the work of forming the league.

Alma 24 17The institution of the condoling and installation council was important and most essential to the maintenance of the integrity of their state, for the ordinances of the league constitution required that the number of the chiefs in the federal council should be kept intact. So to the orenda, or magic power, believed to emanate and flow from the words, the chants and songs, and the acts of this council, did the statesmen and the ancients of the Iroquois people look for the conservation of their political integrity and for the promotion of their welfare.

Alma 24 17So potent and terrible was the orenda of the ritual of the mourning installation council' regarded, that it was thought imperative to hold this council only during the autumn or winter months. Since its orenda dealt solely with the effects of death and with the restoration and preservation of the living from death, it was believed that it would be ruinous and destructive to the growing seeds, plants, and fruits, were this council held during the days of birth and growth in spring and in summer. To overcome the power of death, to repair his destructive work, and to restore to its normal potency the orenda or magic power of the stricken father side or mother side of the league and so making the entire league whole, were some of its motives. [^3]

Alma 24 17In eulogizing their completed labors the founders of the league represented and described it as a great human tree of flesh and blood, noted for size and length of leaf, which was also represented as being set up on a great white mat—that is to say, on a broad foundation of peace, and whose top pierced the visible sky. It was conceived as having four great white roots composed of living men and women, extending respectively eastward, southward, westward, and northward, among the tribes of men who were urgently invited to unite with the league by laying their heads on the great root nearest to them. It was further declared that should some enemy of this great tree of flesh and blood approach it and should drive his hatchet into one of the roots, blood indeed would flow from the wound, but it was said further that this strange tree through its orenda would cause that assailant to vomit blood before he could escape very far. In certain laws the federal chiefs are denominated standing trees, who as essential components of the great tree of the league are absorbed in it symbolically, and who are thus said to have one head, one heart, one mind, one blood, and one dish of food.

Alma 24 17The spirit of Indian culture. This Iroquois peace league was an embodiment of the highest Indian culture which was to be found all over the American Continents before it was quenched by the European invasions. Had this not been so, there would have been no conquest of Mexico by Cortez, and no overthrow of the Incas by the Pizarros. Even the terrible Indians who inhabited Tuzulutan, the Land of War, north of Guatemala and bordering on Yucatan, were conquered without bloodshed by the missionaries under Las Cases, who came to them with the story of the life and death of Christ, both in prose and in poetry.

Alma 24 17In the history of the Jews there is recorded an incident that in many ways resembles the one here that Alma committed to writing: "It was on the fifteenth day of the month of Kislev, that the messengers of King Antiochus set up an idol on the altar of God, and had incense burnt in its honor. And they gave order that the people of Judea should forsake the Law and the Covenant, profane the Sabbath and pollute the Sanctuary. And many chose rather to die than to forsake the Holy Covenant. And the king's officers came to the City of Modin, and said to Mattathias, the son of John, the son of Simon the Hasmonean, a priest of the sons of Joarib who dwelt in Modin: Thou art a great man and strengthened with sons and brethren in this city. Come, then and fulfill the king's command as all the Heathen have done, and the men of Judah and they that remained in Jerusalem. And thou shalt be in the number of the king's friends. But Mattathias answered and spake with a loud voice: Though all the nations that are under the king's dominion obey him and fall away each from the religion of his fathers, yet will I and my sons and my brethren walk in the Covenant of our fathers. God forbid that we should forsake the Law to depart from our faith either to the right or the left. And when one of the Jews came in the sight of all to sacrifice to the idol, Mattathias was inflamed with zeal, neither could he forbear to show his anger, and he slew him, and the city king's officer, and the altar he pulled down. And Matthias cried throughout the city with a loud voice saying: Whosoever is zealous of the Law and maintaineth the Covenant, let him follow me. So he and his sons fled into the mountains, and they went about pulling down the Heathen altars, and they rescued the Law out of the hands of the Gentiles.

Alma 24 17"And the days of Mattathias drew near that he should die and he said to his sons: Be ye zealous for the Law and give your lives for the Covenant of your fathers. Remember what your fathers did in their generations. Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation, and it was accounted to him for righteousness? Phineas, our father, for that he was zealous exceedingly, obtained the covenant of an everlasting Priesthood. David, for being faithful, inherited the throne of a kingdom for ever and ever. Throughout all the ages none that put their trust in God were overcome. Therefore be strong, my sons, and show yourselves men in behalf of the Law; for therein shall ye obtain glory. And he blessed them and was gathered to his fathers.

Alma 24 17"Then Judah, called Maccabee, rose up in his stead, and all his brethren aided him, and they fought with gladness the battle of Israel. He battled like a lion and the lawless shrunk for fear of him. He cheered Jacob by his mighty acts, and his memorial is blessed forever. And when all the people feared and trembled at the sight of the great number of the enemy, and said: What? Shall we be able, being a small company, to fight against so great and so strong a multitude? Judah answered: With the God of Heaven it is all one to save many or a few. And all the people shall know that there is One who redeemeth and saveth Israel. And Judah led them into battle, and behold the hosts of the enemy were discomfited before him. And Israel had a great deliverance. And they sang songs of thanksgiving, and praised the Lord of Heaven for His goodness, because His mercy endureth forever." (From I Maccabees)

Alma 24 17It may be argued that the followers of Judah used arms to fight their battles, and upon those arms rested victory. On the other hand, the Anti-Nephi-Lehites were imbued with the Spirit of Christ, that was their only weapon, and in it was found God's most precious gift, Peace.

Alma 24 18Verse 18

Alma 24 18And this they did, it being in their view a testimony to God. In burying their swords deep in the earth as a witness to God and all men that they never again would shed the blood of their fellowmen, the Anti-Nephi-Lehites willingly deprived themselves of all means whereby to wage combat; they felt that therein they had offered a sacrifice of righteousness which would prove their integrity to the covenants they had made when they entered God's Kingdom. They regarded all men as being brothers, and God the Father of all. In Christ they now lived, and in Christ, they resolved, they would die. Rather than slay a brother, they determined to "give up their own lives," and instead of them taking from him, they would impart of their own substance that he, too, might feel the strength and power of their newly found faith. They also saw, in retrospect, their lives wherein indolence had returned them only misery and filth. They now resolved that henceforward they would eat the fruits of their own labor, and that no more would idleness rob them of its just rewards.

Alma 24 19Verse 19

Alma 24 19They buried their weapons of war, for peace. The lesson to be learned in this verse is this, that when the Lamanites once saw the Light of Truth as it burst in its effulgent rays upon their lives of darkness, a flood of resplendent glory entered their souls and in that light which could not be darkened, they would sin no more. Their works, thereafter, were great, as was their faith. The Anti-Nephi-Lehites, to a man, had now enlisted under the banners of the Prince of Peace and in His cause "they buried the weapons of war, for Peace."

SCAlma 24 20Alma 24 21Alma 24 22Verses 20-22

SCAlma 24 20Alma 24 21Alma 24 22The Lamanites ... came up to destroy the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi. The Lamanites, prodded on by the dissident Nephites, the Amalekites and Amulonites who had left behind and disowned their own people in Zarahemla, prepared themselves to come up to the Land of Nephi and destroy both the king and his followers. They hoped to put one of their own number upon the king's throne, and to this end they began the onslaught.

SCAlma 24 20Alma 24 21Alma 24 22When the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi saw the wicked intent of the Lamanites, they offered no armed resistance. The Lord was their helper, and on Him they relied. True it was, the people of King Anti-Nephi-Lehi met the rebels head-on; however, not with swords, cimeters, clubs, or slings, but they encountered them with shouts of praise to God and begging Him to give them courage and fortitude to meet their resolves. They readied themselves to meet the foe, and neither flinched nor feared thir coming doom. They bared their heads to await the coming blow. The Lamanites, in malicious glee, began the slaughter. One thousand and five souls were thus martyred, and one thousand and five of them were sent thereby to dwell with their God and His holy angels.

SCAlma 24 23Alma 24 24Verses 23-24

SCAlma 24 23Alma 24 24Now when the Lamanites saw that their brethren would not flee from the sword ... they repented of the things which they had done. When the attacking Lamanites saw that the Anti-Nephi-Lehites offered no resistance to their well-planned atrocities, and also that the Christian Saints and themselves, too, were the victims of a hatred which was stirred up by renegade Nephites, they began to inquire of themselves and of each other, "What manner of carrying on is this that leads men to abjure even the very thought of reprisals?" Time and time again, they saw their brethren submit to the ravages which they imposed, when to flee from it was the natural, ordinary thing to do. When the Lamanites struck a wellaimed blow, the Anti-Nephi-Lehites neither turned "to the right hand or to the left" to escape its deadly intent; herein the gleeful eyes of the Lamanites, with murder peering through them, beheld what they had never dreamed of, the Christian Saints "would lie down and perish," and not only that, but they would praise "God even in the very act of perishing under the sword."

SCAlma 24 23Alma 24 24The astonished Lamanites, quite undone by such unprecedented courage and self-sacrifice, held back from further slaughter. The things which their eyes beheld, scenes by them never before witnessed, contrasts so striking, that in wonderment they stopped the massacre of the unoffending Christians. What, at first, seemed weakness in the Anti-Nephi-Lehites, now proved to be the strength of abiding faith with which the Saints abounded. The Lamanites were amazed, then from utter bewilderment their thoughts turned to sorrow. Grief for their brethren who had perished at their hands was heard on every side, and their savage hearts welled up within them, "and they repented of the things which they had done."

Alma 24 25Verse 25

Alma 24 25They threw down their weapons of war. Seeing the vast amount of sorrow their actions had brought about, and the destruction their arms had needlessly caused, many of the Lamanites renounced warfare, and in testimony thereof threw down their weapons of war, and swore that they never more would use them. They were appalled by the useless sacrifice, and almost overwhelmed by the battlefield horror. That they, themselves, had been participants in the murder of their brethren "stung" them with such remorse that they "came down even as their brethren, relying upon the mercies of those whose arms were lifted to slay them."

SCAlma 24 26Alma 24 27Verses 26-27

SCAlma 24 26Alma 24 27Those who had been slain were righteous people. Now, if a thousand and five of the Anti-Nephi-Lehites had been slain by their wicked brethren, even a greater number of the Lamanites took upon themselves the responsibilities and the requirements of the Christian Saints. The Sacred Record notes that all those slain were righteous people, and in their death no sorrow for them would be shown, but, however, the living would rejoice because all those slain would be saved in God's Kingdom.

SCAlma 24 26Alma 24 27It is worthy for us to note that among those slain was not a wicked man. That proves to us the Christian Anti-Nephi-Lehites were true to the pledges they had made to God and their brethren that they would never more resort to force of arms in defense of their rights. They would rather themselves die than take a life. They would prefer death rather than sin. While over a thousand Christians were slain, not one of the unbelieving Lamanites received even a blow.

SCAlma 24 28Alma 24 29Verses 28-29

SCAlma 24 28Alma 24 29Those who joined the people of the Lord ... were actual descendants of Laman and Lemuel. The hatred so often shown by apostates is evidenced by the account of Alma wherein he observes that Nephites who had affiliated themselves with the Lamanites were the greatest offenders against their brethren. Of those of the Anti-Nephi-Lehites who were slain, the "greatest number" met their fate at the hands of the Amalekites who had apostatized from the Nephite form of worship and had gone over to the Lamanites where they were numbered among that people.

SCAlma 24 28Alma 24 29The Sacred Record also observes that among those who "joined the people of the Lord, there were none who were apostates from the Nephite Church of God. No Amalekites or Amulonites, nor any who were followers of the policies of Nehor, graced the list of the many who took upon themselves the Name of Christ, but, instead, "were actual descendants of Laman and Lemuel, the sons of the Prophet Lehi."

Alma 24 30Verse 30

Alma 24 30They become hardened. The history of God's dealings with His children is replete with instances showing that men having once been enlightened by His Spirit and having once partaken of the great knowledge of His goodness and justice, "and then have fallen away into sin and transgression," have become more spiteful and their actions more malignant than even before they knew these things. Such was the case with the Amalekites and Amulonites. They had been taught the truth, and knew of God's love. Now they denied and ridiculed God's Holy Word; their hearts were thereby made harder, and the light within them turned into darkness. "Thus their state becomes worse than though they had never known these things," the Sacred Record concludes.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Doctrine and Covenants 20:9
[^2] A Constitutional League of Peace in the Stone Age of America, by J. N. B. Hewitt, Smithsonian Report for 1918, pp. 527-45.
[^3] See Mr. Hewitt's article this subject, Holmes Anniversary Volume, Washington, D. C., 1916.
