Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 25

SCAlma 25 1Alma 25 2Alma 25 3Verses 1-3

SCAlma 25 1Alma 25 2Alma 25 3The Lamanites were more angry because they had slain their brethren. Because the Lamanites had been deceived by the Amalekites and the Amulonites whom they regarded as being Nephites, into believing that the people of Anti-Nephi-Lehi were enemies to the common good, and that the king, himself, was unfit to rule, they put all the blame for their misguided venture upon the heads of the Nephites no matter where they lived or who they were. They reasoned that all Nephites were responsible for their folly and their disaster. In their hatred of everything Nephite, which was like a seething cauldron of ill will, the Lamanites "swore vengeance" upon the Nephites, and in their spite and angry passions they temporarily forgot the Anti-Nephi-Lehites and went forth to slay the Nephites wherever they could be found. Their anger knew no bounds.

SCAlma 25 1Alma 25 2Alma 25 3In furtherance of their wicked designs, in which the Lamanites imagined that their injuries were caused by the Nephites, they thought that the deceptions foisted upon them by the Amalekites and the Amulonites could be redressed only by inflicting adequate punishment upon every Nephite wherever and whenever one was found. Following this conclusion, the Lamanites gathered their armies together "and went over to the borders of the Land of Zarahemla." There they found a numerous people to whom Alma and Amulek ministered only a few months previously. The City of Ammonihah was the first populated area to feel the brunt of their attack. Before the Nephites in Zarahemla could muster an army for defense purpose, the Lamanites destroyed that great city and all the people therein. This was in fulfillment of a prophecy uttered by Alma: "But behold, I say unto you that if ye persist in your wickedness that your days shall not be prolonged in the land, for the Lamanites shall be sent upon you; and if ye repent not they shall come in a time when you know not, and ye shall be visited with utter destruction; and it shall be according to the fierce anger of the Lord." (Alma 9:18) The fulfillment of this prophecy is also noted by Alma in the Sacred Record: "And it came to pass in the eleventh year of the Reign of the Judges over the people of Nephi, on the fifth day of the second month, there having been much peace in the Land of Zarahemla, there having been no wars nor contentions for a certain number of years, even until the fifth day of the second month in the eleventh year, there was a cry of war heard throughout the land. For behold, the armies of the Lamanites had come in upon the wilderness side, into the borders of the land, even into the City of Ammonihah, and began to slay the people and destroy the city. And now it came to pass, before the Nephites could raise a sufficient army to drive them out of the land, they had destroyed the people who were in the City of Ammonihah, and also some around the borders of Noah, and taken others captive into the wilderness. (Ibid., 16:1-3) "And thus ended the eleventh year of the Judges, the Lamanites having been driven out of the land, and the people of Ammonihah were destroyed; yea, every living soul of the Ammonihahites was destroyed, and also their great city, which they said God could not destroy, because of its greatness. But behold, in one day it was left desolate; and the carcasses were mangled by dogs and wild beasts of the wilderness. Nevertheless, after many days their dead bodies were heaped up upon the face of the earth, and they were covered with a shallow covering. And now so great was the scent thereof that the people did not go in to possess the Land of Ammonihah for many years. And it was called Desolation of Nehors; for they were of the profession of Nehor, who were slain; and their lands remained desolate." (Ibid., 16:9-11. See also COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume III, Chapter 16)

SCAlma 25 1Alma 25 2Alma 25 3The Sacred Record notes that after the destruction of the City of Ammonihah the Lamanites had a number of battles with the Nephites, in all of which the Lamanites were "driven and slain." No doubt the success of their surprise attack upon Ammonihah made the Lamanites bold, and at first, believing in easy victory, they sought out the Nephites and gave them battle. But, as we have seen, the Lamanites were eventually driven out of all the land.

SCAlma 25 4Alma 25 5Alma 25 6Alma 25 7Verses 4-7

SCAlma 25 4Alma 25 5Alma 25 6Alma 25 7Among the Lamanites who were slain were almost all the seed of Amulon and his brethren. The Nephites, gaining in strength every day as their armies had time to assemble, soon routed the vengeful Lamanites who were led by the Amalekites and the Amulonites. It is strange to note that almost all the Lamanites who were slain in these bloody encounters were the descendants of Amulon and his fellow priests who served wicked King Noah. Amulon and his brethren had fled into the regions surrounding the City of Nephi to elude the wrath of Zeniff's people (Mosiah 19:21), and also who had afterwards joined the Lamanites. (Ibid., 23:35) Those of the Amulonites who escaped the Nephites' fury by flight into the wilderness that lay to the east of Ammonihah arrogated to themselves all right to govern the fleeing Lamanites who had then become a disorganized and beaten army.

SCAlma 25 4Alma 25 5Alma 25 6Alma 25 7In the East Wilderness, the Lamanites, seeking revenge for their defeats, found a goodly number of other Lamanites who had been converted unto the Lord; many of these the Amulonites cruelly burned to death "because of their belief." (See, ibid., 17:14-15) Scattered here and there were other remnants of the once proud and victorious Lamanite Army—now looking bedraggled from loss and affliction— began to remember the things Aaron had preached to them "in their land." They concluded that he had not lied to them, and further, that the Lord whom Aaron proclaimed had given to the Nephites great power such as to overcome their adversaries and to resist their foes although they might far outnumber them. These Lamanites began to question the truth "of the traditions of their fathers, and to believe in the Lord ... and thus there were many of them converted in the wilderness."

SCAlma 25 4Alma 25 5Alma 25 6Alma 25 7Once again the hatred which the apostate Nephites had for all believers in Aaron's words was vented upon the converted ones, whom, those who were left of Amulon's children "caused that they should be put to death, yea, all those that believed in these things."

Alma 25 8Verse 8

Alma 25 8These martyrdoms caused that many of their brethren should be stirred up to anger. Those Lamanites who were converted unto the Lord, and therefore were burned to death by the apostate Nephites, had many relatives and sympathizers who became increasingly angry with the Amulonites because of the loss of their loved ones. Strife and resentment that daily became more bitter roused the malignant passions that were folded up in the breasts of the savage Lamanites. To be ruled by the hated Nephites, or them that they regarded as such, was, they thought, bad enough; but when these rulers exercised unjust authority or wicked dominion even to the taking of innocent lives, open rebellion against the perpetrators thereof seemed to be the Lamanites' only recourse. With each fire the Amulonites kindled, the victims of the martyr's pyre cried aloud for vengeance, and it was not long until their united appeals brought retribution upon the heads of the offending, faithless Nephites. The Lamanites, unwilling to grapple any longer with the merciless rule of the usurpers, "began to hunt the seed of Amulon and his brethren and began to slay them." The pursuit of the renegade Nephites did not end with the overthrow of their forced control of government, but the Lamanites followed the fleeing Amulonites even farther into the East Wilderness to avenge their wanton rule.

SCAlma 25 9Alma 25 10Alma 25 11Alma 25 12Verses 9-12

SCAlma 25 9Alma 25 10Alma 25 11Alma 25 12And behold they are hunted at this day by the Lamanites. This brought to pass the fulfillment of a prophecy uttered by Abinadi almost sixty or seventy years before, when he was brought before the wicked priests of still more wicked King Noah, and by them was burned at the stake: "But this much I tell you, what you do with me, after this, shall be a type and a shadow of things which are to come."(Mosiah 13:10)

SCAlma 25 9Alma 25 10Alma 25 11Alma 25 12"Because of his belief in God," the Prophet Abinadi was the first of the faithful in Christ to suffer death by fire. Mormon, in his abridgment of Alma's record comments that Abinadi meant this when he pronounced the terrible indictment against King Noah and his priests "that many should suffer death by fire, according as he had suffered." (V. 11)

SCAlma 25 9Alma 25 10Alma 25 11Alma 25 12In commenting on the martyrdom of Abinadi as recorded in Mosiah 17:12-19, COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, pp. 190-192, we repeat what we said there: "The Prophet Abinadi, pronounced guilty by the loathsome King Noah and sentenced by him to die, calmly looked about the king's chambers and expressed no regrets. He offered no excuses, nor did he plead for mercy or for clemency. What mattered most to him, he had proclaimed the message God sent him to deliver!"

SCAlma 25 9Alma 25 10Alma 25 11Alma 25 12In spite of the scorn King Noah's people had for Abinadi's words, and the contempt they showed by refusing to obey them, Abinadi was true to the promise he had made, "I finish my message." (Mosiah 13:9)

SCAlma 25 9Alma 25 10Alma 25 11Alma 25 12Led forth by Noah's wicked priests and by the clamoring throng that in carnival spirit had gathered to mock him, the prophet was hastened to his place of death and neither flinched nor feared his coming doom.

SCAlma 25 9Alma 25 10Alma 25 11Alma 25 12As the flames of the martyr's pyre began to scorch his weary frame, Abinadi cried unto them, saying many terrible things that would happen unto them: That because many Lamanites should "believe in the Salvation of the Lord their God," their seed would cause the believers to "suffer the pains of death by fire," even as "ye have done unto me." Also, he told them that because of iniquity among them, pestilence and disease would be sowed broadcast among them. In addition to all that, he said, "Yes, and ye shall be smitten on every hand, and shall be driven and scattered to and fro, even as a wild flock is driven by wild and ferocious beasts."(Ibid., 17:17)

SCAlma 25 9Alma 25 10Alma 25 11Alma 25 12Abinadi continued his fearsome prophecy, and we are now contemplating its full fulfillment, for Alma records in the words of Mormon that the Amulonites who were the seed of King Noah's wicked priests "were driven by the Lamanites, and they were hunted, and they were smitten."

SCAlma 25 13Alma 25 14Alma 25 15Alma 25 16Verses 13-16

SCAlma 25 13Alma 25 14Alma 25 15Alma 25 16The Lamanites ... returned again to their own land. Seeing that it was useless to carry on a war of extermination against the Nephites, and that everywhere they were defeated by them, the Lamanites returned unto the land of Lehi-Nephi, or as it is more often called the Land of Nephi. Some of the Lamanites settled anew in different parts of the land, many of them going to the Land of Ishmael and others direct to their old homes in the Lamanite domain. Wherever they went they were greeted by the Anti-Nephi-Lehites, and what is further to be noted, they joined them; thus adding to the people of God great numbers of those who beforetime had rejected His Holy Word as proclaimed by the sons of Mosiah and their companions.

SCAlma 25 13Alma 25 14Alma 25 15Alma 25 16The Spirit of the Lord quickly irradiated their whole lives, or, like a light illumined the souls of all the Lamanites who accepted Christ and His Gospel. They, too, as their brethren had done before them, "did bury their weapons of war." The spirit of prophecy which is the Spirit of Christ, was so abundantly with them that in it they became a righteous people. The Lord helped them in their trials and guided them in all their difficulties. He sustained them when enemies from within and without combined with the powers of Hell to seek their destruction. The Book of Mormon notes that "they did walk in the ways of the Lord, and did observe to keep His commandments and His statutes." With their brethren, who had already proved their integrity to righteous principles, they grew daily in the knowledge of God and in that which is just and true, and with them they were as one in serving Him.

SCAlma 25 13Alma 25 14Alma 25 15Alma 25 16Not only did they live pure lives and therein walked uprightly before God and their brethren, but the newcomers were taught the Law of Moses and to observe it. This they did with fullness of heart. From now on, or until the Book of Mormon calls them the People of Ammon, we shall continue to call the combined believers the Anti-Nephi-Lehites. They understood the great purpose of the Law, and saw in it God's promise concerning Christ and His redeeming love. All the statutes and performances of the Law pointed to the coming Messiah who would bring unto them Salvation if only they would follow Him. In their praise of Him, they pondered, how can we follow Him unless we are willing to keep the commandments of God? (See I Nephi 31:10) Their conclusion was unanswerable. Their faith in the coming Messiah, whom they knew as Jesus Christ, was strengthened by their resolve to serve Him, "and thus they did retain a hope through faith, unto Eternal Salvation, relying upon the spirit of prophecy, which spoke of these things."

Alma 25 17Verse 17

Alma 25 17And now behold, Ammon, and Aaron, and Omner, and Himni, and their brethren did rejoice. ... Near the conclusion of their great mission to the Lamanites, when the results of their labors were plainly seen, and a bounteous harvest of them that loved the Lord was gathered into His store, the missionaries with one accord gave thanks unto God for the good they had done and praised His Holy Name for the blessings they had received from His bounteous hands. For nearly fourteen years they had toiled in the Lord's Vineyard, and now the harvest was great. As they came together many tears were shed for the righteous who had been slain, but through all the afflictions which at times seemed almost to overwhelm them, they discerned God's divine blessing and in it all, God's providential care.

Alma 25 17The great good which they had accomplished, and the many souls that by their labors had been brought unto Christ, reminded them of their supplications to Him and His answer thereto: "And it came to pass that they journeyed many days in the wilderness, and they fasted much and prayed much that the Lord would grant unto them a portion of His Spirit to go with them, and abide with them, that they might be an instrument in the hands of God to bring, if it were possible, their brethren, the Lamanites, to the knowledge of the truth, to the knowledge of the baseness of the traditions of their fathers, which were not correct. And it came to pass that the Lord did visit them with His Spirit, and said unto them: Be comforted. And they were comforted. And the Lord said unto them also: Go forth among the Lamanites, thy brethren, and establish my word; yet ye shall be patient in long-suffering and afflictions, that ye may show forth good examples unto them in Me, and I will make an instrument of thee in My hands unto the Salvation of many souls." (Alma 17:9-11) This promise the Lord had fulfilled. He had "verified His word unto them in every particular."

Alma 25 17So far as we can gather from the records, the great mission of Ammon and his brethren to the Lamanites was productive of results new in the history of the Nephites. On many previous occasions dissenters from the latter had gone over to the Lamanites, until that nation consisted of a mixed race. But the Nephite people appear to have been, almost without exception, the literal descendants of the first founders of the monarchy, Nephi, Sam, Jacob, Joseph, and Zoram, and of the people of Mulek who were found by Mosiah I dwelling in Zarahemla. But now we will see where a large body of Lamanites was incorporated in the Nephite nation and became partakers of the liberties accorded to all other citizens. As the history of both nations proceeds, the original distinctions of descent become less and less observable, as defections from both peoples were constantly occurring, so that in process of time a Nephite was not so much a literal descendant of Lehi's greatest son, as he was one who recognized the Nephite government, also one who was an observer of the Law of Moses and a believer in the Gospel of Christ. While a Lamanite was he who dwelt in the dominions of that people; one who rejected the Law of Moses, and also the Gospel of Jesus Christ, and adopted the false traditions of that race.
