Janne M. Sjodahl, George Reynolds, Commentary on the Book of Mormon, vol. 3 ( 1958)

CHAPTER 26

Alma 26 1Verse 1

Alma 26 1How great reason have we to rejoice. In the last verse of the preceding Chapter (25) it is noted that the sons of King Mosiah "did rejoice exceedingly, for their success which they had among the Lamanites." They, led by Ammon, ascribed unto God all the honor and glory for what was accomplished by them. They took unto themselves not a whit of credit for the attainment of their grand venture, but unto Him who presides On High, they gave praise and thanksgiving. Their thoughts, we imagine, were like those of the Prophet Habakkuk's, who, when having passed through many deepening trials, cried aloud: "Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation." (Habakkuk 3:18)

Alma 26 1These are the words of Ammon to his brethren. Ammon commenced his glorious paean in praise to God with a tribute to his brothers and his other companions who had suffered with him in proclaiming the Glad Tidings of Christ's Gospel to the benighted Lamanites. He addressed them as "brothers and brethren." Ammon was the leader of the missionaries, but as such he recognized the equality of all. There is nothing that equalizes men more than by their walking together humbly with God. Ammon's salutation, "My brothers and my brethren," stood them all alike before the throne of the Great Father of all men. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 42, v. 9) Ammon's solemn declaration reminds us of a Jewish prayer, the substance of which we remember from our youth: "O may all, created in Thine image, recognize that they are brethren, so that, one in spirit and one in fellowship, they may be forever united before Thee. Then shall Thy Kingdom be established on Earth and the word of Thine ancient prophet be fulfilled: The Lord will reign for ever and ever."

Alma 26 1When Ammon and his brothers determined on their mission to the Lamanites in the Land of Nephi, and in doing so would leave their stately homes in Zarahemla, there were many of their friends and relatives who sought to dissuade them from a task so perilous, and one which in their eyes was foredoomed to failure. However, Mosiah's sons, accepting their miraculous conversion as a mark of God's chastening love, resolved that in spite of the objections that were made, to go forward with their plans. At length, and with the prayers and blessings of their father, King Mosiah, they set out on the journey southward to the Kingdom of the Lamanites. After leaving their homes, no doubt every obstacle in their way seemed insurmountable, and on several occasions they were about to return. However, the promises of the Lord that He would sustain them in affliction, and make of them an instrument in His hands for doing much good, so heartened the missionaries that they pressed forward until they reached the homeland of their dark-skinned brethren. But ofttimes in their journey when they were about to despair, disquieting to them, the warnings of their friends reverberated in their ears, and again they heard the taunting gibes of their companions in Zarahemla who had now become their innocent tormentors. But in spite of their misgivings the missionaries were filled with a righteous zeal; they placed upon the altar of love all they held dear, and thereafter walked undaunted in the paths wherein the Holy Spirit guided them.

Alma 26 1About fourteen years later, in reviewing the incidents of their mission, Ammon, overflowing with joy and thanksgiving, cried triumphantly unto his brethren, who also rejoiced, "... could we have supposed when we started from the Land of Zarahemla that God would have granted unto us such great blessings?"

Alma 26 1What great blessings has He bestowed upon us? Can ye tell? In answer to his own query, Ammon laid before his brethren the many ways in which the Lord had bestowed His blessings upon them. Aaron, Omner, Himni, and their companions, knew the answer to Ammon's question, but Ammon, overjoyed by the many expressions of divine favor which were seen by them on every side, was jubilant in his praise to God, and in spite of the fact that Aaron "rebuked" him for his excessive speech, yet Ammon refused to be restrained. He saw all about him the proof of Providential care, and even through the afflictions they had all suffered he discerned God's divine blessings. Ammon reminded his brethren of the former sad lot of the Anti-Nephi-Lehites; how, spiritually they had been in the "darkest abyss," but that now under the leadership of the missionaries they had been brought out from darkness into light. The labors of the missionaries had not been in vain, but were glorious in their results. In their faithfulness to God they had never faltered in any line of duty, even though they suffered nearly unto death that the Gospel should be preached unto their brethren who sat in darkness.

Alma 26 1We may wonder at their accomplishments, but we, too, rejoice with the missionaries in their success as husbandmen in this part of the Lord's Vineyard. "The field was ripe," said Ammon, ready for the harvest. Unafraid and untiring, they never paused in their labors to advance God's Kingdom; in fact it was the reverse. They toiled all the day long to multiply the number of sheaves that would be gathered into the garners, that when night came, and the time of harvest was over, not one single, solitary sheaf would be left in the field to moulder and rot away where the storms of life might beat upon it in almost unrelenting fury.

Alma 26 6Verse 6

Alma 26 6They shall be gathered together in their place, that the storm cannot penetrate to them. Ammon's promise was prophetic. He was raised to the highest point of inspired utterance. He foretold what only a few months later proved to be history. The Anti-Nephi-Lehites, afterwards called Ammonites, [^1] in honor of the greatest of Mosiah's sons, migrated in vast numbers to a land which the Nephites, in their magnanimity, had provided for them. Between this new land, which was called Jershon, [^2] and their former homes in the Land of Nephi, lay Zarahemla, where the main body of the Nephites dwelt. Here, the Ammonites were safe from the sworn vengeance of their erstwhile compatriots, the Lamanites, and here was fulfilled the prophecy which is recorded in this verse. The storm when it came, and the fierce winds that blew, did not penetrate to them, for the armies of the Nephites were placed between the Anti-Nephi-Lehites, or the Ammonites as now they were called, and their enemies. (Alma 27:23) "Behold," said Ammon, "they are in the hands of the Lord of the harvest, and they are His; and He will raise them up at the Last Day." (V. 7)

Alma 26 6Blessed be the Name of our God. Rewarded with the joy of being in the service of God, the happiness that filled the hearts of the missionaries knew no bounds. The perception, that they might have listened to the counsel of well-meaning, but, nevertheless mistaken friends and relatives in Zarahemla to forsake the idea of converting the Lamanites unto the Lord, almost overwhelmed them with a feeling of repugnance. Had they listened to the fearful stories which were told them of their bloodthirsty brethren, they would have been persuaded to abandon the Lamanites to lives of darkness and misery. But, in the strength of the Lord, they had resisted every effort made to intimidate them, and now their joy was complete. We may well conceive of the rejoicing that prompted Ammon to exclaim, "Blessed be the Name of our God; let us sing His praise, yea, let us give thanks to His Holy Name." Ammon's glad-some praise which he raised to God was also an invitation to his brothers and brethren to join him in offering the homage of grateful hearts for the many blessings that had been bestowed upon them. His great desire of them was like that of the Psalmist when David sang: "O magnify the LORD with me, and let us exalt His Name together." (Psalm 34:3)

Alma 26 6The joy of the missionaries was increased as they pondered the results of the years they had spent in the mission field among the Lamanites. They remembered the words of their grandfather, King Benjamin, when that great Presiding High Priest of God's Church preached his last sermon to the Saints assembled in Zarahemla. A great General Conference was then held, and Benjamin, trembling under the weight of many years, enfeebled, and almost worn out with the toils of everyday life, was compelled to raise his voice that even those closest to him might hear: "Behold, I say unto you that because I said unto that I had spent my days in your service, I did not mean to boast, for I have only been in the service of God. And behold, I tell you these things that ye may learn wisdom; that ye may learn that when ye are in the service of your fellow beings ye are only in the service of your God." (Mosiah 2:16-17) In King Benjamin's sermon, no lessons are more boldly proclaimed than is this lesson of service. The conclusion is not to be escaped that we serve God best by sharing with the needy the gifts we receive from His bounteous hands, by showing compassion for the distressed, by upholding the falling, by loosing the bound. Truly, we can ennoble our lives no more graciously than by serving God with deeds of loving-kindness to our fellow men. (See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, p. 44.)

Alma 26 6Let us sing to His praise. (V. 8) From the very first, when our fathers roamed for so many years in the Arabian Wilderness, they sought comfort and joy in songs of praise and thanksgiving to God, to whom they gave all honor and glory. "When my cares are many within me, songs in Thy praise delight my soul." (Hebrew Proverb; See COMMENTARY ON THE BOOK OF MORMON, Volume II, Alma 12:24; pp. 130-131.) Not only did the Children of Israel receive solace from above in singing songs in defeat and in sorrow, but also joy in the lyre when triumph and victory sustained their banners.

Alma 26 6In Israel's history, singing the songs of Zion ofttimes raised the vanquished to realms where God, alone, planted victory upon the armour of righteousness. It drew from the ashes of remorse the hope that in Him light would come forth out of darkness and joy from sorrow. Singing is an important part of Israel's worship; it always was and it always will be. The Nephites inherited this showing of devotion to God, and this particular manner of paying their homage to His Name from their ancestors who in ages past called upon all Creation to worship Him in song. "O sing unto the Lord, a new song; sing unto the Lord, all the Earth." (Psalm 96:1) "Praise the LORD from the Earth, ye dragons, and all deeps: Fire, and hail; snow, and vapours; stormy wind fulfilling His Word; Mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars: Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and flying fowl: Kings of the Earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of the Earth: both young men, and maidens; old men, and children: Let them praise the Name of the LORD." (Ibid., 148:7-13) "Let the mountains shout for joy, let the valleys sing, and be glad before the Lord," is modern Israel's rendition of this familiar theme.

Alma 26 6Imbued with this heavenly legacy, Ammon besought of his brethren a song in praise of Him who had watched over them throughout the many days of sorrow and of gladness which had now ended so gloriously in the Salvation of their Lamanite brethren, the Anti-Nephi-Lehites. Ammon gave thanks to God that he and his missionary companions had not been discouraged in their desire to proclaim the Gospel to the Lamanites. For, he reminisced, if they had listened to the words of their would-be benefactors in Zarahemla, and had stayed within the sanctuary of their protected homes there, their brethren who, through their ministrations had partaken of the mercies of God, would have, in that event, still been stirred up in anger against those whom they now love so much. And what is further, he opined, "they would also have been strangers to God," much as they, themselves, had been strangers to Him before that dreadful day when in the height of their folly they had been stopped in their wicked course by an angel from Heaven.

SCAlma 26 10Alma 26 11Alma 26 12Verses 10-12

SCAlma 26 10Alma 26 11Alma 26 12Ammon, I fear that thy joy doth carry thee away unto boasting. In the fervor of his righteous zeal, Ammon praised God, the Great Giver of the many blessings he and his companions in the mission field had received. His joy was immeasurable, his praise of God knew no bounds. He left no stone untouched or unturned that he might add to the fabric he was building to God's honor and glory. In fact, Ammon's effulgent spirit transported him to realms beyond which only angels from God's presence can attain. "The LORD liveth. Exalted be the God of my Salvation," was the sum and the substance of Ammon's song of praise. Pour out your heart, we imagine he said, and it, too, shall rejoice, for we trust in God at all times. In Ammon's rejoicing we can well understand the words of King David: "Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart." (Psalm 97:11)

SCAlma 26 10Alma 26 11Alma 26 12The joy that filled Ammon's breast, and made his great heart leap like the hart at the waterbrook, caused his brothers to seek his repression. Aaron feared that Ammon's enthusiasm and ardor were more than Ammon's physical strength could endure. Aaron therefore "rebuked" Ammon for his ecstasy which seemed to carry him beyond the limits of propriety. Aaron saw in Ammon's words what he thought was a departure from the path of humility in which they both had trodden together for, lo, the many years of their mission. Aaron thought, also, that Ammon boasted in his own might and wisdom. Boasting is generally associated with pride, and it usually imputes exaggeration, ostentatiousness, or vaingloriousness, to the one who vents his pride. (Merriam-Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary)

SCAlma 26 10Alma 26 11Alma 26 12Ammon's answer to Aaron's reproof was full and forthright. In the words of the Psalmist, we conceive him saying: "I will bless the LORD at all times: His praise shall continually be in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast in the LORD...." (Psalm 34:1-2)

SCAlma 26 10Alma 26 11Alma 26 12I do not boast in my own strength. When compared with God's, Ammon knew that his utmost strength was absolute weakness, and his wisdom foolishness. He did not boast in them, but, however, the light of God's countenance illumined his soul, and what had been dark within him was now made bright. Like a lamp in the gloomy wastes of darkness, his joy spread its rays of gladness all about him, and beckoned his brethren: "Behold, my joy is full, yea, my heart is brim with joy, and I will rejoice in my God." He reasoned thus: "Are not all the mighty men as naught before the LORD, and those of great renown as though they had never been; the wisest as if without knowledge, and men of understanding as if without discernment?" (Jewish Union Prayer Book) And, no doubt, in addition to that, he remembered having read from the Plates of Laban which were in the possession of his father, King Mosiah: "Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and obtaineth understanding." (Proverbs 3:13) And again: "Behold, the fear of the LORD, that is wisdom...." (Job 28:28) Some of Jeremiah's words also came to his mind: "Thus saith the LORD, Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the rich man glory in his riches: But let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me, that I am the LORD which exercise lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness, in the Earth: for in these things I delight, saith the LORD." (Jeremiah 9:23-24)

SCAlma 26 10Alma 26 11Alma 26 12Ammon had been tested and chastened by the Lord in the many afflictions that had come upon him, but, however, he accepted them all as marks of God's refining love which purified and strengthened him. They fulfilled in him, David's prayer: "Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit within me." (Psalm 51:10)

SCAlma 26 13Alma 26 14Alma 26 15Alma 26 16Alma 26 17Alma 26 18Alma 26 19Alma 26 20Alma 26 21Alma 26 22Alma 26 23Alma 26 24Alma 26 25Alma 26 26Alma 26 27Alma 26 28Alma 26 29Alma 26 30Alma 26 31Alma 26 32Alma 26 33Alma 26 34Alma 26 35Alma 26 36Alma 26 37Verses 13-37

SCAlma 26 13Alma 26 14Alma 26 15Alma 26 16Alma 26 17Alma 26 18Alma 26 19Alma 26 20Alma 26 21Alma 26 22Alma 26 23Alma 26 24Alma 26 25Alma 26 26Alma 26 27Alma 26 28Alma 26 29Alma 26 30Alma 26 31Alma 26 32Alma 26 33Alma 26 34Alma 26 35Alma 26 36Alma 26 37Therefore have we not great reason to rejoice? Ammon's words in these verses are in resumÃ© what he had previously noted in his rejoicing. In the conversion of the Anti-Nephi-Lehites unto the Lord, whose mercy extended to thousands of the Lamanites unto their Salvation, the missionaries had been an instrument in the Lord's hands which was used by Him to accomplish His purposes.

SCAlma 26 13Alma 26 14Alma 26 15Alma 26 16Alma 26 17Alma 26 18Alma 26 19Alma 26 20Alma 26 21Alma 26 22Alma 26 23Alma 26 24Alma 26 25Alma 26 26Alma 26 27Alma 26 28Alma 26 29Alma 26 30Alma 26 31Alma 26 32Alma 26 33Alma 26 34Alma 26 35Alma 26 36Alma 26 37By the patience of the missionaries, and their long-suffering under trial, by their diligence in preaching His Holy Word, by their faithfulness in every line of duty, by their good deeds, the Nephite servants of God had proclaimed to the Lamanites that "the God whom they worshiped was indeed the Father of all men," and the things they taught were the expressions of His holy Mind and Will. These unselfish qualities, so apparent in their labors, combined with their obedience to all His commandments, made the sacrifice which was offered by the missionaries upon the altar of service to their fellow men, acceptable to God. He had rewarded them abundantly, Ammon said, "Therefore, let us glory, yea, we will glory in the Lord; yea, we will rejoice, for our joy is full, yea, we will praise our God forever."

THE WAY PREPARED

Near the beginning of the last century, the states along the Atlantic seaboard were close to the frontier of our territorial expansion. The ramparts of what are now great cities stretched far beyond the horizon of man's vision. Here a vast wilderness beckoned the hardy New England farmer, and the planter farther south, to come make a home and draw from the earth those things that had become so necessary to the civilization of the New World.

Intrepid pioneers ventured ever farther westward, some in search of new homes, others for purposes of adventure, and still others to ply their trades. Soon farmhouses were springing up everywhere, and communities, both large and small, were seen on every hand. Men and women from every walk of life sought to get a fresh start in this new land. There were farmers and merchants, schoolteachers and craftsmen from every trade; there were country lawyers and country doctors. All labored together and most prospered. This was a "land choice above all other lands" upon the face of the Earth.

This was a period of time coincidental with an era of world enlightenment. About that time Robert Fulton guided his steamboat, Clermont, up the Hudson River; Benjamin Franklin had only recently "discovered" electricity; commerce and industry were making great advances; the practice of medicine was becoming a science, thus later to put an end to what was pestilence and disease; discovery was easing the task of our workaday lives; it was but a short time since the Continental Congress, meeting at Philadelphia, had given birth to the great American Republic.

This was also a time of religious and spiritual awakening. The people of rural New York became animated by a religious fervor, of such as perhaps they had never even dreamed. They were awakened from a contented drowsiness by the cries of evangelical preachers who spoke mainly of "Hell and Damnation." They promised an unending punishment in a "Lake of Fire and Brimstone." The awful penalties of disobedience were stressed, while a Father's love and mercy were seldom mentioned. People were taught to fear and tremble. The "Torments of the Damned" awaited all, as all were the victims of another's sin!

It would not be difficult to ascribe to these "backwoodsmen," for so the rural people are called, many of the Christian virtues. They were honest, true, chaste, benevolent; indeed "they followed the admonition of Paul." They were cheerful, but not gay; they worked arduously to bring new land under cultivation. The words of a poet, whose name we never knew, may describe them better than can we:

They for their humble sphere by nature fit, Had little understanding and no wit, Received no praise, but though their lot be such, Toilsome and indigent, they rendered much.

Churches for miles around, even the itinerant preacher and those whose pulpit was a tent, held interest-arousing and revival meetings from which came reports of numerous conversions. All those attending were urged to confess their sins and "Come unto Jesus." These gatherings became the social and religious life of each community. The desire for religion was almost universal; it affected everyone.

Whole congregations were carried by their ignorance and zeal to depths they could not fathom and to heights they could not grasp. The avowed purpose of those meetings was soon lost in the bickerings that followed. Little discussions, that at first seemed friendly, became contentions; then they turned into hatred, strife, and angry passions. The opinion of one became the bitter wrath of another. Brother assailed brother, and sometimes children their parents, in spite of their claim to the fellowship of Him who said:

Whosoever shall do the will of My Father in Heaven, the same is My mother and My sister and My brother. (See Mark 3:35.)

Both the clergy and their congregations added to the unrest by joining what was fast becoming a public discussion of "What shall I do to be saved?" Mankind had lost the Way to Heaven, and there was none to lead them to that "Peaceful Shore." Both prophet and priest were profane. One said one thing, another, something else; what one denied, another affirmed most emphatically. All were confused.

The question, "Which church shall I join?" was made more difficult to answer by another question, "Which is the true Church of Christ?" That all were wrong never entered their heads. The cries, "Lo, here is Christ!" and "Lo, there!" were heard from the tents of Baptist, Methodist, and Presbyterian alike. All were like sheep; they wandered first here and then there, not knowing where to go. It was like a man going out at night without a lamp to guide him.

It is here, however, that the great purposes of God begin to unfold. A boy, fourteen years old, read in James:

If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him. (James 1:5)

Joseph Smith lacked wisdom!

He asked God!

God answered his prayers!

Joseph was to join no church!

This is where the Restoration of the Gospel of Christ begins.

This is where the Restitution of all things takes its start.

This is where the "Way is Prepared" that the Plates from which the Book of Mormon was translated were made known and here is laid the foundation for His great latter-day work.

THAT ALL MIGHT UNDERSTAND

The question has been asked, "What part of the Book of Mormon is Mormonism?" That question is in error! It should be the reverse. One might as well ask, "What part of the Koran is the worship of the Moslem?" or "What part of the Old Testament is Judaism?" That is, however, not a forthright nor a complete answer.

To appraise, acceptably, the value each has—that is Mormonism and the Book of Mormon—in Latter-day Saint religion, it will be necessary to ask you to follow us through the events of two thousand years "a religion which had its introduction among the despised inhabitants of the Roman Province of Galilee. A religion which at first was proclaimed by the Jew to be folly and by the Gentile to be foolishness. A religion whose proselytes were few and whose advocates but unlearned fishermen, despised, mocked, ridiculed, and persecuted by every mode which cruelty could invent or evil power achieve. You will remember that for ages the wise men and poets of the Jews had foretold the coming of a King; one who would lead them into battle which in every case would be victorious and would enthrone Jerusalem above the nations of the Earth. But when He came and was crucified in their capital, when they found that His emissaries were not princes and nobles, but poor fishermen of Galilee, their hard hearts became like granite, their spite was keen and inexhaustible, and they left no stone untouched or unturned which they might throw at the bulwarks and the battlements of the Christian Faith."

In the first place: Two thousand years ago a map of the Roman Empire was a map of the World. Imperial Rome was supreme. Warfare had so made it. Her conquering legions were in every clime. Her great military roads tied together all the nations of the Earth into one vast empire of which Tiberius Caesar was head, and emperor, and ruler of all.

He sent governors into each province to act in his stead, and judges to enforce the law. These rulers and magistrates usually upheld the law of the land in which they sojourned, and cared little for else than the decrees of Imperial Rome. Only a few years had passed since Augustus Caesar had issued that famous decree that the whole world should be taxed.

That decree, though merely mercenary, brought to pass the fulfillment of a prophecy uttered many hundreds of years before:

But thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall He come forth unto Me that is to be Ruler in Israel; Whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting. (Micah 5:2)

Under the political fitness of the Roman sway, Jesus Christ established His Church among the little esteemed people of Galilee.

After journeying from His home in Nazareth to the Jordan River to be baptized by John, He called the fishermen of Galilee to leave their nets and follow Him. He told them, "I will make you fishers of men." He called others and chose twelve whom He named Apostles. These were to be with Him always and witness every act of His life. He ordained pastors, teachers, and evangelists and taught them the Gospel. They were to teach others.

When Jesus began His ministry among the Jews at Jerusalem, there were many who refused to walk in the Way of the Lord, and many who had forgotten the agreement their fathers had made with the Lord at Sinai. It was an agreement to be faithful if He would be their God.

Through iniquity, the Jews had fallen from the place they once held. They had stumbled in keeping the commandments of God. Many of the ordinances and judgments they had received from Him were by them abandoned; others were perverted to meet the unholy purposes of priests and kings. Their worship was fast becoming a mere form. They had ensnared themselves in the fowler's net, and privately taught doctrines that robbed them of their heritage.

The Jews were quick to condemn and harsh in the treatment of their neighbors. Class and class distinction ruled their relations one with the other. There were the Scribes and Pharisees who represented the learned. There were the Sadducees who preferred the policies of Imperial Rome. There were the despised Galileans and the Samaritans with whom the Jews seldom spoke. Each one walked in his own way, and all were in pursuit of their own happiness.

Although drawn together by a common religion and bound by age-old restraints, the Jews were torn by strife and disappointed pride. In spite of their learning and piety, crafty men interpreted the Law to feed the hunger of infatuation and greed. To appear more holy than others they clothed themselves in robes of righteousness. The Savior called them "hypocrites" and warned His disciples, "Take heed and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and of the Sadducees." He likened the Pharisees unto whited sepulchres, beautiful to look at but were "full of dead men's bones." The aristocratic Sadducees did not believe in the resurrection of the dead. John the Baptist called them "a generation of vipers."

It has been said of Jesus, "He went about doing good." One day multitudes would follow Him and listen to His teachings. The next, He would be almost alone. On the Sunday we call "Palm," great throngs followed Him into Jerusalem and clamored for Him to be their King.

Before the week ended, Jesus, accused of blasphemy by the high priest and elders of the Jews, stood in scorn before the Roman procurator. The Son of God, the Creator of the Earth, this Jesus whom some men called Christ, faced with courage and steadfastness those who witnessed against Him. He offered no defense to their charges, but entered calmly and even dutifully upon the prospects of His coming doom and neither flinched nor feared it.

Said Pilate, the Roman Judge, to the high priests and the leaders of the Jews who had gathered there, "I find no fault in this man," and as is the custom at this time of the year to release unto you one who is bound and fettered, "Will ye that I release unto you the King of the Jews?" No! No! they cried, instead of that, release unto us Barabbas although we know that he is a thief and a killer. "What will ye then that I shall do unto Him whom ye call the King of the Jews?" and in their spite and self-approval they shouted, "Crucify Him! Crucify Him!"

The Great Redeemer died. On the third day He rose from the tomb. Many saw Him and testified of that fact.

He called His Apostles to Him and blessed them and said:

Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature.

He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned. (Mark 15-16)

The Apostles were so everjoyed at this fresh expression of divine favor that they immediately began to do what the Savior commanded them, and soon Churches were springing up in every land and were filled with congregations both Jew and Gentile who took upon themselves the Name of Christ.

The almost miraculous spread of the Christian Church may be seen in the missionary zeal of the Apostles. If you examine a map of the Holy Land, you will quickly see that Jerusalem was not only the capital city of the Jews, but it was also the crossroads of the great caravans that made it the center of travel, commerce, and industry. There, men from every nation under Heaven were for different reasons brought, some to celebrate the feasts, others seeking merriment, and still others to trade in the precious goods brought by the merchants from other parts of the Orient.

In the second chapter of "The Acts of the Apostles," Luke tells us that on the Day of Pentecost a great number of devout worshipers had assembled in Jerusalem. There were Medes and Persians, strangers from Rome, dwellers from Mesopotamia and from Egypt, and all parts of the Earth. All had purposes of their own, and each sought that for which he had come.

While this great throng of "foreign Jews" was gathered there, the Spirit of the Lord came down upon the Apostles, and they declared, in the tongue of every man there, the Glad Tidings of the Gospel.

And they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this? (Acts 2:12)

For they had heard spoken the wonderful works of God. They wanted the same power, that they, too, might declare in diverse languages "His Great Name." We can conceive that some even wanted to buy it. But Peter, standing up with others of the Apostles, told them of the day spoken of by Joel, also of David, to whom God had sworn that "of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, He would raise up Christ to sit on his throne."

This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses. ...

Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the Apostles, men and brethren, What shall we do? [Meaning, no doubt, if we cannot obtain it by purchase or by management, what then shall we do? Then Peter, spurning their offer of gold and other emoluments, said:

... Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost. ...

Then they that gladly received His word were baptized: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.

And they continued stedfastly in the Apostles' doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers.

And fear came upon every soul: and many wonders and signs were done by the Apostles.

And all that believed were together, and had all things common;

And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need.

And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart.

Praising God, and having favor with all people. And the Lord added to the Church daily such as should be saved. (Acts 2:32, 37-38, 41-47)

And so did the Gospel spread that great numbers of both the Jews and the Greeks believed. The preaching of the Apostle Paul at Corinth and Antioch, at Rome and throughout Macedonia, raised up converts everywhere and even among those who dwelt under the roof of the Imperial Palace at Rome. And soon we find that Pliny, the younger, who was governor over Pontus and Bethnia, in reporting the "state of the empire" to his Imperial Master, said that it was not advisable to put the Christians to death, because if they did so, they would have a large part of the Empire to exterminate. In his letter he stated:

The number of Christians is so great as to call for serious consultation. The contagion of this superstition has spread, not only through cities but all the villages of the country.

Justin Martyr, one of the early Christian fathers, he being born in the year A.D. 106, said:

There is not a nation, Greek or Barbarian, even those who wander in tribes and live in tents, among whom prayers and thanksgiving are not offered to the Father in the Name of Jesus Crucified.

Clement of Alexandria, writing in the middle of the Second Century after Christ, noted that:

The doctrines of Christianity are not limited to Judea, but are spread throughout the whole world, unto every nation, village, and city.

Eusebius, Bishop of Caesarea in Palestine, early in the fourth century caused to be recorded:

Thus then under a celestial influence and co-operation, the doctrines of the Savior, like the rays of the Sun, quickly irradiated the whole world. Presently and in accordance with divine prophecy, the sound of His inspired evangelists and Apostles had gone throughout the whole Earth and their words to the ends of the world. Throughout every city and village, like a replenished barn floor, Churches were rapidly abounding and were filled with members from every people.

But the rapid growth of the Christian Church was quickly followed by an ever-increasing disregard for the teachings of the Savior. Converts in every land brought with them the ideas and the prejudices of other religions, which ages of pagan worship and Jewish stubbornness had implanted in the hearts of their fathers. What at first presaged a grand and glorious future opened the door to all forms of evil, that in latter days, caused the words of Isaiah to be fulfilled:

The Earth is also defiled under the inhabitants thereof; because they have transgressed the laws, changed the ordinance, broken the everlasting covenant.

Therefore hath the curse devoured the Earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate. ... (Isaiah 24:5-6)

The early Christians believed God was their Father, and that He shaped all things to be most for their good and greatest for His glory. They believed that He created all things and ruled all things. They sang of Eternal Life; they instructed and helped one another; they gave all that all might be equal.

Soon their simple worship was turned into gaudy shows, into pageantry, and into elaborate ceremonials. The voices of God's inspired teachers and evangelists were scarcely heard above the din of Babel, and a form of godliness took the place of homage to His Name and devotion to His cause.

The early Christian virtues quickly surrendered to the paganism of Rome and the hypocrisy of the Jews. The Roman religion was idolatrous, and Judaism, instead of being the worship of the True and Living God, had become the "sanctuary of fools" and of those who used it as a starting place for their own peculiar notions.

As early as the days of the Apostles, Paul tells us that "the Mystery of Iniquity doth already work," and in writing to Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and the brother of James, says:

For there are certain men crept in unawares ... ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus christ. (Jude 4)

Paul further says:

For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy.

Without natural affection, trucebreakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good.

Traitors, heady, highminded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God;

Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof: from such turn away. (II Timothy 3:2-5)

And,

For I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock.

Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. (Acts 20:29-30)

Among the prophecies of Isaiah we read:

Wherefore the Lord said: Forasmuch as this people draw near Me with their mouth, and with their lips do honour Me, but have removed their heart far from Me, and their fear toward Me is taught by the precept of men: (Isaiah 29:13)

For, behold, the darkness shall cover the Earth, and gross darkness the people: ... (Ibid., 60:2)

Jeremiah said:

For My people have committed two evils; they have forsaken Me the Fountain of Living Waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water. (Jeremiah 2:13)

There are many passages of scripture that relate to this period in history. It is known as "The Dark Ages." It is a section in the story of mankind that is little understood. How man plunged into such depths of depravity, while at the same time he created unexcelled works of art and architecture, has not been explained. It is a mystery. It can only be likened to the downfall of classic Greece, there, "when the arts were in their highest glory, the wickedness and abandonment of that people reached its maximum."

Surely darkness covered the earth. There was scarcely a ray of moral light to illumine its gloom. One is bewildered by the lack of moral and spiritual light which hung, like a cloud of darkness, over all Europe.

Well might the prophet exclaim:

Therefore night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark unto you, that you shall not divine; and the Sun shall go down over the prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. (Micah 3:6)

Just as the Earth in rotating turns from the great Sun into darkness, just so did the people of the Earth turn from The Son of Righteousness. For centuries there was no light; God did not reveal Himself to those who claimed to be His vicegerents here on the Earth.

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord. (Amos 8:11)

In medieval darkness, ignorance and superstition were almost universal. It was a crime to read God's Holy Word, and a heresy to worship Him according to one's own conscience. The annals of those times trace, indelibly, the course of the human heart when evil and error take the lead. The chosen leaders of the Church, the watchmen in its towers, appointed to guard and to guide, became its corruptors, and the Church, itself, was made a vehicle upon which unworthy priests rode to positions of prominence and power. Men became the servants of evil; in the name of that which is most holy, they excused themselves in doing that which is most to be eschewed.

Priest-ridden, by fraud maintained, with error throughout, the Church of Jesus Christ ceased to exist upon the Earth. In the words of the eminent Doctor D. D. Cummin, a student of those times and a clergyman of the Church of England:

Deadly errors grew up like rank grass, deception, the most revolting, outraged the whole Church; blasphemous assumptions and what Paul called "doctrine of devils" heaped power and affluence upon the clergy, until they were, in the words of the Apostle, "exalted above all that is called God." ... the highest offices in the Church were bought and sold as common merchandise. The doctrines of the Church were arrayed in robes, the most grotesque and ridiculous, and all Christendom was decked in the habiliments of absolute apostasy.

We think it not necessary nor wise to enter here into any prolonged exposition of the awful events recorded of the Middle Ages of Europe, but we deem it important to say that during that long night all succession in the Priesthood of God was broken, and what was left was merely a sham, a fraud, which led like "the blind leading the blind" along "slippery ways of darkness." Their unseeing eyes failed to behold "the Light that shines in the dark," "the Light of the world," the "Son of Righteousness."

To chronicle the events of that period is to pale before the record that is made. We have been asked to excuse and forget what was done then. This, we cannot do! There is no explanation that justifies an excuse. There is no palliative that will deaden the painful effects of those perplexing times. What they did then has conditioned us now, and history has recorded the facts. The facts of Medieval Europe need no interpreter, and history needs no advocate to condemn them. They, themselves, proclaim a disavowal of belief in God, a disavowal of belief in Him as the Maker and the Creator and the Ruler of all.

Let us sum it all up! "Mankind had lost the Way to Heaven," and there was none to lead him back. In the attempt to find that way they sank deeper and deeper into the dark recesses of night, where ignorance and superstition guided the feet of all who sought Eternal Life.

One remembers here the words of Amos:

And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it. (Amos 8:12)

It is not our purpose to denounce any church, nor to condemn its adherents for their beliefs. Each church has some truth in it, but they do not have the Priesthood of God. With their different forms of idolatry and their many creeds, their charms, deceptions, rosaries, amulets, and canons of law, etc., etc., they proclaim themselves to be, not the Church of Jesus Christ, but the "great and abominable church" which Nephi saw in a vision and which was referred to by the Apostle Paul as the "Mystery of Iniquity," the apostate church, "Babylon the Great."

It is here, however, as has been pointed out in divers places, where the importance of Mormonism is best exhibited.

It is here where Mormonism can be said to be the voice of Israel's Shepherd calling His sheep from the woods, from the moor, from the mountaintops. Mormonism here declares the majestic truth that the night of spiritual darkness is past; that the morning twilight is here; that the voice of our Father has again been heard to speak, and again is preached that glorious proclamation, "Prepare ye the Way of the Lord."

Mormonism declares, emphatically and without equivocation, that the Priesthood of God has again been entrusted into the hands of men here upon the Earth, and that the same gifts, powers, and blessings of old are again "signs that shall follow them that believe."

This is the time spoken of by the Apostle John, when he was on the Isle of Patmos:

And I saw another angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.

Saying with a loud voice, Fear God, and give glory to Him; for the hour of His judgment is come: and worship Him that made Heaven, and Earth, and the sea, and the fountains of waters. (Revelation 14:6-7)

These are, also;

... the times of restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all His holy prophets since the world began. (Acts 3:21)

Now, such an apostasy as we have indicated actually taking place, the question will arise, "What shall become of those who, through no fault of their own, never heard the Gospel Plan? Will they be lost eternally in the Kingdom of God? Will they be forever damned to dwell with the devil and his angels because they were blinded by the craftiness of Satan?" Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints refuse to believe it! They believe in God, the Father Almighty, and they believe that it is His glory and His work to bring to pass the Eternal Salvation of all His children, everywhere. They believe that the "... Eternal Purposes of the Lord shall roll on, until all His promises shall be fulfilled." (Mormon 8:22)

By way of interpolation, let us add:

The circumstances attending the first vision given to the Prophet Joseph Smith, when he saw the Father and the Son, have been so often published, and must be so familiar with our readers, that with this bare mention of the facts we will pass them by. It is sufficient for the purpose of our present research to know that this marvelously important event did happen. Then and there the cornerstone was laid of the vast fabric to God's glory of which Joseph was the master builder, when mortal beings alone are considered. (Story of the Book of Mormon by George Reynolds.)

Let the Prophet Joseph Smith, himself, tell us concerning events that occurred at this time:

We [Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery] continued the work of translation [the Book of Mormon] when, in the ensuing month (May 1829), we on a certain day went into the woods to pray and inquire of the Lord respecting baptism for the remission of sins, that we found mentioned in the translation of the plates. While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord, a messenger from Heaven descended in a cloud of light, and having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us saying:

"Upon you, my fellow servants, in the Name of Messiah, I confer the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the Earth, until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness."

He said this Aaronic Priesthood had not the power of laying on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost, but that this should be conferred on us hereafter, and he gave us directions that I should baptize Oliver Cowdery, and that afterwards he should baptize me.

Accordingly we went and were baptized. I baptized him first, and afterward he baptized me ... after which I laid my hands upon his head and ordained him to the Aaronic Priesthood, afterwards he laid his hands on me and ordained me to the same Priesthood ... for so we were commanded.

The messenger who visited us on this occasion and conferred this Priesthood upon us, said that his name was John, the same that is called John the Baptist in the New Testament; and that he acted under the direction of Peter, James and John, who held the keys of the Priesthood of Melchizedek, which Priesthood, he said, would in due time be conferred on us, and that I should be called the First Elder of the Church, and he (Oliver Cowdery) the second. It was the fifteenth day of May, 1829, that we were ordained under the hand of this messenger, and baptized.

Immediately on our coming up out of the water after we had been baptized, we experienced great and glorious blessings from our Heavenly Father. No sooner had I baptized Oliver Cowdery, than the Holy Ghost fell upon him, and he stood up and prophesied many things which should shortly come to pass. And again, so soon as I had been baptized by him, I also had the spirit of prophecy, when standing up, I prophesied concerning the rise of the Church, and many other things connected with the Church, and this generation of the children of men. We were filled with the Holy Ghost, and rejoiced in the God of our Salvation. (Taken from a little pamphlet, Joseph Smith Tells His Own Story.)

Many of those to whom this thing has been declared have asked: "What, then, did the Reformation of the Sixteenth Century mean?" How about all those good men: Luther, Knox, Calvin, John Wesley? Surely they were not deluded, much less impostors. No, we admit that, just as the stars in the sky on a dark night after the great Sun has gone down, there is still some light, praise God; but notwithstanding all this, we deny that the true Church of Jesus Christ, with the authority to minister in the ordinances of the Priesthood, exists or has existed in any one of the many creeds of the world since the Seventh Century.

We do not disclaim that position, we proclaim it.

Although the Glorious Reformation did much to raise mankind, and although it banished, we hope forever, many of the abuses to which the church was subjected, still it was powerless to bring back the true Church.

When the great reformers commenced their fight against what they called "the desecration of the church and the perversion of its teachings," the Church of Christ was then upon the Earth, or it was not. There can be no question about that! If it was, they should have, under no circumstance, made one to oppose it. If it was not, they could not have created it. If they made a church, then it was their church and had no power to save. Christ, and Christ only, is the Author of our Salvation, and the Head of our Church.

When the Risen Redeemer visited the Nephites here on the American Continents, this was a point He doubly stressed. It is recorded in the Sacred Record:

And Jesus again showed Himself unto them, for they were praying unto the Father in His Name; and Jesus came and stood in the midst of them, and said unto them: What will ye that I shall give unto you?

And they said unto Him: Lord, we will that Thou wouldst tell us the name whereby we shall call this Church; for there are disputations among the people concerning this matter.

And the Lord said unto them; Verily, verily, I say unto you, why is it that the people should murmur and dispute because of this thing?

Have they not read the Scriptures, which say ye must take upon you the Name of Christ, which is My name? For by this Name shall ye be called at the Last Day.

And whoso taketh upon him My Name, and endureth to the end, the same shall be saved at the Last Day.

Therefore, whatsoever ye shall do, ye shall do it in My Name; therefore ye shall call the Church in My Name; and ye shall call upon the Father in My Name and He will bless the Church for My sake.

And how it be My Church save it be called in My Name? For if a church be called in Moses' name then it be Moses' church; or if it be called in the name of a man then it be the church of a man; but if it be called in My Name then it is My Church, if it so be that they are built upon My Gospel. (III Nephi 27:2-8)

This in brief is the answer to the question that is asked. Without discussing its doctrines or its beliefs, this is Mormonism. Mormonism is a cup; the wine in that cup is the Word of the Lord. The Book of Mormon is the Word of the Lord! If we reject the cup, we cast away and so lose the wine that is in that cup. Let us accept Mormonism, and drink the precious wine which it offers us. Let us joyfully obey every Word spoken by the Lord of the Vineyard, or by His servants (Jacob 5); then Eternal Life will be the portion of His people, and Salvation in the Kingdom of Heaven the heritage of all who love the Lord.

Now, in conclusion, the Book of Mormon is a grand and glorious revelation of the mind and will of God. It contains the Gospel of Jesus Christ in its fulness. (The angel Moroni to the Prophet Joseph Smith.) It makes known the power of God unto Salvation, and points the Way to His Eternal City. And here, the Book of Mormon stands before the world's highest tribunal, the people of the Earth, that court of righteous and holy decisions, and says:

These are proofs of my origin, these are witnesses to the truth of which I speak. God, himself, bearing witness of it.

—PHILIP C. REYNOLDS.

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] Alma 28:26
[^2] JERSHON means the land of the Expelled, or of the strangers. We think it altogether probable that this significant name was given to it at the time it was set off for the habitation of these expatriated Christian Lamanites, as it defines their condition as exiles, and their relation to the Nephites as strangers. The name is not mentioned before this event, and would possibly be the only local name by which it was known to the compiler of the Sacred Record. Before the date of this exodus, it was, we think, considered a portion of the Land of Zarahemla. (See Alma 27:22 ff.)
