Sterling W. Sill, Wealth of Wisdom (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1977)

LEARNING WISDOM FROM OTHERS

"And as all have not faith, seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith."

Our Wisdom Literature

In that period of our world's history between 200 B.C. and A.D. 100, a great deal of religious writing came into being that has been referred to as the wisdom literature of the Hebrews. Some of this is now found in the Apocrypha, which contains a number of books that were not included in the Bible.

The wisdom literature of this and other periods contains philosophies that express, by means of proverbs, sermons, and fables, the results of the reflections of wise men concerning the general questions of life. The writers of the wisdom literature made use of the scriptures, including the writings of the prophets, as well as many others noted for their excellent counsel and good judgment.

Today as in the past, wise men give counsel through their writings. Wisdom literature is not all religious writing. The Master himself spent much of his time speaking of the activities of the sower, the prodigal son, the good Samaritan. He told inspiring parables about the lilies of the field, the good husbandman, the vine-dresser's sons. A poet has said:

He spake of lilies, vines and corn, The sparrow and the raven, Things so wonderous and so wise, Were on men's hearts engraven.

We who live today, in this age of the greatest of all knowledge explosions, have access to untold amounts of wisdom literature applying to our health, our occupations, our minds, and our souls, and we should be more appreciative than anyone else has ever been of important ideas.

In some eras and societies, human wisdom and divine wisdom have been regarded as being opposed to each other. This is not necessarily so. In the Apocrypha, wisdom literature generally, and even the scriptures themselves, we find many statements to the effect that wisdom is the one virtue that is indispensable to the human being who would lead a godly life, a life of excellence.

One of the prominent writers of the wisdom literature of the early period was Simeon, the son of Jeshua, who was called Ben-Sira. He was the author of the Sirach, or Ben-Sira's Book of Wisdom. Ben-Sira was a constructor of wise sayings and uplifting philosophies. He belonged to the class of sages who in the days of Jeremiah occupied recognized positions alongside the priests and the prophets. His book of wisdom contains moral axioms and wise counsels regarding almost every conceivable situation in life. Like many other constructive thinkers, Ben-Sira expanded some of these proverbs into stimulating essays. To Ben-Sira, even the most secular forms of wisdom partake of something that is fundamentally religious, and he may have been anticipating the Lord's statement that to Him "all things are spiritual," for certainly wisdom is an offshoot of that wisdom which emanates from God. Wise maxims and counsels may be applied to people in every condition of life. Most of them deal with the ordinary, everyday relationships between persons, whether in regard to the rich or the poor, the oppressed, those who mourn, rules of courtesy and politeness, respect for one's betters, kindness, and other similar topics.

Knowledge of human nature requires one's attention in every step of our life's journey. It was clearly Ben-Sira's objective in writing his book to present to the people of his day an authoritative work of reference to which recourse could be had for guidance and instruction in every circumstance of life.

The people of his period were faithful to the law, the ordinances of which were binding because they were the revealed will of God. As Solomon, another writer of wisdom literature, pointed out, "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." (Prov. 9:10.) By the fear of the Lord is meant a personal law of God, obedience to the divine commandments, and observance of the law. Truth is the finest expression of any wisdom literature.

Just as the wisdom literature and consciousness of it influenced the Hebrews, so we today ought to think and write and aspire to make our own wisdom literature and become conscious with it and identify with it.

For each of our individual activities, we should ask ourselves, Is it right? Is it wise? Is it helpful? Is it profitable? Our small troubles may be the result of our imprudence; more serious troubles may result from wrong doing. Therefore, to be wise we should avoid imprudence as well as abstain from evil. Our wisdom literature may be represented by the philosophies of ancient times, but it should motivate us to a greater, fuller recognition of wise ideas and activities for our own life and time. Let us each strive to make ourselves worthy of the designation of wise men. Let us strive always to follow the counsel of the Lord, who in our day declared: ". . . seek ye diligently and teach one another words of wisdom; yea, seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.)

The World's First Book of Wisdom

The Bible is probably the world's most useful and worthwhile resource. It accounts for many of the differences found in human lives. When peoples have lived without the word of the Lord, they have usually soon dwindled in unbelief and marched along that road that has led them to degradation and the fall of their civilization.

In attempting to measure the benefits of following the precepts of the Bible, compare the Christian attitudes of the American founding fathers, who built a nation on a foundation of belief in God, with the objectives of such godless men as Hitler, Stalin, and some of our present-day dictators. Without divine guidance, men and women are likely to lose the spirit of righteousness as well as their human dignity, liberty, and free agency. We see a reflection of biblical values in Abraham Lincoln, who translated its benefits into his own life and made them serve his country's welfare. As he was freeing the slaves he said, "As I would not be a slave, so I would not be a master." Many other great men have been able to utilize the godly virtues mentioned in the holy scriptures and make them negotiable in their own lives and the lives of others.

Surveys show that a large percentage of the people who live in the United States at least claim to believe in the Bible. Many accept it as the word of God. The actual number is much smaller of those who effectively study it and do what it says, so that they get its fullest benefit. We can only imagine what our society would actually be like if every citizen enthusiastically and wholeheartedly believed in God.

It is comparatively easy to believe in the Bible as a distant object of adoration. When it sits unopened on the shelf, the effects of its doctrines are often too indefinite to cause a conflict in our minds. And when there is no pressure to put its commandments into actual operation, we are inclined to think it is a wonderful book. But when the Bible is opened, with its doctrines exposed and its philosophies inviting practice, then we sometimes lose some of our enthusiasm. Therefore, even though the Bible remains our greatest possession, we lose much of its value when we do not fully accept its theology and fully practice its teachings. When we follow the process of partial enthusiasm and fractional obedience, we are wasting some of our greatest resources.

The Bible is not only the world's first book of religion; it is also the world's first book of philosophy. It is the world's first book of history. It is the world's first book of culture. It is the world's first book of literature. Many great writers repeatedly refer to the Bible. Jesus himself quoted from the Old Testament 89 times. The works of Shakespeare contain 550 quotations and allusions to the Bible. The writings of Emerson are filled with many ideas and philosophies from the Bible. The poetry of Tennyson contains 330 Bible references. The Bible is one of the most significant miracles of all ages.

Even though the Bible was written when the camel was the chief means of transportation, in many respects this book is even more up-to-date today than it would have been if it had been written yesterday, for many of the events discussed in it are still awaiting fulfillment. The Bible contains many inspired teachings about the relationship existing between God and ourselves, and many of its instructions were written specifically for our own day and beyond.

Some Bible prophecies are presently being fulfilled. In other chapters we may look ahead to such over-whelming events as the cleansing of this earth by fire in preparation for the glorious coming of Christ with his holy angels to reign upon the earth during its promised millennium of a thousand years of peace. The Bible also tells of such personal events as our own resurrection and the conditions surrounding our eternal future destiny.

The Bible is the world's first book of success. The very best way to be a good lawyer or a good teacher or a good businessman is to be a good man, and the Bible is filled with many teachings about both goodness and greatness. All we need to do is just get them out of the Bible and into ourselves.

The Bible is the world's first book of wisdom. When we read it with the idea of getting its wisdom, it becomes a different kind of book than if we read it for its poetry or its history or even its theology. Because we usually find those things that we earnestly look for, one who strictly lives by the Ten Commandments, the Sermon on the Mount, and the other sacred writings cannot help but be a wise man. Wisdom and righteousness are synonymous, as are wickedness and unrighteous behavior.

The wisdom of the Bible has scarcely been touched. It has thousands of inspiring stories, commandments, and philosophies capable of upgrading the lives and glorifying the spirit and activities of everyone who will make an effort to get on intimate terms with it.

Many great lessons may be learned from reading the Bible. For example, when Moses was starting across the desert with his vast company of people, he needed someone who knew the desert to serve as their guide. There was a man living on the edge of the desert by the name of Hobab, whose services Moses desired to obtain. Moses said to him, ". . . come with us, and we will do thee good." Hobab replied, "I will not go." However, because Moses desperately needed Hobab, he tried again. This time he altered his approach and said, ". . . thou mayest be to us instead of eyes." (Num. 10:29-31.) In this he used an entirely different appeal. When Moses had tried to induce Hobab saying, "We will do thee good," Hobab was not impressed.

Most people are not generally attracted by do-good programs. Yet we are still making this kind of appeal in many places today, frequently without success. For example, we say to a prospective church member, "You come to church and we will do thee good." In other words, we strongly infer that we are nice people and it would do you good to be associated with us. That may be entirely true, but this appeal usually doesn't have very much power. However, when Moses told Hobab that he would be as eyes to them in the wilderness, he was saying, "Hobab, come and be our leader. You know the desert better than we do, and we will probably get lost without you to show us the way." Translated into our language, this says, "You come and teach this class in religion or lead this cultural or recreational activity. You have an ability that we don't have, and we need you to be our eyes in the wilderness." This appeal to serve was too strong for Hobab to resist, and he was soon on his way guiding the children of Israel toward their promised land. Like Hobab, most people respond more readily to an invitation to serve than one to be served.

The Bible teaches many success principles. For example, it tells us:

The Bible is the word of the Lord. It contains the greatest program ever written on the greatest of all subjects—eternal progression. We have the promise that if we do certain things we will be resurrected, glorified, and become even as God is. Certainly one of our greatest opportunities is to study this tremendous wonder volume and make it a part of our lives.

The Great Teacher

Some 2700 years ago, as the prophet Isaiah looked forward to the coming of Christ, he foretold some of the important things about the Savior, including some of the titles by which he would be known. He said, "For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end. . . ." (Isa. 9:6-7.) In his antemortal life the Christ was ordained to be the Savior of the world and the Redeemer of men. He has been called the Master and the Great Physician. One of the most magnificent of his titles is that of the Great Teacher.

In a revelation given to Moses, God the Father said of the antemortal Christ, then known as Jehovah, "And worlds without number have I created; . . . and by the Son I created them, which is my Only Begotten." (Moses 1:33.) Even before Bethlehem, Christ was a Creator of worlds. He was the second member of the Godhead, which served as the presidency of heaven. He ruled with God the Father long before this earth itself was formed. He was appointed by the Father to have direct charge of the affairs of our earth. He was the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Some fifteen centuries B.C. he came down onto the top of Mt. Sinai in a cloud of fire with such power that the mountain shook and the people trembled. Among other things, to the accompaniment of the thunders and lightnings of that holy mountain, he said, "Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Ex. 20:3.) Just think of the tremendous progress we would make if we always followed that one direction given by this greatest intelligence of heaven next to the Father himself. This earth would then soon become God's paradise.

In the meridian of time Jehovah, the first begotten Son of God in the spirit, took upon himself mortality and became known to us upon this earth as Jesus Christ.

One of Jesus' primary responsibilities was that of teaching. As he finished his life's work upon this earth and prepared to ascend to his Father from Mount Olivet, he passed this teaching commission on to those he had prepared for this assignment. He said to those leaders who stood at his feet: "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: . . . and lo, I am with you alway, even to the end of the world." (Matt. 28:19-20.) He said: "He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be damned." (Mark 16:16.) This commission has now been passed on to us.

Dr. Henry C. Link once said, "Nothing puts so much order into human life as to live by a set of sound principles." The soundest principles ever known in the universe are the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Each one has an important purpose, and we receive miraculous power when we make them a part of us.

When the Prophet Joseph Smith was asked how he taught a divergent group of people, members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, he said, "I teach them correct principles, and they govern themselves."

Teaching correct principles to his children is probably the most important function of God himself. But, like so many others, this is a function that he shares with us. He has appointed teachers among his children to carry on this process of imparting knowledge and fostering development.

What a great good fortune it is to have wonderful parents who are good teachers of righteousness and truth. In addition to having parents who set good examples, we are also blessed if we have good teachers in our youth, teachers who enlarge our vision and stimulate our minds.

Of course, not all great teachers are employed in classrooms. Some of the greatest lessons of my life I learned from a bishop, from a Scoutmaster, and from my employer out on the farm. On my own, I have taken some courses from Shakespeare, Emerson, Elbert Hubbard, Harry Emerson Fosdick, the apostle Paul, the prophet Job, the prophet Moses, and a humble fisherman by the name of Simon Peter. What a thrill it is just to think that at our own pleasure we can select the greatest minds that have ever lived upon the earth and learn their greatest lessons!

God has provided us with many other kinds of teachers. One of the most powerful of these is that of our own experience. We could give ourselves a substantial advantage in life by keeping track of uplifting experiences in our lives with some pointed notes about what we have learned from each of them. It is one of the good fortunes of our lives that we can learn to do by doing. We can also learn from having anticipations and motivating expectations. Actually we are our own greatest teachers.

Another important teacher is industry. Industry is a parent virtue, and when we really learn how to work, then any accomplishment is placed within our reach. Industry is one variety of genius. It has been said that "genius is the power to make continuous effort," and "the secret of success is constancy of purpose." Obedience is a great teacher. Faith is a great teacher. Habit is a great teacher. Example is a great teacher. As the poet has said:

Example sheds a genial ray of light Which men are apt to borrow, So first improve yourselves today And then improve your friends tomorrow.

Inspiring associates with whom we work are great teachers. More or less unconsciously, even to ourselves, we absorb from them that which is inspirational, uplifting, helpful, and profitable to us.

All of the great virtues are also parent virtues, and they beget the most wonderful offspring in their own image. However, we ourselves are the only ones who can actually bring about our own success. We are the only ones who can properly prepare the mental soil where real learning takes place most effectively. No one can do our studying for us. No one can do our thinking for us.

No one except ourselves can shape our attitudes or form our determinations. A good teacher should know much about the student, but a good teacher should also know much about himself. This is particularly true when we are going to function in both roles at the same time.

There are certain procedures that can make learning more pleasant and easy, and if we get ourselves in the right mood and generate the right kind of ambition we can succeed. We should always serve God, and as our own teacher and the one who controls our own destiny, we ourselves should intervene endlessly and vigorously in our own behalf to bring ourselves to that great destination where we will all someday want to be.

The Wisdom of Jesus

The greatest being who ever lived upon our earth was born nearly two thousand years ago in Bethlehem of Judea and was known as Jesus of Nazareth. He was the first begotten and most capable son of God in the spirit, and he was appointed by the Father and ratified by the premortal council of heaven to be the Savior of the world and the Redeemer of men.

He was associated with the Father as the Creator of our world. It was under his direction that Lucifer was banished from heaven because of his rebellion against God. During his short life, and his shorter ministry, he was known as the Great Teacher, the Great Physician. He was the Light of the world and the Master of men.

During his premortal state, he had been associated in the Godhead with his Father and the Holy Spirit. He has all knowledge and all power; he is all good, and one of the thoughts that gives me one of my greatest comforts is to think of him in his state of being all-wise. Out of his wisdom, under the direction of the Father, he created this earth. He organized the principles of life and happiness that we know as the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. He has also made us the beneficiaries of his abilities and virtues, and has indicated that someday even we may become like him if we fully follow his direction.

We sing a song in which we say, "Cast thy burdens on the Lord." The Lord himself said it this way: "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; . . . For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matt. 11:29-30.) How thrilling it is to know we may be entitled to be inspired by him and be uplifted by his example and make ourselves the beneficiaries of his all-knowing wisdom. We have also been promised that if we are worthy, we will have the inspiration of the Holy Spirit to guide us in all our activities.

The scripture says, ". . . there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." (Job 32:8.) How necessary it is that we learn to keep our lives and minds open always to the promptings of the Spirit!

We might go back and review, as we know it, the earthly ministry of the Savior of the world. Certainly our capacity is increased as we learn to appreciate the many blessings available from him. Of his early life in Nazareth, we know very little. However, the scriptures make some significant statements about him, including the following: "And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him." (Luke 2:40.) The scriptures put great emphasis on wisdom as one of the leading characteristics of the Master of all mankind. Luke makes another statement about it when he says: "And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and man." (Luke 2:52.) That is the kind of development that all of us should be aware of and working toward. It indicates increase in mental development, physical development, and spiritual development. These references both mention Jesus' wisdom, and about the only other thing that the New Testament tells us about the early life of Jesus is his experience of teaching the wise men in the temple when he was twelve years of age.

What could be more important than these all-wise, all-knowing, all-good characteristics of him who is our Creator and Redeemer and the one working to bring about our eternal exaltation. In every way, Jesus taught us to always use good judgment and to learn to reason logically and think effectively. We learn wisdom by practice and by being obedient to wise instruction. He taught us to study. He said, ". . . seek ye out of the best books words of wisdom; seek learning, even by study and also by faith." (D&C 88:118.)

Jesus gave the greatest success formula of all ages in just two words when he said, "Follow me." How important it is for us to follow him in his faith, in his industry, in his righteousness, in his thoughtfulness.

He was teaching us preparation when he told the parable of the wise and foolish virgins. (Matt. 25:2.) He was doing the same thing when he taught about the faithful and wise steward. (Luke 12:42.) Usually we don't fall down in life because of our sins. Our biggest problems come because we are unwise. The more foolish things we do, the more unwise we become. The more wise things we do, the wiser we become. Wisdom feeds upon itself, and so do sin and foolishness and bad judgment. If we sin today, the habit gets a little deeper and tomorrow's sins come easier. The Ten Commandments are wise statements, and we should make no exceptions in being obedient to their precepts. When we make exceptions, we tear the good habits down and build the bad habits up.

We should also keep all of the other directions of the Lord. Think of the wisdom of the parables, the inspiration of the Beatitudes (beautiful attitudes), the great principles of salvation, eternal progression, literal bodily resurrection, the blessings of the celestial kingdom. The very best way to be a wise man in heaven is to be a wise man here on earth. That is what Jesus had in mind when he said we should live by every word that proceedeth forth from the mouth of God.

He has said, "Whatever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life, it will rise with us in the resurrection. And if a person gains more knowledge and intelligence in this life through his diligence and obedience than another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come." (D&C 130:18-19.) He will also have many advantages in this world.

To develop wisdom is the way to wealth. It is the way to health. It is the way to happiness and success. It is the way to knowledge and power and fulfillment. Let us start working at it more diligently immediately, since any procrastination may lead to our doom. Solomon said, "With all thy getting, get understanding." And someone who may have been wise like Solomon said, "With all thy getting, get going."

The Wisdom of Job

One of my favorites of the Old Testament personalities is the prophet Job. Even among the giant luminaries that light up the pages of holy scripture, Job stands out like a bright beacon.

We are introduced to him in the first chapter of the Old Testament book that bears his name, where the record says, "There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job: and that man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil." (Job 1:1.) He was a very wise man, a great prophet, and an outstanding family man. Because of his thoughtful planning and vigorous industry, he was also a very wealthy property owner.

Job loved God and all righteousness. He possessed the most admirable qualities of character. In him we see love, righteousness, faith, understanding, patience, and sympathy with his fellowmen.

A predominating theme of his book centers in that eternal question concerning the purpose of human suffering, either merited or not merited. Suffering frequently is purifying to our souls if we have the right attitude about it. The scripture says even of Jesus, ". . . yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered." (Heb. 5:8.) Probably next only to the Master himself we think of Job as heading the list so far as human suffering and the excellence of his attitude about it are concerned.

One of the most thrilling ideas in the holy scriptures so far as I am concerned is spoken by Job when, in the midst of his troubles and afflictions, he lets us feel the strength and power of his godly attitude as he says, "All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my nostrils; My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit. . . . till I die I will not remove mine integrity from me. My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live." (Job 27:3-6.)

Under the pressure of a little adversity or trouble many people adopt the foolish attitudes of anger and bitterness and blame everybody else for their problems. Job's friends tried unsuccessfully to get him to adopt this negative, destructive attitude. Even his wife said to him, ". . . curse God and die" (Job 2:9), but Job pointed out that he had received many good things from the hand of God and that he ought to be able to stand up like a man under a little adversity.

Job had thrilling faith in God. He said to God, "I know that thou canst do every thing. . . ." (Job 42:2.) And whether he understood the purpose of his own suffering or not, he would not abandon his integrity or his faith, for he said of God, "Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. . . ." (Job 13:15.)

God also paid Job one of the greatest compliments when he asked Satan, "Hast thou considered my servant Job, that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil?" (Job 1:8.) Satan tried to argue that Job's piety depended upon his prosperity, and that if Job should find himself in difficulties, he would abandon his allegiance to God.

There are many people who follow their religion as a sharp, unethical businessman would pursue his business opportunities. He would make the best deals he could but would turn away and do other things if they did not seem to secure for him an advantage.

And so God permitted Satan to take from Job everything that he had except his life. But Job stood up to the situation with great strength and determination. He said, "Naked came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." (Job 1:21.)

Over the ages, Job has been characterized chiefly by his patience, but his character was also rich in integrity and wisdom. The Lord himself asked Job some searching questions. He said, "Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare, if thou hast understanding. Who hath laid the measures thereof, if thou knowest? or who hath stretched the line upon it? Whereupon are the foundations thereof fastened? or who laid the corner stone thereof; When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (Job 38:4-7.)

Jesus said, "And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent." (John 17:3.) We should also know about the laws of God and his program for our own lives. The Lord wanted Job to know about his antemortal existence. That is just as important for us, for we also were present in that council of God when the foundations of this earth were being laid; and when we knew that we were going to have the privilege of coming to the earth and living upon it and having the privilege of taking advantage of the opportunities of our second estate, no wonder "the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy"!

The book of Job poses some other questions. For example, "Canst [a man] by searching find out God?" (Job 11:7.) Human wisdom is a weak and fragile thing compared to the wisdom of the Divine, but Job points out that there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth it understanding. If we keep God's commandments, he will reveal himself and his programs to us. He will help us to discover the secrets of wisdom.

Job was confronted with another question: "If a man die, shall he live again?" (Job 14:14.) Many people in the world do not know the answer to this famous question, and yet almost no other could be as important. There are some who would give a negative answer. There are some who believe in an eternal life on a basis so weak and indefinite that it has little power to upgrade their lives. As there is wisdom in knowing about our premortal states, so there is wisdom in knowing about our premortal states, so there is wisdom in knowing about our eternal postmortal estate. God himself said, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Cor. 15:22.) God has ordained the literal bodily resurrection and the eternity of the family relationship. How much wiser we are in handling our problems when we know and understand the answers to these questions!

Now feel the enthusiasm of the faith of Job, who lived many generations before the resurrection was initiated upon this earth. He said, "Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were printed in a book! That they were graven with an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever! For I know that my redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: And though my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God: Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me." (Job 19:23-27.)

In order to increase the quality of wisdom within himself, Job spent a great deal of time meditating about the values of life. He asked himself some very important questions and insisted upon training himself to give the right answers. This procedure and the questions themselves might serve us as advantageously as they did him, if we would go about it in the same way. Job said, "But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding?" (Job 28:12.) He might also have said, "How can we find and develop both of these important qualities?" What a wonderful asset we ourselves could have if we would get a proper testimony about these important subjects for ourselves instead of the weak attitude we might acquire by allowing the answers to skate too lightly across the surface of our minds!

Job asked another important question when he said, "Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be profitable unto himself? Is it any pleasure to the Almighty, that thou art righteous? or is it a gain to him, that thou makest thy ways perfect?" (Job 22:2-3.) If a man does the right thing he can be very profitable unto himself as well as to God.

Job points out that "man knoweth not the price" of wisdom. He said, "It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed for the price thereof. It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir." He said, ". . . the price of wisdom is above rubies." (Job 28:13, 16, 18.)

We can easily understand this idea because, while wisdom can produce wealth, wealth cannot produce wisdom. Therefore wisdom is greater than wealth. Wisdom can also produce love and righteousness. What a great bargain it would be if we could buy unerring wisdom with money, with labor, with education, or even with our own blood, sweat, toil, and tears. To help us get the right answer, we ought to meditate more upon Job's question and try to discover the answers to this important proclamation: "Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of understanding?" (Job 28:20.) If we could personally get some good answers to those questions, we would be well on our way to the most outstanding personal joy.

As a proof of his own wisdom, Job said, ". . . the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding." (Job 28:28.) He might also have said, "Obedience to God is wisdom," "Living the principles of the gospel is wisdom," "Righteous industry is wisdom."

More than just about anything else, God our Eternal Heavenly Father wants each one of us to build solid qualities in our characters. He wants us to be fully informed, fully righteous, fully thoughtful. He wants us always to use good judgment, with love in our hearts for good things.

After Job had passed all his tests, he was given twice as much in material things as he had had before. He was also much wiser. The record says, "So the Lord blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginnings." (Job 42:12.) And God will similarly bless us if we are diligent in developing the excellence of our wisdom.

The Wisdom of Solomon

One of the most famous men who has ever lived upon the earth was Solomon, the son of David, who was born around 1000 B.C. David, his famous father, had succeeded in consolidating the nation of Israel by driving out the hostile tribes in a long series of wars and had established his capital at Jerusalem. As David neared the end of his life, he said to Solomon:

"I go the way of all the earth: be thou strong therefore, and shew thyself a man;

"And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his way, to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, as it is written in the law of Moses, that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest, and withersoever thou turnest thyself;

"That the Lord may continue his word which he spake concerning me, saying, if thy children take heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul, there shall not fail thee (said he) a man on the throne of Israel." (1 Kgs. 2:2-4.)

Then the record adds, "So David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David." (1 Kgs. 2:10.) "Then sat Solomon upon the throne of David his father. . . ." (1 Kgs. 2:12.)

Solomon ascended the throne when he was just a teenager, "and his kingdom was established greatly." (1 Kgs. 2:12.)

"And Solomon loved the Lord, walking in the statutes of David his Father. . . .

"And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there; for that was the great high place: a thousand burnt offerings did Solomon offer upon that altar.

"In Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night: and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.

"And Solomon said, Thou hast shewed unto thy servant David my father great mercy, according as he walked before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee; and thou hast kept for him this great kindness, that thou hast given him a son to sit on his throne, as it is this day.

"And now, O Lord my God, thou hast made thy servant king instead of David my father: and I am but a little child: I know not how to go out or come in.

"And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou hast chosen, a great people that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.

"Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who is able to judge this thy so great a people?

"And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.

"And God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment;

"Behold, I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto thee.

"And I have also given thee that which thou hast not asked, both riches, and honor: so that there shall not be any among the kings like unto thee all thy days.

"And if thou wilt walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as thy father David did walk, then I will lengthen thy days." (1 Kgs. 3:3-14.)

"And the Lord magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel." (1 Chr. 29:25.)

"And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore.

"And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the children of the east country, and all the wisdom of Egypt.

"For he was wiser than all men. . . .

"And he spake three thousand proverbs: and his songs were a thousand and five.

"And he spake of trees, from the cedar tree that is in Lebanon even unto the hyssop that springeth out of the wall: he spake also of beasts, and of fowl, and of creeping things, and of fishes.

"And there came of all people to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth, which had heard of his wisdom." (1 Kgs. 4:29-34.)

God also gave Solomon riches and honor, which are the natural result of an understanding heart.

We might, with great profit, study some of the statements made by this favored king, statements that will, if we desire, help us develop some of the by-products of wisdom, such as prestige, power, wealth, and influence. He said:

"Fools despise wisdom and instruction." (Prov. 1:7.)

"Incline thine ear to wisdom." (Prov. 2:2.)

"How much better is it to get wisdom than gold!" (Prov. 16:16.)

Most of the gifts of God do not come to us freely. Most of them require great effort and thoughtfulness on our part. Solomon said:

"I gave my heart to know wisdom." (Eccl. 1:17.)

"Man's wisdom maketh his face to shine." (Eccl. 8:1.)

"The price of wisdom is above rubies." (Prov. 8:11.)

"Wisdom is better than weapons of war." (Eccl. 9:18.)

"Wisdom is better than strength." (Eccl. 9:16.)

"The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." (Ps. 111:10, Prov. 9:10.)

Solomon pointed out one of the chief characteristics of foolishness when he said, "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God." (Ps. 14:1.) It is very foolish to disbelieve in God, but it is also very foolish to fail to follow his direction. All crime and sin is foolishness.

One of the interesting aspects about the wisdom of Solomon himself is that it turned sour and did not always continue with him. Wisdom can be destroyed by sin and poor judgment, and as Solomon became older, he lost the spirit he had had in his youth. Instead of always acting in harmony with the wisdom with which his life had begun, he did many evil things and died an idolator, very much out of favor with God. As a consequence of this, he, more than anyone else, was responsible for destroying the work of the Lord in ancient Israel, and the kingdom was later divided and both its northern and southern sections were taken into foreign captivity.

The scriptures give us a rather sad obituary for the wisdom by which Solomon had previously been distinguished when it says: "But king Solomon loved many strange women. . . . Of the nations concerning which the Lord said unto the children of Israel, Ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto you: for surely they will turn away your hearts after their gods. . . .

"For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods: and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his father.

"And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord. . . .

"And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel, which had appeared unto him twice,

"And had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods: but he kept not that which the Lord commanded." (1 Kgs. 11:1-2, 4, 6, 9-10.)

Solomon's wisdom lacked that qualifying phrase wherein Jesus said, ". . . he that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matt. 10:22.) Some of the things that led Solomon to this point are indicated by his own statements that, at the very time when he was boasting of his wisdom, he was engaging in unwise practices; he himself said:

"I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly." (Eccl. 1:17.)

"I sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, . . . and to lay hold on folly. . . .

"Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth darkness.

"The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walketh in darkness; . . .

"Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it happeneth even to me. . . .

"Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under the sun is grievous unto me: . . .

"Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun: because I should leave [my possessions] unto the man that shall be after me.

"And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity.

"Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the labour which I took under the sun.

"For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge, and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he leave it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil." (Eccl. 2:3, 13-15, 17-21.)

"Better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king, who will no more be admonished." (Eccl. 4:13.)

Solomon was speaking from bitter experience when he said: "When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed. Better it is that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest vow and not pay." (Eccl. 5:4-5.)

In the latter years of Solomon's life he presents a sad picture of wisdom that has gone rancid and turned to folly because he tried to practice during his life both its good and its bad at the same time. Thus he ended up in despair and misery and said of his own life, "Vanity of vanities, . . . All is vanity." (Eccl. 1:2.)

Solomon the wise man seemed to be following the procedure of many people of today who want to try out or experiment with evil. This is a memorable example of what happens when one of the wisest, most powerful men of his day, one whom God loved, was brought down to such a low state that he destroyed the work of his life and died very much out of favor with God.

Socrates

The delights of biography are among the most pleasant in all of human experience. Through books we can enjoy in almost limitless diversity the kind of intimacy with the greatest people of all ages that might have been impossible even to their own next-door neighbors in their own day. We can appropriate their ideas in order to season our own speech and sharpen our own opinions.

One of the most important of our early benefactors answered to the name of Socrates. He lived for seventy-one years in ancient Athens, beginning in the year 470 B.C. His life greatly influenced events that brought about the Golden Age of Greece, and it has enriched all ages since.

Socrates was the son of Sophronicus, the stone-cutter. For some years he followed the trade of his father. Since he was a philosopher at heart, he finally laid down his tools and went out into the marketplace to teach a higher regard for virtue among his contemporaries. Appropriately enough, he was the first man to whom the term "philosopher" was applied. This word comes from Greek words that mean "a lover of wisdom," and certainly no title could have fit him better. To love wisdom is to have the ability to judge soundly and deal sagaciously with facts, especially as they relate to the lives and conduct of people. At every human birth two elements are comingled—a physical body (similar to that possessed by the animals), and a soul (which God shares only with us).

Because Socrates loved to reason, to think, and to understand, he devoted his life to philosophy. It gave him a fine sense of satisfaction to feel maturity and wisdom developing within himself, and he was gratified when he saw such virtues increasing in others. One of the secrets of his successful life was that he treasured knowledge, understanding, fairness, and righteousness.

Many times Socrates mentioned having received promptings from an inner voice. He said that from the time of his childhood this voice had always forbidden him to do any kind of evil. When a friend admonished him to remain silent to avoid a disagreement, Socrates said, "I cannot hold my tongue, as it would be a disobedience to a divine command."

One of his favorite doctrines was that learning is mostly remembering. He believed the doctrine that we all lived in a previous life and that the intelligence attained there influences us in this life.

Socrates was a builder of virtue, an architect of wisdom. He believed that all labor that produced courage in the mind and strength in the soul was good. He felt that he had been charged by Deity with a special mission to help people grow in godliness. He talked a great deal about the immortality of the soul. I have often thought what a thrilling event it would have been if he could have met with Jesus of Nazareth for one of the discussions he loved so much.

Socrates preceded Jesus in mortality by 470 years, but in many ways he approached Jesus about as closely as anyone. His influence and power did not come from the eloquence of his words so much as from the influence of his magnificent character. Even a nod from one who is highly esteemed can have more force than a thousand arguments of studied phrases from one lacking in strength of soul.

To Socrates all wickedness was a result of either ignorance or sloth, and history seems to bear him out on this point. Had he lived in our day he would have had his work cut out for him, for he taught that the first duty of every man was to obey the law and submit to punishment when he was judged to be in error. Although most of his life was spent in teaching and reasoning, he never allowed his discussions to become heated or bitter. He always kept perfect control of himself, no matter how badly the argument went against him. Hatred had no place in his life.

When the war broke out between Athens and Sparta, Socrates enlisted and distinguished himself as a fearless warrior, excelling his fellow soldiers in the ease with which he endured hardships. He walked over the winter ice with bare feet and often pulled his belt one hole tighter in lieu of breakfast, to teach the complaining soldiers that battles could be won with discipline and endurance.

The ancient Athenians had a custom that when a commander was slain in battle, those who attended his person fought it out; if they were not victorious, then they died with their leader. Early in his life Socrates swore this same kind of allegiance to wisdom. He pledged to himself to hold wisdom and righteousness dearer than all else, and like a courageous Athenian soldier, he never thought of laying down his arms or leaving the battle before it was won.

Socrates loved to reason much as a duck loves to swim. He loved to help men discover their ignorance and understand how to correct it. He understood the truth that most men fall asleep at their posts when there is no enemy in the field. It has been the fateful tendency of men to leave off thinking about a subject when the issue is no longer in doubt; when a question is definitely settled, slumber sometimes takes over. Socrates tried to keep people working and learning, for he believed that ignorance and sloth were enemies bent on destroying the uplifting pleasures of the mind. He knew that when once these spiritual joys were lost, they were difficult to recover.

Few things were more important to Socrates than his own life. He gave up his life readily when it was required of him, but he had already offered it up on the field of battle. We have every reason to believe that he was being completely honest when he said, "I care not a straw for death; my only fear is of doing some unrighteous or unholy thing." He said, "A good man ought not to calculate his chances of living or dying. He ought only to consider whether he is doing right or wrong."

Socrates never tried to make money out of his teachings. He taught because he loved wisdom and desired to develop the nobleness of others. He said, "One man finds pleasure in developing his land, another in improving his horses. But pleasure for me lies in seeing myself grow day by day." He believed that the beginning of wisdom was to understand one's own heart. In the guise of a learner he questioned the wisest men of Athens; in their answers he tried to get a reflection of his own mind. If their answers dissolved into nothingness, in the light of his reason, then his own supremacy was apparent. On the other hand, if they proved him in error, he was equally grateful and adjusted his own ideas accordingly.

Socrates' motto "Know thyself" has come down to us across the centuries as one of the wisest of counsels. He learned to know himself by watching himself. He wanted to know what he himself did when he was thwarted, crossed, contradicted, or deprived of those things that were supposed to be more desirable. He always looked upon his own mind as a kind of second party. He would try mentally to stand apart from himself and watch his own mind work. Then, should it become confused and angered, that would be proof of his insufficiency and littleness. He also watched other people and learned from them. The mixed motives that we seldom detect in our own acts can often be recognized without difficulty in someone else.

Socrates had a special cure for every defect, both in himself and in others. He accepted every fact, circumstance, and experience, and counted them all as gain. Just to live was to him a special privilege, and he included each unpleasant experience as being just as valuable as the pleasant. He believed that those who evaded unpleasant experiences were cheating themselves out of much that was worthwhile in life.

To Socrates, a good idea or an important moral principle was as much of a reality as a block of marble—and it was far more valuable. He believed that a philosopher should never speak unless his words were steeped in meaning, and that character was largely a matter of growth. As a lover of wisdom he conceived that his mission in life was to help others think and reason logically for themselves, so they would never be left at the mercy of the opinions of others. Many people came long distances to hear him. He attempted to bring about an improvement in their lives by talking them out of their ill tempers, their bad habits, and their improper attitudes. He tried to persuade others to adopt lives of simplicity and service. In his day, groups of men frequently had dinner together to discuss problems. He impressed them with the idea that at every feast two guests sit down asking for entertainment: one is the body and the other is the soul. What we give to the body it presently loses, but what we give to the soul it keeps forever. At the dinners the men sat on the floor in a circle, partially leaning against each other for support. Commenting on one of the advantages of this arrangement, Socrates said that as water is made to run from a fuller to an emptier cask by means of a siphon, so wisdom flows from the greater to the less among men.

What an exciting thing it is that such a pipeline of wisdom is still in operation! The siphon of philosophy can still pour the greatness of noble men into our own lives. It can reach back 2500 years into ancient Greece and bring to us the enjoyment and profit that was generated in the lives of the men of her Golden Age.

It has been said that if Socrates had done nothing else but to give form to the mind of Plato, he would deserve the gratitude of all future centuries. Even yet it is the mind of Plato to whom thinkers turn for treasure. Plato was twenty years old and Socrates was sixty when they first met. Until Socrates died some eleven years later, they were together almost constantly. Then for the fifty years following Socrates' death, Plato recorded and expounded the wisdom of his teacher. He wanted to give all generations an insight into the brilliant mind and noble character of this unusual man.

The Storehouse of Wisdom

One of the great creations of our day is the university, an institution built for the purpose of fostering the finest kinds of human betterment. It is a place where one can go to get the knowledge, the skills, the attitudes, and the personality traits necessary to make him effective in carrying forward his part of the work of the world as well as the work of the Lord.

The university was originally set up and designed to build character and faith in its students. It fosters medical schools, experiment stations, and teaching colleges. It has libraries wherein can be found the best of culture and the greatest human thoughts that have ever been produced by the wisest men who have lived upon our earth. The purpose of the university is also to bring together teachers with fine minds and effective teaching aptitudes.

A great university is made up of schools of music, art, and science. It fosters research into fields that promote human initiative, progress, and faith. We have levied high taxes upon ourselves, and endowment funds have been accumulated, to promote universities where one can go to avail himself of the most effective occupational techniques and the finest philosophies available in our society.

In the past, many an unschooled boy worked his way through a university and came out a scientist or a teacher of culture and righteousness, or a fosterer of patriotism, idealism, and freedom. The ancient and wise Solomon said: "Wisdom is the principal thing; therefore get wisdom: and with all thy getting get understanding." (Prov. 4:7.)

Nicholas Murray Butler, long-time president of Columbia University, once said, maybe a little facetiously, that the reason a university was sometimes referred to as a storehouse of wisdom was that the freshmen often brought more wisdom in at entrance than the seniors took out at graduation. This is certainly a very destructive possibility. It may have some application even in life itself.

Graduation time is usually a time to make an assessment of our situation and an appraisal of our future prospects. But it might be an even better idea to have our commencement exercises when we enter college rather than when we leave. By doing our thinking about it first, we may increase the chances that we will not lose too many things along the way and find ourselves worse off as seniors than we were as freshmen. In any getting process there is always a cost involved, and we pay too much of a price when we lose more values than we acquire. We must not arrive at the end of the journey with less than we had in the beginning.

Some go to college with great faith and carry away a worthless skepticism in its place. Some trade godly patriotism for satanic cynicism. Some go to college with a free mind and a wholesome spirit and leave with a whole set of damaging addictions. Some walk into a university with aspirations for marriage, a happy home, and a family of faithful children, but when they walk out they have a lot of hangups on birth control backed up by modern liberation ideas. Because of the widespread infiltration of immorality into university standards of living, some who begin college with moral purity lose it during their university experience.

During our educational period, we may make ourselves so adaptable to new ideas that we do not screen them effectively enough for their quality, beauty, or productivity, and instead of greater culture and broadened horizons of spirituality, we carry away mostly only their ashes and dust. Not only has the curriculum been invaded in many colleges and universities, but many university professors who at one time represented the finest standards of our civilization are now teaching the poisonous doctrines of communism, atheism, dishonesty, disloyalty, and immorality. It is one of the phenomena of our time that some university professors are rabidly opposed to having the name of God even mentioned in the marble halls built for us by our faithful forefathers. They seem to take delight in relieving students of their basic fundamental character traits and high spiritual values. And while some professors strenuously object to the teaching of religion, they insist on the right to teach against it.

We may be assured that those who strive to widen the breadth of today's accepted moral conduct do so to condone the evil that they themselves practice. If one vigorously derides spiritual development in others, it can be generally concluded that he has failed in that area of his own development, and he defends himself by teaching these false doctrines to others in order to make his philosophies seem acceptable. There are many who ridicule faith and spirituality, who smile in contempt when anyone mentions virtue or reverence or devotion to God or adherence to the God-given standards of morality. There are many who make their captive audiences their victims by lining up their faith, patriotism, morality, and reverence and then proceeding to riddle them with words shot out of the mouths of their own irreverence and sin.

One has a perfect right to cancel his loyalty to the church or his allegiance to the government, but normal behavior would let the matter rest at that point. However, some professors can't conduct a class without shooting barbs at those who foster spiritual interests and idealistic concepts. A part of this program of destruction is to belittle religious leaders and try and destroy the ideals they foster. There are those claiming the protection of academic freedom who are against any expression of theism by others but who insist on the right for themselves to preach atheism, which is merely the opposite side of theism. One who claims fairness should not try to destroy the one without allowing for the defense of the other.

Atheism itself is divided into many small sects, including communism, agnosticism, skepticism, humanism, and pragmatism. The atheist proclaims his own dishonesty by accepting pay to teach psychology, sociology, history, or English while he is preaching his own atheistic philosophy to his students. If the atheist wants to teach his doctrine at a public university, let him purchase property off campus and build himself a building and offer classes labeled for what they are. It should be the right of a student in any university to register for a course in English with some assurance that he will be taught the subject of English, or to register for a course in history and be taught the subject of history, and not be exposed to the distorted philosophies of an ungodly professor. If we are going to prevent the teaching of religion, we should certainly also prevent the teaching of its negative expression, atheism. Any system that protects the destruction of faith and forbids its defense must ultimately destroy the moral fiber of the people. One of the great blessings of our lives is that no one can take our values from us without our consent, but we must constantly be on guard against being seduced or led captive unaware.

We may also apply this idea to every other human experience, including life itself. We came into this life direct from the presence of God. We brought with us the blessings of a great past and a lot of wonderful future possibilities. At birth we are added upon with mortal bodies. We have been given potentially magnificent brains, and we have been endowed with personalities capable of miraculous accomplishments. We have been given the possibilities of education and occupations in which we may develop our talents. The Lord has organized his church upon the earth and given us the holy scriptures with the godly doctrines of eternal happiness and progression. But along the way we may become dropouts from education and from religion. We may throw our morality overboard and disobey God's most important commandments, which leads to failure in our primary purposes of life. Then when we come to our final graduation, before us are bodies with evil addictions, opportunities wasted, and souls condemned.

Of one group of earth's children, the Lord said, ". . . it had been better for them never to have been born." (D&C 76:32.) That is, they had spent this wonderful privilege of mortality and had less at the end than they had had at the beginning. The greatest privilege of life is to work out our own salvation in fear and trembling before God and then to be judged by our works. What a magnificent blessing it can be if we will accumulate a great volume of good works, developing godly spirits that will make us eligible to enter eternal life with many values at the end of life that we did not have at the beginning. May we make sure that we magnify our callings so that we will not lose our benefits along the way.

The Sphinx

The mythology of the ancient Greeks and Romans has many interesting stories that describe some of life's possibilities for both good and bad. One of these Greek myths is centered in the mysterious legend of the sphinx, which was supposed to be a dangerous monster. Typically it had a lion's body, a bird's wings, a human breast, and a human head.

One of the most famous of these Greek composites was the sphinx of Thebes. The Greeks had a legend that this female sphinx went around terrorizing people by demanding that they answer a riddle taught to her by the Muses. The riddle was: "What is it that has a human voice and yet becomes four-footed and two-footed and three-footed?" When the question was not answered correctly, the victim was devoured by the sphinx. Eventually, Oedipus gave the right answer, which was "Man." The explanation of the riddle was that man crawls on all fours in infancy, then he walks on two feet, and finally he leans on a staff when he is old. For some reason, when her riddle was known, the sphinx killed herself.

Sphinx-like people have continued to operate long after the destruction of the sphinx of Thebes. The dictionary says that a sphinx is someone who has a mysterious, inscrutable character, a person who deals in enigmas that are inexplicable, puzzling, and incapable of being understood. Such a person is one who speaks and behaves mysteriously and is incomprehensible and unfathomable.

To us, the ancients themselves frequently seem Puzzling and hard to understand. For example, at a great cost in treasure, labor, and lives, they built gigantic pyramids out in the desert of Egypt. Why those poor people should have devoted so much of their strength to a project of such comparative uselessness is an enigma to us. Near the pyramids, they built the famous sphinx of Giza in 2550 B.C. The face is a portrait of King Khafre (Chephren) of the Fourth Dynasty, and the image is one of the most famous monuments in all antiquity. This sphinx, which has the recumbent body of a lion, is 172 feet along and 66 feet high; it is partly hewn from solid sandstone and then built up with other stone.

The enigma of this sphinx is increased by the small temple built between the lion's paws and against its breast. No one seems certain as to what its purpose was. I suppose that what the people did at Thebes or Giza, or why they did it, is of small consequence to us; however, it might remind us of some of the disadvantages to us when we allow ourselves to become inexplicable enigmas, mysterious and incomprehensible either to ourselves or to others.

The sphinxes were always part human and part animal. This mixing of human and animal traits did not end when the sphinx of Giza was finished 4500 years ago. Since that time many people have been accused of resembling animals. In one of the scriptural parables, the writer of Proverbs says, "As a roaring lion, and a raging bear; so is a wicked ruler over the poor people." (Prov. 28:15.) Peter makes an interesting comparison when he says: "Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeing whom he may devour." (1 Pet. 5:8.)

Frequently we hear unhappy wives say that their husbands act like animals. The Bible refers to some men as wolves in sheep's clothing. One woman recently said that her husband was usually as cross as a bear. Since each person has different kinds of problems to contend with, many different kinds of animals may be represented in our sphinxes.

Our present-day problems, particularly in families, would not be as bad as they are if we were to build all of our unfavorable monuments out in the desert and leave them there by themselves. We add to the problem by carrying our sphinxes around with us every place we go, allowing them to expound their riddles, stir up fears, and behave so mysteriously that sometimes they cannot be understood.

Bronowski once said that "violence is the sphinx by the fireside," and then he made the significant point that "it has a human face." In this poetic metaphor he was bemoaning the fact that the violence we deplore in the world and in our own homes is not all "strange" or "criminal" or "crazy" or "bestial." Instead, like other sphinxes, violence always has a human face. The most incomprehensible sphinx of violence can be domestic and human in the most chilling sense of the word. There is an irrational human component that frequently runs through the circuits of our minds and hearts.

Contrary to what some unhappy persons may think, our major problems do not come because of the animal in man. Actually, animals do not do very many wrong things. It is the man in man that causes most of our troubles. Our grandfathers used to make a better analysis of this situation. They said that it is the devil in man that causes him to miss the mark in life.

There is little hope for any of us until we learn to recognize and control our evil tendencies. Who else but the devil or ourselves could inspire Christians to slaughter Christians in Ireland and Semites to destroy their Semite cousins in the Near East, or cause children to rebel against their parents and produce all of the human carnage that we see around us in our own land.

Our most serious wars do not take place on the battlefields of foreign lands. They are being carried on in our own homes. And our sphinxes are not always sleeping. Frequently they are fully aroused because their passions are being continually stirred and their blood is kept in a constant boil. Hate, evil, and lust for vengeance and domination too often control the centers of our thought.

Everything is evil that is not motivated by love and approved by reason. Violence may end in murder but it does not begin there. Usually violence begins quietly in a little bickering; then arguments get louder and resentments accumulate. We sometimes develop a self-centeredness that numbs our reason and destroys our love and happiness.

We are in serious trouble when the ghastly sphinx of "unrighteous dominion" takes over our lives. This sphinx begins by quietly sneaking into our lives; then, with a little success, it assumes an arrogant conviction that its sex or its position or its control of the purse strings or its might make it right. There is no appeal when one's reason has been abandoned.

Recently, a young woman, the mother of six fine children, came in to talk about some of her problems. She says that she and her husband love each other and neither of them wants a divorce. Neither of them has any other heart interest nor any record of immorality or similar wrong-doing. And yet this entire family is perfectly miserable because of her husband's sphinx that has a lust to dominate. He has an income that is far above average, but he takes the attitude that it all belongs to him personally, and he uses it as a bribe or threat to discipline the other family members. Anything he may choose to give them seems to him to be pure benevolence on his part.

When the wife wants to get the children some needed clothes, the husband maintains that she is ruining him financially. When she suggests that they sit down and talk about it, he refuses. As their money disappears each month, instead of figuring out what happened to it, he just assumes that in some mysterious way she is responsible. He is an enigma that cannot be reasoned with.

This man never questions his assumption that he is always right in everything he does and that his wife and children are always wrong. His selfishness and inability to see any other point of view except his own gives a harmful conviction to his distorted opinions, and thus he always convinces himself and seriously confuses his victims.

There are many reasons why we should try to make our sphinx have understanding and be reasonable. It is very difficult to live with an enigma who behaves mysteriously. We have a great self-training job ahead if we have a character that is inscrutable, puzzling, and inexplicable.

Just suppose someone were going to carve the image of our sphinx in stone 172 feet long and 66 feet high so that all of the details could be given. Which of the animals would be represented? We might hear some of the roaring of the lion, the screeches of the vulture, and the rampaging of the bull in the china shop. And, as Mr. Bronowski indicates, it might have a human face—our face.

The greatest responsibility God has ever laid upon any human being is to make the most and the best of his own life. Our destiny is not to develop any animal parts or characteristics. Certainly it was not intended that we should either think or act like the devil. Each one of us was created in God's own image, and each of us has been endowed with his attributes and potentialities, the development of which is one of the purposes for which we live.

We should cling to our inheritance and be constantly reaffirming it in our lives, for each of us is truly a child of God. Instead of being inexplicable and incapable of being understood, our lives should be an open book so that everyone, including ourselves, can read an inspiring chapter on every contact.

Repentance is one of the first and most important principles of the gospel. Like Mary of Magdala, most of us have a few devils that need to be cast out. James said, "Resist the devil, and he will flee from thee." (James 4:7.) On the other hand, Jesus said: "Follow me." We can follow him in his reason, in his goodness, and in his faith. Then the image of us will have the form of a magnificent human being with a godly soul and a godly personality, and a godly face—our face.

The Happy Prince

Many years ago, Oscar Wilde wrote a fantasy of a fine young man whom he called "The Happy Prince." During his lifetime this young man lived in a royal palace with high walls enclosing beautiful grounds. The walls excluded much of the ugliness and misery of the outside world. Most of the daily activities of the prince were made up of joys because of his pleasant activities, and so he was called the Happy Prince. At his death a beautiful statue was made in his likeness and placed on top of a tall column high above the city.

The statue was not only very beautiful, but it also cost a great deal of money. A large red ruby was mounted in the handle of the sword that hung at the prince's side. The Happy Prince's eyes were represented by two beautiful sapphires from India. His uniform was made of hundreds of leaves of pure gold. As the statue stood there on its pedestal above the city, it shone and glistened in the sunlight and all the people looked up and admired it. They loved it because of the happiness that had characterized the prince's life.

Then one day a little swallow, belated in its flight for its winter rest in the warm sun of Egypt, flew up to the monument of the Happy Prince to spend the night between the prince's feet. As he was about to tuck his head under his wing, a large drop of water fell upon him. The swallow looked up and saw that the eyes of the Happy Prince were filled with tears. The Happy Prince explained that because he had been placed high above the city, he was saddened by the misery, poverty, suffering, and sin he could clearly see all about him. The swallow was thinking only of a good night's rest so he could continue his journey; however, the Happy Prince entreated him to stay a few days and be his messenger.

The prince pointed out to the little swallow the abode of a poor seamstress living in dingy rooms across the roofs of the city. She worked night and day at her sewing, trying to get enough money to provide for her sick son who was tossing in his bed close by with a burning fever. The prince persuaded the little swallow to take the ruby out of his sword hilt and give it to the tired mother. This deed of generosity and kindness caused great happiness to the seamstress and brought relief from suffering to her son.

As the swallow was making some of his trips over the city, he saw the cathedral spires and watched the workmen carry out their various assignments of toil, and he and the Happy Prince discussed the many cases of misery and need that lay all about them. Then the prince asked the swallow to pluck out one of his sapphire eyes and give it to a young man living in a garret who could not work because of the bitter cold. They saw a poor little match girl who had allowed her matches to get wet and who was afraid to go home because her father would mistreat her. The Happy Prince begged the swallow to take his other eye so that the little match girl could take something home to her father and she would not be punished.

The Happy Prince was now completely blind, so he persuaded his dear friend and messenger to fly over the city and tell him what he saw. As each case came up that needed help, the Happy Prince would order the little swallow to pick off some of his golden leaves and carry them to those who were in need. With the little swallow serving as the messenger of the Happy Prince, light came into children's faces, hungry people were fed, and sick people were made well.

At intervals the little swallow would think about his friends who were waiting for him in Egypt, but he could not leave the prince in his attempts to bring joy to other people. But finally all of the golden leaves were gone, and the prince no longer lighted the city with his brilliant reflection. The mayor and his councilmen looked up and remarked how drab and shabby the statue had become. Their hero now looked no better than a beggar, so they decided that his statue must be taken down. The workmen discovered that the lead heart of the Happy Prince had broken, and they found a dead swallow lying beneath the prince's feet.

It may be that as Oscar Wilde was writing this story, he was thinking of that scriptural passage which says, ". . . none of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself." (Rom. 14:7.)

All mankind were created to live together in nations and in families, and to work together for the good of all. There was a period following the time of Christ when the record said, ". . . they had all things common. . . . Neither was there any among them that lacked." (Acts 4:32, 34.)

However, it seems that we have not been good enough to maintain this standard for a very long period at a time, so the Lord has replaced it with the law of tithing and other welfare programs. These have many advantages, because a large group of people can help solve the problems of individuals much more easily than a few having such limited resources as those possessed by the Happy Prince and the swallow.

All of us seem to be beggars in many ways. We are dependent upon God and other people, and God has conditioned what we receive from him by what we give to others who are in need. It is a divine scriptural law that with what measure we mete, it shall be measured unto us again. (See Matt. 7:2.) Jesus said, "Give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom." (Luke 6:38.)

For a number of years Peter Marshall served as chaplain of the United States Senate. One morning in his opening prayer he said to the Lord: "Make us a part of the answer and not a part of the problem." Too frequently we ourselves cause serious problems that unnecessarily consume the efforts of other people. It would take a good many Happy Prince and little swallow combinations to supply the damaging thirsts of alcoholics, dope addicts, moral perverts, and those who rebel against God. The greatest responsibility of every human being is to take care of himself, and the first soul that anyone should bring to God is his own soul.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt once recited an old Chinese prayer, which said, "Reform the world, and start with me." Handling our own problems is a job no one can do quite as well as we ourselves can.

We should also devote some of our time to helping others. The Happy Prince gave his ideas and his substance and himself to help others, and we should do the same. Each of us has many things to give. We can give encouragement, love, enthusiasm, ideas, and our substance.

Frequently as I have flown over a large city, I have looked down and seen the millions of lights that represent individual human families, all of whom probably have problems with which they need help. However, my vision is limited from that distance, and like the Happy Prince with no eyes, I cannot see these important human needs. But in our ordinary contacts we usually have a closer view where we can see into the lives of people, and feel their suffering and despair.

I have thought of God, who is also located high above the city. The scriptures tell that of all the things upon the earth, nothing is hidden from him. He understands our miseries as well as our joys, and he even understands all of our thoughts that lead to them. I can imagine that he may sometimes become very sad when he sees those wrong things that we do. A lot of evils take place every day that would tend to break his heart. It is certain that all of the problems and miseries of the world could be avoided if everyone strictly kept his commandments.

Under the universal law of free agency, God has done about as much as he can for our benefit and happiness until we do something for ourselves. He has organized his church. He has taught the principles of the gospel. He has told us how to qualify for the celestial kingdom. He has given us a program for taking care of those in material need. We may wipe every transgression out of our lives by our repentance. The Lord has given us the gift of the atonement and has promised us a glorious resurrection with the possibility of eternal progression and eternal increase. The scripture refers to him as the Prince of peace, and his benefits are far more valuable than rubies and sapphires and leaves of gold. He is also the Prince of righteousness, and by our righteousness we can also make him the Happy Prince. As he has been our greatest benefactor, he expects us to serve and uplift each other. If we do so, we will also be happy. Our lives are given to us that we may enjoy them. This joy can best be brought about when we are effectively engaged in the service of each other.

The Wizard of Oz

Many years ago Frank Baum wrote an interesting fantasy entitled The Wizard of Oz, which also has some interesting lessons to teach. The story tells of an intelligent, personable girl named Dorothy who lived on the prairies of Kansas with her Aunt Em and Uncle Henry and Toto, her dog. Her interesting experiences began when one day the cyclones for which Kansas is famous picked up the house with Dorothy and Toto in it and transported it to the magic land of Oz, where she landed among the friendly Munchkins. She immediately became a heroine because her house dropped upon and killed the Wicked Witch of the West, an enemy of the Munchkins.

Dorothy and Toto were very anxious to get back to Aunt Em and Uncle Henry in Kansas, so the Munchkins suggested that she should go to Emerald City and consult the Wizard of Oz about her problem.

In her journey along the yellow brick road leading to Emerald City, Dorothy had many interesting experiences. She came upon a scarecrow who was having trouble because he was losing too much of his straw stuffing. Being a friendly, helpful person, Dorothy stopped and stuffed his straw back into him where it belonged. She told the scarecrow of her own problem of getting back to Kansas and that she was hopeful the Wizard of Oz might be able to help her. In turn, the scarecrow unburdened himself to Dorothy and told her of his life-long desire to possess a brain instead of the meager straw that had been stuffed into his head. They agreed that if the Wizard could get Dorothy and Toto back to Kansas, he might also be able to help the scarecrow to get a brain.

After they had proceeded for a time down the road together they met a tin woodman, whose job was to cut down trees with his ax. However, a recent rain had caused his tin to rust, and his joints were so stiff that he could not move. He told Dorothy there was an oil can close by, and she obligingly oiled his joints so he was again able to move. The tin woodman told his new friends of his desire to have a heart, and everyone agreed that the best solution would be for them all to seek the aid of the Wizard of Oz.

Finally in their journey they met a cowardly lion. All of the lion's friends were supposed to look up to him as the king of the beasts; by tradition he was the master of the jungle. But he was very unhappy because his feelings of inadequacy caused serious cowardice. And so the cowardly lion also joined the company in seeking the help of the Wizard of Oz.

Upon their arrival at the Emerald City, they were opposed by the Witch of the East. They also discovered that the Wizard of Oz was not a wizard at all. After he had been exposed, he admitted that he was a humbug. But he did convince the scarecrow that everyone can have a brain who can learn to use one. He then gave the scarecrow a diploma so he could prove to himself and to everyone else he had a brain and could think. The Wizard put a chain around the tin woodman's neck with a golden heart on it, showing that he had a heart and all he had to do was to learn how to use it. He gave the cowardly lion a medal proving primarily to the lion himself that he had valor and courage. The Wizard of Oz was a humbug, and yet he was also a wizard.

Dorothy had made friends with a good fairy, who told her and her companions that all of them could have anything they wanted if only they wanted it hard enough. She told them how to want and wish with greater power. Consequently, Dorothy's friends soon had what they wanted, and it wasn't very long before Toto and Dorothy themselves were back with Aunt Em and Uncle Henry in Kansas.

Like Dorothy and her friends, we all have important journeys to make down that yellow brick road of life. In addition, we all have need for many of the same things. Everyone is in need of a better brain than that handful of straw that is under so many hats.

Someone has asked this question: "How would you like to create your own mind?" But isn't that exactly what we do? William James said, "The mind is made up by what it feeds upon." The mind, like the dyer's hand, is colored by what it holds. If I hold in my hand a sponge full of purple dye, my hand becomes purple. If I hold in my mind and heart some great ideas, my whole personality is colored accordingly. If we want to have strong minds, we ought to use them a lot and feed them on the right things. Brains are not only inherited, but like our muscles they are also developed by effective use. At some time in our lives most of us feel like we have some variety of straw brains.

Woodrow Wilson said, "The greatest ability of the American people is their ability to resist instruction." Most of us have our share of that unfortunate talent. Thomas A. Edison once said that there is nothing a man wouldn't do to avoid thinking. For some people, thinking is the most disagreeable, unpleasant, boring employment they ever have. And yet Solomon said, "As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he." (Prov. 23:7.) Now, I don't know just where that leaves us, but if we are what we think and if we don't think, then it becomes pretty evident that we have a problem.

Someone once voiced a great success idea when he said: "Us guys that ain't got no education has got to use our brains." If we don't want to be straw men, we need to develop our brains. What a thrill that we can feed our minds on the greatest ideas of industry, enthusiasm, faith, decision making, and action taking.

It is also very important, as we make our way toward that magical city in our own lives, that we discover and develop some finer, warmer heart qualities. Our emotions sometimes get a little bit rusty so that our joints don't move very well. Frank Baum's tin woodman wanted to feel the emotions of excitement and love running through his system. How difficult it is for one to go through his life without a heart; then it is impossible for him to fall in love with life or with the great world of wonders in which he lives. Some people can't fall in love with their families or with righteousness or with God. Heart exercises are among the things that make life worthwhile, and yet, like the tin woodman, many people go through their lives with rusty joints.

Some time ago I saw a man who didn't have any hands. There are many other people who do have hands but don't know how to use them. Some people have idle hands, some have lazy hands, some have unfriendly hands, and some have ignorant, unskilled hands. And while we are visiting with our Wizard of Oz, it may be that he could fix us up with a pair of friendly, willing, enthusiastic hands that could move mountains or save souls or more effectively greet our friends.

In Mr. Baum's story the lion also had a difficult situation. He was born to be the king of beasts, and what a tragedy that somewhere along the way he had lost his courage. As a consequence of losing his courage, he had also lost his composure and his self-confidence. In the real drama of life we must not lose our courage or our kingship.

We all need brains that are not made of straw; oil on our joints so we can move around and use the great powers of our hearts; and the courage and willingness to perform miracles. As the good fairy said to Dorothy and her friends, "If we want anything enough, we may obtain it."

Thanks, King

One of the emotions that we have a common interest in is the emotion of gratitude. We are all indebted to God for life and all its benefits. Gratitude is a parent ability; it brings forth after its own kind. Cicero, the Roman statesman, once said that gratitude was the mother of virtues.

Gratitude implies affection and love. The gratitude one feels for his country, his parents, his children, and for God all differ widely at different times, but all are based on love. If someone does a small courtesy for us we may give them a sincere "thank you." When they do some greater service, we may have trouble expanding our words to match the increased benefit received. If we would give someone a small but sincere thank you for a friendly greeting or a kind deed, how would we thank God for life and an everlasting opportunity and eternal happiness?

We have a memorable lesson in gratitude given us by the Indian boy Jim Thorpe, who was born in 1888. He grew up on the plains of Oklahoma. In 1911 he attended the small Carlisle University, where he became a great athlete under the stimulating direction of a young coach named Pop Warner. In 1912, Jim participated in the Olympic Games in Sweden and was by far the outstanding performer. After the games he was given a royal banquet by King Gustav of Sweden, but because of Jim's weakness for liquor, he was unable to attend the banquet. King Gustav himself presented Jim Thorpe with a gold medal, and Jim also received a life-size bronze bust of the king. In an elaborate presentation speech, the king said to this young Indian boy, "Sir, you are the greatest athlete in the world." In accepting the bust, the medals, and the other honors and expressions of appreciation and kindnesses extended to him by the king himself, his host country, and its royal family, Jim gave his own expression of appreciation in his famous response: "Thanks, King."

Following this historic event, he had a great deal of trouble because he had accepted some money for playing a few games of summer baseball and thus was guilty of a technical violation of his amateur athletic standing. Therefore, he was asked by the Olympic committee to return his medals, which themselves had an intrinsic value of over $50,000.

Because of reversals in his fortunes, caused by his own weaknesses and bad habits, great bitterness grew up in Jim's heart. His weaknesses destroyed most of the advantages his earlier excellence had given him.

However, all through his life Jim remembered what the king had said about his being the greatest athlete in the world, and nothing could take those words away from him. Although he lived and died in poverty and trouble, he was always enriched by the memory of the king's words, "Sir, you are the greatest athlete in the world."

Jim Thorpe came to Carlisle University a skinny youngster weighing 130 pounds. During his college period he turned himself into 185 pounds of muscle, strong ligaments, split-second reflexes, and a keen competitive brain that gave him supremacy in football and track and every other sport in which he engaged. In football he was a brilliant ball carrier, a fine blocker and passer, an excellent receiver, and the game's greatest all-around kicker. He rated the All-American halfback designation in 1911 and 1912. During his junior year, Lafayette University played host to Carlisle in a track meet, during which Jim racked up practically every blue ribbon on the field. Singlehandedly he routed the entire Lafayette track team.

Carlisle played Brown University on Thanksgiving day in 1912. The referee said that all by himself, Jim Thorpe defeated the entire Brown University by a score of 32 to 0. In 1912 he was the decathlon and pentathlon winner at the Olympics in Stockholm. On February 11, 1950, an Associated Press Dispatch from New York carried a headline that stated: "Thorpe Named Top Athlete." The article said, "Jim Thorpe, the almost legendary figure of the sports world, had additional laurels heaped upon his leathern brow Saturday when the nation's sports experts named him the greatest athlete of this half century." Thorpe had previously been voted the number one football player of the past fifty years; he also became the only double winner in the Associated Press poll when 252 out of 393 sports writers and radio broadcasters accorded him this honor. In order, the first three places were voted as follows: Thorpe, 252; Babe Ruth, 86; and Jack Dempsey, 19.

Just think what might have happened if Jim Thorpe had been able to maintain that training and excellence throughout his life. However, because of liquor and other personal problems, his later years were bitter. He brooded a great deal. He was unable to maintain himself for long in any occupation that was remunerative or satisfying to him. He soon dropped from sight, and not much was heard of him again until his death on March 27, 1953, at age 64, in a trailer house outside Los Angeles.

When we come into the world, most of us are given advantages of body, mind, home, and teaching. If we could just learn and practice gratitude and appreciation and respond in kind, our lives would be happier and more successful. But sometimes those with the greatest possibilities deny their own future with ingratitude. We sometimes break our parents' hearts or set a bad example for our associates. Some become disloyal to their country, rebel against the finest social traditions, and fight the establishment. Frequently those who ought to be the most grateful disown their responsibilities and even fight against God. Usually they also become bitter, resentful, and unhappy. We ought not to waste even one precious day of this life in bitterness or ingratitude. Jim Thorpe had a wonderful body, a keen mind, and a fine spirit. But on the very brink of what could have been a magnificent accomplishment, he let weaknesses get in his way, and a great possible future career went down the drain.

What about us? For our manifold blessings, everyone in the world ought to look up toward heaven and say, "Thanks, God. Thanks for everything." Then we could make a firm pledge to him that we would never break the rules of the game nor violate any of the laws made to govern our eternal success.

The accolade that Jim Thorpe received from King Gustav was wonderful, but the King of kings has pointed out that a straight and narrow way leads to life, and only he who endures to the end shall be saved.
