Sterling W. Sill, Wealth of Wisdom (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1977)

USING WISDOM IN OUR ACTIONS

"And keep the charge of the Lord thy God, to walk in his way, to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and his testimonies, . . . that thou mayest prosper in all that thou doest, and whithersoever thou turnest thyself."

Wisdom Is Where You Find It

Every person who desires to be successful in life should be able to bring to his work as many as possible of the ideas, inventions, and skills that have already been perfected by others. Many people have developed great expertise in their own lives, and their skills may well be appropriated by us for our own accomplishment.

Knute Rockne got his idea for glamorizing the uniforms of his football team by watching the chorus line at a theater. Orville and Wilbur Wright studied bees and birds to get ideas for their airplane. A smallpox serum was invented by a doctor studying a milkmaid who had cowpox. Penicillin was developed from mold.

Jesus had something like this in mind when he told the story of the steward of the rich man. He also indicated that worldly people are sometimes wiser than those who are known as the children of light. I understand this to mean that sometimes persons involved in a particular activity may close their minds and cease learning from others who are better students of what is happening in the world around them. I think the Lord intended that those to whom he referred as the children of light should keep their eyes open for all usable truths, from whatever source. He gave a helpful suggestion when he said, "Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness." (Luke 16:9.) I don't think he meant that one should adopt unrighteous ideas, but there are a lot of useful ideas developed by others that can be used by the children of light.

Jesus gave us another helpful idea for our own development when he declared: "He that is faithful in that which is least is faithful also in much: and he that is unjust in the least is unjust also in much.

"If therefore ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?

"And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own?" (Luke 16:10-12.)

If we do not develop wisdom in our own affairs, our own thinking, and our own families, certainly it will not be available when a crisis comes along. And if we cannot be profitable to ourselves, how can we expect the Lord or anyone else to trust us with their affairs?

In carrying on the work of the world, we actually develop many of the skills that will enable us to be more effective in carrying on the work of the Lord, and vice versa. At their best, the work of the world and the work of the Lord can be closely related, for the Lord has said that to him all things are spiritual. Our skills should be directed toward success and should be capable of being profitable in any place when they are properly employed. It has been said that an institution is but the lengthened shadow of the men who built it. Should our efforts be involved in building temples or in building skyscrapers, those who invest in what we do will be most interested in finding out what kind of people we are. They will also want to know where we are going and how far. If one is wise enough to be responsible, everyone will be better off as a consequence.

When Andrew Carnegie was once asked to speak to the members of a college graduating class, he said, "I desire to speak only to those who want to be millionaires." He meant that he was interested only in speaking to those who had the industry, the courage, and the ambition to amount to something. Ordinarily no one invests his money with the idea of going broke, and no wise person cultivates relationships with those who are irresponsible. If we are to succeed, our abilities should be the kinds that are negotiable in any environment, against any kind of competition.

To qualify for the title of children of light, we ought to be wiser, better informed, more dependable, and more profitable in our associations than any other people. Wisdom will make us rich toward God. It will make us rich in our associations with other people. It will make us rich in our material affairs.

Some may ask, "Where can wisdom be found? How do we go about getting full possession of it?" There are many answers. Ralph Waldo Emerson said that we live in the lap of an immense intelligence, and wisdom is all around us. It is found on the printed page, on television and radio, and on film. It is in our sermons and our prayers.

Creation itself has given us a miraculous aid to wisdom: a conscience. When our first parents ate the fruit from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, God said, ". . . the man is [now] become as one of us to know good and evil. . . ." (Moses 4:28.) We also have available the wisdom of God, the wisdom of the prophets, the wisdom of great men and women. If we are to be wise, we must think wisely and act wisely.

It is not difficult to distinguish between wisdom and foolishness when these traits are displayed in someone else. The difficult thing is to learn to recognize these conditions in ourselves. An old axiom says that a man is judged by the company he keeps, and wisdom and good judgment keep the finest company.

The apostle Paul said something about charity that applies equally to wisdom. He might have said, "Wisdom doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in the truth." (See 1 Cor. 13:5.) We might add, "If there is anything lovely, virtuous, praiseworthy, of good report, or filled with wisdom, we seek after these things." (See Article of Faith 13.)

People Changers

The most important assets of our universe are people, and the most important events that ever take place upon our planet are those events which improve human nature and human fortunes. We live in a world of opposites, and it seems that our ability to progress is usually about equal to our ability to retrogress. The main fact of our universe is the conflict of these two powerful forces, one attempting to lift us up and the other exerting all of its influence to drag us down.

If we could make a chart of our world's progress, it might resemble a graph showing the ups and downs of an erratic stock market. The depression periods would show extreme low levels in the days of Noah and Sodom and Gomorrah. Babylon is still noted for its wickedness, and the ancient empire of Rome reached an all-time level.

Most people making the graph for our own day would show some high peaks of scientific accomplishment, knowledge explosions, and business prosperity, but would probably picture a steadily descending line indicating a worsening of morality, a weakening in righteousness, a declining interest in the scriptures, a lessening in patriotism, and an upsurge in degeneracy.

The natural settling process that goes on in our society where we tend to come to rest at some low level makes the idea of lifting people up of the greatest possible importance. And yet so many of us turn off our engines, so to speak, and drift downward to one of the lower levels of life.

God has made a firm commitment to free agency, but he has placed a great many influences in the world to change us upward. President David O. McKay once said that the purpose of the gospel is to change people, to make bad men good and good men better. However, there are many people who want to change their circumstances, but who are unwilling to change themselves.

There are many institutions and influences in life designed to change people. Governments were instituted by God for the benefit of man, and God will hold us responsible for our acts in relationship to the government in making good laws and seeing that they are enforced.

Our occupations lift us up by teaching us the skills and attitudes of successfully making a living. Our entire culture is organized to make us honest, dependable, law-abiding citizens.

We have another set of powerful people changers in the great books that are so easily available to us. The famous educator Horace Mann once said, "A house without books is like a room without windows." No man has the right to bring up his children without surrounding them with good books. Children learn to read by being in the presence of good reading material. The love of knowledge comes from reading and grows upon us, and the love of knowledge in the young mind is almost a warrant against the inferior excitement of passion and vices. Of course, the greatest of our great books are the holy scriptures, in which we may make available to ourselves the direct word of the Lord as well as the prophets whom he has inspired.

Daniel Webster said, "If religious books are not widely circulated among the masses in this country and if the people do not become religious, I do not know what is to become of us as a nation. And the thought is one to cause solemn reflection on the part of every patriot and every Christian. If truth is not diffused, error will be. If God and his word are not known and received, the devil and his works will gain the ascendancy. If the evangelical volume does not reach every hamlet, the pages of a corrupt and licentious literature will. If the power of the gospel is not felt through the length and breadth of the land, anarchy and misrule, degradation and misery, corruption and darkness will reign."

Another important influence for our benefit is found in trusty, well-selected, close friends. The greatest power in the world is the power of example. We tend to think and do those things which we see and hear other people do and say. The phrase "everybody's doing it" usually has a downhill connotation, but those great deeds done by our heroes can quickly change our lives into something much more worthwhile.

But the greatest of all people changers is ourselves. Whether we like it or not, we are being modified every day, and every hour we are becoming something that we have never before been. The scriptures speak of laying off the old man of sin and taking on the new man of righteousness. If we continue to keep ourselves under the right influences, we can soon be new persons embodying all of the right qualities. One of our problems is that we are not always consistent. Instead of going continually toward the goal, we go up and down, backward and forward, alternating between good and bad, failure and success.

The whole human family is supposed to be on a continual uphill march. However, when we do ten good things and then make ten exceptions, we are doing as much toward tearing down as we are toward building up.

After the Lord had healed the impotent man, he gave him this significant counsel: ". . . sin no more, lest a worst thing come unto thee." (John 5:14.) This indicates a significant possibility for all of us. The apostle Peter pointed out the serious nature of a mere temporary righteousness when he said:

"For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

"For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandments delivered unto them.

"But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again; and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire." (2 Pet. 2:20-22.)

Permanent upward changes are the valuable kind. Francis Bacon once said:

It is not what we eat, But what we digest, that makes us strong. It is not what we read, But what we remember, that makes us wise. It is not what we think, But what we do, that makes us successful. It is not what we earn, But what we save, that makes us rich. It is not what we preach, But what we practice, that makes us Christians.

And so we return again to this great idea that the most important responsibility in the world is that of changing people upward on a permanent basis. Everything that makes people more miserable, more unhappy, or more unfaithful is bad, and everything that makes people more faithful, more industrious, more beautiful, and more holy is good.

Where Much Is Given

One of our greatest sources of interest in life is centered in our standard of living. We have a natural human tendency to like fine things. We enjoy nice homes, good food, and pleasant people with whom to associate. We also are the beneficiaries of the greatest knowledge explosion that has ever been known. We have the greatest educational opportunities and the highest standard of living ever before in history. In addition, we have the judgment of time shining upon the life of Christ. We have volumes of scripture with an authoritative "thus saith the Lord" attached to every doctrine. Our modern printing developments give us an intimate command of the greatest literature and enable us to share the most provocative experiences of all past ages. We know which activities of individuals and nations have brought both reward and destruction. The gospel of Jesus Christ has again been restored, and, as of old, prophets of the Lord again walk the earth.

The scriptures say that no man lives unto himself alone. Nothing could be further from the truth than to say to ourselves, "What I do is my own business." What we do is also God's business. He has commanded us to repent and be baptized. He has asked that we join his church and conduct ourselves according to his doctrines. We have an obligation and an opportunity to make him a party to our eternal marriages and govern our families according to his laws. We ourselves belong to him.

The apostle Paul said: "What? know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost which is in you, which ye have of God, and ye are not your own? For ye are bought with a price: therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are God's." (1 Cor. 6:19-20.)

The scripture says: ". . . the Spirit [of God] enlighteneth every man through the world, that hearkeneth to the voice of the Spirit." (D&C 84:46.) We belong to him. We are dependent upon him. In a modern-day scripture the Lord has given us one of the important laws of consequence when he said, "For of him unto whom much is given much is required. . . ." (D&C 82:3.)

When we come into this world as human beings, we bring with us instinctive knowledge and the ability to learn. We brought much of it with us from God. William Wordsworth once wrote a philosophy in which he said:

Our birth is but a sleep and a forgetting; The Soul that rises with us, our life's Star, Hath had elsewhere its setting And cometh from afar; Not in entire forgetfulness, And not in utter nakedness, But trailing clouds of glory do we come From God, who is our home. ("Ode on Intimations of Immortality")

And while, for a good purpose, our memory of our antemortal lives has been temporarily withheld from us, yet for a long pre-earth period we lived with God, where we became what we are and where in our natural growth we learned many things. And unless we deliberately distort our own intelligence, turn off our reason, and smother the whispering of the Spirit, we cannot help but know right from wrong and good from evil. We are intelligent people.

Some people may claim that there is no harm in stealing from the government or from some wealthy corporation. But that is only because they let evil overrule their judgment or intelligence. Everyone knows that to take property that belongs to someone else is wrong. We have many divine instincts, such as those governing our self-preservation and our reproduction instincts. We have instincts for fairness and right. With a few minutes of thought anyone could figure out that those who keep the Sabbath day holy will, over their lifetimes, be different people from those who do not keep the Sabbath day holy. And when God has given us this power to reason, we are obligated to use it.

We can all know that we ought to honor our parents and that we ought to obey God rather than man. No one has a right to do wrong. We are not free to conduct ourselves as we please. What we do is the business of every other person in the world. We distort our own intelligence and deceive ourselves when we sin against our own conscience. Many of our most serious sins are not written in the statute books. For example, just think what great errors we make when we sin against reason, against intuition, and against instinct. And one of our greatest sins is when we sin against knowledge.

When Adam and Eve partook of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, they were given a natural instinctive ability to know right from wrong. Then God said: "Behold, the man is now become as one of us to know good and evil." (Moses 4:28.)

Those who commit the greatest sins are called sons of perdition or sons of Satan. They are the ones who sin against the greatest knowledge. But to sin against any knowledge is serious. We have the responsibility to use every one of the abilities as well as the possibilities that God has given us. These great gifts obligate us to study, to learn, to think, and to reason, and when we do this, then the Lord gives us more. Paul said to the Hebrews:

"For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost,

"And have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come,

"If they shall fall away, to renew them again unto repentance; seeing they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put him to an open shame." (Heb. 6:4-8.)

The Lord has given us the power of repentance, which also carries some corresponding obligations. The apostle Peter said:

"For if after they have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein, and overcome, the latter end is worse with them than the beginning.

"For it had been better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after they had known it, to turn from the holy commandment delivered unto them.

"But it is happened unto them according to the true proverb, The dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire." (2 Pet. 2:20-22.)

Peter is saying that what we do is not strictly our own business.

Again in our own day the Lord has said: "And now, verily I say unto you, I, the Lord, will not lay any sin to your charge; go your ways and sin no more; but unto that soul who sinneth shall the former sins return, saith the Lord your God." (D&C 82:7.)

It is easy to understand this philosophy from what we ourselves do. For example, I know of a man who borrowed $2500 from a friend. After several years of no payment, either of principle or interest, the friend offered to settle if the borrower would pay just $1000. Then the one owing the debt began to think that the entire amount he owed was $1000, and so it would have been if he had taken action. But he trifled and made excuses until finally the creditor told the debtor that if he did not accept this bargain by a certain date, he would be taken to court for the entire debt. The debtor felt that if he promised and trifled a little more, his friend would get tired and forget the whole thing. However, the creditor finally took the debtor to court and received a judgment for the amount of the former debt plus interest plus costs amounting to over $6100.

When the Lord forgives us on condition of a reformation taking place in our lives, we had better pay up and get the thing settled before the former sins are returned with compound interest and something thrown in for a penalty. The Lord said: "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say; but when ye do not what I say, ye have no promise." (D&C 82:10.) Again he has said: "I command and men obey not; I revoke and they receive not the blessing." Then he pointed out our lack of reason when he said: "Then they say in their hearts: This is not the work of the Lord, for his promises are not fulfilled. But we unto such, for their reward lurketh beneath, and not from above." (D&C 58:32-33.)

One of our greatest mistakes is that we sometimes think that life is unimportant, that what we do is our own business, and that what we do doesn't matter very much one way or another. This is not so. We are the children of God, formed in his image, endowed with his attributes, and heirs to his glory. We are being tested and proven and tried to see whether or not we will do all things whatsoever the Lord God shall command us. (See Abr. 3:25.) May we always live his commandments and follow his teachings.

Manufactured Genius

One of the greatest ambitions in human beings is that which prompts us to do well. Shakespeare describes several of the roads leading to accomplishment when he says, "Some people are born great, others acquire greatness, and others have it thrust upon them." Earl Nightingale tells the story of Mike Grost of Michigan. It is reported that at age three Michael's mother was reading a story to him when he suddenly stopped her and said, "Mommy, why don't you ever let me read to you?" To humor him, she handed him the book and he calmly read the book's text to her verbatim. At age eight he attended elementary school each morning and Michigan State University in the afternoon. He graduated from college at fifteen. He had an I.Q. somewhere above 200; in fact, it was so high that it could not be accurately pinpointed.

People who are born with such brilliant minds are not always the ones who achieve the most lasting fame. There are many examples where luck or circumstances seem to have had much to do with some particular success. Some people have been in the right place at the right time, or they have been born into the right family, or they have inherited wealth or other supposed advantages. We often say that one is a naturalborn teacher or a naturalborn salesman or a naturalborn orator. And probably no one would try to deny that there are certain natural differences in people that influence both their success and their failure.

Everyone has two personalities. One is the one that he is born with, and the other is the one he develops after he is born. No one is born with his brain already loaded with facts or know-how. No one is born with the habits of a genius already established.

Like so many other things, genius can be manufactured. Demosthenes, who became the greatest orator in the world, had a type of manufactured genius. He was born with a serious speech impediment that caused him all kinds of problems and embarrassment. He was so bothered by his difficulties that he went down to the seashore and for long periods he shouted to the waves with his mouth full of pebbles. Finally, after great study, labor, and effort, he became the greatest orator in the world. This was not in spite of his speech defect; rather, it was because of his speech defect. Demosthenes himself manufactured traits that put him in a class by himself.

There are cases of manufactured genius all around us, and sometimes our friends and teachers assist us in the manufacturing process. Such a person was Edith Stern, whose father set out to deliberately transform her into a genius. He began this process when she was a baby by piping classical music into her nursery twenty-four hours a day. When she was two and one half years of age she was checking books out of the public library. Of course, we are not sure what would have happened if she had not had this special attention.

Alexander Hamilton was considered to be a genius. He himself has given us his formula for how he made himself a genius. He said, "Men give me some credit for genius, but all of the genius I have lies in this: When I have a subject in mind I study it profoundly. Day and night it is before me. I explore it in all its bearings. My mind becomes pervaded with it. The result is what some people call the fruits of genius, whereas it is in reality the fruits of study and labor."

This simple formula can always be depended upon. The big questions involving success then become very personal ones, and each one of us must decide some objectives for himself. It would be helpful if we would get some definite answers to such questions as: How would you like to become a genius in your family relations? Or in doing your work? Or how would you like to be a genius in helping to carry on the work of the Lord?

The first step to any accomplishment is to believe in it. We ourselves may not always be able to determine our brain power, but we can control our enthusiasm and the power of our convictions, which is more important.

Benjamin Disraeli, the great former British prime minister, said, "Genius is the power to make continuous effort." Elbert Hubbard said, "The great secret of success is constancy of purpose." Calvin Coolidge voiced his own classic formula for gaining power when he said, "Nothing in the world can take the place of persistence. Talent will not. Nothing is more common than unsuccessful men with talent. Genius will not. Unrewarded genius is almost a proverb. Education will not; the world is full of educated derelicts. Persistence and determination alone are omnipotent." And Leonardo da Vinci underscored that miraculous power of industry that we ourselves may develop when he said, "Thou, O God, doth sell us all good things at the price of labor."

On the other hand, if one wants to be a dullard, a sloth, and a drug on society, all he needs to do is to remember and use all of the usual alibis, excuses, and rationalizing as to why he should not succeed. He may claim that industry is too tiring, or that success is too boring, or that it is unimportant. Some people are afraid that they might overwork and bring on a heart attack. However, far more people rust out than wear out. It is much more likely that someone will have a heart attack because of feelings of frustration, negativism, and guilt than from doing any well-planned, invigorating, productive work.

Ben Hogan, the great golfing champion, once said that because he couldn't outsmart his rivals, he decided he would become a champion by outworking them. That is a dependable way to excellence in any branch of our mental, social, or spiritual lives. Whatever our problems may be, we should not despair; there is one thing that everyone can be absolutely certain about, and that is that every one who is born into this world is given an enormous potential. It is not more capacity that we need most, for everyone operates far below the level of that capacity which he already has.

Studies have indicated that about 95 percent of the people whose biographies are in the Encyclopedia Britannica came from quite ordinary families. Each of us has deep, untapped reservoirs of ability. Don't worry about it if you don't think you were born in the gifted or genius categories; you can build up any success just as you can build up your physical body.

John the Revelator said:

"And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to their works.

"And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were judged every man according to their works." (Rev. 20:12-13.)

Each of us is commanded to work out our salvation in fear and trembling before God.

You can't pick out superior salesmen or superior missionaries by giving them an I.Q. test, nor can you tell which of God's children are going to come forth in the resurrection of the just or to qualify for the celestial kingdom by their intelligence quotient. Someone has said that if Henry Ward Beecher had developed at the same rate after age thirty-five as he did from twenty-five to thirty-five, he would have been a colossus by age fifty, whereas John Wesley had his greatest period of growth between fifty and seventy.

Abraham Lincoln was unschooled and no one ever accused him of being a scholar, but he had a high quotient of honesty. He had the ability to love his fellowmen, and this and many other traits put him in the realm of genius. He was a genius in integrity and a genius in honor and a genius in righteousness. He said, "I am not bound to win but I am bound to be true. I am not bound to succeed but I am bound to live by the best light that I have. I will stand with anyone who stands right and I will part from him when he goes wrong."

What a man can do best, only he himself can determine. Where is the professor who could have taught Shakespeare or Michelangelo or Leonardo da Vinci? God has placed a vein of genius in every one of us, but each must learn to command the shaft by which we draw out the gold.

Demosthenes was not born a champion orator. Napoleon developed his own military genius. Caesar was an epileptic, yet there are many people who are presently drawing total and permanent disability benefits who are in better physical condition than Caesar was when he conquered the world. All of his life the apostle Paul was bothered by what he called a "thorn in the flesh." Beethoven was deaf. John Milton was blind. Every individual has within himself a natural inclination to do well if he will only do it.

Jesus set us a very high goal when he said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) God is all-knowing, all-wise, and all-powerful, and this is possible because he is also all-good. His progress is built on truth and righteousness. At one time Satan was the lightbearer, the brilliant son of the morning. He might have been called a prodigy or a heavenly genius. His prospects were magnificent, but when he let rebellion get into his life and disobeyed God, he began a downward course and was soon cast out of heaven. Because of his evil, Satan is destined to completely lose all of his power, even his power to do evil. He has already lost his happiness, his genius, and his godliness. The eternal laws of righteousness were summed up by the Creator when he said, "If thou doest well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door." (Gen. 4:7.)

And so we come back to our proposition. How would you like to be a genius with your family? in your citizenship? in your employment? before God? And we repeat the thrilling fact that genius can be manufactured out of righteousness and good works.

No-Fault Insurance

It has been said that there is nothing new under the sun, but frequently someone makes a rather startling application of some old idea we may not have thought about before. In recent years a proposal has been going around among the insurers of automobiles that has been referred to as no-fault insurance.

The traditional concept of paying the losses on automobiles that have been damaged in accidents has been to determine who caused the accident and hold him responsible. But this has not always worked successfully, because it is often difficult to determine exactly where the blame should be placed. Sometimes an accident may be the equal fault of both parties, or sometimes one may be 25 percent to blame and the other 75 percent to blame.

Some accidents are caused by change or circumstances that cannot be anticipated in advance, resulting in serious disagreements as to exactly where the fault lies, and many such arguments have turned into expensive lawsuits. There have also been cases where the expense involved in determining the liability has been greater than the cost of the damage. Then someone came up with the idea of no-fault insurance, whereby the insurer pays all of the claim without trying to determine where the blame rests.

The advantage of this kind of a procedure is that money formerly spent in expensive investigation and lawsuits can be used in paying claims no matter who is at fault. This also saves hard feelings and time, though it may encourage irresponsibility.

This may be a new and very good idea so far as paying automobile claims is concerned, but in our society the no-fault idea can hurt in many ways. It is an interesting coincidence that as our society has been deteriorating in the past few years, our irresponsibility has been increasing. Many people take refuge in the no-fault philosophy by claiming that we are all the products of our environment and there is nothing that we can do about it. Some feel that we become what our society makes us, that we ourselves are not liable and should not be asked to bear the blame.

Frequently the conflict of good and evil gets us so mixed up that we lose our sense of right and wrong. A newspaper reporter was once asked whether or not she believed in the Ten Commandments. She replied, "Who am I to say what is right or wrong?" If this young woman does not know whether or not the Ten Commandments are right, then what does she know? It is a great convenience for some people to be able to say, "What difference does it make anyway whether a thing is right or wrong?" Some people think, "I am what I am and there is nothing I can do about it." Or they just say, "I couldn't care less either one way or the other."

And so we try to alibi, offer excuses, and rationalize ourselves out of our problems. We accuse the devil or our parents or blame some experience of our childhood for our weakness. William Ernest Henley had a more substantial sense of responsibility when as a hopeless cripple he wrote the poem "Invictus":

Out of the night that covers me, Black as the Pit from pole to pole, I thank whatever gods may be For my unconquerable soul. In the fell clutch of circumstance I have not winced nor cried aloud. Under the bludgeoning of chance, My head is bloody, but unbowed. Beyond this veil of wrath and tears Looms but the Horror of the shade, And yet the menace of the years Find and shall find me unafraid. It matters not how straight the gate, How charged with punishments the scroll, I am the master of my fate: I am the captain of my soul.

Such a philosophy, if universally adopted, would soon transform our world into God's paradise. And the scriptures say that every individual person beyond the age of accountability must and will be held fully responsible for his works.

When we use the no-fault philosophy, we are making a serious miscalculation of fact. We can be sure that God will not have us covered with no-fault insurance. Certainly the murderer, the adulterer, the Sabbath breaker, the profane, and the criminal will not all share the same fate as the saint. God attaches a different kind of value to rebellion than he does to loyalty. Truth and falsehood, industry and sloth, courage and cowardice, heaven and hell all have different significance for us. It is difficult to live the religion of Christ if we have the attitude of the devil, but it is easy to live the religion of Christ if we have the standards and spirit of Christ. It is easy to live effectively in the world if we avoid the sins of the world. There are many inspiring examples of people who have lived in the world and yet have not been of the world.

We remember the inspirational story of the young French peasant maid, Joan of Arc. Louis Kossuth said she was the only person who ever held supreme command of a great national army at age seventeen. By the age of nineteen she had delivered France from its enemies and become the heroine of her country.

Although she lived in the most brutal and wicked period since the Dark Ages, yet she did her job as well as anyone that any nation has ever produced. She lived when crime was common among mankind. She was truthful when lying was the ordinary speech of man. She was honest when honesty was a lost virtue. She maintained her personal dignity, unimpaired, in an age of fawning and servilities. She said that even the rude business of war could be better conducted without profanity and the other brutalities of speech.

She had dauntless courage when hope had perished in the hearts of her countrymen. She was spotlessly pure in mind and body when most of society was foul in both. She was the genius of patriotism, the embodiment of sainthood, and finally wore a martyr's crown upon her head.

Few could understand why Joan continued to be alert, vigorous, and confident while her strongest men were exhausted by long marches and severe exposure. On one occasion with an almost impossible objective ahead, she said, "I will lead the men over the wall." One of her generals said, "Not a man will follow you." Joan replied, "I will not look back to see whether anyone is following or not."

Then, with a flash of her sword, she gave the signal and led the way, and the soldiers of France followed. She was often seen sweeping across the plain at the head of her troops, her silver helmet shining, her bright cape fluttering in the wind, her sacred sword flashing, her consecrated banner held aloft. With an unshakable belief in her mission glowing in her heart, she swept everything before her. She sent a thrill of courage and conviction through the French army such as neither king nor patriot could produce. Instead of developing sins and weaknesses by saying "Everybody's doing it," Joan of Arc always did what she believed to be right.

Any success is extremely difficult when we recognize no weakness or fault in ourselves. Since time began, one of our biggest problems has been caused by those people who commit many sins and then say "I am not to blame. It was not my fault." We try to solve too many of our problems by adopting a martyr's complex or imagining that everyone is picking on us. Too many people have the feeling that no matter what the situation may be, no fault attaches to them.

Recently I observed a rather horrifying example of this no-fault philosophy, which was brought to the surface in a divorce proceeding. All through his life the husband had had a lot of problems, and instead of learning to recognize them, he had tried to solve them by the traditional ostrich method of hiding his own head in the sand. He had developed a hide as thick and tough as an elephant's, so no feeling of responsibility could get through to him. When his parents had tried to counsel and advise him, he developed a persecution complex and felt that for some reason they were maliciously picking on him—this in spite of the fact that it must have been perfectly clear to all of his senses that he himself was at fault.

His wife's life since her marriage to him had been a terrible ordeal. Before her marriage she herself had had a moral indiscretion, and in an attempt to clean the slate she had confessed her past sin to him before they were married. He brushed it aside as unimportant, but in the ten years that passed since then, he repeatedly brought it up to her. He himself had also been a transgressor, but all of his sins were not only forgotten by him, but they were also completely excused. It was as though his wife's past had covered him with some no-fault insurance that made all sin unblamable in him.

Few things are more difficult than to try to reason with someone whose mind is so calloused that logic is not possible. By our rejection of responsibility, we can sink others into the depths of depression or push them to the very edge of a breakdown. We therefore increase our own problems and at the same time decrease our ability to solve them.

We were placed here upon this earth to learn to overcome problems and develop our strength. One of the most certain facts in our existence is that we do not live in a no-fault world. Nothing is more clearly written in the scriptures than that we are going to be judged according to our works. There is a fundamental law in the universe that says that someday the books of our lives must be balanced. We can no more do a good thing without at some time, in some way, receiving a reward than we can do an evil thing without suffering a penalty. We should know that if we live righteously, if we develop our minds and wills and personalities, we will be rewarded. May God help us be wise enough to eliminate our faults and choose righteousness.

The Chains of Hell

The scriptures speak a great deal about the bondage of Satan, the imprisonment of evil, the bands of death, and the chains of hell. Although these terms represent conditions that are very real and should be important to us, yet they sometimes don't influence us much because we do not fully understand what they mean.

The prophet Alma tells about some people whose souls were on the very brink of destruction when they were rescued by their own repentance. Changing their attitudes was like being awakened out of a deep spiritual sleep. They had been in the midst of thick darkness, but now their souls were illuminated by the light of the word of the Lord. Alma tries to describe the situation of these people by saying that they had been encircled by the bands of death and had been bound down by the chains of hell. Their repentance had released them from an everlasting destruction.

Since the beginning of time, men have been taken captive by the devil and have been led by him down to eternal destruction. Jude comments on a different side of this situation when he says: "And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, [God] has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day." (Jude 6.) The Lord comments on this awful situation when, in our own day, he has said: ". . . the wicked have I kept in chains of darkness." (D&C 38:5.) Many people have a tendency to enslave themselves by doing evil. The Lord says the whole world groans under the weight of its iniquity. He says that this captivity is as "an iron yoke, it is a strong band; they are the very handcuffs, and chains, and shackles, and fetters of hell." (D&C 123:8.)

A chain is a series of connected rings or links that are usually made out of metal. Chains are used for various purposes, to encumber or restrain. There are also other kinds of chains. An engineer's chain is a means of measurement. We speak of a chain of mountains or a chain of events. A number of radio stations may join together to form a broadcasting chain. We have chain stores and chain reactions.

We also draw chains of thought out of our minds, and our emotions are linked up together in our hearts in a similar way. Thoughts almost never come singly and alone. They almost always form themselves into chains. These groups seem to have an affinity for each other as though they were tied together.

One of the important ways to learn is through association of ideas. We remember poetry or other things most easily when they have a chain of continuity tied together by meter, rhyme, and rhythm. In our relations with others, we may sometimes become chained together by our thoughts and interests. Because we are more or less chained together, we may draw each other up or drag each other down. A low-souled person who tends to think in his own level may lower our altitude. On the other hand, when we attach ourselves to high-minded people and the thoughts in inspiring literature, it is as though a great chain were let down with a grab-hook on its end to lift us upward.

When we succumb to too many low influences, we tend to feel that we are the slaves of our environment. However, we also have a godly ability for decision making and follow-through. We are completely free to choose those things which will draw us upward.

When we give way to evil we tend to respond to future evil more or less automatically until it may carry us to a point where we lose control of ourselves. Because of our weaknesses, evil power can also get power over us by default. We are all different, and rarely does one's self-control descend to a zero, or rarely does anyone have complete self-control. Therefore, our degree of control over ourselves varies according to how effectively we work at it.

Brigham Young once said: "A man can dispose of his agency or his birthright as did Esau of old. But when disposed of he cannot again obtain it. Those who dispose of the proffered mercies of the Lord have their agency immediately abridged and bounds and limits are then set upon them. When listened to, evil begins to rule and overrule the spirit which God has planted within man."

Joseph Fielding Smith pointed out that God has caused some civilizations to be destroyed as an act of mercy to those involved. Nations or peoples have become so wicked that the children growing up among them have little possibility for developing true agency; then that culture has sometimes been destroyed to break this chain of evil and give everyone a better chance.

We often see the destructive influence of a chain in operation when one takes his first drink of liquor. He may not do it because he wants to drink, but because he wants to be friendly. Someone has said that becoming an alcoholic is like getting olives out of a narrow-necked bottle. The first one may be a little difficult, but after the way has been cleared, the others come out more easily. And so it is that one drink usually calls for another, and a million future drinks may all be linked to the first one. In like manner, one cigarette may be tied to numberless other cigarettes, with lung cancer bringing up the rear.

Some people may think of preliminary sins as harmless, but they are tied to sins that can destroy our souls. Like attracts like and sin begets sin. And there is nothing about being a weakling or a coward today that will make us giants and heroes tomorrow. Betrayal inspires betrayal. Weakness begets weakness; and each link is a little larger and stronger than its predecessor. Someone has said:

It was such a little, little sin And such a great big day, And I thought the hours would swallow it, Or the wind blow it away. But the moments passed so quickly And the wind died out somehow, And the sin that was a weakling once Is a hungry giant now.

We remember the story of Charles Dickens' Christmas Carol, where the ghost of Jacob Marley made a visit to his former partner, Scrooge, on the seventh anniversary of his death. He came up the stairs dragging a long chain of fetters made up of cash boxes and other things behind him. When asked for an explanation, Marley's ghost said, "These are the chains I forged in life."

Evil has a dangerous characteristic. Once it gets a foothold, it quickly begins crowding out righteousness. When young people start having a part in evil, they soon begin losing interest in the things they formerly treasured. Then they no longer enjoy engaging in family prayer. When they begin to smoke or drink, the Word of Wisdom offends them. They become annoyed by any discussion of those ideas that are opposed to what they are doing. The stronger the guilt complex, the more they are oppressed by good. Then they like to get as far away as possible from the restraints of good parents and teachers. Evil has a way of demanding the patronage of its devotees.

May the Lord help us to keep our lives free from the bondage of Satan and the chains of hell so that we may be governed by his laws of righteousness and inherit that glorious destiny which God himself has provided.

Dedication

The dictionary says that dedication is an act or a rite of setting apart or dedicating something to a divine being or to a sacred use. It is a solemn appropriation of values, and the dictionary gives as an example the dedication of Solomon's temple. It also points out that on November 19, 1863, the national cemetery of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, was dedicated as the final resting place of those who fell in one of the greatest battles of the Civil War. We remember that it was on this occasion that President Abraham Lincoln gave his famous Gettysburg Address:

"Fourscore and seven years ago our fathers brought forth upon this continent a new nation, conceived in liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.

"Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endure. We are met on a great battlefield of that war. We have come to dedicate a portion of that field as a final resting-place for those who here gave their lives that that nation might live. It is altogether fitting and proper that we should do this. But in a larger sense we cannot dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we cannot hallow this ground. The brave men, living and dead, who struggled here, have consecrated it far above our poor power to add or to detract. The world will little note, nor long remember, what we say here; but it can never forget what they did here.

"It is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to the unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly advanced. It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us, that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion; that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom, and that government of the people, by the people, and for the people, shall not perish from the earth."

And thus this spot of ground was dedicated to God as the final resting place of those stalwart sons who had answered the call of their country and had given their lives for a sacred purpose.

Governments were instituted by God for the benefit of man, and he holds all men accountable for their acts in relation thereto. He requires that we dedicate ourselves to promote the national good, not only in time of war, but all of the time. He himself has said that when one is in the service of his fellowmen, he is also in the service of God.

God has also established his church upon the earth. He has commanded that all men should have faith in him, be baptized, and devote themselves to carrying on his work through his church organization. We build houses of worship as well as sacred temples where his work can be effectively carried on in his name.

More than three thousand years ago, David was anointed by Samuel to be the king of ancient Israel. Among other things, the people needed a temple. It had been nearly four hundred years since the Israelites had entered their promised land under Joshua, and for all of these years the only thing they had to serve them as a temple was the little portable tabernacle they carried around with them as they wandered in the wilderness.

The people needed the temple. The Lord wanted them to have a temple, and David, the king, wanted to build the temple. However, an important part of dedication is worthiness, and because David was not worthy to build the temple, the Lord said that its construction would have to wait until after David's death. Finally, after Solomon had succeeded his father upon the throne, the Lord commanded him to build that great temple to God which has been known through the ages as Solomon's temple.

This luxurious edifice required seven years to build. The altars, many parts of the building, and much of the furniture were overlaid with pure gold. The building was also beautified and ornamented with valuable gems and costly jewels. Then, when the building was completed, Solomon stood before the altar with his hands spread forth toward heaven, and the record says that he and all the people dedicated the temple unto the Lord.

After Solomon had finished his dedicatory prayer, fire came down from heaven and consumed the sacrifices. Then the Lord appeared unto Solomon by night and said, "If my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from the heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land." (2 Chr. 7:14.)

For many years this temple was one of the wonders of the world. It was the symbol of Jehovah worship in the earth. It was the devotional center of Israel. But the important part of dedication is in people and not in buildings or costly ornaments, and because the people themselves did not keep the covenants they had made when they had dedicated the temple, and because they themselves failed to maintain their purpose, the temple soon began a downward course. It was shorn of much of its magnificence by invaders, and it was despoiled of its treasures by both local and foreign sinners. Some of its gold was used by the people to buy off the attacks of enemies and some was used to purchase the cooperation of other nations. Finally the temple was burned to the ground and utterly destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, and all of those remaining treasures were carried away to Babylon. The temple was subsequently rebuilt on the same spot by King Zerubbabel, but because of the wickedness of the people, it was again destroyed. It was in the process of again being rebuilt by King Herod during the ministry of Jesus.

This historic spot had great significance in the lives of the Israelites. It was here that an angel commanded David to build an altar on which to offer a sacrifice to Jehovah. It was here that the magnificent temple of Solomon stood. It was here that Jesus himself came, and that he taught the wise men when he was twelve years of age.

Some few weeks before the crucifixion, because of the antagonism of the people, Jesus left Jerusalem and went some twenty miles to the little village of Ephraim, where he spent some time in training his apostles for the responsibilities that would soon rest upon their shoulders. Then, as the feast of the Passover approached, he startled his followers by saying, "Come, let us go into Judea again." (John 11:7.) Just seven days before he would hang with outstretched arms above Calvary, he began that solemn march toward Jerusalem and the cross. He arrived in Bethany, about a mile and a half from Jerusalem, on Friday evening, at the beginning of the Sabbath. This was the home of Mary, Martha, and Lazarus.

Over the last Sabbath (from Friday evening to Saturday evening) the Gospel writers have drawn a reverent veil of silence. Then on Sunday morning, the first day of the week, Jesus made his triumphal entry into Jerusalem riding on the back of an ass. Passover travelers from many areas were also making their way toward Jerusalem, and as he became a part of this imposing procession, palm branches and flowers were strewn in his path along the way. The people shouted, "Hosanna to the son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord." (Matt. 21:9.)

All day long he taught the people in the temple without success. On Monday he returned again. This is the day when he cleansed the temple by driving out the moneychangers. He said, "It is written, My house is a house of prayer: but ye have made it a den of thieves." (Luke 19:46.) On Tuesday he came again for the last time to the temple, and all day long he taught the people, again without success. As the end of the day approached, Jesus left the precincts of the temple and began his journey back to Bethany.

As he crossed the Mount of Olives he stopped to rest near its summit and, with his followers around him, turned and looked back to the temple. Then he made his famous farewell speech to Jerusalem. He said: "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Behold, your house is left unto you desolate." (Matt. 23:37-38.)

He was leaving this sacred edifice forever, and it no longer qualified as a temple of God. This is an indication of that sacred truth that the most important objects for dedication are not made from the cedars of Lebanon or the sycamore, nor are they made of gold and rubies. Rather, they are made of human lives. May we each dedicate ourselves to those sacred causes to which God himself is devoted!

An Ounce of Prevention

If our lives are to be successful, there are certain things that must be done—and certain things that must be left undone. A fundamental law of life says that everyone must be judged according to his works. A corollary to this also says that there are certain experiences that must be prevented from taking place. We may lose our eternal exaltation by neglecting either one of these two processes. One problem is that we don't go far enough in the right direction and the other is that we go too far in the wrong direction. We must provide ourselves with sufficient motivation for the one and an adequate system of restraining power for the other. There are probably a lot more people who lose their blessings because of doing wrong than who fail to earn them by doing right.

Someone has pointed out that while there are a hundred steps from hell to heaven, there is only one from heaven to hell. It takes years to build a life, but it can be destroyed in an instant. Some time ago I listened to discussions about three men who were being considered for an appointment to office. As their virtues and vices were being compared, of each one it was said he is good in certain areas but lacking in others. I discovered that it isn't always important what one's great virtues are, because they can so easily be cancelled out by little vices. Of the first man it was said, "He is a great person and he wants the job, but he is lazy." Of the second it was said, "He is a great scholar, a hard worker, very ambitious, but he is immoral." Of the third it was said, "He is very capable, he has a fine record, he knows the business, but he doesn't want the job."

A banker can balance off a hundred-dollar liability with a hundred-dollar asset. But one can't do that in public relations or in leadership responsibilities. If a political candidate goes before the people with ten virtues and one little vice the people, particularly those of the opposing party, do not say, "Let's sit down and talk about his ten virtues." What they want to do is thoroughly discuss his one vice.

It is important that we build up our virtues, but it is even more important that we eliminate our vices. One wrecking crew, whether in the building trades or in life, can destroy in an hour what it has taken several lifetimes to build up. We must select the right and exclude the wrong. We must center our minds on the good and then be able to effectively motivate ourselves to bring about its accomplishments.

Even greater skill is required in life to prevent from happening those things that would destroy our accomplishment. An old axiom says: "An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure." Many years ago a story came out of India indicating that each year 50,000 natives were crushed by pythons. The natives discovered that it was better to search out the python eggs where they had been laid in the sand and destroy them before they were hatched than to struggle with the deadly snakes after the pythons had been allowed to mature. We have innumerable examples of this idea. In 1886, 120,000 people in America lost their lives to the scourge of smallpox. Then someone invented a preventative in the form of a vaccine, and for the past several years there has not been a single death from that python of disease; we have destroyed its strength by preventing it from being born.

I received several lessons, many years ago, in the disadvantages of letting a problem develop its full strength and then trying to overcome it. When I was a small boy, my father built an irrigation reservoir on a high part of our land where water could be impounded when it was plentiful and used when it was scarce; when our irrigation turn came at night, we could put the water in the reservoir and use it during the daytime.

On one occasion it was necessary to repair the valve in the outlet. But when the pipe was put back, sufficient care was not taken to see that the dirt was made firm enough that the water could not leak through it. We learned that a little leak in the dike, if not taken care of early, could be disastrous. Then it was too late to do very much about it. For many hours the men worked feverishly, throwing in rocks and sandbags in an effort to stem the tide of waters that an hour or two before had been only a tiny wet spot on the other side of the reservoir dam. And as a result, instead of the water helping the young crops, the flood of waters rushed down through the young plants and washed out all prospects for a crop that year. A little more attention given to prevention would have guaranteed an abundant harvest.

I also remember another impressive lesson about prevention. It was my job to prevent the growth of the tall sweet clover in the orchard, and I discovered to my sorrow that if I let this tough weed get a good head start, it was very difficult to destroy its tough roots. My job would have been easy if I had gotten after it in the early spring when the ground was soft and the plants were small and tender.

To refuse those first cigarettes provides much better control of lung cancer than to try to struggle with the disease after the awful monster has been allowed to grow. Immorality is a python that has devastated many lives, destroying confidence, bringing venereal disease, breaking up families, and causing serious eternal destruction. Fear is a python. The unprofitable servant said, "I was afraid, so I hid my talent in the ground." (See Matt. 25:25.) There are many more important ways to control fear than by giving in to it.

The Lord himself said, "If ye are prepared ye shall not fear." (D&C 38:30.) We can prepare for any problem if we start working on it in time. Recently a man came to see me about his marital difficulties. A half dozen times his wife had cancelled her divorce proceedings on his promise to reform, but now her patience had become completely exhausted, so he came seeking the aid of others. He admitted all of the charges and then some. He said, "I have been unthoughtful. I have been immoral. I have done everything in the book, but now I would like to have my wife and family forgive me and start over again."

I could understand how he felt. I felt that same way when I was trying to cut that uncuttable clover. When the reservoir broke and we lost our crops I would like to have been able to put the water back into the reservoir and restore the crops that had been washed away. But it is pretty hard to repent of full-grown clover or a broken reservoir dam when the damage has already been done.

This man with the marital troubles wants to start over and that is a wonderful idea, if he can do it. But he couldn't behave himself even when his pythons were just small wiggling snakes. How can he handle them now that their giant coils are so tightly wrapped around him? If we can't carry our burdens while they are light, how are we going to manage them when their load is a hundredfold? It is much easier to control one's temper while the pythons are still eggs than to try to struggle with them after they have become pythons. The time to prepare a ship for the storm is not when the vessel is in the middle of the ocean being smashed by the waves. It is while the boat is still in the dockyard, while the planks are being picked and the rivets are being driven. It is difficult to get our children to love and respect us if their confidence has been destroyed time after time in the past. If one wants to prevent destruction, mistrust, and hate growing in the hearts of loved ones, the best time to do it is before the seeds have been allowed to germinate.

In the book of Revelation we are told of a message that the Lord sent to the members of the church at Laodicea. They had brought a harsh condemnation on themselves because they had allowed the weeds of indecision, indifference, and sloth to grow up in their hearts. The Lord said to them, "I know thy works, that thou art neither cold nor hot. . . . So then because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth. Because thou sayest, I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing; and knowest not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." (Rev. 3:15-17.)

Evil things, as well as good things, begin small. Nothing is ever born fully grown. If we learn to tell good from evil and then develop strong habits about every good thing, we soon become enthusiastic, hardworking, and build some solid habits around each individual success. But if we allow a few little leaks in the dikes of truth or if we take privileges with sin and pay no attention to the disease of immorality, we can be certain that it will grow into some kind of a vicious python or destructive flood of waters that will destroy us.

Our world is witnessing the awful spectacle of millions of people who are losing the most worthwhile things. They are being destroyed because the python eggs of dishonesty, atheism, criminality, immorality, and sloth were not destroyed before they were born. Those little sins that are merely pleasant pastimes now may cause us to lose our eternal exaltation. A little penicillin or a little industry or a little pledge of allegiance or some earnest covenants of righteousness made now may save our souls from being washed into hell. May the Lord help us with our program of prevention.

Freedom

The inspired Declaration of Independence states that all men are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights and that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.

Freedom is one of our greatest gifts from God. The U.S. Constitution guarantees Americans freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom to worship, and freedom to own property.

In 1941 President Franklin D. Roosevelt announced his famous four freedoms. It was his objective that every American should have freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear. We have the freedom to think, the freedom to grow, the freedom to love, the freedom to be loved, the freedom to raise our lives above the ordinary, the freedom to become like God.

Too often, however, men and women destroy their God-given freedom. Most of the battles ever waged have been fought in an attempt to deprive others of their freedom. This destructive program began with the war in heaven, when Lucifer wanted to establish himself as the savior of the world. He wanted to save everyone by compulsion. When his program of force and limitation was rejected, he rebelled against God and led one-third of all of the hosts of heaven after him. Ever since, he and his followers have seized every opportunity to deprive men of free agency and to enslave them.

Monarchs sometimes put mental and physical fetters on their subjects, forcing them to think and to act in certain ways. The Alexanders, the Caesars, the Napoleons, the Kaisers, the Hitlers, and the Stalins have tried many times to conquer the world and, like Lucifer, to subjugate its people. There are dictators in the world today who would without a moment's hesitation enslave everyone if they could.

World War I was said to be fought to make the world safe for democracy. That was also the avowed purpose of World War II, and that is the reason why we are spending so much in human lives and money in withstanding the spread of communism.

In his great program for the latter days, God raised up inspired men to establish the Constitution of the United States, and ordained that America's mission in the world should be to serve as the citadel of liberty and to keep freedom, righteousness, and human dignity alive. We have met with all kinds of opposition, inspired by the continued leadership of Lucifer, the fallen son of the morning.

God himself has made a strong personal commitment to freedom. He has said: "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." (John 8:32.)

Righteousness, good attitudes, and plenty of industry will also make us free. God has given us the lifesaving principles of the gospel to help us to keep ourselves free and happy. But in order to keep ourselves free, we must keep our minds free to think. Each of us needs a clear conscience and a will that is not fettered by bad habits or evil distortions.

In order to keep our freedom, we must place out of bounds all those things that would enslave us. James says: "Resist the devil, and he will flee from you." (James 4:7.) Sometimes people bring disaster upon themselves when they fail to distinguish between freedom and irresponsibility, not recognizing that the right kind of freedom has limitations on it. For example, freedom of the press does not give anyone the license to commit libel against his neighbor. Freedom of the seas does not give anyone a pirate's license to take the treasures of others, not does it entitle anyone to sink ships or destroy lives. A very important part of liberty consists in understanding where freedom ends and license begins.

A marriage certificate does not entitle one to ruin the success or destroy the happiness of his marriage partner. When one brings children into the world, he is not free to desert or neglect them. Actually, no one is ever given any right to do wrong. God has said, "For I the Lord cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D&C 1:31.) He is completely bound by his own laws of righteousness. He said, "I, the Lord, am bound when ye do what I say . . ." (D&C 82:10), and when we obey the laws of God, we begin to become free as God is free.

As we obey the laws of health, we free ourselves from disease. As we obey the laws of success, we free ourselves from failure. As we obey the laws of God and heaven, we free ourselves from the bonds of Satan and the torments of hell. Even Satan is not free, and sometime when he feels the full shock of the backfire of evil, he will discover he has paid a bitter price for his rebellion and sin.

In his vision of the future, John the Revelator says:

"And I saw another angel come down from heaven, having the key of the bottomless pit and a great chain in his hand.

"And he laid hold on the dragon, that old serpent, which is the Devil, and Satan, and bound him a thousand years,

"And cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and set a seal upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years should be fulfilled: and after that he must be loosed a little season." (Rev. 20:1-3.)

Since his rebellion against God in the council in heaven, Satan has taken many liberties with the truth. He is the master of license, the most ardent supporter of irresponsibility, the greatest practitioner of evil. But even now he is not free to think or to love good people or to do good things or to be happy. We must not get ourselves into this situation. In Paradise Lost, John Milton put some words into the mouth of the Creator when he wrote:

I formed men free and free they must remain Till they enthrall themselves. I will not change their natures Or revoke the high decree that hath ordained their freedom. They themselves ordained their fall.

And so we come back to the statement in the Declaration of Independence: "We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable rights; that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness." Life is our greatest possession, but it is made greater by our practice of freedom and by how effectively we pursue the happiness that God has ordained.

Introductions

We have an interesting custom in which on important occasions we make introductions of people. Usually before a speaker presents an important subject to an audience, the speaker himself is introduced by someone. It is thought that when the strength and accomplishments of the speaker are made known to the audience, everyone gets more out of the discussion. The introduction is very important, for it starts the program on its way.

Actually, we don't know very much about ourselves, or about life, or even about God. We need someone to introduce us to wisdom, industry, courage, and righteousness. Some people are employed for an entire working lifetime and never really understand their work or its possibilities or its consequences. Sometimes we belittle ourselves by saying, "I'm just a teacher," or "I'm just a salesman," or "I'm just a worker." Our divorce carnage may be attributed to the fact that marriage partners have never been properly introduced to those facts and responsibilities involved in marriage. What a great help it would be if each of us could get a good introduction to our parents, our children, and our spouses. We ought to know more about this world in which we live as well as that world toward which we are working. We should also know something about the opportunities all about us.

When we introduce a speaker, we frequently tell about his past and his present interests, and we sometimes attempt to predict his future. These are also some of the things we need to know about ourselves.

Someone has said that the four most important dates in a person's life are (1) the day he is born, (2) the day he gets married, (3) the day he selects his life's work, and (4) the day he dies.

Isn't it interesting that the thing that we know less about than anything else in the world is our own individual selves? You can ask a man questions about science, invention, history, or politics, and he will answer you, but if you ask him to sit down and write out an analysis of himself and tell you about his mind and soul qualities, you may not get a very good answer. Or if you ask him where he came from or what his purpose in life is or what his eternal destiny is, he will probably be silent and uncomprehending.

Someone once said to his friend, "Who do you think you are?" His friend whispered quietly to himself, "I wish I knew." It would be of the greatest help to us if we took time to discover that we are the children of God. What exciting news to know that we were created in God's own image and that we have been endowed with his attributes. And if we could have the concealing veils of mortality drawn aside and understand our antemortal accomplishments, and godly future possibilities, we would feel like falling down and worshipping before him.

Just suppose that we could have visited with Abraham as he tended his flocks out on the plains of Palestine. We might have thought of him as a rather ordinary kind of sheepherder. But if we could have known him during his antemortal estate when, because of his integrity and righteousness, he rated as one of the greatest intelligences of heaven and was chosen to stand among the noble and great in the council of God, we would probably have had a very different opinion. Or what would we think if we could look in on Abraham at this moment as he rules with God in heaven?

The apostle Paul once said that we should be careful how we entertain strangers, because some have entertained angels unawares. But all of us are continually entertaining some of the finest of the angels. Just suppose we had the right kind of introduction to those spirits that have been sent to us from God to be our own children. They were not only sent to be entertained in our homes, but they were also sent to be educated and given their characters as well. What do you think that we ought to know about their past and their present and their future? How thrilling it is for us to know that gods, spirits, angels, and men all belong to the same species, though in different degrees of righteousness and in various stages of development.

When Jesus was born in the Bethlehem stable, the innkeeper may have announced his birth to some of the other guests by saying, "It's a boy." But suppose those people who lived then had actually known who he was. There were some who watched him grow up and listened to him speak, and yet they crucified him upon the cross, and he said of them, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.) Through the scriptures God has given us an introduction to his Son when on several occasions he has said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

In a revelation to the prophet Moses, God also made a part of his speech introducing his First Begotten Son in the spirit who was to be his Only Begotten Son in the flesh when he said to Moses, "And worlds without number have I created; and I also created them for mine own purpose; and by the Son I created them, which is mine Only Begotten." (Moses 1:33.) Yet we sometimes say of him, as did the ancients, "His blood be upon us, and on our children." (Matt. 27:25.)

Consider the importance of that day when we are married. That is when God entrusts into our hands the responsibility for establishing the most important institution in the world, the home—our home. As a place to spend the first part of their lives, our first parents, Adam and Eve, were placed in the Garden of Eden. That ought to be the atmosphere of every one of our homes, for every home serves not only as a reception center, but also as a training school for immortal souls, and we serve as their teachers and examples. It is God's purpose that in our homes they should learn love, kindness, righteousness, and obedience. This is the place where the foundation of their immortality will be laid.

Our children's lives should not be exposed to bickerings and sin. They should never be faced with the ugly spectres of hate and divorce. If we were properly introduced to our wives and our children, we would certainly not allow ourselves that awful privilege of breaking their spirits, making them unstable, and causing the destruction of their chances for eternal glory.

Now for the third important day of our lives. We need a better introduction to that part of the work of the world that life has given us to do. Elbert Hubbard once said that business is the process of ministering to human needs. "Therefore," said he, "business is essentially a divine calling." That is, the farmer who provided the food for your family's breakfast this morning was ministering to a human need, and therefore he is entitled to say that he is engaged in a divine occupation. The doctor who gave me blood transfusions was ministering to a human need, and he also is employed in a divine calling. We should think of our part of the work of the world in that way and do it in that spirit. We can give ourselves the finest introduction to our work by doing it in the best way that it can be done.

The fourth most important date of our lives is the date of our deaths. In fact, someone has said that death is the most important event in life. We live to die, and then we die to live. And if we are true and faithful in this life, God will someday introduce us into the celestial kingdom, and, with his hand on our shoulder, we may hear him say, "Well done, thou good and faithful servant: thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy lord." (Matt. 25:21.) God bless us that this may come to pass.

Downhill

An old fable tells about a farmer hauling his produce to market in a wagon drawn by two horses. The horses were having a difficult time on the steep grade. Finally the farmer said to a stranger, "How far is it to the top of the hill?" The stranger replied, "You're not on a hill, your rear wheels are off."

This farmer may seem unobserving, and yet we often fail to observe ways to make our lives easier. Jesus said: "Take my yoke upon you, . . . For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light." (Matt. 11:29-30.) But we frequently add some difficulty factors to life that are unnecessary along the narrow-road concept of success taught by Jesus. Alcoholism, idleness, nicotine-ism, dishonesty, immortality, and dope addiction make life more difficult and much more unpleasant.

The first part of my walk to work is uphill. Then, when I turn to an easy downhill grade, the walking is much more pleasant and a lot easier. Sometimes a gentle breeze blows at my back and gives me an additional lift. With good, strong conviction we can give ourselves a tail wind. Effective know-how and a little enthusiasm can make our course downhill all the way.

Nothing gives us such a good, strong, helpful tail wind as a positive mental attitude. And nothing sets the grade in our favor like some firm decisions for righteousness. But many people believe that it is too difficult to live the religion of Christ, to be successful, and to be happy. We listen to the propaganda of failure without deciding what is right or wrong. We are getting on the broad road and then taking off our rear wheels.

Recently a young man was trying to find someone to help him solve his problems. He was unemployed, and he seemed to think that to destroy the "establishment" was the first and greatest commandment. He had an untidy, dirty personal appearance and dressed in the full uniform of rebellion. He had been divorced twice, and he hated his parents. He had no money, no friends, and no desire to change himself. He was headed uphill.

We can give ourselves a downhill grade by living the golden rule. Industry and motivation can lubricate our machinery and make our lives more exciting. A social worker was once making a survey in a so-called underprivileged neighborhood. He stopped at the door of a house, and after knocking several times a small crack opened in the door and out of the inside darkness a woman's voice said, "You don't need to stop here. Me and my husband, we ain't interested in nothing." These people were carrying a heavy load of inactivity and unsociability and it must have seemed to them to be an uphill climb.

To give the journey through life a downhill grade, get up early enough to watch the sun rise. It is exciting to experience the light, warmth, and energy that helps to make the earth beautiful with flowers and vegetation.

Add momentum to the downhill course by getting excited about your work. Edward Everett Hale once said that the best education is to be perpetually thrilled by life. We should fall in love with what we are doing and learn to do it well. A salesman who loves his job has more fun and makes more sales than the salesman who hates his job.

The downhill grade will be more rewarding if you strive for excellence and recognize the satisfaction that comes from doing good. Sir Galahad said:

My good blade carves the casques of men, My tough lance thrusteth sure, My strength is as the strength of ten Because my heart is pure.

We can whip up a tail wind by following the Lord's law of health and by eliminating nicotine, alcohol, caffeine, negative thoughts, criticisms, and evil from our lives.

May we make our lives easier by traveling the straight and narrow road after we give it a downhill grade and put the wind at our backs.

Liberation

We hear a great deal today about the liberation of women. We are all aware of the fact that for many years women were not permitted to get an education, nor were they allowed to vote, hold political office, or speak in public. Even the Bible has been interpreted by some as placing women in an inferior position to men. In some earlier periods daughters were not allowed to inherit property if there were any sons in the family. And only in 1919 was an amendment made in the Constitution of the United States permitting women to vote.

Women are not the only ones who have had liberation problems. A little over a hundred years ago Americans were fighting a destructive civil war that was to decide whether or not slaves should be liberated. Present-day blacks claim that their political liberation does not satisfy them, and they are now undertaking an energetic campaign aimed at several kinds of economic and social liberation.

In a sense, everyone is serving in some kind of bondage, and everybody is attempting to get himself liberated from something. The Revolutionary War was a war to free Americans of taxation without representation. Labor unions today are trying to get their members liberated from what they think of as long hours and low pay. Eastern European nations are seeking liberation from the Communists. The Indians and other minority groups are working on programs of liberation. The Jews want to be liberated from persecution; the Catholics and Mormons would like to be liberated from religious discrimination. Millions of people who live on government relief want to be liberated from the unpleasant effects of poverty, unemployment, and work itself.

The dictionary says that liberation means to release from restraint or bondage. To liberate is to set someone free. The dictionary also mentions other kinds of liberation, such as to liberate the mind from prejudice, or to free the body from disease, or to liberate the soul from the bondage of sin.

The primary purpose of religion is to liberate us from ignorance and sin. Jesus was our greatest liberator; he said, "Deliver us from evil." He gave us the law of repentance to liberate us from the consequences of our sins. And yet we have a tendency to enslave ourselves. This has been going on for a long time. It started in the grand council in heaven, long before this earth itself was created. In the very beginning, God made a personal and solid commitment to freedom. In fact, next to life itself, free agency is his primary gift to us. And in this great commission he said to us, "Nevertheless, thou mayest choose for thyself."

In the plan of God designed for our eternal progression, it was necessary that we become mortal and live here upon this earth to acquire the bodies of flesh and bones that in the resurrection will go with us throughout eternity. In our antemortal life we walked by sight. We came here to learn to walk a little way by faith. This is the place where we are tested and proven and tried. For our development and progress a world of opposites has been prepared, so we can see good and evil side by side. God has also given us the companion law of responsibility, whereby we must suffer the consequences of any unrighteousness.

In God's plan, a Savior was to be provided to come here and redeem us from our sins on condition of our repentance. Because of our free agency, it was evident that some would be lost. Therefore, Lucifer, the brilliant son of the morning, suggested that he come here and use force and save everyone by compulsion. When his suggestion for enslavement was rejected he rebelled against God and drew away one-third of the hosts of heaven after him. And ever since that time he and his evil forces have gone up and down the earth doing what they can to enslave as many people as possible in every conceivable way. Satan is practicing a program of liberation that works against our interests. Through his program he is seeking to liberate us from those restraints of the Ten Commandments. He is stirring up people to object to the religion of Christ.

Many people today want to be released from the necessity of working for what they get. Many would rather get their bread by stealing or by legislation or by going on relief. The forces of evil are building up a great avalanche of divorce, where people are relieved from the responsibilities and restraints of marriage.

One of the greatest commands ever given by God was when he said to our first parents, "Multiply and replenish the earth, and subdue it." He has given us the privilege of bringing his spirit children into the world, where they can enjoy the magnificent benefits of mortality. As a part of this program, God made the family the greatest of all institutions. In the family is where the foundations are laid for love and happiness. God himself said, "It is not good for man to be alone." And he might have said that it is not good for women to be alone, and it is not good for children to be alone. Men and women and children were not only built to live together and to support and love each other, but it was also designed that they should be dependent upon each other.

The Declaration of Independence refers to the fact that all people are equal before the law. However, they are not equal in their life expectancy, since the average woman lives several years longer than the average man. Men and women are not spiritually equal; women were given a finer spiritual sense so that they might more effectively mold the soft clay in the lives of children. Napoleon was once asked, "What is the greatest need of France?" He gave his famous one-word answer: "Mothers." Good mothers are far more in demand now than they were in Napoleon's day. The mother was created by God to be the heart of the home. What a tragedy it is when so many women want to be like men! It is, of course, necessary for many women to be the breadwinners as well as the mothers of a family. And because of the shortage of good men, and because of the custom of older men marrying younger women, many women must remain unmarried in this life. But the traditional role of a true mother still ranks far above adopted occupations of women. Men are born with greater physical stature and more strength than women, because God intended that they should serve a different function. But most women are superior to men in their ability to love and train young children to be good citizens, and the fact that some of them have liberated themselves from their godly role of training children and inspiring men to righteousness is one of the reasons for the serious worsening that has recently taken place in our society. There are a lot of women and men who are running away from life and the particular responsibilities God has given them.

Oscar Wilde once said that if God wished to punish us, all he would need to do would be to answer our prayers. If all our prayers were answered, most people would work less and get more. If the prayer of the "vocal minority" speaking for modern women's liberation were answered, we would have more rights that were wrong. We would have more dependable methods of birth control, easier divorces, more readily available abortions, fewer mothers, fewer children, and less righteousness.

How fortunate it was that the mothers of Moses, the apostle Paul, Jesus, and Abraham Lincoln were not abortionists or hung up on the latest methods of birth control. The greatest need of our world is not for more doctors nor for more lawyers nor for more bank presidents. It is for more and better wives and mothers!

Someone has said, "We admire the artist who presents mimic man upon the canvas. We applaud the sculptor who carves that same image in the enduring marble, but oh how insignificant are these achievements, though the highest and fairest in all the realms of art, as compared to the great vocation of the human mother. She works not upon canvas that will fade or upon marble that will crumble into dust, but upon mind and spirit that will endure forever and bear throughout eternity the noble impress of a mother's hand."

The mothers of the ancient scriptures felt that the greatest misfortune that could come upon them was the curse of barrenness. And I suppose that the torments of hell will have no more meaning for anyone than for those female souls who have been successful in getting themselves liberated from fulfilling their God-given privilege of bringing children into the world.

Therefore, we might go back in our imagination to that early morning of creation when God created man in his own image, "in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them. And God blessed them, and said, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it. . . ." (Gen. 1:27-28.) And we might join with the Creator and say to those noble spirits who are the mothers and wives and children of men, "God bless you in the great responsibility that you have to love and train and lift the children of God up to the high level of godliness."

Woman's Search for Happiness

In recent years we have been hearing and reading a great deal about women and their search for happiness. Over the ages women were sometimes referred to in such terms as the "weaker sex" or as "unfinished men." Now many of them belong to what we might call the discontented sex. In past generations they were not permitted to vote, and their educational and occupational privileges were also somewhat limited. Many women have felt that they were being treated like second-grade citizens who were inferior to men in their political rights and vocational opportunities.

Certainly women are different from men. They do not have the physical strength or some of the other capabilities of men. On the other hand, women are superior to men in many ways. They are prettier than men; they usually live longer than men, and they have different aptitudes than men. Over the centuries men were traditionally the drunkards, the lawbreakers, the murderers, and the adulterers, whereas the traditional role of women was that of the mothers of men, the teachers of men, the inspirers of men, and the helpmeets of men.

There can be no question but that men have sometimes taken some unfair advantages of women. The Lord himself has said to the discredit of men, "We have learned by sad experience that it is the nature and disposition of almost all men, as soon as they get a little authority, as they suppose, they will immediately begin to exercise unrighteous dominion." (D&C 121:39.) In many cases in the past as well as in the present, women have been and are being made the victims of this very serious male sin of unrighteous dominion. Now a large and militant group of women are raising a cry, demanding to be liberated. They want equal political rights, equal job opportunities, and equal pay with men. Many women want more sexual independence, safer methods of birth control, easier abortions, with equal privileges to enjoy the sins that in the past were largely the domain of men.

In my youth I never heard of such a thing as a woman smoking cigarettes or drinking liquor. Women also had higher standards of morality. However, many women are now not only demanding equal opportunities in the businesses and in the professions, but they also want to dress like men, look like men, and act like men. They are also narrowing the gap between men and women in their moral standards and criminal activities.

Abraham Lincoln's mother was never permitted to vote, but her son said of her, "All that I am or ever hope to be, I owe to my angel mother." As men have taken this attitude toward women, it has made the men themselves much better. However, when men lose respect for women or think of them as imitation men, then both men and women are in serious trouble.

The fact that the women of ancient Athens did not meet with men in the marketplace was no sign that either were not doing their jobs effectively. It was not in politics or athletic games or business or war where women were supposed to excel. Women were designed to be the heart of the home. They have been given some great personal and spiritual endowments that make them far superior to men as mothers.

The biggest job in the world is that of establishing morality and teaching principles of truth and righteousness, and women will probably never be happy if they abandon this natural role and attempt to compete with men. However, they can excel as wives, home builders, trainers of children, and the inspirers of men. As a group and as individuals, women have made tremendous contributions in our world.

Anthropologist Margaret Mead wrote an article some time ago that appeared in the Chicago Daily News. It was entitled "The American Woman—A Sad Success Story." She said:

"The American woman is the envy of women throughout the world. She is envied for her freedom to come and go, travel alone and far away, drive a car, go to college and have an abundant choice of what she will wear, how she will furnish her home, and what she will feed her family. She is envied for her opportunity to become a lawyer, a doctor, a businesswoman or a senator, to own and manager her own property, to marry without asking the consent of her guardians and to live alone if she chooses.

"The American woman, however, presents a curious echo of what the world thinks of her. She will often say: `I ought to be perfectly happy, I have a devoted husband, a lovely home, many friends, three delightful children, and yet. . . .'

"The sentence usually ends in some self-criticism of one sort or another. `Why am I not happy? What is wrong with me? I know there ought to be something I could do about it.' "

For all of their material blessings and unparalleled opportunities, most women are not as happy as they ought to be. One reason may be because their own standards are unrealistic. Whether one is a woman or a man, no one can succeed in all things at the same time. It is generally unrealistic to want to be successful and happy as a mother, a homemaker, and a wife, and at the same time win laurels in the business world. Neither can one practice birth control or favor abortion and at the same time please God, whose greatest command was for woman to multiply and replenish the earth.

But even so, those women who are interested in women's liberation do not usually compare themselves with their neighbors or their own family members. Instead, they compare themselves with the women they see on television and in the newspapers and the magazines. They compare themselves with those whose hair is always beautifully groomed, whose kitchens are always spotless, whose children are well fed and well behaved, whose homes are beautiful and designed with the latest equipment. Against such measures of status, no woman, no matter how fortunate or how beautiful or how much loved, no matter how well read, trusted by her children, and adored by her husband, can ever consider herself a complete success or as completely happy. Her standards are unrealistic. She thinks she should be much more than she is and have more than she has.

In woman's search for happiness, she will be more likely to succeed if she makes her quest in that area where God placed her to function: as the heart and spirit and the motivating power of the home.
