Sterling W. Sill, Wealth of Wisdom (Salt Lake City: Deseret Book Company, 1977)

BUILDING WISDOM INTO OUR SOULS

"Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock."

Wisdom Hath Builded Her House

Solomon reminds us of the seven pillars of wisdom: "Wisdom hath builded her house, she hath hewn out her seven pillars." (Prov. 9:1.) Building is one of the most important occupations of man, and among the most important objects of our building are the houses we build.

Jesus tells about a wise man who built his house upon a rock. The record says:

"Therefore whosoever heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon a rock:

"And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell not: for it was founded upon a rock.

"And every one that heareth these sayings of mine, and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which built his house upon the sands:

"And the rain descended, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house; and it fell: and great was the fall of it." (Matt. 7:24-27.)

We build houses to shelter us from the storms of life. We build houses of worship. The apostle Paul mentioned another important building situation when he said, ". . . ye are God's building. . . [Therefore] let every man take heed how he buildeth. . . ." (1 Cor. 3:9-10.) Some buildings fall because they are built on unsure foundations; others collapse because they are insufficiently pillared.

We might follow Solomon's interesting formula and get wisdom to build us a house that is invulnerable. He does not tell us which seven pillars he had in mind, but inasmuch as it is our own house we are building, we might appropriately select the seven that would best suit us, for God himself said, "Thou mayest choose for thyself." Therefore, if we were going to exercise wisdom, what would our seven pillars be?

We might be cautioned by the fabled buildings of the Three Little Pigs, who tried to protect themselves from their archenemy, the Big Bad Wolf. One built his house of straws and another of sticks. These both shared the fate of the New Testament story of the house built upon the sand, for both went down before the puffs of the wolf. The result was that both of these little pigs were eaten up by their enemy. But the third little pig was wise enough to provide a better foundation and stronger pillars; he built his house of bricks. As a consequence, his life was saved and his enemy destroyed.

If we take up where the Three Little Pigs and the two house builders in the New Testament left off, where shall we begin? Jesus made love one of the principal pillars of the church itself. Certainly we ought to love God; we ought to love our neighbors; we ought to love our spouses; we ought to love ourselves. Therefore, love could well be the first pillar.

The number of pillars needed is seven, and inasmuch as we are given our absolute freedom to choose without limitations, what will we select for the other six?

As pillar number two, what could be better than to have the virtue and power of truth? It is indestructible and all powerful. A poet said,

Truth crushed to earth shall rise again, The eternal years of God are hers. But error wounded writhes in pain And dies among her worshippers.

A life built on truth would make us very secure and give us great pride in our building.

As pillar number three, we might support our life's house with industry. What a thrilling opportunity it is to be able to work. The primary consideration of our lives even on judgment day will be given to our works. Next to my belief in God, I believe in labor. During the Savior's ministry he repeatedly admonished his followers to be doers of his word. Just as one of the seven deadly sins is sloth, so one of the seven cardinal virtues is industry. Happy is he who makes this godly trait an integral part of his life's building!

As pillar number four we might select a powerful faith. Faith is the chief support of every accomplishment. It is the moving cause of all action. We are told that all things are possible to him that believeth.

As pillar number five, we might select freedom. We fought the war in heaven to preserve this priceless pillar of agency. The slave never rises substantially because he does things under the lash, but we may do things because of sheer love and enthusiasm. Emerson said, "Of what avail is plow or sail, or land or life, if freedom fail?" We should, however, keep in mind that freedom is not free. It must be deserved and won and continuously maintained. It is not a gift; it is an accomplishment. It is not bestowed; it is a hard-won technique. It does not abide; it must be maintained.

For pillar number six, what could make wisdom's house more attractive than those godly character qualities with which we were endowed when it was said, "And God created man in his own image." But even these godly traits were given us originally only as possibilities to be developed. Every man has two creators—God and himself. Certainly the creation of man is not something that was finished in the Garden of Eden. It is still going on. We ourselves are creators, and we may develop godly qualities to the limit.

As our seventh pillar, we must have a program, a godly way of life. We must have a connection with the source of all intelligence and power. We must be in tune with the infinite. Thomas Carlyle once said that a man's religion is the most important thing about him; that is what he thinks about and believes in and stands for and works at and lives by. How thrilling it is if we make up our minds we will live by every word that proceeds forth from the mouth of God. As the psalmist reminds us, "Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it. . . ." (Ps. 127:1.)

If we have all seven pillars, we have a completeness. However, if we leave any one of them out, we are as sounding brass and tinkling symbol. A godly way of life requires obedience to the Creator. With godly qualities of character fully developed, we may become even as God is.

We remember the story by Dr. Goodell about a house that was built upon the traits of dishonesty and irresponsibility. This account tells of a wealthy man in whose home lived a young woman to whom the entire family was devoted. She was courted and finally married by a young building contractor. Then the wealthy man engaged the contractor to build a house for him. He had a renowned architect draw the plans. Then, laying the plans before the builder, he said he wanted him to construct the finest house of which he was capable; money was no object. Everything must be of the highest quality.

However, the builder had a little dishonesty in his heart. Thinking to make an extra profit, he built a cheap foundation. He used a poor grade of lumber where he thought it would not be noticed. He adulterated the paint and slurred over the plastering. He used imitation materials for the roofing.

When the young man handed over the keys of the finished building to his wealthy benefactor, he was told that this house was his wedding present. Not long after the young couple moved in, the inferior foundation began to crack, and the rains seeped through the roof and discolored the walls. Throughout the rest of their lives, the builder and his family were continually reminded of his dishonesty. What a different house he would have built had he known that he was going to spend the rest of his life in it!

Each of us is presently building the house in which we are going to spend eternity. While we are thinking about the immortality of the body, we should also give a little thought to the immortality of the soul. If we are forced to spend eternity thinking about our own misspent lives, then we may understand a little more clearly what Paul meant when he said, ". . . let every man heed how he buildeth. . . ." Edwin Markham gives voice to this thought in these words:

We are all blind until we see That in the human plan, Nothing is worth the building That does not build the man. Why build these cities glorious If man unbuilded goes? In vain we build the world Unless the builder also grows.

The Creation of Man

When God created the body of man out of the dust of the ground, the spirit that he placed in him to guide and direct and animate the body was one that already had a long antemortal experience behind it. Our intelligent spirits had long looked forward to the creation of this earth and to being added upon with the benefits of mortality. Looking forward to our second estate, God said to those who were associated with him in the ruling councils of heaven, "We will go down, for there is space there, and we will take of these materials, and we will make an earth whereon these may dwell; And we will prove them herewith to see if they will not do all things whatsoever the Lord their God shall command them. And they who keep their first estate shall be added upon; . . . and they who keep their second estate shall have glory added upon their heads for ever and ever." (Abr. 3:24-26.)

In giving the first and primary law of life, God said to man, ". . . thou mayest choose for thyself." (Moses 3:17.) Our first and probably our most important law of life is free agency. We came here under the promise of free agency.

God left man himself unfinished and provided that man might be an important part in determining what he himself should become. What we become is up to us and will depend largely upon what we ourselves do about it.

Abraham Lincoln once turned down a postmaster because he didn't like his looks. The sponsoring senator said, "But you can't hold that poor man responsible for his face." President Lincoln said, "Every man is responsible for his face." And everyone is responsible for every other part of himself. What we are on the inside shapes our appearance on the outside, and what we are on the outside gets into our insides. Suppose you look at somebody in the moment of rage. His face becomes distorted as though he were insane. After the rage is passed, the face tends to go back to its natural position; yet, the return trip is never quite complete. When you overbend a piece of steel or overstretch an elastic, it never goes completely back to its original position.

We have all seen plain people who have become beautiful by the working of a radiant spirit. A godly spirit will make the plainest body beautiful. Great mental and spiritual traits transform our body into their likeness. Emerson once said that beauty is the mark that God sets on virtue. By what we do, we not only create our outward beauty of expression, but also virtues that shine out of the depths of our souls.

The apostle Paul indicated what the end result of our pattern of activities would be when he told the Corinthians that in the resurrection of the dead there were three primary kingdoms or glories or classifications of people. The highest is called the celestial, which Paul likened in its glory to the brightness of the sun. The second is the terrestrial, which he compared to the light of the moon. The third is the telestial, which he likened to the twinkle of a tiny star. Then Paul said: ". . . for one star differeth from another star in glory. So also is the resurrection of the dead." (1 Cor. 15:41-42.)

Some time ago in western Canada, I thought I discovered what it would be like to ride in a telestial automobile. A missionary took me to one of my appointments in an automobile he had purchased two years previously for sixty dollars. Before we had gone very far, I noticed that smoke was coming out of both the front and the rear of this machine, and I heard noises that I had never before identified with an automobile. When we arrived at our destination, I was very pleased that the experience had been concluded satisfactorily. It then occurred to me that it would not be too inconvenient if, for the rest of my life, every time I used an automobile it was the telestial variety. But I would not like to spend an eternal life with a telestial body or a telestial mind or a telestial personality, especially when God has entrusted me to create whatever I will out of my own life.

The apostle Paul wrote to the Hebrews and explained to them how through their righteousness they might obtain a better resurrection. And what a great idea that is! In this life we may build for ourselves a stronger body, a more effective mind, a more sparkling personality. But our creative powers do not stop there. We may raise ourselves far above the telestial or the terrestrial and become celestial beings. This is a difficult idea almost totally impossible to comprehend. As the apostle Paul said to the Corinthians, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (1 Cor. 2:9.) We can imagine beauty, comfort, and success worth billions of dollars, but we cannot even conceive of the most ordinary of God's blessings to us.

President David O. McKay once said that the purpose of the gospel is to change people, to make bad men good and good men better. Evil activities reverse these processes and may make good men bad and bad men worse. But one thing is certain, and that is that every day we are being modified to our advantage or our condemnation, and those important forces going in both directions are fashioning us in their own image according to which one we give ourselves to. The scriptures looked forward to our possible destiny and said, "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High." (Ps. 82:6.) The greatest work that any of us will ever do will be that of creating our own selves, and we will determine in all details the kind of people that we will become. May God bless us that because of our workmanship our eternal lives will be filled with beauty, success, happiness, and eternal glory.

What Do You Want to Be When You Grow Up?

Since time began, one of the most common questions asked of children is, "What do you want to be when you grow up?" We are accustomed to making a lot of mistakes when we are young. Childhood is a time to have fun while we prepare ourselves for the future. During childhood, many people try to help us solve our problems because in many ways we live below the level of responsibility. Even after we become of legal age, we sometimes fail to display many of the earmarks of wisdom or maturity. The rate of our maturity may depend partially upon how we answer this question, "What do you want to be when you grow up?" And there are some related questions we might also ask: What do you want to know? How do you want to feel? Whom do you want to associate with? What do you want to do?

In spite of the opportunities and advantages of our day, it is interesting that many people never actually grow up. Some reach an educational, spiritual, or social level early in life from which they never seem to advance substantially. Frequently people are no wiser at thirty than they were at twenty. They are not any happier at forty than they were at thirty. Sometimes one's character is no better at fifty than it was at forty. And many are frequently no more godly at seventy than they were at sixty.

We remember James M. Barrie's little character named Peter Pan. When Peter Pan was young he heard his parents discussing what they wanted him to do when he grew up, and because he didn't want to do these things, he decided not to grow up at all. Instead he ran away from home to live with the fairies in Never-Never Land. As a consequence, he always remained a child. However, stagnation and retardation are not the most desirable states to be fostered in anyone's life. In God's great plan of evolution it was projected that we should pass from one state of accomplishment to another and from one estate to another until we arrived at our fullest development and our greatest glory where we have the fullest enjoyment of the finest faculties and the most godly abilities.

The apostle Paul spoke of this growing-up process when he said: "When I was a child, I spake as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put away childish things." (1 Cor. 13:11.) We must not cling too long to our childishness or by such retarding activities that we become permanent victims of that dread disease known as arrested development.

Ethel Barrymore, the actress, was once criticizing actor Douglas Fairbanks, Jr., and someone said to her, "But Ethel, he is so young." Miss Barrymore replied, "Yes, but he has been so young so long."

Solomon devised a kind of timetable for the important journey toward maturity when he said, "To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven: A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted." (Eccl. 3:1-2.) Then he went on to delineate a long list of things that should be done on a regular, predetermined schedule.

We might add something to Solomon's list and say, "There is a time to develop character qualities and a time to build faith. There is a time to mature a strong personal self-control in order to improve all of our life's situations. Early in life is a time to throw away bad temper and childish irresponsibilities so that we can practice those great virtues of human maturity at their best."

God called Abraham the "father of the faithful," and he promised to make of Abraham's posterity the greatest nation on the earth. After they were released from their Egyptian bondage, God met the Israelites before Mount Sinai and gave them the Ten Commandments to help them mature spiritually. But like Peter Pan, there were many of these things that they did not want to do. When we grow up we must exchange our ignorance for understanding.

To hand the control of our lives over to bad temper, irresponsibility, lying, cheating, profanity, rebellion, coveting, and killing will continue to keep us retarded. All sinners are trying to solve their problems by immature means. Child marriages are never successful if there is insufficient maturity to maintain happiness at a high level. Before anyone takes upon himself the responsibility of marriage and parenthood, he ought to make sure that he has a good supply of religious, financial, emotional, and personality maturity. With maturity one is no longer free to indulge his own childish whims and fancies.

Recently I talked with a mother of seven children who had some serious marital problems. She had become bored with her husband, and instead of correcting the problems in an adult way, she became infatuated with another man. Instead of being guided by what was right, she was impelled by her unrighteous appetites to meet clandestinely the object of her new interest. The result was moral transgressions serious enough to break up two families, which will undoubtedly have very serious consequences in the lives of many people. Her wonderful children have been humiliated and embarrassed by the childish actions of their mother, who is performing on a much lower standard of maturity than are the children themselves.

Some people can be faithful only when no temptation is present. They can practice maturity only by fits and starts, whereas Jesus was speaking of a more grown-up person when he said, ". . . he that endureth to the end shall be saved." (Matt. 10:22.) Elbert Hubbard also mentioned this character quality when he said, "The secret of success is constancy of purpose." Disraeli said, "Genius is the power to make continuous effort."

I know of a man who is continually going stale in his occupation. He cannot maintain his interest in his work. He starts a new job with his enthusiasm at the top of the thermometer, but as soon as he discovers that the job has a few problems to work out and some disadvantages to endure, his enthusiasm gradually declines until his job has lost most of its attraction and challenge. His ambition cannot be maintained in the presence of problems, and so he abandons each job in turn and starts over, only to repeat the failure cycle in some other place.

Now we might ask ourselves, What about maturity and eternal life? Of course, we are aware that mortality is not the end of existence. Neither is this the place where our finest and most glorious objectives are finally realized. Someone pointed out our problem when he said, "Seeing we are here but for a day's abode, we must look elsewhere for an eternal resting place where eternity is the measure, felicity the state, angels the company, the Lamb is the Light, and God is the portion and inheritance."

It has been said that our pre-earth existence is the childhood of our immortality and that this life is the time when we grow up. In the interest of our own eternal maturity, we might again ask ourselves, What do we want to be when we grow up? With whom will we want to be associated? What relationship will we have to have with God?

The scriptures indicate that if they follow the saving laws of righteousness, the offspring of God may become even as their eternal parents. What a great disappointment it will sometime be for those who have followed Satan to discover that their progress has been eternally stopped and that all of the good has been smothered out of their lives! And what a great disappointment it will be for us if someday we find that we have arrived at a place where we did not want to go, and that we have become what we did not want to be! Jesus said, "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) And we can be perfect if we will.

The Family

By nature God designed human beings to be gregarious, and they always do better when they live and work harmoniously together in governments, businesses, social groups, the church, and the family. In our world no one lives successfully unto himself alone.

The family was designed as the chief source of our education, our love, our security, our prosperity, and our happiness. In the very beginning, God said, "It is not good for man to be alone," and he might have said, "It is not good for women to be alone, and it is not good for children to be alone."

The scriptures tell of the elaborate creation that took place when God brought into being this productive, beautiful earth to serve as our home. The crowning scene took place on the sixth day when God placed man upon the earth.

Recently someone was criticizing the scriptures, saying that the book of Genesis gives two conflicting accounts of creation. Many people are confused because they do not understand that the account in the first chapter of Genesis describes our spiritual or pre-earth creation. This account is as follows:

"And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth.

"So God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them.

"And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth." (Gen. 1:26-28.)

While this creation of men, women, and all other things took place in heaven, it looked forward to the great drama of our mortal existence. This account of the creation of our spirits is reviewed and explained in the second chapter when the Lord says:

"These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the Lord God made the earth and the heavens,

"And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground.

"And there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.

"And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul." (Gen. 2:4-7.)

The Lord makes this scripture clearer as it is recorded in some ancient writing of Moses not found in the Bible:

"And every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the field before it grew. For I, the Lord God, created all things, of which I have spoken, spiritually, before they were naturally upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had not caused it to rain upon the face of the earth. For I, the Lord God, had created all the children of men; and not yet a man to till the ground; for in heaven created I them; and there was not yet flesh upon the earth, neither in the water, neither in the air." (Moses 3:5.)

The record gives an interesting account of the creation of Eve as follows:

"And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh instead thereof:

"And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.

"And Adam said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man." (Gen. 2:21-23.)

The writer of Proverbs says: "Whoso findeth a wife findeth a good thing, and obtaineth favor with the Lord." (Prov. 18:22.) Whoso findeth a good husband also findeth a good thing, and whoso findeth some good children findeth some good things. Marriage was intended to be the happiest, healthiest, and most desirable state in all of human existence. God created male and female in the spirit world, and marriage was ordained in heaven before the earth was created. God performed the first marriage before death had entered the world. About marriage, he himself said, "For this cause shall man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave unto his wife. . . . Wherefore they shall be no more twain, but one flesh. What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder." (Matt. 19:4-6.) Thus God established the foundations for the family.

Parents are the source of life, and the family is the sponsoring agency for most of our education, our personal development, our social welfare, our love, our happiness, our character formation, and our religious activities.

Even our eternal welfare is based largely on the happiness, love, mutual motivation, and righteousness that are developed in our homes. In no other situation as in marriage has God provided for such joint effort and joint accomplishment. No matter how intelligent or creative one parent may be, he cannot create life by himself, and neither can be establish the solid foundations of character and love by his single effort.

In her sphere the mother has the greatest possible importance. She is the homemaker. She has the strengths of love, faith, and kindness in which she excels. And in many phases of family life she is expected to outperform her husband. Then the family pool their good qualities in a philosophy of all for one and one for all.

The Parent Sins

One of the most common and one of the least understood of all of our activities is that of parenthood. The first requirement of every person is that he must have parents, a father and a mother, and in obedience to the command to multiply and replenish the earth, we have filled the world with offspring.

There are several meanings of the words father and mother. George Washington was called the father of his country. Gutenberg was the father of printing. The Mississippi River is called the father of waters. Satan was called the father of lies. It has been said that our wishes are the fathers of our thoughts. Our ambitions and our faith are the fathers of our accomplishments.

We speak of the mother church, the mother country, mother earth, the mother spirit, the mother tongue. We speak of the state of Virginia as the mother of presidents because it was the birthplace of eight U.S. presidents—Washington, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe, Harrison, Tyler, Taylor, and Wilson.

Some of the characteristics of all offspring is that they are small and weak when they are born and that the family identities are not always apparent until some later date. Certainly no person or animal ever began life fully grown with the appearance or the power of the parent fully developed. George Washington and Benedict Arnold were both born small and powerless. At first neither of them could walk or talk, and neither of them could walk or talk, and neither of them showed any conclusive evidence of what his final destiny might be. At one time both were great generals, but Washington became the father of his country and Benedict Arnold became its betrayer. While the mothers of Judas Iscariot and Abraham Lincoln were caring for their infant sons, they had no positive idea of how important either of them would become or how far their lives would grow apart.

Just as human beings can be parents, so too are virtues as well as vices capable of parenthood. Bad attitudes and evil deeds may lead to sorrow, loneliness, and misery. As human beings we ought to be mindful of the quality of those parent virtues as well as the parent sins that use us as a matrix for their posterity.

The multiplication of sins in recent years has filled the land with trouble—and they are still breeding and multiplying like compound interest. Suppose we make a list of some of the most dangerous of those deadly parent sins. What would they be? A sampling of them might include such sins as the following:

We reject God when we fail to live his commandments, and we reject all good in about that same way. Recently I talked with a couple who had been ideally happy. They had both been good church workers. They were doing well financially and were well mated physically and in personality. Then he let one of these fast-multiplying parent sins get into his life. He began to break that great command of God which says, "Thou shalt love thy wife with all thy heart, and shalt cleave unto her and none else." (D&C 42:22.) He began cleaving to someone else, and when we start compromising with evil, many unpleasant events begin to take place. As he began losing interest in his wife, instead of laying the blame on his infidelity where it belonged, he decided that the reason she had gone down in his affections was because of what she had done. Then he began rationalizing about what a hard life the other woman had had and how she had been mistreated by her former husband, so in order to make up to her for all her troubles, he began displeasing God by his sins and breaking his own wife's heart. He let one problem give birth to a dozen more serious problems.

One man rejected his wife because in having two children she had allowed her weight to go from 106 to 121 pounds. Another rejected his wife because she had muscular dystrophy and he said, "I don't want to be married to a cripple." Those who take one particular marriage vow promise to be true and faithful "for better or for worse, for richer or for poorer, in sickness and in health, until death do us part." Actually, every problem should bring those who love each other closer together rather than allowing the demon of rejection to push them farther apart.

All sins are destructive to our best interests, but their most dangerous characteristic is that they come linked together in chains and family groups. When we become friendly and invite one evil into our lives, it takes it upon itself to invite all its relatives and associates in. When we destroy one sin, we destroy a multitude that is just waiting to be born. Everyone carries the seeds of many physical diseases in his body, but they do very little damage as long as they are kept inactive. As Goethe said, "I have in me the germ of every crime." But we must not let them start multiplying in us. May the Lord help us to free ourselves from these parent sins and keep our spirits healthy.

Interest

In our language we have an interesting word called interest. In one meaning, it represents a share of ownership. The dictionary gives the example of a man who had a one-third interest in a bakery. That meant that he had a one-third right to all of the advantages and profits that came from this business. But this ownership also obligates him to assume one-third of the responsibilities and duties necessary for the bakery's success. We may obtain or lose ownership interests in the greatest things, including happiness and heaven itself. Of one unfortunate soul the Lord said, ". . . he perisheth forever, and hath no interest in the kingdom of God." (Mosiah 4:18.) One of the big questions that will be asked about us when our lives have been finished is, What do our interests consist of?

Interest also means the price or rate paid by a borrower for the use of that which he borrows. When one borrows money he pays a percentage of the principal as rent or interest. Compound interest is when the interest is added to the principal at regular intervals so that we not only get interest on the principal, but also on the interest. Under this program, if we invested $100 at 7 percent interest compounded quarterly, the compound interest would amount to $123,462 in 100 years. Our principal would have been increased over 1200 times.

These sums invested at compound interest work day and night, Sundays and holidays, winter and summer, in all kinds of weather. Compound interest never rests, never takes a vacation, never stops working. It makes a great difference to us whether this power is working for us or against us. Some people never enjoy more than a fraction of the value of their toil because so much of what they earn is eaten up in interest. On the other hand, if interest is working for us, our economic welfare is multiplied. Generally there are two ways to make money. One is by personal labor and the other is to have our money work for us.

I know a man who has had a very interesting life. He has been successful in his business and been active in serving others and trying to make them happy. He has had some beautiful flower gardens and has given the flowers away. He has also helped many people go on missions and has sent others through college. As he has gotten older he has had to cut down on the amount of personal work he does. In order to compensate for this loss in his personal strength and the good that he can do, he has set up a large financial trust made up of the money he has accumulated during his productive years to give him a kind of economic immortality beyond the time of his own death. Through the magic of interest his power to help other people may be continued forever. He has now accumulated enough money to send out after his death more missionaries and to provide more college educations and more flowers to brighten the lives of people than while he was alive. Many of the people he has counseled and helped during his lifetime have already passed away, but he has some wonderful grandchildren and their associates that he would also like to help, and so he has arranged to set up a counseling service for that purpose. The counselors will die and be replaced, but his interest income will guarantee that the service itself will go on.

The word interest also indicates a mental state in which we are concerned about something. This is the state in which we are favorably aroused toward some special consideration, when our minds become heated and inflamed with enthusiasm. One great religious leader once said that he was not interested in possessing a religion; he was interested in a religion that would possess him. We may also get so interested in our occupations and our families and our good deeds that, by possessing us, they give us greater power for accomplishment. Victor Hugo once said that there was nothing as powerful as an idea whose time had come. An idea's time always comes as soon as we can harness it and set it to work. An idea's time also arrives when it inspires us and gives a finer incentive for righteous accomplishment.

This kind of driving interest in ideas is more productive than the compound interest paid by financial investments. This kind of interest fosters all of the other kinds. If we have righteous zeal, we can acquire a capital interest in more important things than a bakery. A love of great literature gives us a capital interest in our own culture and refinement. Passion for the holy scriptures gives us a capital investment in the celestial kingdom. The scriptures promise that if we have a sufficient interest in righteousness, we may become celestial beings with a controlling interest in happiness, beauty, love, and all of the other good things represented by heaven itself. How tremendously important is our responsibility to maintain our interest at a high level in the right things! When any wholehearted interest is centered in those hopes or benefits that we desire more ardently for our own lives, miracles can be accomplished.

When Jesus said that we should love God and our neighbors and ourselves and our work, he was saying that we should be intensely interested in them. The scripture says that God is love, and love is a special interest in something that has been fully matured.

The very best way to master any problem is to get interested in it. I know a man who changed his occupation from one he loved but which had limited possibilities to one he disliked but which had unlimited possibilities. This man solved the problem by centering his interest in a job that was productive. He magnified all of its good points and minimized all of its disadvantages. He developed a compelling interest in it. He learned firsthand that if you would like to be successful in something, get intensely interested in it.

Another man has an almost consuming interest in the great literature. In order to capture the exact shade of meaning with all the power that the author intended, he memorizes a large part of it. As he gets older his ability to memorize increases, not that his mind becomes more retentive, but his interest becomes greater.

Recently a middle-aged man announced that he wanted his name taken off the rolls of the Church. In his early life, he had never been very interested in identifying with those great philosophies of life preached by the Master. Church leaders worked with him until a feeble interest had been generated, and for a few years as his interest was pushed by others, he held some responsibilities. But because of his tendency toward evil, his religious interest became too weak to support itself. He deserted his wife and family and stopped going to church. Then he developed bitterness toward the thing he was unrighteously opposing. Because he was violating many of the commandments, he began to fight everything that the Church represented. Naturally, he felt relieved if he could get out of his mind all his ideas of obligations of good so that his conscience would stop bothering him; and he felt that he could do evil to his heart's content if his name was not on the Church records. Therefore, he was excommunicated for apostasy. His evil interests had become strong by exercise.

An important failure factor is called "conflict of interest." We usually screen political candidates very carefully for any interest they have that would tend to destroy the purpose they were elected to serve. Conflicting interests cannot co-exist without damaging each other. They fight each other to a standstill, and they tend to destroy progress on both sides. In life itself a strong enough conflict of interest can make it impossible for us to identify with our finest purposes. Because the motivating powers are lost, success becomes more or less impossible. However, we still allow for too many conflicts of interest to develop in our work and in life itself. Sin can keep us from prayer, and prayer can keep us from sin. A guilty conscience destroys enthusiasm. As a result of his conflict of interest the unprofitable servant said, "I was afraid, and went and hid [my] talent in the ground." (See Matt. 25:25.)

And so we might do well to get a little better acquainted with this excellent and useful word, interest. Jesus said that we should lay up treasures in heaven. We can also develop some great treasures in ourselves, such as courage, ambition, enthusiasm, wisdom, and the attitudes and skills of righteousness, which will grow by compound interest to become a mountain of treasure.

Guaranteed Success

Success might be described as two things: (1) the ability to accept or set for ourselves the proper goals and objectives; (2) the power to bring them about. Someone has said that the first step toward any accomplishment is to believe in it. Our biggest problem is that so many people don't believe in success.

The opposite of success is failure, and while most people give lip service to success, they never seem to get around to making it a part of their own program. We have many ways that we use to actually talk ourselves out of success. We remember Aesop's fable of the fox and the grapes. When the fox failed in his first jump he sealed his failure with an alibi when he said, "The grapes were sour anyway."

Henry Ward Beecher once said that religion had not been tried and found wanting—it had been found hard and not tried. We hear until we are weary about all of the temptations of our day and how difficult it is for us to live our religion. This is merely an excuse, for no temptation is a temptation at all unless we are entertaining it. Every temptation without implies a desire within. Someone has said that we should never say how much the devil tempts, but only how strongly we are inclined. God never forces anyone to do right, and Satan has no power to force us to do wrong.

Jesus said: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matt. 5:48.) Another scripture says that God "cannot look upon sin with the least degree of allowance." (D&C 1:31.)

The apostle John says that sin is the transgression of law. That is also a good definition of failure. There are laws of gravity, laws of electricity, and laws of success that never fail unless we transgress them. If we release our hold on a rock, it will fall to the ground; so will a character quality and a standard of values. To reach any success, we need to follow the law. If one wants to be a good cook, he must follow the recipe. If he wants to be a good dressmaker, he must follow the pattern. If he wants to become a good pharmacist, he must follow the prescription. Someone has said that all science is a collection of success formulas.

A famous man was once being interviewed about his success. He said that he had always been successful, even when he was a small boy. He told his questioners that when he and his friends used to hunt birds' eggs, he could always find more eggs than any of the other boys. When they asked for an explanation, he said that he thought it was because he always looked in more bushes. This boy learned one of the laws of success very early in life.

People who become losers are those who do their jobs in the wrong way. Instead of always following the laws of success they merely say, "I'll try it out," or "I'll see how I like it," or "I'll do the best I can." Some try out marriage and attempt to find a life's work that is agreeable to them whether they follow the law or not. Success in marriage isn't just the big thing. It is the only thing. Marriages fail because someone did something wrong. The greatest marriage partners are those who will not allow the marriage to fail.

If we want to be leaders and guarantee the success of others, we need to develop the good judgment, the generosity, the industry, the spirituality, and the love that go with success. Think of our assignment as parents. What a thrilling experience it is for anyone to be born of goodly parents. With the right kind of parents, it is pretty hard to fail.

We study medicine to learn how to keep ourselves well physically. We study psychology, psychiatry, and other subjects to learn how to keep ourselves well mentally. Agriculture is how we feed ourselves. Sociology is how we live together agreeably. Law is how to keep our lives orderly. Business is how we successfully deal with each other. And we have the gospel and its teachings to learn how to keep ourselves well spiritually.

Religion is how we save our souls and bring about our eternal exaltation. In religion or in life, success is just not the big thing—it is the only thing. The one business of life is to succeed. I am sure God did not go to all the trouble of creating this beautiful, wonderful earth without having some wonderful destiny in mind. He did not create us in his own image and endow us with potentially magnificent minds and personalities and surround us with wonders and opportunities, and then expect us to waste our lives in failure. Yet every day many thousands of people fail in the main purposes of their lives.

The Son of God came to earth and established his church among us with the thought in mind that everyone should belong to it. He appointed leaders and instructed them to live so as to be worthy to have his Spirit. He revealed the doctrines of eternal salvation. Then he gave his leaders the authority as well as the command to lead. Good leaders set good examples. They demonstrate a way of life that has been approved by God himself.

On the other hand, how miserable it is to think of leaders who don't lead; of home teachers who don't teach; of the Lord's watchmen who don't watch. All around us there are false friends who consciously or subconsciously are teaching us to depart from morality, religion, and success.

The greatest of our true friends is God, our Eternal Heavenly Father. In the gospel principles he has outlined those things that we must do. If we obey his laws, we may become as he is. God is the only absolutely safe guide in the universe, and we are the ones to put his wisdom in force. If we know him, believe in him, trust him, and obey him, our success is guaranteed. May God bless us to join with him in guaranteeing our eternal success.

The Corporation

One of the great inventions of our time is the corporation. There are many important things in our world that need to be done, and often there is no one person or group of people who are strong enough, wise enough, or who live long enough to do these things by themselves. There are many workers who need to be trained in skills necessary to enable them to carry forward their part of the work of the world. All of these and many other needs have given rise to the formation of corporations.

However, in the minds of some people there is an actual stigma that attaches to any success, and often criticism is directed toward what we call big business. Yet big business and big science and big government provide the means for us to produce our food, become educated, and raise our standard of living.

A corporation comes into being when a number of people get together and prepare to act as a unit under special rules with some particular purpose in mind. The corporation has its own organization, and the rules regulating its activities must comply with the laws of the land. The corporation is a means of helping us reach our objectives more quickly, effectively, and harmoniously.

A corporation has many abilities that a person or small group of people does not have. It can raise large sums of money to help it accomplish its goals. Through the selling of stock, thousands of others may join with the corporation to assume the risks and share in any profits that may be generated.

Each of us benefits from the activities of large corporations. For example, I have a great experience that comes from my contract with a newspaper corporation, where for a few pennies a newspaper is laid on my front step every day. This is a bargain, because it would be impossible for me as an individual to gather the news throughout the world, write the editorials, collect the accounts of the social happenings, prepare the sports page, get the stock market reports, and draw the comics. In addition, I would have to go to the expense of manufacturing and running the printing presses, building the buildings, growing the paper pulp, and manufacturing the paper. But because of the cooperation of other subscribers, I can have a nicely printed paper delivered to me at a regular time each day for little cost.

Similarly I have at my beck and call the services of hundreds of other corporations. As a customer of an automobile firm, I have the services of scientists studying and working continually to give me the most effective, the nicest-looking automobile fully equipped with radio, temperature controls, lights, power, and speed for my pleasure and profit. Other corporations are similarly working to provide the fuel for my auto.

The airlines have developed other kinds of special equipment for my benefit. They have trained men and women to be pilots, navigators, and stewardesses who are always ready day or night to take me any place on the surface of the earth that I want to go, and they will get me there in the shortest possible time. Many other corporations have been organized to take care of every conceivable need I may have, and they do it in a way that I could not possibly provide for myself at any cost.

Corporations have many other advantages over individuals. They never get sick, and they never die. If one of their scientists or servicemen becomes unable to function effectively, he is replaced by someone else who has already been trained to carry on in my interests.

As a customer I have many safeguards, for corporations are supervised and regulated by appropriate branches of the government. All of them must be competitive with other corporations. If one falls down in its function, it may lose its business to a competitor and the defaulting company may run the risk of going broke. One of the greatest advantages is that the government is merely the referee and not the star performer.

There are some other interesting corporations that are called eleemosynary institutions. These are corporations organized primarily to dispense charity or give away money. Many successful companies and wealthy individuals use their money to establish foundations, the purpose of which is to maintain libraries, operate hospitals, finance colleges, and personally help individuals under certain conditions. The government itself is engaged in an eleemosynary function. It collects taxes from those who are able to pay them and uses the money to reform criminals and give medical care to those who are ill. It also fights delinquency and provides social services for those in need. An immense total of this money goes for direct relief.

When I moved into the city where I now live, the streets were all paved and paid for. The sewer systems had been put in. The power lines had been installed. The stores, churches, and government buildings were in full operation and fully paid for. I may enjoy all of these benefits that have been provided by those who have already passed from this stage of existence.

Of the ten U.S. corporations having the most assets, four are life insurance companies. The greatest values in the world are life values. Because life is very uncertain, any individual person may not live long enough to carry out his ambitions. However, for a set monthly payment, he may buy an insurance policy. Then if his own life is cut short in time, the life insurance company will provide the money to educate his children, pay off the mortgages, give his wife an income to the end of her days, and do other things he might have done had he lived long enough.

Someone has said that a good citizen is one who puts more back into life than he takes out. He leaves the world better than he finds it. When people produce more than they consume, they leave a surplus that continues to provide eternally such things as libraries, universities, and other benefits that can be had for money. It is a very common practice for corporations and individuals to set up special funds for such purposes.

In similar manner one may provide that when his body is consigned to the grave and his spirit goes back to God who gave it, the wealth that he has set aside may continue to produce an income for carrying on the work of the world and the work of the Lord as though he were actually doing it himself. It is another application of that great passage that says, "Though he were dead, yet shall he live." The most productive of all corporations is the religious corporation. The charter of the church is to teach those life-saving principles of the gospel and minister in all of the necessary ordinances of salvation. It is the job of the church to collect tithing, build churches, erect temples, and send out missionaries. The church's job is to develop faith and cause people to repent of their sins, be baptized, and have hands laid upon them for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Unlike some of the other great corporations, the work of the church is largely done by those who are called into service without remuneration.

In the greatest sermon ever preached, Jesus Christ said that we should lay up for ourselves treasures in heaven. Someone has said about the treasures of the earth that you can't take them with you. That may not be entirely accurate. The thing that we spend more time doing than anything else is in our employment; and those treasures of the earth that may come as a consequence may be translated into character, temple work, missionary work, and all sorts of other things that can be taken with us. In addition, that accumulation which is left behind may continue forever to store up additional treasures in heaven. Even after our death we may continue to assist God to bring to pass the immortality and eternal life of man.

Each one of us has a kind of corporation soul in his own life, and may God help us to operate it with constant wisdom.

Saltwater Remedies

Some time ago I heard a prominent educator declare that the reason we don't get better solutions for our problems is that we try to cure our difficulties by indulging in too many of the wrong kinds of solutions. This educator referred to these solutions as "saltwater remedies." For example, if your problem was that you had an extreme thirst and someone offered you a sparkling glass of saltwater, your thirst would only be made greater. This was the educator's idea of a saltwater remedy.

We should not try to cure our problems with remedies that don't remedy, but only make our situation worse. Salt has a chemical property that attracts and holds water, and if you take in more salt, it attracts the moisture that you already have in your system and prevents it from doing its assigned job. In other words, additional salt causes you to have greater thirst rather than relieves that which you already have.

We remember Samuel Coleridge's story of the ancient mariner whose ship was becalmed on an ocean. Because no rains fell, the sailors had no fresh water. The ancient mariner said, "Water, water, everywhere, nor any drop to drink." Finally, one by one, his sailors died of thirst.

Salt is a common substance in nature, and in small quantities we use it to season our food. It is used as a preservative. It has an ability to change temperatures. We use it to melt snow on our streets in winter. We sometimes use it as a gargle to kill disease. But one of its properties is certainly not that of quenching thirst.

The Dead Sea is 26 percent salt, and at the southern end of the sea is a mountain of salt measuring seven miles long and several hundred feet high. The Great Salt Lake also has a high concentration of salt, and volumes of salt deposits many feet thick make up the floor of what used to be the old Lake Bonneville.

We sometimes have in our lives troubles that may be compared to these vast deposits of salt, and one of our biggest difficulties arises because so frequently we try to cure these problems by applying saltwater remedies. For example, I know a man who has always seemed to be a little short on cash, and in trying to solve this problem, he has attempted to get the additional money he needs by doing some forging. He has just been released after serving four and a half years in the state penitentiary. In order to provide himself with an additional $200, he lost a good job with a very promising future. He lost four and a half years of pay and a good reputation. This man's attempt to solve his financial problems not only solved none of his problems, but created many new ones.

Some time ago a man was telling me of his drinking problem. He had undergone a long struggle to cure himself of his thirst for liquor. With the help of friends and Alcoholics Anonymous he thought he had gotten the poison completely out of his system, and then on one occasion he joined a group of friends engaged in some social drinking. Again he felt the thirst for a drink, and he thought that just one little friendly drink wouldn't hurt him. He took the saltwater remedy of drinking liquor, and now he is back into more trouble than he was to begin with.

Recently a young woman came to talk about some of her problems. By nature she was a loving, warm-hearted person who liked gaiety and company. But in trying to solve some of her problems she got mixed up with the wrong kind of people, and through their influence she got a lot of evil into her life. She was trying to cure her need for company by saltwater methods. She discovered to her sorrow that improper relations with immoral friends did not satisfy her desire for the feeling of security and companionship, but instead made her social and moral problems much worse. Now she is hooked on some bad habits and a bad reputation that make her goals in life more difficult than they were before.

Someone has said, "You can lead a horse to water but you cannot make him drink." However, there are ways to make the horse thirsty and then he will drink by himself. All you need to do is to put a little salt in his oats or on his hay and you will be unable to keep him away from the water. And if he drinks pure, clear water he can solve his problem. But if you also put a lot of salt in the watering trough, the horse may soon be dead of thirst. A similar situation applies to us. Satan has no power to force us to do wrong, but he can still accomplish his purpose when he makes the salt of evil easily available to us, and then we tend to destroy ourselves by his poisonous remedies.

We hear till we are weary about the temptations of our day. Temptations beset us on every hand. They are in the movies and the magazines. It sometimes seems that almost everything we see or hear or read has some temptation in it drawing us downward. However, the problem is not in the temptation, but in our attitude toward it. No temptation is a temptation at all unless we are entertaining it. We blame Satan for a lot of our problems where we should pile the blame on our own unwise attempts to solve our problems by improper means. It is by overcoming problems that we develop ourselves.

Someone has said: "We pray for strength and God gives us difficulties to overcome. We ask for wisdom and God sends us problems, the solution of which develops wisdom. We pray for ability and God gives us a brain and brawn with which to work."

If we want to develop strong muscles, we get a heavy job to do. God always fits the back to the burden, and we can solve almost any problem when we have good judgment, right decisions, industry, and high standards of righteousness. Someone once said to President Abraham Lincoln that his eyes looked tired and they thought he should rest. President Lincoln said, "It is my heart that is tired, and in order to rest my heart, I have to go on at an accelerated pace." If you have a son who is tired of school, the best way to cure his problem is not for him to quit school to rest up. That is a saltwater remedy. The way to solve his problem is for him to work twice as hard at his studies and get ahead in his work. No one ever gets bored while he is winning. Usually we do not get tired while we are ahead. The pace that kills is the crawl. We can sleep better at night if we work harder during the daytime. As we keep ourselves physically healthy with pure water, good food, and plenty of exercise, so we keep ourselves spiritually strong and mentally stable with righteous conduct and good attitudes. When we try to make ourselves happy by indulging bad habits or exercising negative attitudes, we are drinking the saltwater that will make them worse and may finally even destroy our souls.

There are some people, who, when they want to have fun, go out and get drunk, but this is a saltwater prescription. Drunkards are never really happy. Criminals are not happy. Immoral people are the most miserable people in the world because they destroy their peace of mind by indulging their saltwater remedies in attempting to appease their appetites. All evil practices are saltwater remedies.

We lose much of the great power God has invested in the human personality and fail to develop the great spirituality he intended us to have because of too many saltwater remedies. Just think how many things we do that actually increase our problems rather than offer us any cure.

We go through life bothered by our fears and our feelings of guilt instead of correcting them with superior behavior and righteousness. Many people complain of loneliness in their lives, but there are also a lot of good ways to overcome loneliness. When we keep ourselves busy doing friendly, interesting, constructive things for others, life always takes on more interest. On the other hand, we can increase our loneliness by those saltwater remedies of magnifying our troubles, being pessimistic, and feeling sorry for ourselves.

All of us have needs that must be satisfied. We can't go without food for more than about thirty days; we can't go without water for more than about three days; we can't go without air for more than about three minutes; and we can't go without a good opinion of ourselves for very long without getting our lives all mixed up. We need self-confidence and interest in life to make our lives happy. The one burden that is too heavy for anyone to bear is to feel that his own life is not worthwhile.

Jesus said, ". . . blessed are all they that do hunger and thirst after righteousness; for they shall be filled with the Holy Ghost." (Matt. 5:6, Inspired Version.) He said to the woman of Samaria, "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again; But whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life." (John 4:13-14.) This water will wash out the impurities and make our lives wholesome and strong.

The Lord has given us another purifier in the principle of repentance. Because we cannot make a right with two wrongs, whenever we get an evil into our hearts, instead of trying for a cure by taking in other poisons, we should wash out the one that is already there with repentance and righteousness. Otherwise, we magnify our problems rather than eliminate them.

A roadside billboard of an oil company says, "A clean engine produces power," and so does a clean mind and a clean heart. May the Lord help us to keep out of our lives those saltwater remedies that make life unsuccessful.

Mud

Recently a good friend of mine was trying to identify some word in our language that would be the least meaningful and have the minimum amount of significance and prestige. She finally settled on the little three-letter word M-U-D.

The dictionary says that mud is a sticky, slippery substance formed by mixing water with dirt. Mud also serves as a symbol for belittlement. When we want to deflate someone or something, we may refer to them or to it as mud or dirt. We describe the lowest kind of behavior as dirty. Probably the worst anyone can say about any of the forms of dirt itself is to call it by its own name, DIRT, for there is no word insignificant enough to belittle dirt. In its dry state, dirt becomes dust, which can be very unpleasant to deal with. Even when a good rain solves the problems of dust, it may cause an equal difficulty by creating a sea of sticky, slippery mud.

One of the favorite scenes in the old Mack Sennett comedies was to see someone dressed in his best clothes fall on his face in the mud. Even since the days of Mack Sennett, in one way or another, people continue to fall into a lot of different kinds of mud puddles, both symbolic and otherwise. In fact, the number one problem of our day is dirt: dirty government, dirty business, dirty people, and dirty attitudes. We have far too much mud-slinging in our politics, but we have even more in our marriages. Muddy roads and muddy fields will dry up in time, but muddy thinking, muddy outlooks on life, and muddy morals seem to get continually worse. One of our greatest needs is to get ourselves out of the mud. And we might keep in mind that no one ever fell into any kind of a mud who didn't first get too close to it.

On the other hand, there are many things about mud that we should be grateful for. One is that God put all dirt under our feet and a clean, life-giving atmosphere over our heads. What might life be like if he had reversed this order? Dirt also has a clean side; it is probably nature's greatest purifier. All kinds of human, animal, and plant waste and filth returned to the earth become fertilizer. Even worn-out and diseased plants and animals can be used by the earth to enrich itself. This combination of dirt + water = mud is undoubtedly a great asset. This is especially true because of its close alliance with the warm, life-saving rays from the sun.

God made a great contribution to us when he covered our earth with a wonderful layer of topsoil. This thin layer of dirt has in it millions of times more value than all of the minerals, metals, oil, and precious gems put together. When we use up our mineral resources they are gone forever, but dirt is everlasting and productive. The soil is like a miraculous bank account from which we can endlessly draw many substances without decreasing the original in the slightest. Supported by a cultivator and a little fertilizer, with assistance from the sun, the air, and the rain, topsoil becomes a marvelous manufacturing plant turning out the choicest vegetables, the most nutritious grains, the most delicious fruits, and the finest meat.

Recently I was trying to help a man and his wife solve some of their marital problems. One of his points of contention was that she had referred to him as dirt. In trying to help heal his wounds, I said, "I can prove that she is absolutely right." Then I read to him from the account of creation wherein it was said, "Thus the heavens and the earth were finished. . . . but the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not a man to till the ground." (Gen. 2:1, 5.) And then, I suppose, so that it would stick together, the Creator added a little water to his dust. At least the record says: "But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and man became a living soul." (Gen. 2:6-7.)

The first question Adam and Eve were asked to decide was whether or not they would eat the fruit from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, which came out of the ground. After they had eaten, God said: "Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil. . . ." (Gen. 3:22.) I would just like to point out in passing that the right kind of knowledge still tends to have that effect upon people. To eat of the fruit from the tree of knowledge still tends to make men and women become as God. And what is even more exciting is to contemplate God's promise that if we are faithful, he will someday invite us to eat the fruit from the tree of life.

Many years ago I sat before a sculptor who had been engaged by a university to sculpt a bust in bronze. As he was finishing the clay model, he invited my wife and me to come to his studio to see his nearly finished work, and while we were there he would put on the finishing touches. We took our young daughter with us. While we spent some time discussing other matters with the sculptor, our daughter began browsing around the studio. Suddenly she was startled by unexpectedly coming upon this nearly finished clay model. With great excitement she shouted, "Daddy! Daddy! Come here quick! There is a piece of mud over here that looks exactly like you!" And so it did. And if anyone refers to me as dirt, he will be technically correct. God formed Adam out of the dust of the earth, which had first been watered by the mist. And, according to the dictionary definition, this would make us all some variety of mud.

Each of us also helps to create himself out of the dust by what he eats and drinks. Our food comes out of the topsoil and, in addition, chemists have estimated that we are all 70 percent water. It might even help us to have better attitudes toward ourselves if we realized that in addition to those elements, there has also been mixed into us a little of that wonderful sunshine that comes down upon our heads. We ourselves are the finest products of the earth.

We can increase the values of our lives by attracting the more godly elements. It bothers me to hear the evolutionists expound their theories that man evolved from some low, one-celled form of life. There is the far more wonderful explanation. The scripture says, ". . . there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty giveth it understanding." (Job 32:8.)

I am sure that God did not go to all of the trouble of creating this wonderful earth without having a grand destiny in mind for those whom he permitted to live here upon it. John L. McCreary expressed something of the miracle that comes from the earth when he said:

The dust we tread beneath our feet Shall change beneath the summer showers To golden grain and mellow fruit And rainbow-tinted flowers. The granite rocks disorganize To feed the hungry moss they bear; The forest-leaves drink daily life From out the viewless air.

We may attract from life the most inspiring elements. In every choice in life we have at least two points of view to select from. Someone has said, "Two men look out through iron bars. One sees the mud, the other sees the stars." Every condition of our lives will be placed on more solid ground if we always look at the perfection that is inherent in our earthly possibilities.

Jesus announced our most noble concept, indicating our highest destiny, when he quoted an ancient scripture in which God says, "Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most High." (Ps. 82:6.) God's law of heredity indicates that if we are faithful, we may someday become like our eternal parents. And if, along the way, someone should sometime call us "a stick-in-the-mud," that might make us all the more grateful for our final godly destiny. As we stand with our feet on the earth, may God help us to keep our eyes on the stars.

A Success Kit

We have some interesting words in our language that are important to the success of what we do. One of these is the word kit. The dictionary says that a kit is a set of implements used in an occupation. It is a collection of necessary personal effects that form a part of one's equipment. There are also kits that help us live life more effectively. Poet R. L. Sharpe refers to this situation when he says:

To each is given a bag of tools, A shapeless mass and a book of rules; And each must make, ere life is flown, A stumblingblock or a steppingstone.

Man himself is a great success kit. The scriptures call people by different titles. The Lord said to Ezekiel: "Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel." (Ezek. 3:17.) Solomon said: "The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord." (Prov. 20:27.) In the scriptures certain men are called by such titles as prophets, messengers, ministering spirits, apostles, and missionaries.

Suppose we try to analyze ourselves and identify those important tools used by us to bring about our own success. We will find that they are mostly a part of ourselves. The apostle Paul, in his famous twelfth chapter of First Corinthians, compared the spiritual gifts as well as the officers of the church to the human body and said that all were necessary; that the hand could not say to the foot, "I have no need of thee." Man, the greatest creation of God, has no parts that are superfluous or useless. In a very important way a human being can be compared to a kit of tools, every member of which is important and serves some useful function.

God fashioned each part of us to aid in bringing about some particular success. He has given us brains with which to think and plan and organize our work. A human brain is about the size of one's two hands and is made up of fourteen billion cells. It is the greatest creation of God himself; there is nothing like it in the universe. With it we have the power to set objectives, build character, and make resolutions.

As a part of our success kit each of us has been given a personality. None other of God's creations can even smile, and our personalities make God our only fellow in the universe. A survey some time ago indicated that most of the things that we do that result in failure or success are not because of mere competence or incompetence. Our failures come about because of personality traits. We may be negative or positive, pleasant or unpleasant, weak or strong. We may be a failure or a success, or good or bad, according to our own choices.

It is interesting that God has given his human creations these gifts that are so far above the other works of his hands. He tied the trees and other vegetation to the earth so that they could not move about in any attempt to improve their own situation. Animals were given the privilege of movement but they are limited in what they do by a set of instincts they can do nothing about. In addition, they are unable to learn any new thing. But men and women are permitted to move over the earth in any direction at any time when they think it would give them any advantage or satisfaction.

No generation of animals has ever learned anything from any previous generation; they all respond according to the specifications that were put into creation's package thousands of years ago. That is, roosters crow in the same key today as they did in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylonia. Bees store their honey in the same size of hexagonal cell as they did thousands of years ago in ancient Egypt. There is very little difference in their behavior or needs, and they have limited personal equipment to work with.

No horse can ever learn to use a saw or a hammer or a pair of pliers. Not even the most intelligent horse can learn to open a gate or turn on a water tap or build himself a shelter from the cold or even shake hands with another horse. A horse has legs that are stronger than man's and yet no horse can climb a ladder, do a tap dance, or put on ice skates. No animal ever learns to read or to memorize the holy scriptures. Animals know nothing at all about God, their Creator, or what their final destiny is to be. No animal is ever thrilled by musical concerts or scientific lectures. It seems that the animals were created not to serve themselves, but to serve us. Horses work, cows give milk, chickens lay eggs, and pigs manufacture bacon, whereas people laugh, love, converse, work, and sing. The Lord said, "Man is, that he might have joy." (2 Ne. 2:25.) Man's primary purpose is to build up his own happiness, and every part of man was created as an instrument of his success.

Men were put together mysteriously by their Creator. David has said that we are fearfully and wonderfully made, and we were built for an eternity of progress and increase. (See Ps. 139:14.) Just think of the great value of the human gift of language. How tragic it is when we let our kit of tools go rusty because they are not used. Someone has made a list of ten great human sins that we commit against ourselves, which we express by saying:

And so we come back to the fundamental proposition that we each have a miraculous kit within ourselves, the ultimate purpose of which is to make us become even as God. May God help us to learn to use all of our equipment for its highest purpose.

He That Hath Eyes, Let Him See

Of all of the miracles and wonders I have heard about, nothing surpasses the miracle of eyesight, which beholds the glory of the sun, can reach out across the universe to the most distant star, and can bring back to us all the beauties and wonders of the world.

Jesus pointed out that some of us have eyes that don't see and ears that don't hear and hearts that fail to understand. Because these gifts are granted us only on a kind of lend-lease basis, when we fail to use them, they lose their potentiality and consequently our lives themselves are let down from the high place that the Lord intended them to occupy. These gifts are also sometimes taken from us by processes of aging or ill health.

After I had had nearly seventy years of abundant good health the optometrist discovered in my eyes the seeds of retinal deterioration that would eventually rob me of my ability to read. It is a situation in which the central vision of the eye loses its ability to function. For several years I have suffered the effects of this downward trend in my physical vision. One by one some of the pleasures of reading, the joy of seeing clearly the expressions on the faces of my friends, and the light in the eyes of my grandchildren have been gradually taken away. Consequently, my life has become more solitary than before. I frequently become lonesome for the faces of my friends and for the pleasant association formerly had with friends living in the pages of great literature. Much of my association has been cut off with some of the ancient and modern prophets. And because I can no longer read newspaper print, I miss keeping up-to-date on the happenings of our own age of miracles and wonders.

When the apostle Paul was imprisoned in his Roman dungeon to await his execution, he wrote a letter to Timothy, asking him to bring Paul's coat to the prison to keep him warm through the long cold months of the approaching winter and also to bring him his books. Paul reminded Timothy that he was particularly anxious to have him bring his beloved parchments. I'm sure that Paul felt if he had his coat to keep him warm and his books to keep his mind profitably employed, he would get through the winter all right. And what a great joy it would be to me if for an hour or two a day I could borrow a couple of good retinas while I fed on some of the great philosophies, the wonderful poems, and the great scriptures of those enchanting books that have lost some of their ability to lift me up, though they still occupy their accustomed places on my bookshelves.

I have no serious feelings of guilt or regret because of my present inability to read, for I have read a great deal and have enjoyed it very much. I have memorized many stimulating passages. But I miss the ability not only to explore, but to reread. We usually like those things best that we are most familiar with. We like to sing the familiar songs. Children like to hear the same story over and over again. We love to read the biographies of the people we know. We love the great literature that is most familiar to us.

Shakespeare wrote thirty-seven plays and staffed them with 1,000 characters, each of whom is the personification of some personality trait. Some of these children of Shakespeare's creative imagination are among my finest friends. I love to go into the courtroom at Venice and hear Portia make her plea to Shylock for mercy for the unfortunate Antonio, or hear her inspiring expression of love to her betrothed husband, Lord Bessanio. I love to listen to Henry V give his impassioned speech of arousal to his soldiers before the battle of Agincort, or to hear Julius Caesar give his philosophies of courage. Caesar said: "Cowards die many times before their deaths;/The valiant never taste of death but once./Of all the wonders that I yet have heard,/It seems to me most strange that men should fear;/Seeing that death, a necessary end,/Will come when it will come."

I like to walk through the pages of Paradise Lost with John Milton. I have a particular interest in Milton, because he was blind for some twenty years before Paradise Lost was written. Someone has said that John Milton never saw paradise until he lost his eyes. He said of his own blindness:

Seasons return; but not to me returns Day, or the sweet approach of ev'n or morn, Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose, Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine; But cloud instead, and ever-during dark Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair Presented with a universal blank, Of Nature's works, to me expung'd and raz'd, And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.

John Milton's first wife died, and he married again after he was blind. He often wondered what she looked like and wished that he could see her, but he was blind. Then one night he saw her in his dream. He thought he had never imagined anything quite so beautiful. He said: "Vested all in white, pure as her mind, love's goodness, sweetness in her person shined so clear that nothing could have rendered more delight. But, oh, as to embrace me she inclined, I waked, she fled and day brought back my night."

When John Milton was awake, he was blind. Only in the nighttime did he have eyes. Contemplating this loss, he said, "Light, the prime work of God in me extinct, with all her various wonders of delight." He prayed that inasmuch as physical light had been denied him, God would grant him the gift of spiritual vision so he might see and understand the things of God. Then in concluding his prayer, he said: "So much the rather thou celestial light shine inward and the mind with all her powers irradiate. There plant eyes, all mists from hence purge and disperse, that I may see and tell of things invisible to mortal sight."

I have another special interest in the blind Greek poet Homer, who lived nine centuries B.C. He wrote the great epic poems, The Iliad and The Odyssey. The Iliad is a story of the valor and heroism displayed in the ten-year Trojan War, and The Odyssey is the account of the Greek hero Odysseus and his ten-year adventurous return trip from the battlefields of Troy back to his Greek kingdom, Ithaca. I love to read the potent passages of these experiences because I feel a relationship and an intimacy with those who take part.

And most exciting of all, I like to devour the holy scriptures and live with the prophets and hear the word of God himself. I can stand at the foot of Mount Sinai and, to the accompaniment of the lightnings and thunders of that sacred mountain, hear the divine voice giving those laws called the Ten Commandments. In imagination I can go to the top of the Mount of Transfiguration and see Jesus transfigured before Peter, James, and John. I may stand at the foot of the cross as the Son of God made the sacrifice by which he redeemed all of mankind, including me, and made eternal exaltation possible on condition of our own good works.

Sometimes our senses deteriorate with age or lose their power because of disuse, sin, or perverted interests. And so I would say with Jesus, "Having eyes, see ye not? and having ears, hear ye not?" (Mark 8:18.) While we have minds and hearts capable of understanding, we ought to use them to the limit.

How grateful I am that though some things have been taken, yet many still abide. I can still hear the testimonies of my friends and feel their enthusiasm. I have an increase of gratitude for those other gifts of God of which I have a full use.

My earnest prayer to my Heavenly Father is that my ears may hear and my heart may clearly understand those important truths that are so necessary to our eternal success and happiness.

The Golden Age

Since time began, people have had an intense attraction to the metallic substance that we call gold. Gold is one of the most precious of our metals. It has been used through many centuries as a valuable medium of exchange. It is an excellent bartering agent by which we may obtain other things. We may count our wealth in terms of its equivalent in gold. Gold is more malleable than most other metals and can be easily fashioned into beautiful jewelry and other ornaments. It has a higher specific density than most other materials. One cubic foot of gold weighs 1,210 pounds; one and three-quarters cubic feet of gold weighs over a ton. A cubic foot of gold would weigh nineteen times as much as a cubic foot of water.

Many parts of Solomon's temple were overlaid with pure gold. When the temple in Jerusalem was destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, vessels of gold were taken to Babylon to serve in the palace of the king. (Dan. 5:3.) We sometimes hear of the streets of heaven as being paved with gold. In his revelation concerning our earth's future existence, John saw the New Jerusalem when it shall descend out of heaven after the second coming of Christ, and he said, ". . . and the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass. . . . and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass." (Rev. 21:18, 21.)

A beautiful story is told about a house with golden windows. Jesus gave us a superb rule of conduct called the Golden Rule. Up until 1935, in our financial affairs we had a gold standard of measurement for all of our money. In marriage we also have the custom of observing a golden wedding anniversary.

We have a term, "fine gold," for gold that has a highly pure content. We make a similar application to people by saying they are fine people, pure gold.

Over the centuries, periods of great prosperity and progress have been referred to as golden ages. This designation was used by the Greek poet Homer to describe a period of the past that he considered more civilized and enlightened than his own. Homer had no written records that described such a period, but he might have been acquainted with the traditions of the famous Mycenaean and Cretan civilizations that had flourished long before his time.

Historians have applied the phrase "golden age" to a period when a nation reaches its highest peak of achievement, particularly in the arts, literature, sciences, and philosophy. For example, historians maintain that the golden age of Greece actually dawned in the age of Pericles, from 461 to 431 B.C., long after Homer's time. During that period, Athens reached great heights in sculpture, architecture, and drama.

Aristotle mentions four cardinal virtues that helped the Greeks achieve their high place: courage, temperance, justice, and wisdom. Plato defined courage as endurance of the soul, justice as excellence of the soul, temperance as health of the soul, and wisdom as communion of the soul with reality.

The Greeks did not find virtue easy. Aristotle said, "Excellence is much labored for by the race of men," and the Greek poet Hesiod said, "Before the gates of excellence, the high gods have placed sweat; long is the road thereto, and steep, and rough."

Socrates went around Athens trying to develop the wisdom of his fellow Athenians so they could understand truth. He was wise enough to know that no man could see the truth about other things unless he first saw the truth about himself, and to show a man the truth about himself isn't exactly a popular procedure.

Plato pointed out that there exists in every man a spark of good that must be developed. This is the spark that John called the light that "lighteth every man that cometh into the world" (John 1:9), light that exists in every human being and that can be kindled into a bright flame to lighten the whole world. However, Alfred the Great pointed out that "power is never good, except he be good that has it."

If we could effectively follow these wise and important principles we might all reach a golden age.

Many other nations have also enjoyed eras described as their golden age. Historians would probably agree on the following:

Egypt, the golden age of literature, 2200-2050 B.C.; the golden age of wealth and empire, 1500-1385 B.C.

Rome, 27 B.C.-A.D. 14, the age of Augustus.

Mexico, 1440-1520, the reign of the Montezumas.

Spain, 1474-1516, the reign of Ferdinand V and Isabella I.

England, 1558-1603, the reign of Elizabeth I.

France, 1640-1740, the reigns of Louis XIV and Louis XV.

People often regard the legendary past of their ancestors as their golden age of glory. They usually have few facts, but use their imaginations to fill the times with the highest virtues and ideals. They speak of the "good old days" as having been the best.

All of these are relatively unimportant when compared with the golden possibilities each one of us has.

For the most wonderful period in history, we should not look only back into the past. Branch Rickey, the famous baseball manager, when asked to describe his finest day in baseball, said, "I can't, because I haven't had it yet." Certainly we should do those things that enable us to look ahead and not back for our most exciting period of life both as individuals and as civilizations.

A golden age is brought about not by golden sunsets or golden windows or golden goblets; it is brought about by golden people. A great admiral once said that he would rather have "iron men in wooden boats than wooden men in iron boats." We are better off as golden men in a corrupt age than as corrupt men in a golden age. The aim of wisdom is to develop golden men with a golden touch to live in a golden age. A great society can only be brought about by golden men with golden philosophies. The golden age of Greece would not have been what it was without Pericles, Socrates, Sophocles, Demosthenes, Euripedes, and Aristotle. The age was made great because of the accomplishments of its artists and sculptors, philosophers, and statesmen.

The Bible points us forward to a time when we may live in a golden city upon this earth. This shall come about after the cleansing of the corruption that is presently destroying our atmosphere. What a great era of prosperity we might expect during the millennial reign of Christ, when the evil that presently holds us back shall be eliminated, permitting people to go forward to unheard-of prosperity and progress. Then we may have a golden age of morality, a golden age of enjoyment, a golden age of accomplishment.

We might think of the golden age of America as that time when the people gained their freedom. The United States was established with a divine constitution that God himself had provided for by raising up wise men for that very purpose. What tremendous opportunities we have to establish in the world a new golden age of wisdom, of reason, of godliness. Our forefathers lived on a flat, stationary earth and plowed their ground with a wooden stick, while we live on an earth of power steering and jet propulsion. But we need the character and personality qualities to match our opportunities. We have a golden age made up by men of tin.

In many ways ours is the most progressive age. Some time ago, it was reported that 80 percent of all the scientists who have ever lived upon the earth are alive today. We are making greater progress in many areas than has ever been known before in the world, but we are also being held back because we are mixing too much of the dross of corruption into the gold of progress. Some of that which dazzles our eyes is merely fool's gold, and it would certainly be ridiculous to build a golden age for fools.

God did not reserve his greatest scientists, his greatest professional men, his greatest captains of industry to come to earth in this dispensation of the fulness of times without also reserving for this period his greatest prophets, his wisest teachers, and those having the finest character qualities. The greatest golden age that can be built must follow the directions of Deity, and God has indicated that it can only be established upon a foundation of genuine wisdom.

At the time the earth is cleansed of its sins, those ripened in foolishness will be destroyed, and Christ, the God of wisdom, will reign for a thousand years. After the millennium, the celestial kingdom of God will be established upon this earth. If we want to be golden people then, we should begin by being golden people now.

For thousands of years alchemists have tried to transmute the baser metals, such as iron and lead, into gold, and they have not yet been successful. The only way to bring about a golden age is through golden people. Each of us has that individual power of a golden touch within himself. We don't need to wait a thousand years or even for one more minute. We may be golden parents, golden children, golden citizens today. We can make golden lives by building our lives on the rocks of wisdom and excellence. What could give us a greater thrill or incentive for accomplishment than to renew in our lives the attraction for pure gold and to strengthen our abilities to get this valuable element in operation in our own personal lives!

The United Order

The scriptures speak about an interesting religious practice that has sometimes been used over the ages to promote the economic welfare of people. This program has been known by various names, such as the United Order, the Order of Enoch, the Law of Consecration. It is based on the philosophy of an ideal economic order in which everyone works to the full limit of his ability, and each member has the privilege of withdrawing from the total accumulation according to his need rather than according to his ability to contribute. In the ideal operation of this program, no one has that which is above another, and those who are sick or have large families or other kinds of problems share in the total—not according to any equity, but according to what their needs may be.

We hear of this unique arrangement first in the days of Enoch, one of the greatest prophets who ever lived on this earth. Enoch was ordained to the priesthood at age 25. At age 65 he was set apart by Adam to go on a mission to teach righteousness among the wicked, and for the next 365 years he worked continuously at his call. He gathered his people together in the city of Enoch, about which the scripture says: "And the Lord called his people Zion, because they were of one heart and one mind, and dwelt in righteousness; and there was no poor among them." (Moses 7:18.)

We might try to imagine a society in which there were no poor, no slums, no idlers, and no sinners. Apparently this idea worked pretty well in the entire city of Enoch, for all its people were eventually translated and taken up into heaven.

This economic order was also practiced for a time in the days of Jesus. In Acts 2:44 we find this reference: "And all that believed were together, and had all things common." The scripture also says: "And the multitude of them that believed were of one heart and of one soul: neither said any of them that ought of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had all things common." (Acts 4:32.)

There was also a period of great righteousness among the Nephites. Of them the record says: "And they had all things common among them; therefore there were not rich and poor, bond and free, but they were all made free, and partakers of the heavenly gift." (4 Ne. 3.)

This program would mean a utopia among us if we had the righteousness and self-control to make it work. We can understand some of the advantages of this kind of arrangement to help solve the inequities among us. One father may have ten children to support and another may have no dependents at all, or there may be much more sickness and fewer opportunities in one family than in another, and these inequities cut down the financial privileges of such people. But because of human weaknesses, this system has never seemed to work very well for very long. We have too much selfishness and too many idlers to make any common program work very well. There are too many people who want to take more out of life than they put in.

To make this higher law really work, everyone would need to be ambitious, virtuous, and love his neighbor as himself. It would be necessary for each one to live as near to the top of his condition as possible. Because we haven't been able to qualify for the United Order, the Lord has instituted some lesser laws, including tithing, fast offerings, and other welfare programs. However, because of our personal weaknesses and lack of faith, even these lesser laws are not obeyed very well.

The United Order idea has other interesting possibilities. We do have access to the sunshine and the atmosphere in common. The beauty of the entire earth is ours to behold and enjoy. Someone has said, "I own the landscape." For all practical purposes, we also own the mountains and the oceans, the moon, and even the sun.

We have the scriptures in common. Those who are poor and those who are rich, if they are worthy, may share equally in the use of the temples. The scriptures say that everyone will be judged according to his works, and if we properly prepare ourselves, each may labor in the work of the Lord to his heart's content. Our access to God and the celestial kingdom is had by us in common with the most wealthy.

Emerson has said that we live in the lap of an immense intelligence and we may draw therefrom according to our own needs and desires. The most favored among us are not always born in the palaces of princes, and frequently over the head of genius we find a roof of straw.

Shakespeare said: "Assume a virtue if you have it not." There are no copyrights or patents on virtues, ambitions, or abilities. All good characters and personality traits may be had in common if we will only take the time to develop them.

When we put our knowledge of medicine on a kind of United Order basis, every doctor and everyone else in the world is entitled to take advantage of the newest methods, ideas, and discoveries with little or no charge. I have just finished reading a book written by the man who, so far as I know, is the greatest salesman in the world. He has developed within himself information and techniques that enable him to be more prosperous and more successful in his field than anyone else on earth. This same information is available to everyone on a United Order basis. That is, this man has not only written all of this information down for others to apply, but he is willing to tell his associates, competitors, friends, and enemies every detail of his success secrets. It wouldn't be considered very good form to pick this man's pockets and take away that money which he has already earned. However, he gives everyone the unlimited and more valuable privilege of picking his brains and his spirit, so they may acquire from him the source of supply rather than merely the result.

Certainly this concept of a United Order is one of the most valuable ideas that our world has produced. The only problem involved is that so frequently we fail to take advantage of these opportunities.

Many years ago Joseph Addison wrote an interesting parable titled "A Mountain of Miseries." He had been pondering over the celebrated thought of Socrates that "if the misfortunes of mankind were cast into a common stock and then equally distributed to everyone of those who now think themselves the most unfortunate, they would be even more miserable with their new allotment of troubles." Socrates contended that the hardships and misfortunes that so concern us now would be far more agreeable than those we would get if we traded with any other person.

Mr. Addison says that as he was turning this idea over in his mind, he fell asleep and dreamed that Jupiter issued a proclamation that every mortal should bring his griefs and calamities to an area appointed for this purpose and throw them down together in a common pile. In his dream Mr. Addison was stationed in the center of the area, where he could observe everything that took place. His heart was melted as one by one he saw the whole human species marching by groaning and moaning under their burdens of grief and miseries; then, in obedience to the decree, they threw down their various loads of care in the place appointed. The resulting pile grew quickly into an enormous mountain. One man threw down his poverty, another his ill health, and another his unsavory reputation. There was a multitude of old people who with great delight threw down their wrinkles and their aches and pains. Many put down disabling worries, haunting fears, and distracting guilt complexes. A most interesting part of the procedure, Mr. Addison observed, was that many of the problems disposed of by this vast throng were more imaginary than real. Some threw down occupations they despised, and some used the opportunity to get rid of an incompatible spouse, a dominating parent, or a disobedient child.

While this confusion of miseries and chaos of calamities was taking place, Jupiter issued a second proclamation in which it was ordered that each one should pick up a new affliction in exchange for his old one and return to his own habitation. A poor galley slave who had thrown down his chains now replaced them with a case of gout. Some exchanged sickness for poverty and some traded hunger for a lack of appetite. Some traded care for pain, and some traded pain for care. Mr. Addison describes the pitiful condition thus created when the items that made up the mountain of miseries had been securely fastened upon the backs of the wrong people. The whole area was now filled with even more pitiful groans and lamentations as the sufferers wandered along under the severe pains of their new and more critical agonies. Finally Jupiter took compassion upon them and ordered them a second time to lay down their loads, this time with the design of everyone taking back his own miseries so that each could be tolerably happy again.

There are several important applications of this constructive idea. God has made available for us his own finest secrets of success. He has piled up for our use a great mountain of virtues, religious doctrines, ideas, abilities, attitudes, and personality traits, from which we may endlessly draw according to our desire. He has given us four great volumes of scripture, which we may study, memorize, and practice to our heart's content. He has ordained one day each week as the Sabbath day. We may go to the house of the Lord on that holy day he has set apart and work diligently and endlessly in the interests of our own eternal exaltation. He has ordained that through the law of repentance we may discard all those sins and bad attitudes that cause our problems without the necessity of picking up the sins and problems of anybody else.

We may not be able to share the bank account of John D. Rockefeller; but if we live every one of the principles of the gospel, we will have more material wealth than we need anyway, and in addition we can cut ourselves as large a share as we desire of the treasures of heaven.

Wise Unto Salvation

Among the important people figuring in the account of the birth of Jesus were the wise men who came from the East to honor him. There were probably many other men living in the East and in the West at that time who could also properly be classified as wise men, but these particular wise men seemed to have had greater motivation to be wise in the ways of the Lord. Because of their past interests and accomplishments, they had studied the divine program and knew of the far-reaching effect of the Savior's birth.

The apostle Paul was speaking to a later wise man when he wrote to Timothy and said, ". . . from a child thou hast known the holy scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus." (2 Tim. 3:15.) There are many things that can help us in this important objective, to be wise unto salvation. One is the study of the scriptures mentioned by Paul to his young disciple. The Lord himself has said, "Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth." (2 Tim. 2:15.) Another way in which we arrive at this same end is through industry. We learn to do by doing.

If you had your choice of what kind of wisdom would be most profitable to you, what would it be? Thomas Carlyle said, "A man's religion is the most important thing about him. That is what he thinks about, and believes in, and works at, and fights for, and lives by." A man's religion also determines what his eternal life will be like. Therefore, how important it is that we become wise in the ways of the Lord!

Becoming wise takes thought and effort. Even dreamers have little value unless their dreams are undergirded with both a plan and a program. The poet has said:

I may as well kneel down and worship gods of stone. As offer to the living God a prayer of words alone.

Prayer can also be of great benefit. But prayer should never be mistaken as a substitute for thinking. If there are two men of equal intellectual power and both pray but only one is fully devoted to industry, there will be a great disparity between the accomplishments of the two, everything else being equal. It must always remain a fundamental truth that "the hands that help are holier than the lips that merely pray." Leonardo da Vinci gave us a thought-provoking prayer when he said, "Thou, Oh God, doth sell us all good things at the price of labor."

Studying, thinking, and reading should all be regular emotional experiences. If an idea in the mind does not arouse an emotion in the heart, it is unlikely that it will get out into the activity muscles. Before success can take place, the imagination must be stirred and set on fire. There must be a preliving of one's success, and every fantasy must be grounded in some measure of reality before it can take off for greater accomplishment.

The apostle Paul said that the scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation, but some good mental emotions and some effective appraisals of values can also make us wise unto salvation. We must look forward as well as backward. One of the things that keeps each of us going is our ability to dream and aspire effectively. Sometimes we can wish things so intently that they happen. But we need to do a lot of dome work as well as home work. We need to get our hearts into the act. We also need to get ourselves oriented to righteousness if we are going to be wise unto salvation.
