The following are additional ideas Primary leaders may use with the Sharing Time printed in the January 2006 Liahona. For the lesson, instructions, and activity that correspond with these ideas, see “Promises in the Scriptures” on pages F4 and F5 of the children’s section in this issue.

1.  2. Explain in your own words D&C 82:10 using examples from the scriptures of promises fulfilled. Invite the children to turn to D&C 82:10, and explain that the Lord’s promises require specific actions on our part. When we do what He asks, the Lord blesses us according to the promise. Mark, discuss, and memorize the scripture (see Teaching, No Greater Call [1999], 171–72). Divide the children into groups of five or six. Give each group a beanbag. As you sing a song or hymn, have the children in each group toss the beanbag among the group members. When the music stops, have the child from each group with the beanbag say one thing he or she will do this week to be worthy of the promises of the Lord. Continue the game as time permits. Bear testimony of the great promises that have been given to the faithful. Sing “I Am a Child of God,” (Children’s Songbook, 2–3).

2.  Song presentation: Teach the song “Scripture Power” (see 2006 Outline for Sharing Time and the Children’s Sacrament Meeting Presentation). Hold up a picture of the Savior, and ask the children to listen for things that will help us be like Him. Sing, “Because I want to be like the Savior, and I can, I’m reading His instructions, I’m following His plan.” Holding up your scriptures, ask where we read His instructions and where we find His plan. While helpers hold the picture and scriptures, sing those lines again. Ask them to listen for what “His word will give to me.” Then sing the whole line, holding up your scriptures with two hands. Explain that His words will give us power! Sing the song to that point, and when you sing the word power, hold up your scriptures with both hands. Tell the children, “Because I want the power of the scriptures in my life, I’m changing some things. Listen and tell me what they are.” Sing, “I’m changing how I’ll live, I’m changing what I’ll be.” Take answers; then sing the lines together. Lead children in the whole verse. Ask them to count on their fingers how many times they hear the word power as you sing the chorus. Tell them to alternate singing words of the chorus with you: for example, they sing, “scripture power”; you sing, “keeps me safe from sin.” Then have half the Primary sing with you as you continue to alternate with the other half of the Primary. Bear your testimony of the scriptures.
