Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

George Q. Cannon: A Biographical Sketch

"I know that God lives. I know that Jesus lives, for I have seen him." (Deseret Weekly 53:610.)

How the people assembled in general conference in the Salt Lake Tabernacle must have thrilled when they heard that powerful testimony. President George Q. Cannon was nearly seventy years old when he spoke those words. Having such a knowledge and being able to bear such a testimony must have contributed greatly to the success he attained in life.

George Quayle Cannon was born January 11, 1827, at Liverpool, England, the eldest child of George and Ann Quayle Cannon. His parents were natives of Peel, Isle of Man, the family line being traceable on the island for centuries back. George's brothers and sisters were Mary Alice Cannon, who married Charles Lambert; Ann Cannon, who married Orin N. Woodbury; Angus M. Cannon; David H. Cannon; Leonora Cannon, who married Robert Gardner; and Elizabeth Cannon (the daughter of George's father by a second marriage), who married William Piggott. (Historical Record 6:174.)

As a youth, George was a careful reader of the Bible. The knowledge thus acquired of the dealings of God with his children provided the foundation for his deep and abiding faith. He later said, "When I have read this Bible as a child, I have wept because I did not live on the earth when Jesus wandered among men. And I have asked myself, why is it that men cannot receive those blessings as they who were the associates of Jesus received them? I asked my teachers, and I asked my parents, 'Are there men now who receive these blessings?' and they answered me that there were none, and I wondered why it was so." (Millennial Star 24:563.)

His aunt, Leonora Cannon, had moved to Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where she became the wife of John Taylor, a Methodist preacher. Elder Parley P. Pratt arrived in Toronto in 1836 and baptized John Taylor and his wife. Two years later John Taylor was called to the apostleship, and on January 11, 1840, he and other members of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles landed at Liverpool to fill missions in the British Isles.

In Liverpool, Elder Taylor called at the home of his brother-in-law, George Cannon, where he met the mother and her son George Q. Finding that the head of the household was at work, he departed, promising to return. As he walked away from the door, the mother said to her son, "George, there goes a man of God. He has come to bring salvation to your father's house." (Instructor 79:67.)

As soon as Elder Taylor preached the gospel to her family, Mrs. Cannon was ready to be baptized, knowing for herself, as she said, that the principles he taught were the true gospel of the Son of God. Her husband read the Book of Mormon carefully twice before his baptism. After finishing it the second time, he remarked, "No wicked man could write such a book as this; and no good man would write it, unless it were true and he were commanded of God to do so." (Andrew Jenson, Historical Record 6:174.) George Q. Cannon always believed he was born with a testimony of the gospel. Years later he stated: "Did you ask how I got my testimony of the truth of Mormonism? Why, I never got one. . . . The reason why I received none was because I did not have to get one. It was born with me. Since I first heard the Gospel, or Mormonism as it is called, I have always known it to be true. It seemed to be a part of my very nature. I can remember, though, in my early boyhood that I felt very badly because I had no especial gift, and I used to think I was not a favored child of God, else I would have received the gift of tongues or some other such gift." (Young Woman's Journal 4:123.)

After their baptism the Cannon family was filled with the "spirit of gathering to Zion." To fulfill this desire, they saved and planned for two years. Prior to his marriage, the father of the family had had a dream concerning the death of his wife, and when migration was talked about, they seemed aware that she would not live to reach Zion. But she was determined to undertake the journey for the sake of her children. The family started for Zion, sailing from Liverpool on the ship Sidney on September 17, 1842, but the mother died and was buried at sea. The others continued their journey to Nauvoo.

At the time of their arrival in Nauvoo a general conference of the Church was in session, and a great crowd was on the landing stage to greet them. Although George had never seen a picture of Joseph Smith, he instantly knew and pointed him out to the others. All his life he treasured that inspired recognition. He later wrote: "Nearly every prominent man in the community was there. Familiar with the names of all and the persons of many of the prominent Elders, the Author sought, with a boy's curiosity and eagerness, to discover those whom he knew, and especially to get sight of the Prophet and his brother Hyrum, neither of whom he had ever met. When his eyes fell upon the Prophet, without a word from any one to point him out or any reason to separate him from others who stood around, he knew him instantly. He would have known him among ten thousand. There was that about him, which to the Author's eyes, distinguished him from all the men he had ever seen." (George Q. Cannon, The Life of Joseph Smith, the Prophet, p. xxvi.)

Young George was seventeen when Joseph Smith and his brother Hyrum were martyred. He shared the grief of the people at the tragedy and had an additional sorrow because his beloved uncle, John Taylor, had been wounded by the mob. He saw his father construct the coffins in which the martyrs were to rest. He may even have been with his father when that skillful man made the death masks. (Instructor 79:162.)

There was confusion in the minds of some of the Saints following the loss of the Prophet, but the Cannons had no doubts. George was present at the meeting in the grove at Nauvoo when the mantle of Joseph fell upon Brigham Young in a miraculous manner, and he spoke of it many times throughout his life: "A more wonderful and miraculous event than was wrought that day in the presence of that congregation we never heard of. The Lord gave His people a testimony that left no room for doubt as to who was the man He had chosen to lead them. . . . On that occasion President Brigham Young seemed to be transformed. . . . The tones of his voice, his appearance, everything he said and the spirit which accompanied his words, convinced the people that the leader whom God had selected to guide them stood before them." (Juvenile Instructor 5:175, 182.)

On August 19, 1844, George Cannon died at St. Louis while on a short visit. After the death of his father, young George went to live with his uncle, John Taylor, until October 1849. At that time John Taylor was the editor and publisher of the Times and Seasons and the Nauvoo Neighbor, so George learned the printing business. While still in Nauvoo, he was ordained an elder by John Taylor on February 9, 1845, and on the same day he was ordained a seventy. The quorum of which he became a member was organized that day, and he was chosen to be clerk.

When the Saints were exiled from Nauvoo in 1846, Elder Cannon accompanied the main body to Winter Quarters. There he remained until the next year, when he made his way with other exiled Saints across the plains to Salt Lake Valley. He arrived October 3, 1847, and thus became one of Utah's earliest pioneers.

In the fall of 1849, with a number of other brethren, he was called to California, under the direction of Elder Charles C. Rich of the Quorum of the Twelve. After a hazardous journey, the company reached lower California. George Q. worked in the gold mines until the fall of 1850, a work in which he had little interest. It was great news to him, therefore, when he was called with nine others to go on a mission to the Sandwich (Hawaiian) Islands. This mission to the islands emphasized a prominent trait in his character. The missionaries had expected to preach to the white population, but the opportunity to do so was very limited. Consequently, most of the elders were in favor of returning home. Elder Cannon was impressed by a sense of his duty to preach the gospel; however, he did not feel that he had performed his part by stopping at the very threshold of his work. "I felt resolved to stay there, master the language and warn the people of those islands, if I had to do it alone," he recalled, "for I felt that I could not do otherwise and be free from condemnation," (George Q. Cannon, My First Mission, p. 22.) His unflinching devotion to duty and unwavering faith that the Lord would bless his labors were the means of a great triumph in disseminating the gospel message among the Hawaiian people. The elders had to learn the language—an accomplishment that came with remarkable ease to Elder Cannon. He wrote: "My desire to speak was very strong; it was present with me night and day, and I never permitted an opportunity of talking with the natives to pass without improving it. I also tried to exercise faith before the Lord to obtain the gift of talking and understanding the language. One evening, while sitting on the mats conversing with some neighbors who had dropped in, I felt an uncommonly great desire to understand what they said. All at once I felt a peculiar sensation in my ears; I jumped to my feet, with my hands at the sides of my head, and exclaimed to Elders Bigler and Keeler who sat at the table, that I believed I had received the gift of interpretation. And it was so." (My First Mission, p. 23.) From that time on he had little difficulty in understanding what the people said. He refrained from speaking or reading English as much as possible and even trained himself to think in the native tongue.

No sooner had Elder Cannon begun to travel among the natives in an earnest endeavor to search out those who would receive the truth, than the direct interpositions of Providence began to be manifested. He was led, at times in a singular manner, to individuals whose hearts were in a condition to receive the gospel, and within a short time numerous baptisms occurred. This was in fulfillment of a blessing upon his head by John Taylor, who had predicted that he "should stand in the waters as a Saviour, and call upon the multitudes to come forward and be baptized." (Millennial Star 14:493.)

The history of the Sandwich Islands Mission reads like a romance, with the young missionary as its central figure. His eloquence charmed the natives and overwhelmed his opponents. His personal traits won the hearts of hundreds. From village to village and from island to island he passed, kindling in the hearts of the simple, honest, and affectionate islanders faith in the gospel, a remarkable and contagious religious zeal, and an unbounded and undying affection for himself. "Dreams, visions and revelations were given to me," he wrote, "and the communion of the Spirit was most sweet and delicious." (My First Mission, p. 43.)

Elder Cannon had hardly commenced his labors among the Hawaiians when he was seized with an overpowering desire to translate the Book of Mormon into their language. He believed they were of the house of Israel, a branch of the race descended from Lehi, and he longed to place before them, in their own tongue, the record of their forefathers. His fellow laborers, the four elders who had remained with him, encouraged him, and from the First Presidency at home came words of cheer, counseling him to persevere.

This translation demanded much care. He could get no aid from the white men in his labor, but he had the assistance of several of the natives. He read his translation to them as it progressed and discussed with them the principles to see if they obtained the same idea from the translation that the English edition gave to its readers. He afterwards examined the translation carefully with the aid of William Farrer and a native named Kauwahi, a man of acute intellect and talent, who was known as the most eloquent and best reasoner in the Hawaiian nation. During this revision, they went through the Book of Mormon twice to see that no words or sentences had been omitted and to correct any inaccuracies in the translation or the idiom. The work, a labor of nearly two years, was finished January 31, 1854. The original plan had been to purchase a press and materials to publish the Book of Mormon in Hawaii, and money for that purpose was raised by selling advance copies of the book and by loan. In the meantime, on July 29, 1854, Elder Cannon and the four faithful elders sailed home, carrying with them the love, almost adoration, of literally thousands of the people who had believed their words and been baptized into the true church of Christ. Speaking of this fifty years later, President Cannon said: "Of all the experiences in the intervening years there are none more dear to my memory than the blessed experiences of those years upon the Islands, where I saw the miracles of the Gospel repeated in the healing of the sick, by faith and the laying on of hands; where I grew strong in my own duties and certain of the divine help of God; where the sowing of the seed brought so bountiful a harvest. It was then that I was filled with prophecy for the future of Hawaii, and my prophecy has been fulfilled." (Church News, July 17, 1949, p. 6.)

After arriving in San Francisco sometime in August, Elder Cannon remained there some forty days and assisted Parley P. Pratt in copying his Autobiography. He then went on to Salt Lake City. Upon his arrival he was named to be one of the presidents of the 30th Quorum of the Seventy.

Waiting for him was a lovely young schoolteacher, Elizabeth Hoagland, whom he had known as a girl when they crossed the plains together. They were married on December 11, 1854, less than two weeks after his return. In later years he wrote of his marriage: "When I went on my first mission, I was engaged to a young lady. After a lengthy absence, I came back as poor as missionaries generally do. But I got married twelve days after my return. I tried to get employment, but up to the day of my marriage had not obtained it. The next day after marriage I secured employment. I had only been home five months when I went on another mission; and though it was in the winter time, I made means so fast that when I started on this mission, having been called to take my wife with me, I left Salt Lake City with a very excellent outfit—mules and wagon, provisions, etc." (Juvenile Instructor 33:65.)

Soon after his return to Utah, Elder Cannon received an intimation from President Brigham Young that he would be called to return on a mission to Hawaii. However, before this, Parley P. Pratt wrote to the First Presidency from San Francisco asking that Elder Cannon be sent there to aid in the publication of a newspaper, and also to publish the Hawaiian translation of the Book of Mormon. Consequently, Elder Cannon was called, at general conference in April 1855, to go on a mission to California to labor under the direction of Elder Pratt.

In San Francisco, he found that Elder Pratt had already started on his return home. Elder Cannon followed him and soon caught up with him. Elder Pratt set him apart to preside over the Pacific Mission, subject to the direction of any of the Twelve Apostles who might visit or be called to labor in that area.

The first order of business for the young elders (Elder Joseph Bull and Matthew F. Wilkie had accompanied him) was to secure a suitable office in San Francisco, set up the press, and go to work. Elder Cannon later wrote:

"An office was secured on the principal street in town, and we immediately commenced the publication of the translation of the Book of Mormon in the Hawaiian language. Two thousand copies of this work were issued and sent down to the Islands. While publishing this work, and attending to the other labors which devolved upon me, I maintained a constant correspondence with President Brigham Young. He still favored the publication of a newspaper, and appointed me to be its editor, and, by his kind, fatherly and hopeful counsels, gave myself and the Elders laboring with me continual encouragement in our labors. . . .

"Prospects in San Francisco for the establishment of a printing-office and newspaper, I found to be of the most discouraging character. . . . The Lord opened our way in a most signal manner. . . . It really seemed to me that money grew in our hands, and . . . would go further and accomplish more, than four times the amount would under ordinary circumstances. . . . Friends were raised up on every hand, and though our pathway was not free from obstacles, yet the work moved off so successfully that we felt greatly favored and blessed of the Lord." (George Q. Cannon, Writings from the Western Standard, pp. vii-ix.)

The last form for the Book of Mormon came off the press January 28, 1856, just over six months after Elder Cannon and his associates had arrived in California. Thus was the Book of Mormon first translated and published in the Hawaiian language. The publication of a paper, the Western Standard, and the fulfillment of duties involved in the mission called for all of Elder Cannon's mental and physical energies for a period of nineteen months. The Western Standard became a powerful agency for good and permanently established its editor's reputation as a writer. Later his editorials were compiled and published under the title Writings from the Western Standard.

When the news of the approach of Johnston's army toward Utah was received, Elder Cannon closed the mission affairs and returned home, reaching Salt Lake City on January 19, 1858. He was appointed adjutant general of the army being organized for defense against invasion. Soon afterwards he was directed by Brigham Young to take a printing press and material to Fillmore to issue the Deseret News in a reduced size, which he did from April to September, 1858.

On his return north, an incident occurred that illustrates his great faith.

"At Payson at noon on Monday, as I was unhitching my team at Brother William B. Preston's, . . . Brother John Bollwinkle drove up with a carriage and mules and handed me a note. It was from President Young, and was dated the day previous, Sunday. He informed me that I had been appointed to go East on a mission. The company I was to go with expected to start the next day (the day I received the note), and he wished me to come to the city as quickly as I could. In reply to my inquiry the messenger said he would be ready to start back as soon as he had eaten his dinner and fed his mules.

"While he was gone, I gathered up what clothing and bedding and weapons I needed for the journey, and in about three-quarters of an hour we were on our way to Salt Lake City, where we arrived the next morning as day was breaking. As I had only been home from a mission a few weeks before I went to Fillmore, and had been absent several years before on another mission, I had no home in Salt Lake City. In leaving my family at the roadside, therefore, I left them with no bright prospect for comfort and ease during my absence. But they uttered no complaints. They put their trust in the Lord and during the two years of my absence, He was their benefactor and friend." (Juvenile Instructor 28:220.)

On seeing him, President Young turned to others in the office and said, "Didn't I tell you it would be so? I knew I had but to call; here he is." (Bryant S. Hinckley, The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers, p. 169.) Probably this was as short notice as any elder in the Church ever received for a mission of such duration.

The eastern mission was of a delicate nature; so much prejudice against and misinformation concerning the Church prevailed that correcting false impressions had to be done judiciously to be effective. Elder Cannon began with characteristic zeal and energy. By means of letters of introduction from General Thomas L. Kane and others, he was able to meet many editors, members of Congress, and other public men and to present to them the true state of affairs in Utah. In addition to this special assignment, he had charge of the branches of the Church in the East, and in 1859 and 1860 he acted as Church emigration agent, in which position his careful attention to detail made his services highly valuable.

While on this mission Elder Cannon was selected to fill the vacancy in the Quorum of the Twelve occasioned by the assassination of Parley P. Pratt. On his return home, August 26, 1860, he was ordained an apostle by President Brigham Young. This calling fulfilled the prophecy made by Elder Pratt a few years previously that George Q. Cannon would succeed him as a member of the Twelve. Elder Cannon's calling as an apostle also fulfilled a revelation he himself had received many years earlier: "The Lord revealed to me when I was quite young that I at some time would be an Apostle. I never told it to any human being; but on more than one occasion I have gone out and besought the Lord to choose some one else and to relieve me of that responsibility. I have besought Him earnestly, time and again, that if I could only get my salvation and exaltation without being called to that high and holy responsibility, I would much rather He would choose some other person." (Deseret Weekly 40:377.)

Soon after this he was appointed, together with Elders Charles C. Rich and Amasa M. Lyman, to preside over the European Mission. His duties were to take charge of the Millennial Star and the publishing business connected therewith and also emigration. These three apostles presided over the European Mission until May 14, 1862, when Elders Lyman and Rich returned home and Elder Cannon went to Washington, D.C., where he had been called by the First Presidency. He and W. H. Hooper had been elected United States Senators representing the Utah Territory, and he was to join Senator Hooper in endeavoring to get the territory admitted to the Union. They labored faithfully in this assignment until the adjournment of Congress, when Elder Cannon returned to England.

For the next two years, until 1864, Elder Cannon presided over the European Mission, visiting twice the branches of the Church in Scandinavia, Germany, Holland, Switzerland, and France. During the four years of this mission more than thirteen thousand Saints sailed from Liverpool for Zion.

For the next three years Elder Cannon was private secretary to President Brigham Young and enjoyed the great leader's personal friendship. He also became well informed regarding affairs at Church headquarters. He was a careful, thoughtful observer, a constant reader, a student of men and measures, with the power of assimilating and turning what he saw and heard to practical account. A natural diplomat, with polite address and easy conversation, he impressed favorably and had great personal magnetism.

But Elder Cannon was not to lay aside his missionary work. Thousands of youths needed to receive the same testimony as their parents of the divinity of the gospel restored to earth, that they might in turn be valiant in its behalf and enjoy its blessings. At the Sunday School jubilee in 1899 he spoke of how he had felt: "When I returned from Europe, after filling continuous missions for a long time, I felt there was an immense field in Zion for the labors of the Elders. I had seen how few souls could be gathered abroad, and when I reflected upon the numbers of our children at home, I felt a burning desire to spend all the time I could in trying to teach them the principles of the Gospel. Upon my return, in 1864, I organized a Sunday School in the Fourteenth Ward, and other schools were organized directly afterwards." (Conference Report, October 1899, p. 88.)

In January 1866, he commenced publication of the Juvenile Instructor. His experience as a writer and his love for children aptly qualified him to issue such a paper, and he served as editor and publisher until his death more than thirty-five years later. In an editorial entitled "Salutatory" in the first issue, Elder Cannon wrote: "No other community, with which we are acquainted, indulge in such high hopes respecting their young as do the inhabitants of this Territory. . . . To have these hopes and expectations gratified, steps should be taken to train our children and to do all in our power to prepare them for the duties that will devolve upon them. It is to aid in this work and to supply a want which has been long felt to exist that the publication of this paper has been undertaken." (Juvenile Instructor 1:3.)

George Q. Cannon's name was long identified with the Sunday School movement. He became general superintendent in 1867, when the Deseret Sunday School Union was organized, and served in that capacity the balance of his life. He publicly stated that he knew of no work that had given him greater satisfaction. In educational matters he was connected with the public school system, being at one time chancellor of the Deseret University, and he was a strong supporter of Church schools. On April 5, 1888, he was appointed a member of the Church's general board of education.

Elder Cannon's field of usefulness as a writer was greatly enlarged in the autumn of 1867 by his appointment by Brigham Young to edit the Deseret News. Up to then, the newspaper had been issued weekly and then semiweekly, but he instituted the Deseret Evening News, a daily, the first issue being dated November 21, 1867.

Upon him fell the labor of conducting, in behalf of the Church and through its official organ, one of the mightiest controversies that ever agitated the minds of men. Not only was it necessary for the peculiar features of the faith and practice of the Latter-day Saints to be explained and defended before the world, but it was also necessary to teach the members of the Church at home; the Deseret News was a great power in this work of defense and education. The teachings it printed aided in giving form to the faith of the Saints, and its utterances and arguments were cues and texts that were used by thousands of speakers at home and abroad. Under the editorial direction of George Q. Cannon, the Deseret News also became an eloquent exponent of the principles of the American Constitution and the Declaration of Independence.

During the fall of 1871 a great many articles appeared in various papers on the subject of admitting Utah to the Union, on the condition that the Latter-day Saints relinquish their practice of plural marriage. So much was said in favor of, and so little in opposition to, this method of dealing with the question that Presidents Young and George A. Smith, who were then at St. George, felt there was danger that the Latter-day Saints were being put in a false position. They telegraphed Elder Cannon to proceed at once to Washington, D.C., to define the true position of the Saints on this important point. He remained in Washington until Congress adjourned for the holidays.

In August 1872, he was elected to Congress as a delegate from Utah. In that position he served for ten years. Although not entitled to vote as a representative, he exercised a marked influence among leaders in that notable body. Because of the intense prejudice against Utah and her people, his experience in Congress was frequently difficult. In spite of this, he made many warm friends in the national capital. In his journal he wrote on the day he was to be sworn in as a new member of Congress: "I am here without a man who is in sympathy with me; but I have a Friend more powerful than they all. In this I rejoice. I feel there are angels with me, and as one of old said, they that are for us are more than they who are against us. When I pray, I feel comforted and filled with joy. Of myself I feet very weak; but in my Lord I feel strong." (Instructor 80:157.)

In 1873, when Congress adjourned for the Christmas holidays, Eider Cannon made a hurried trip to St. George to see President Young. He recorded the following advice he received: "He said that I ought to be careful about my movements in Washington—that I would be watched and everything I did scrutinized and I ought to keep a journal of my movements that I could prove where I was at any time. If anything should occur to General Grant, he (the President) would be accused of having prompted its commission, and I would probably be charged with having had it done. He said that next to himself I was the most hated of any of the authorities. . . . They would seek my life with the greatest of anxiety after seeking his, and I ought to be careful of myself. In all the publications of our enemies my name was generally held up to the public next to his own." (Instructor 80:158.)

Finally, in March 1882, the outcry against the Latter-day Saints culminated in the passage of law that rendered Elder Cannon ineligible to serve as delegate. This was the Edmunds Act, disfranchising those who practiced polygamy as a religious rite. Many members of Congress parted from their friend, "the Mormon delegate," with unfeigned regret. He had won his way to their hearts, not only by his uniform courtesy and his affable and engaging manner but also by his great knowledge of Congressional affairs. He had made it a point to acquaint himself with all departments and functions of the government and with the names, personal history, and constituencies of every member in both houses of the national legislature, and his retentive memory and quick recollection enabled him to give information at a moment's notice.

President Brigham Young died August 29, 1877. Under his direction, George Q. Cannon had prepared his will and was made the principal executor with Brigham Young, Jr., and Albert Carrington as co-executors. Elder Cannon, then editor of the Deseret News, stood close to his leader when death came. He had been at the President's bedside constantly for thirty-six hours. At the request of the family, he conducted the services. In his journal he wrote: "To describe my feelings upon the death of this man of God, whom I loved so much and who had always treated me with such kindness and affection is impossible. . . . On my part, he was in my eyes as perfect a man as I ever knew. I never desired to see his faults; I closed my eyes to them. To me he was a Prophet of God, the head of the dispensation on the earth, holding the keys under the Prophet Joseph, and in my mind there clustered about him, holding this position, everything holy and sacred and to be revered. . . . I never criticized or found fault with his conduct, his counsel or his teachings at any time in my heart, much less in my words or actions." (Instructor 80:258.)

In October 1880, the Quorum of the Twelve reorganized the First Presidency, the Church having been without that quorum since the death of President Brigham Young. Under date of October 8 Elder Cannon recorded the following in his journal: "Elder Woodruff's motion [that John Taylor be the first President of the Church] was then called for and carried unanimously. President Taylor said he was prepared to name his counselors and being requested to do so, named me as his first and Joseph F. Smith as his second. The mention of my name was a great surprise to me. As I had been nominated again for Congress and would be absent this winter and probably half at least of the next two years, I had felt free in expressing my feelings upon the subject of the First Presidency and in favor of it, not thinking for a moment that my name would be mentioned for this position and feeling satisfied that no one could suspect me under the circumstances of having any personal ambition in connection with this matter.

"I could scarcely express my feelings. Before the names of the counselors were called, I had a presentiment that my name would be mentioned, and I trembled all over. My nerves twitched all over my body, and I could scarcely control myself. When my name was mentioned, I rose to my feet and begged of the brethren to excuse me from filling that position. I told them that I would much rather remain in the Quorum of the Twelve. I could think of at least twelve or thirteen men who could fill that position, in my opinion, better than I could. My agitation was extreme, and I was completely overcome. President Taylor said it was not a matter of personal choice. Several of the brethren also spoke very kindly, approving of the nomination, and it was carried unanimously on motion of Brother Woodruff." (Instructor 80:411.)

In 1884 extreme persecution of the Latter-day Saints began, particularly aimed at the plural marriage doctrine. Because of the intense bitterness of the crusade, it was felt advisable for the leading brethren of the Church to avoid coming directly within the power of the persecutors. This antipolygamy crusade, which raged from 1884 to 1890, singled out George Q. Cannon as a main object, for it was thought that if he could be compelled to surrender, the entire church would soon follow his example. However, he preferred exile and imprisonment to such a course, and in common with most of the Church leaders he went into retirement, remaining "underground" for several years, though helping to direct the policy of the Church.

One of his most trying experiences occurred in 1886. A $500 reward had been posted for his arrest so it was decided he should leave the area. He boarded a train for California, but at Humboldt Station, Nevada, he was arrested. He was brought into Salt Lake City under military escort and placed under bonds set at $20,000 and $25,000, totaling the enormous sum of $45,000. The feeling against the Church leaders was so bitter that President Taylor counseled President Cannon not to appear when his case was called, so the bail was declared forfeited. Subsequently the amount was restored by an act of Congress.

Finally, the persecution began to diminish. President Cannon and other leaders met the issue as early as it was reasonably safe for them to do so and were subjected to fine and imprisonment. He served four months in the Utah penitentiary.

The period of President Cannon's greatest power and influence followed his incarceration. President Taylor having died in exile, Wilford Woodruff became head of the Church and the First Presidency was reorganized in April 1889. Again George Q. Cannon was chosen first counselor. He bore a heavy part of the burden of that administration, the most notable events of which were the issuance of the famous Manifesto, discontinuing plural marriages, and the completion and dedication of the Salt Lake Temple. In addition to his duties in the First Presidency, he was engaged in many other enterprises. He was at various times a director of the Union Pacific Railroad Company and of the Salt Lake and Los Angeles Company; vice-president and director of ZCMI; founder and president of the publishing firm of George Q. Cannon and Sons Company; president of the Utah Sugar Company; vice-president and director of Zion's Savings Bank & Trust Company; director of the Cooperative Wagon and Machine Company; president of Brigham Young Trust Company; president of the Utah Light and Power Company; and director of the Bullion-Beck and Champion Mining Company and the Grand Central Mining Company. He also organized the George Q. Cannon Association, of which he was the president and in which he placed all his property. He was president of the Trans-Mississippi Commercial Congress for one term and attended all its sessions. He was also president of the Irrigation Congress and addressed its meetings on several occasions as an authority on irrigation.

In addition, President Cannon wrote many important works: My First Mission, the initial volume of the Faith-Promoting Series; The Life of Nephi, the ninth volume of that same series; The Life of Joseph Smith, and The Latter-day Prophet. He also assisted in writing The Life of Brigham Young and other publications. During his lifetime more than three hundred of his discourses were printed in various publications. His editorials for the Juvenile Instructor numbered well over a thousand, and the editorials written for the Millennial Star and the Deseret News were uncounted hundreds. He wrote A Review of the Decision of the Supreme Court of the United States in the Case of George Reynolds vs. the United States. He had begun a compilation of the History of the Church when death called him. President Heber J. Grant wrote, "The record made by him in writing is a great one, equaled by but few who have devoted their entire life to literary pursuits." (Young Woman's Journal 12:243.)

After the death of President Woodruff, Lorenzo Snow succeeded to the Presidency on September 13, 1898. The Lord revealed to him who his counselors should be, and he named George Q. Cannon and Joseph F. Smith, both of whom had been counselors to Presidents Taylor and Woodruff. He remained in this position until his death.

In 1900 President Cannon attended the jubilee of the Sandwich Islands Mission. He landed at Honolulu on December 10 and the next day received a magnificent greeting. He was crowned with the yellow lei, the emblem of royalty, and several prominent people in the present and former governments waited upon him. Ex-Queen Liliuokalani attended a meeting at which he spoke in Hawaiian, which he was able to recall in a surprising manner. He wrote in his journal on December 17: "The ex-queen Liliucokalani sent me word that she would like to see me at one o'clock today as she expects to sail for Hilo. . . . She welcomed me very cordially and expressed the pleasure it gave her at meeting me. She also dwelt on the good my visit had done and would do, how the people's feelings had been aroused and their love awakened and strengthened by my visit. Many more remarks of this character were made by her, and when I arose to bid her good-bye, she said she would like me to give her a blessing; then she led the way to another room. Before I was aware of what she was doing, she was on her knees at my feet to receive the blessing. I felt very free in blessing her, and the Spirit rested upon us both." (Improvement Era 53:624.)

It was during this visit that President Cannon prophesied that one day a temple would be built in Hawaii. This was fulfilled in 1919. He returned home late in January 1901. His health, which for two years had been impaired, withstood poorly the Utah winter as compared with the Pacific Islands climate, and in March he sought relief on the Pacific coast in California. In the early morning of April 12, at the peaceful old Spanish town of Monterey, the end came. His body was brought home for burial, and after a public funeral it was consigned to the family vault in the city cemetery.

Many wonderful tributes were paid to George Q. Cannon. Elder Orson F. Whitney closed his sketch with these words: "President Cannon was a man of varied gifts and wide experience. A natural counselor, his eminence and influence as such were well warranted. As an orator he shone among the brightest, and almost equal to his powers as a speaker were his abilities as a writer. . . . No man in Utah, after the passing of President Brigham Young, wielded with all classes so great an influence as President George Q. Cannon, and this influence was felt up to the very close of his life." (History of Utah 4:663.)

President Heber J. Grant made the following observation: "There has been no other man in Utah who has shown such marked ability in so many different ways as has he. . . . The broad educational views held by President Cannon entitle him to be ranked as one of the foremost men from an educational standpoint that Utah has ever produced. . . . Speaking of the estimate in which President Cannon was held in the world, . . . I was informed upon one occasion, when a number of leading statesmen were discussing different men and were endeavoring to decide as to who were the eight brightest minds in America, President Cannon was named as one of the eight. . . . One thing which aided President Cannon very greatly was his marvelous memory. Never have I come in contact with a man possessed of such a remarkable capacity to remember faces and incidents and family relationships. . . . It seems when one stops to think of all that he has accomplished . . . that figuratively speaking, during his lifetime, he removed mountains." (Young Woman's Journal 12:243-45.)

At his funeral his fellow counselor in the First Presidency, Joseph F. Smith, said: "He was a mighty man . . . a man remarkable in many ways, whose actions inspired confidence in those with whom he was associated. Something about him won the love and confidence of all who met him." (Millennial Star 63:312-13.)

Elder Bryant S. Hinckley, in his book The Faith of Our Pioneer Fathers (page 175), includes this interesting information: "George Q. Cannon . . . attained a fame that spread far beyond the confines of the community in which he was one of the most illustrious leaders; being reckoned among America's greatest statesmen and holding even an international prominence in reputation. At the close of 1901, the year of his death, the show windows of the celebrated commercial emporium of the most noted avenue in Berlin, Germany, the magnificent Unter den Linden, displayed his portrait along with six others, as the principal world personalities whom death had taken during the previous twelve months. His seat was indisputably among the mighty."
