Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

SECTION 1

THE GOSPEL PLAN

Now, if a man can only know whence he came, why he is here, and that which awaits him after this life, it seems to me that he has abundant causes of happiness within his grasp.

If we are the children of our God, then God our Eternal Father has had an object, a great object to accomplish in placing us here on the earth. . . . This earth has been created for a purpose. Man is here for a purpose. Death is in the world for a purpose, just as much as life, and all these are a part of the Divine plan connected with man's existence in the past, at the present and for the future. —GEORGE Q. CANNON Journal of Discourses 26:184, 187 September 28, 1884

CHAPTER I

Preexistence and the Mortal Probation

The true origin of man. It cannot be a question with any person of faith in our Church as to the origin of man. We did not have monkeys for ancestors, nor any inferior order of beings. We have not grown up to our present position as human beings through various stages of development from a very low order of creation. We descended from God. Man was created in His image. He is our Father. We have not ascended to reach our present position; but many of the human family have fallen from their high estate into dreadful degradation. (Dec. 1, 1892, JI 27:720)

Gods in embryo. There was a period when we, with Jesus and others, basked in the light of the presence of God and enjoyed His smiles. We are the children of God, and as His children there is no attribute we ascribe to Him that we do not possess, though they may be dormant or in embryo. The mission of the Gospel is to develop these powers and make us like our Heavenly Parent. I know this is true, and such knowledge makes me feel happy. (Oct. 4, 1863, MS 25:722)

Literal offspring of God. God in His infinite mercy has revealed to us a great truth. It is a truth that, when understood by us, gives a new light to our existence and inspires us with the most exalted hopes. That truth is that God is our Father, and we are His children. What a tender relationship! What a feeling of nearness it creates within us! What? God my Father? Am I indeed His son? Am I indeed His daughter? Do I belong to the family of God? Is this literally true? The answer is, "Yes." God has revealed it, that we are literally His children, His offspring, that we are just as much His children as our offspring are our children, that He begot us, and that we existed with Him in the family relationship as His children.

What an immensity of vision is given to us in this truth! What a field for reflection! And how our hearts should be inspired with great hopes and anticipations to think that the Being under whose direction this earth was organized, who governs the planets and controls the universe, who causes the rotation of the seasons and makes this earth so beautiful and such a delightful place of habitation, is our Father and that we are His children, descended from Him! What illimitable hopes the knowledge of this inspires us with!

Angels given charge concerning us. Now, this is the truth. We humble people, we who feel ourselves sometimes so worthless, so good-for-nothing, we are not so worthless as we think. There is not one of us but what God's love has been expended upon. There is not one of us that He has not cared for and caressed. There is not one of us that He has not desired to save and that He has not devised means to save. There is not one of us that He has not given His angels charge concerning. We may be insignificant and contemptible in our own eyes and in the eyes of others, but the truth remains that we are the children of God and that He has actually given His angels—invisible beings of power and might—charge concerning us, and they watch over us and have us in their keeping. . . .

Those who otherwise might be thought to be contemptible and unworthy of notice, Jesus says, be careful about offending them, for "their angels do always behold the face of my Father." (Matthew 18:10.) We are in their charge. They watch over us, and are, to a certain extent, doubtless, responsible for the watchcare that they exercise over us, just as we are responsible for any duty that is assigned us.

Preexistence a reasonable doctrine. This is one great truth that has been revealed to us. And with this truth is this kindred truth: We dwelt in the presence of our Father; we are the brothers and sisters of that great and exalted Being who helped create the heavens and the earth, namely, Jesus Christ, our Savior and our Redeemer; and as He dwelt in the presence of the Father and afterwards descended and took upon Himself the form of man, being born as a babe, so we have done. It is no more wonderful for us to be born in this manner—as babes—than it was for Him to be born a babe—the babe of Bethlehem. It is just as reasonable to suppose that the whole family of man had a pre-existence as it is to suppose that Jesus, and He alone, had a pre-existence. (1890, Contributor 11:476-77)

Preexistence of Jesus. Was He, the Son of God, born of a woman? Yes. Well, then, if one God was born of a woman, why not other Gods be born of women? Is He the exception to the entire race? Is He the only Being born of woman that can attain to the Godhead? That is not logical. It is not reasonable to suppose this. . . .

Jesus, who was the Son of God, who was God Himself, was born of a woman. When Jesus said, "I am that I am" (Exodus 3:14), when He appeared unto the brother of Jared, when He appeared unto Moses, He was doubtless then at the full stature of a man. Yet He was born of a woman. I do not wonder at Paul saying, "Great is the mystery of godliness." (1 Timothy 3:16.) God manifested in the flesh! It is a mystery to human beings, for they do not comprehend these things.

If Jesus, who was at one time at the full stature of a man, was compressed that He could enter the world as an infant, is it unreasonable to say that the rest of mankind could be born in that way? I think not. It appears to me that if Jesus could be born that way we could be, that our spirits could be compressed, although we might be six feet six inches in height or weigh 300 pounds, so as to be born as a little infant. It is a strange thing to state; but because we do not understand all things, shall we reject truths? Or shall we wait until a full revelation comes to us? . . .

Knowledge of preexistence forgotten. There is no doubt in my mind that we were familiar with the principles of the Gospel, and though they had faded from our memories, yet when we heard them again the recollection was revived. I believe that when we see our Father in heaven we shall know Him; and the recollection that we were once with Him and that He was our Father will come back to us, and we will fall upon His neck, and He will fall upon us, and we will kiss each other. We will know our Mother, also. We will know those who have begotten us in the spirit world just as much as we will know each other after we pass from this state of existence into another sphere. . . .

Spirit memories. I was a boy when my people gathered with the Saints of God. I was very curious to know the Prophet Joseph, having heard a great deal about him. I happened to be in a large crowd of people where the Prophet was, and I selected him out of that large body of people. There were no means of recognition that I know of which would suggest him to me as the Prophet; but I recognized him as though I had always known him. I am satisfied that I had known him and been familiar with him. There are instances which all of us doubtless have known which have proved to us that there has been a spiritual acquaintance existing between us. We frequently say, "How familiar that person's face is to me." In this way kindred spirits are brought together. We are drawn together by this knowledge and this acquaintanceship which, I have no doubt, was formed anterior to our birth in this state of existence. (Apr. 7, 1889, DW 38:676-77)

A son of the morning. We are told that there was once a rebellion in heaven. The Prophet Joseph and Sidney Rigdon beheld in vision, and they recorded that which they saw in this language: "And this we saw also, and bear record, that an angel of God who was in authority in the presence of God, who rebelled against the Only Begotten Son whom the Father loved and who was in the bosom of the Father, was thrust down from the presence of God and the Son, and was called Perdition, for the heavens wept over him—he was Lucifer, a son of the morning." (D&C 76:25-26.)

Some have called him "the" son of the morning, but here it is "a" son of the morning—one among many, doubtless. This angel was a mighty personage, without doubt. The record that is given to us concerning him clearly shows that he occupied a very high position, that he was thought a great deal of and that he was mighty in his sphere, so much so that when the matter was debated concerning the earth and the plan of salvation, he was of sufficient importance to have a plan, which he proposed as the plan by which this earth should be peopled and the inhabitants thereof redeemed. His plan, however, was not accepted; but it was so plausible and so attractive that out of the whole hosts of heaven one-third accepted his plan and were willing to cast their lot with him.

The difference between Lucifer and Jesus. Now, the difference between Jesus and Lucifer was this: Jesus was willing to submit to the Father. He had His plan which was accepted. Everything that has come down to us, coupled with our own experience in relation to the effect of the Spirit of God upon the heart, leads us to the conclusion that if Jesus had proposed a plan that would not have been accepted by the Father, He would not have rebelled against the Father nor against the Son of God, who might have proposed the plan which was accepted.

How different it was with Lucifer! Because he could not have his way, he was determined to wreck everything. He would pull down the throne of the Eternal Father and destroy everything. He was not one with the Father. If he had been, that rebellion would not have occurred.

Spirit of Lucifer manifested on earth. Now, it is a remarkable fact, which completely verifies and establishes the truth of the record concerning this rebellion in heaven, that from the time Adam appeared on the earth and children began to multiply and increase the spirit that Lucifer exhibited in heaven has been manifested on the earth. When he has had power to influence men and women, he has filled them with precisely the same spirit that he manifested in heaven before man came upon the earth. That spirit made its appearance in Cain, and the Bible shows us that it was continued from generation to generation. The Book of Mormon is filled with the same testimony.

But we need not depend upon the records that have come to us for illustrations of this and testimony concerning it. We ourselves, in our own persons, in our own organization as a Church, have seen the same spirit and the same results that attended its manifestation in ancient times and even as far back as the time of which I speak—before the earth was peopled. We have seen the spirit of rebellion exemplified in our Church as it was when we were in our spiritual existence. . . .

Spirit of Lucifer vs. Spirit of God. History has repeated itself all the time in the Church of God. The Book of Mormon is full of it. That record shows how the sons of Lehi divided, some listening to Lucifer and entertaining the spirit of rebellion, and others entertaining the Spirit of God and seeking for its love and union. Those who yielded to the spirit of Lucifer sought the destruction of the others, and not being willing to submit to that which was right, they rebelled against their father. They determined to have their own way, regardless of the rights of others.

That history, from the beginning of it to the end, shows clearly the operation of these two influences, the Spirit of God bringing the people into union and love, and the spirit of Lucifer—which God in His own wisdom and for His own purposes has permitted to come upon the earth to test us—working out destruction wherever it could get possession of the people to manifest itself through, until it wrought the entire destruction of two races of people on this continent—the Jaredite race and the Nephite race. (Apr. 7, 1895, DW 50:641-42)

This estate a proving ground. We have been sent here with our agency, for the express purpose of being tested and proved. We have had this second estate granted unto us that it may be ascertained whether we shall keep it or not. . . . We are left to exercise our agency, just as we did in our first estate at the time of our trial, to see whether we will be faithful to God in this second estate.

We are shut out, as I have said, but God points out to us the way in which we should walk. He tells us what to do and entreats us to be obedient to Him. He asks us to cultivate His Spirit, to seek to Him for light and guidance; and He promises us that if we will do this and be faithful to Him in this earthly existence, He will crown us with glory and will give unto us eternal happiness.

We are the children of God. God is our Father. He wants us to be like Him. He wants us to enter upon a career that will lead us to as great heights as He has attained to. Therefore, it is well that we should be tested—tested even unto death, if necessary—because He intends to make us His heirs and to bestow upon us the glory that He possesses, leading us along in the path of progress till we will be in our sphere as He is in His sphere. But Satan has determined to destroy this plan. He has determined to lead away as many of the children of men as he possibly can. (Feb. 27, 1898, MS 60:213-14)

Church members were faithful spirits. We have got to be watchful, for I tell you God has sent us here to test us and to prove us. We were true in keeping our first estate. The people that are here today stood loyally by God and by Jesus, and they did not flinch. If you had flinched then, you would not be here with the Priesthood upon you. The evidence that you were loyal, that you were true and that you did not waver is to be found in the fact that you have received the Gospel and the everlasting Priesthood.

This life a higher test. Now you are in your second estate, and you are going to be tested again. Will you be true and loyal to God with the curtain drawn between you and Him, shut out from His presence, and in the midst of darkness and temptation, with Satan and his invisible hosts all around you, bringing all manner of evil influences to bear upon you? The men and the women that will be loyal under these circumstances God will exalt, because it will be the highest test to which they can be subjected.

A veil between God and man. It is not as it was before. We were then in the presence of God. Now there is a veil between us and our Father, and we are left to ourselves, to a certain extent. We are left to be governed by the influences that we invite, and there are any number of evil influences around us, whispering into our ears and hearts all manner of things. If we will open our hearts to receive them or allow them to enter our hearts, we will think evil of our brethren and of our sisters; we will have malice towards them; we will envy them; and we will say bad things about them. God will test us in all this. (Oct. 9, 1892, DW 45:621)

It is a part of the plan of salvation, I say, connected with man's existence upon the earth that God should thus withdraw Himself, as it were, from man and that a veil should be drawn between Himself and man and that if knowledge of Him be obtained, it should be obtained by the exercise of great faith and continued labor on the part of His children. . . . (Sept. 28, 1884, JD 26:187)

Never since Adam and Eve partook of the forbidden fruit has man beheld the face of God except under some very peculiar circumstances. After they fell they were banished from His presence, then they heard the voice of God, but they did not behold Him. He withdrew Himself from them, and there was a veil drawn between God and man. A few men such as Moses and the brother of Jared and Joseph Smith and a few others of the children of men were able through faith to penetrate, as it were, the veil and to behold God under certain conditions. But to the whole world of the children of men God has been willing to communicate through His Spirit, through the manifestations of His power, through angelic visitations, through dreams and visions and through methods of communication that He has adopted or that come within the power of man to receive—He has communicated His mind and His will and revealed Himself with sufficient plainness to enable His children to do that which He requires at their hands, to press forward and to keep His commandments and to rejoice in the knowledge He has bestowed. He has done sufficient to enlighten men and women to cause them to rejoice. (Jan. 18, 1885, DNW 34:50)

Glories from beyond veil wisely withheld. If we could understand the glory we once had with our Father in heaven, we would be discontented in dwelling in this condition of existence. We would pine for the home we left behind us. Its glory and its beauty, its heavenly graces and delights were of such a character that we would pine for it with that homesickness that men have some partial knowledge of here on the earth. . . .

Wisely, in the providence of God, this knowledge is withdrawn from us. We can have a glimpse occasionally, through the revelations of the Spirit to us, of the glory there is awaiting us, and sometimes when men and women are approaching death—when they are ready to step out of this existence into the other—the veil becomes so thin that they behold the glories of the eternal world, and when they come back again—as some have . . . —they come back to this mortal existence with a feeling of regret. They have had a foretaste of the glory that awaited them; they have had a glimpse of that glory that is behind the veil; and the love of life is so completely lost, the love of earthly home and friends is so completely taken from them, that they desire with all their hearts to take their exit from this life into that glorious life which they knew was on the other side of the veil. (Sept. 28, 1884, JD 26:192-93)

Adam a perfect immortal man. We are told in the Bible that "God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he Him." (Genesis 1:27.) Adam was no gorilla, no squalid savage of doubtful humanity, but a perfect man in the image of God. When placed on the earth he was immortal. Eve was no degraded, loathsome creature, but a lovely, admirable being, a suitable partner for an immortal man.

The loveliest pair That ever yet in love's embraces met: Adam, the goodliest man of men since born His sons; the fairest of her daughters, Eve.

Man when placed on the earth was not far from God. But through the practice of sin he has fallen. The most perfect men and women on earth today are physically far beneath their great progenitors, Adam and Eve. We are not the offspring of monkeys but are the children of God, and Jesus is our brother.

The Book of Mormon shows us how the Lamanites became the degraded beings they are. Revelation informs us also concerning the negroes. They are not more perfect than their ancestors; they have not been progressing towards a better type but have fallen, by the transgression of some of their parents, far below what they were originally. (Jan. 31, 1874, JI 9:30)

True evolution. We hear considerable about evolution. Who is there that believes more in true evolution than the Latter-day Saints?—the evolution of man until he shall become a god, until he shall sit at the right hand of the Father, until he shall be a joint heir with Jesus! That is the Gospel of Jesus Christ, believed in by the Latter-day Saints. That is the kind of evolution we believe in, but not the evolution of man from some low type of animal life.

There is a tendency today in the scientific world to entertain and advocate such ideas concerning the origin of man. The attempt is made to prove that man has come up from the lowest depths through the stone age, the bronze age, the iron age, until he has reached his present condition. This is incorrect.

Man is the son of God and came here perfect from the eternal worlds. Adam was made in the image of God, and he stood upright before Him. His children, however, fell into darkness and sin, and corrupted themselves; and probably there were times when they used flints, just as geologists now attempt to prove, and afterwards, bronze and iron. But that was not man's original condition. He came from God perfect, and he was so intelligent as to give names to all the animal creation, and he became their lord and master. He knew God and walked with Him.

Adam was very intelligent. God was not a simpleton then. He knew just as much as scientific men do now, I think. It has not been necessary for Him to go to school since the days of Adam in order to learn knowledge. He always knew what He comprehends today, and He could teach Adam everything that was necessary to be taught. Not only that, but men who lived as long as they did must have learned an immense amount. Think of it, Adam living nearly a thousand years! What progress he would make in the knowledge of earthly things, even supposing he started out ignorant! So with the others, until the earth was filled with knowledge. But men corrupted themselves and fell into darkness and sin, and became so wicked that God, in order that wickedness might not destroy His purposes, had to send a flood to wipe them out, excepting a few.

Enoch walked with God three hundred and sixty-five years, and the Bible says he was not for God took him. If he walked with God that length of time, he must have known something about Him, and about the heavens, and about the organization of the earth, and something about what is called science now, geological as well as astronomical. Our revelations tell us that not only he but his city was translated. They were all taken, with the exception of Methuselah, who was left on the earth, because the promise had been made to him that through him one should arise who should be the progenitor of a new world. This proved to be Noah, his grandson. After that the earth waxed worse and worse until the flood was sent and destroyed the world. (Sept. 24, 1893, DW 47:506)

Purpose of mortality not fully understood. God has placed us here upon the earth to accomplish important purposes. These purposes have been in part revealed unto us. Probably it is not possible for men and women in this mortal state of existence to comprehend all the designs of God connected with man's existence upon the earth; but much has been revealed upon this subject to us as a people. . . .

Now, if a man can only know whence he came, why he is here, and that which awaits him after this life, it seems to me that he has abundant causes of happiness within his grasp. . . .

An important question. The Bible tells us we came from God. The Bible tells us He is the Father of our spirits. How is He the Father of our spirits? This is an important question and one that each of us should endeavor to understand. I think it is of the utmost importance that the Latter-day Saints should understand and be able to comprehend this question thoroughly, because upon the proper understanding of this must, to a great extent, depend their actions in this life. . . .

Savior and apostles foreordained. The Lord Jesus was undoubtedly selected for the great mission of redeeming the world because of His great qualities and His peculiar fitness as one of the Godhead. It is written of Him, "Thou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness; therefore God, thy God, bath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows." (Psalm 45:7.)

Who were his fellows? Were not all the distinguished of heaven's sons there—they who afterwards made their appearance on the earth as Prophets, Apostles and righteous men? If He was chosen above all His fellows and anointed with the oil of gladness, is it not consistent and reasonable to suppose that His faithful Apostles were also chosen and anointed to perform their part in the great drama of human existence for the enactment of which the earth was to be prepared? If He had companions in the heavens, or to use the language of the Scriptures—"fellows," is it reasonable to suppose that He left them there while He came down here and took upon Himself mortality? Does it violate in the least any idea that we derive from the sacred records to think that His "fellows" also came here and, as He did, also obtained mortal tabernacles? . . .

His disciples had the right to think, from all that He taught, that if He had been with the Father before coming into this mortal life, they also had been there. If they were to be so closely associated with Him in the great future, what was there to suggest to them that they had not been intimately connected with Him in the past? If He had been chosen from before the foundation of the earth to do the work which He was then doing, what inconsistency would there be in their being chosen also, as His ministers and associates, at the same time? . . .

A divine plan. If we are the children of our God, then God our Eternal Father has had an object, a great object to accomplish in placing us here on the earth. . . . This earth has been created for a purpose. Man is here for a purpose. Death is in the world for a purpose, just as much as life, and all these are a part of the Divine plan connected with man's existence in the past, at the present and for the future. . . . (Sept. 28, 1884, JD 26:184-87)

Why are we here? It is necessary, in His wisdom and according to the laws of exaltation, that we should descend from our heavenly abode and come here and take upon us mortal tabernacles and forget all that we knew. The reason of this is that we should be tempted, that we should be tried, that we should be purified, that the dross of our nature should be cleansed by obedience to the laws of God and that by obedience to His laws these tabernacles which we have received and which belong to this fallen world may be redeemed and be fitted and prepared to dwell in a higher and purer abode—in an element that is far beyond anything that we know anything of at the present time. These tabernacles of ours, which are so full of humanity and its weaknesses, God has given unto us, and He has told us how we can redeem them—by obeying the laws He has taught. . . .

Why is the devil permitted to tempt mankind? It is necessary that we should be tempted, that we should be tried, that we should be purified, by going through these trials and passing through this furnace of affliction which this life furnishes. . . .

Human nature desires an easy path to tread. It wants to go with the stream, to float with the current. We therefore avoid the hardships of life if we can. But after we have passed through these trying scenes and endured these afflictions, we look back at them and are thankful and say they have been more fruitful in profitable experience to us than any other scenes that we have passed through. This is not only the case in relation to parts of our lives, it is the case in relation to the whole of our lives.

When we have passed through this probation, if we have been faithful, we shall look back at all that we have experienced and thank God with all our hearts that He permitted us to come on the earth and have the opportunities that we had of showing our fidelity to God, our willingness to keep His commandments and our determination that we would not be seduced from the path of obedience and rectitude by the blandishments and the temptations of Satan.

It is necessary, I say, to exaltation that we should pass through these scenes. (1890, Contributor 11:477-78)

This life a mission to be faithful. We are sent here as missionaries, so to speak. God has given to each of us a mission. He has sent us forth and has said unto us: "Go, now, and be faithful. I have blessed you with everything that is necessary to fill a good mission on the earth. You are going in to new scenes, and you will be exposed to temptations such as you have never known. You are going to take upon you a tabernacle of flesh, and Satan is going to be there with you. He has tempted you here; you have been exposed to his allurements and his sophisms, but you resisted his propositions, and you clung to me and to Jesus, my well beloved Son.

"Now, go down on the earth and receive tabernacles of flesh and bones and be proved there and see whether you will be faithful there in the midst of the darkness that will prevail; for there will be a veil drawn between your present life and that life, and you will have to live by faith. If you will exercise faith in Me, I will always be with you; My spirit will be with you; and if you will keep My commandments, you will come back into My presence, and you will dwell with Me eternally, and you will enter upon a career of never ending glory. Now, go and be faithful."

I have just described to you in my crude way something of that which I know occurred when we came from the abode of our Father in heaven. He wants us to be faithful. He does not want us to listen to Satan. (Apr. 21, 1895, DW 51:291)

A faith testing state of probation. There is a characteristic about the faith of the Latter-day Saints in which they perhaps differ from most of the professed followers of Jesus Christ—they do not believe that God expects or desires them to put off acquiring these perfections, powers, gifts and graces which belong to the heavenly world until they reach that world; but they believe that God has placed them here in a state of probation and that He has hid himself only to a certain extent from them. He has drawn a veil of darkness between Himself and His children on the earth for the purpose of trying their faith, developing their knowledge and testing their integrity, so that those who will feel after Him in faith, persevering in the midst of ignorance, darkness, doubt, confusion and the temptations of Satan, and all the evils with which we come in contact in this state of being may receive His blessings and the gifts, graces and favors which He bestows upon His most favored children. Hence, the Latter-day Saints believe in doing everything here that will help to prepare them for life eternal in His presence. They look upon this world as a place where they should attend to these things. (Oct. 8, 1874, JD 17:230)

This life a preparation. His reason for placing us here was to develop our divine natures. If we were not surrounded by darkness, we could not develop. We must taste the bitter in order to relish the sweet, that our spirits might be purified and that we might exercise our free agency. Good and evil must be presented before us. We are as free agents in our sphere as the angels are in theirs. We are free to do right or to do wrong and to choose the path we shall tread in. . . .

God will force no man to heaven, because we would be of no value if there. When we get to heaven it will be because we have developed within ourselves the qualities that make heaven. We must develop heaven within ourselves, so that there will be perfect harmony between us and our surroundings. . . .

Must conquer earthly desires. I thank God for giving us our agency, because I think this earth will be a furnace to cleanse me and prepare me for a better condition of affairs and a better life, and I believe this of all of us. . . . It is just as necessary that our bodies should be subject to law as it is that our spirits should be. These bodies of ours are naturally rebellious—full of strange appetites. We are here to conquer these desires. All of us will be sanctified and redeemed if we are faithful. But we must bring this earthly substance in subjection to the will of God.

When men die, their bodies do not leave this planet. Our spirits leave here, not being created out of the elements of this planet, but if these spirits of ours are subject to the Spirit of God and are controlled by its influence and our tabernacles have been subject to the law of God, they will be redeemed, exalted and glorified. Every law of God that we obey tends to our exaltation. The spirit that we have here will be the spirit that will animate us in the resurrection. If it is a spirit of evil, it will have power over us; if it is one of truth and righteousness, it will direct us. All the progress we make here will be to our advantage in the next life. The intelligence acquired here will not be lost. We will keep adding to it, and the more we seek understanding the greater will be our endowment of knowledge. Fidelity, industry and all the other good qualities exhibited on earth will be manifested in heaven. . . .

I do not believe we will go immediately to celestial glory. There must be a preparation—some means by which we shall become nearer and nearer to the glory which is promised. . . . We are not going to receive blessings unless we comply with the conditions on which they are predicated. God will not force these things upon us. (Feb. 1, 1891, MS 53:195-97)

We are here to experience power of evil. It seems as though evil is as eternal as good, error as eternal as truth, and therefore He wants us to know this power. I do not know what the Father has in store for us to the full extent; but I suppose that evil will always exist, and though we shall be emancipated from the power and dominion of evil, it will be by keeping the commandments of God. We shall understand in eternity that which we have learned in the flesh, and we shall know the dreadful effect of doing evil. This is the object that God has had in placing us here and leaving us to the exercise of our agency.

The days of our probation are not many. We shall have but one probation. This is the opportunity for us to gain this experience, and we should make use of it carefully. We should not allow the day to pass without profiting by it. We should look upon this existence as an exceedingly precious one, in view of the object of our Father in placing us here. (Nov. 2, 1895, DW 51:802-3)

Obtaining a knowledge of good and evil. The devil in tempting Eve told a truth when he said unto her that when she should eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil they should become as Gods. He told the truth in telling that, but he accompanied it with a lie as he always does. He never tells the complete truth. He said that they should not die. The Father had said that they should die. The devil had to tell a lie in order to accomplish his purposes; but there was some truth in his statement. Their eyes were opened. They had a knowledge of good and evil just as the Gods have. They became as Gods; for that is one of the features, one of the peculiar attributes of those who attain unto that glory—they understand the difference between good and evil.

In our pre-existent state, in our spiritual existence, I do not know how extensive our knowledge of good and evil was. That is not fully revealed. But this I do know that when we come to earth and become clothed with mortality, we do arrive at a knowledge of good and evil, and that knowledge prepares us for that future existence which we will have in the eternal worlds; it will enable us to enter upon a career that is never ending, that will continue onward and upward throughout all the ages of eternity.

It is for this purpose that we are here. God has given unto us this probation for the express purpose of obtaining a knowledge of good and evil—of understanding evil and being able to overcome the evil—and by overcoming it receive the exaltation and glory that He has in store for us. . . . (Sept. 28, 1884, JD 26:190-91)

A precious probation. The admonition conveyed to the living by the death of our friends is one that should be taken to heart. Every one should so live each day that no duty will be unperformed or neglected. The days of our probation are given unto us in which to perform certain work. We cannot live twice; there is but one life given unto us, and during that life we must lay the foundation for future existence.

It must be a terrible feeling to become conscious on the other side of the veil that while we had opportunities afforded us of doing the work assigned to us in this mortal existence we failed to do it. What a reflection it must be, for instance, for a man who is a member of the Church and has abundance of means to find himself tormented by the consciousness that he has failed to contribute of his means as the Lord requires towards the work of salvation by the payment of tithing and other things. He has left his money behind him, and somebody else possesses it, and he is poor indeed. It must be torment for one who calls himself a Latter-day Saint to wake up in eternity and find himself in such a condition. And so with every other duty that devolves upon us. The command of the Savior is to lay up treasures in heaven, and every young person should remember how important this is.

The days of your probation, children, are more precious to you than gold. Be careful of them. Avoid all manner of sin, and so live that the spirit and power and blessing of God will attend you, whether you live long upon the earth or only for a short period. (Sept. 15, 1881, JI 16:210)

The antagonism of Satan. We have a foe opposed to us that is the most wily, that is the most cunning, that is the most determined, that is the most unscrupulous, that can be imagined, and that foe is one who was once a great angel holding authority in the presence of God. He was our brother, sitting side by side with our Redeemer, having equal opportunities with Him. But he rebelled. . . .

Over this earth he has wielded for generations great sway; his dominion has been almost unquestioned, and he has imagined that he would gain supremacy in the earth and be successful in preventing the Father from fulfilling his designs concerning the earth. Therefore, he has sought by every means within his power to destroy the work of the Father. He has shed the most precious blood which has coursed in the veins of mortal man to accomplish his purposes. He has filled the earth with lies. He has circulated every abominable thing. He has stirred up the children of God one against the other and has inspired them with the most deadly and hostile sentiments against everything that is holy and pure and god-like. . . .

Satan restrained by God. If he had the power, he would sweep this entire people from the face of the earth. If he could, he would destroy us all. . . . It is because he has not the power that he does not do it; it is because our Father and God checkmates him and restrains him and overrules his acts that he does not do this. The disposition is there; the willingness is there; the murderous spirit is there, everything is there that is necessary to accomplish this except the power to do it, which God in His providence withholds or controls, so as to prevent its exercise. We know this. . . . We have this kind of a foe to contend against. (Aug. 23, 1884, JD 25:301-2)

Satan serves a purpose. This earth is not always going to be the pandemonium it is today, in some respects. It is not always going to be the hell it is today for millions of human beings who are suffering and toiling and going down to the grave in misery, as they are in almost every land. He is not going to allow this to continue; for this fair earth was created for man's abode and happiness.

Satan, however, has obtained power over man, and it seems as though he had got possession of this earth and that it would always remain as it is now. But not so. Men have said, "Why doesn't the Lord kill the devil?" Well, the devil answers His purpose, in his place. (Mar. 11, 1894, DW 48:479)

Must overcome all influences. One of the great objects, as I imagine, which God has in view in sending us here upon the earth is to give us experience in the influences of the earth that we may contend with them successfully and overcome them, that when we pass beyond the veil, we may be in a position to comprehend them to a greater extent than we could had we not come here and felt the influences to which human nature is subject. (Nov. 13, 1864, JD 11:29)

Effect of evil influences. Every properly constituted person can feel the influence of the various spirits that are in the world and that seek to bring us in subjection to them. To some it is given to see these influences, but all can feel them . . . . You will see a man all at once seized with a spirit of anger; another time you will see a person seized with a spirit of jealousy or some other evil influence infuriated sometimes, so much so that he or she is transformed. You have seen people's faces completely changed by the spirit that takes possession of them. They cannot see that power; but it is undoubtedly a spiritual entity. We may not be conscious of it, but it takes possession of us if we yield to it.

Everyone has power to resist evil. The Lord our God has sent us here to get experience in these things so that we may know the good from the evil and be able to close our hearts against the evil. . . . It is true that some have greater power of resistance than others, but everyone has the power to close his heart against doubt, against darkness, against unbelief, against depression, against anger, against hatred, against jealousy, against malice, against envy. God has given this power unto all of us, and we can gain still greater power by calling upon Him for that which we lack. If it were not so, how could we be condemned for giving way to wrong influences?

There could be no condemnation for our doing what we could not help; but we can help doing these things. We can help yielding to wrong influences and being quarrelsome and selfish. We can help giving way to the spirit of theft, and we can resist the spirit of lust. God has given us power to resist these things, that our hearts may be kept free from them and also from doubt; and when Satan comes and assails us, it is our privilege to say, "Get thee behind me, Satan, for I have no lot nor portion in you, and you have no part in me. I am in the service of God, and I am going to serve Him, and you can do what you please. It is no use you presenting yourself with your blandishments to me. You come and try to insinuate into my heart evil thoughts about the servants of God or about the work of God, and I will not listen to you; I will close my heart against you. . . ."

Whenever darkness fills our minds, we may know that we are not possessed of the Spirit of God, and we must get rid of it. When we are filled with the Spirit of God, we are filled with joy, with peace and with happiness no matter what our circumstances may be; for it is a spirit of cheerfulness and of happiness. . . .

This life our second estate. This is our second estate. We kept our first estate. In the time of trial in the eternal worlds, when the spirits had to choose between Satan and Jesus, we and all the children of men who are on the face of the earth adhered to our Father. There was one-third of the hosts of heaven who joined Satan in his rebellion. The plan which he proposed for the salvation of the children of men was so specious and attractive that one-third of the children of God thought Satan was right and the Father wrong. These did not keep their first estate, and therefore they were denied the privilege of coming on earth and receiving a tabernacle. They are consigned to darkness—to hell—and are in torment. They are angels to the devil. . . .

Now, the Lord our God has given unto us this probation, which we call our second estate. . . . We consented to come here. For when the foundations of the earth were laid, the sons of God sang together, and rejoiced because an earth was prepared to which they could come and receive tabernacles and enjoy the blessings connected therewith. It was a step in our progress towards the glory that our Father has attained unto.

The Lord has given unto all the children of men His Spirit; not the Holy Ghost with its gifts, for that is only received by obedience to the commandments of God; but every man receives the light of the Spirit, and every man that has listened to and cherished it has joined this Church. Those who have not listened to the voice of the Spirit have not received the Gospel. (Aug. 26, 1894, DW 49:449-50)

Choice spirits born now. We have been told repeatedly that God has reserved in the heavens choice spirits to come forth in this last dispensation, because of the greatness and the magnitude of the work to be accomplished. Of course, among the spirits of men, as we have proved in our mortal existence, there are differences of degree. It has required apparently the most valiant men and women to come forth in the last days for reasons which ought to be plain to those who reflect.

This is not a short lived dispensation; it is to go on increasing in power and volume until it shall fill the whole earth, and the earth be redeemed and sanctified. And, of course, it requires great valor, great obedience and great gifts in order to accomplish the end that is to be attained under the promises of God. The Lord has permitted spirits to be born among the various races of mankind that are fitted and qualified to accomplish this great work. He has called His servants as fishers and as hunters to go forth to the various nations of the earth, and hunt and gather out therefrom those spirits who shall be drawn to the Gospel. (Oct. 7, 1894, DW 49:738)

I know that the Lord, for a wise purpose, has called the noblest spirits that he had around him to come forth in this dispensation. He called them to come in humble circumstances that they might receive the experience necessary to try and prove them in all things, that they might descend below all things and gradually begin to ascend above all things; there was a wise design in this. (Mar. 19, 1865, JD 11:100)

God has reserved spirits for this dispensation who have the courage and determination to face the world and all the powers of the evil one, visible and invisible, to proclaim the Gospel and maintain the truth and establish and build up the Zion of our God fearless of all consequences. He has sent these spirits in this generation to lay the foundation of Zion never more to be overthrown and to raise up a seed that will be righteous and that will honor God and honor Him supremely and be obedient to Him under all circumstances. (May 6, 1866, JD 11:230)

Constant stream of noble spirits being born. I feel sure that this work will lose nothing by the departure of those who are called to go; for . . . there is a constant stream of emigration from the spirit world of noble spirits to take the places of those who are going hence. As they pass away, having filled their probation, others are pressing forward to the gates of life, anxious to emerge into this sphere of existence, pressing forward, a vast column of them, noble and holy beings, ready to take their part in the probation which God has assigned unto all his children. (July 6, 1884, DNW 33:498)

God has chosen us out of the world and has given us a great mission. I do not entertain a doubt myself but that we were selected and fore-ordained for the mission before the world was, that we had our parts allotted to us in this mortal state of existence as our Savior had His assigned to Him. (May 1, 1887, JI 22:140)

A life of progress. It should be the aim of every Latter-day Saint to be godly, to understand godliness, and to carry out godliness in his or her life, so that we all shall be like our Father in heaven as near as we possibly can be. Jesus has given us to understand that it is possible for His disciples to be perfect; for He says: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) He did not mean by that that we should attain to the fullness of godhood in this life, but that we should carry out in our lives and exemplify in our conduct those laws and principles which God has revealed and which are the principles of perfection and godliness.

If we do this every day, we shall eventually be permitted to enter into the presence of our Father and God and dwell with Him. But unless we take this course we cannot approach perfection. Therefore, the life of a Latter-day Saint is a life of progress—a life of continued improvement. The Latter-day Saint who is living as he should do is better today than he was yesterday; he will be better tomorrow than he is today. If there be any imperfections in his life, he is eager to discover and correct them, that he may become more perfect and more like our Father. (May 19, 1889, DW 39:17)

All must progress or retrograde. We cannot value our calling too highly. And I say to you that you have entered upon a pathway that leads back to God. You may dally by the wayside; you may fool away your time; you may be idle, indifferent and careless; but you only lose thereby the progress that you ought to make. Unless you commit the unpardonable sin, you will have to progress. It is written in the eternity of our God that every soul must progress that does not retrograde.

Therefore, make good use of the time you have. Now is the time of your probation; now is the time of harvest; now is the summer of your days. Let it not be said, "the harvest is past, the summer is ended, and my soul is not saved." But let us bear in mind that now is the probation that God has given us. Let us make use of it by doing the works of righteousness, by keeping the commandments of God, by having our eye on the mark of our high calling in Christ Jesus. (Nov. 9, 1884, JD 26:86-87)

Perfection in our sphere. The main thing for us is to cherish in our hearts the spirit that God gives, cherish those good and holy influences that He pours out upon His children, live up to the light that He has revealed. If we do this, we are as perfect in our sphere as God our Eternal Father is in His. . . . Every being, no matter what his condition or circumstances, no matter what his race or his nationality, no matter what his creed may be—every being who lives up to the light that God has given, whether it be much or little, is perfect in his sphere just as God the Eternal Father is, and will receive a reward according to the light that he has received. (July 6, 1884, DNW 33:498)
