Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 2

The Fall and the Atonement

Adam fell that men might be. I rejoice myself in the fall of man. I rejoice that Adam partook of the forbidden fruit, for he did so knowingly and understandingly, comprehending fully the results that would attend his partaking of that fruit. It was not so with Eve. Eve was deceived; Eve was beguiled. The adversary, Lucifer, through the serpent, beguiled Eve and deceived her and induced her to eat of the forbidden fruit.

It was not so with Adam. He was aware of all the consequences that would follow that which he did; but he knew that unless he did partake there would be an eternal separation between him and the partner that God had given to him, so he transgressed the law. Death would inevitably come upon her because of the transgression, and she would be thrust out from the presence of God. He knew this, comprehended it, and knowing it he nevertheless partook of the fruit, and he fell. As Lehi says: "Adam fell that men might be; and men are that they might have joy." (2 Nephi 2:25.) Because had he not partaken of the fruit, they would have been eternally separated. (Jan. 18, 1885, DNW 34:50)

The fall foreseen by God. It was a part of the plan that was understood in the heavens before Adam was placed in the garden. God by His foreknowledge understood perfectly that Adam, in the exercise of his agency, would fall. Therefore, He prepared a Redeemer in the person of His Son Jesus Christ, who we are told was "the lamb slain from the foundation of the world." (Revelation 13:8.) God having seen that Adam would fall, that death would come upon him and that a Redeemer would be necessary in order to redeem man from the effects of the fall—for unless there had been a Redeemer provided, Adam and all his posterity would have slept an eternal sleep, they would have been consigned to the tomb and there would have been no redemption therefrom because of the penalty that had been pronounced by the Father upon him if he committed this act—God, knowing all this, provided a Redeemer. That Redeemer was the Son of God, Jesus our Savior, in whose name we all approach the Father, in whose name salvation is given unto the children of men. It was arranged beforehand that He should come and perform His mission in the meridian of time—lay down His life, as it was known that He would do, through the wickedness of bad men. . . .

A way for salvation prepared. It would be in violation of those eternal laws which our God Himself recognizes, for Him to have interfered and deprived man and woman of their agency. But, knowing the consequences of their actions, He prepared a way for their salvation and their redemption, and thus it is that we are born on the earth. It was part of the design that we should be subjected to all these afflictions and trials and ordeals that belong to this mortal state of existence. This was part of the plan. (Sept. 28, 1884, JD 26:189)

Race of Gods redeemed. It was necessary that a probation should be given to man. The courts of heaven were thronged with spirits that desired tabernacles. They wanted to come and obtain fleshly tabernacles as their Father had done. Their progenitors, the race of Gods with whom they associated and from whom they have descended, had had the privilege of coming on earthly probations and receiving tabernacles, which by obedience they had been able to redeem. Hence, I say, the courts of heaven were thronged with spirits anxious to take upon themselves tabernacles of flesh, agreeing to come forth and be tested and tried in order that they might receive exaltation. . . .

Death a consequence of the fall. One of the consequences of the fall was that in the day that man ate of that fruit he should surely die—die so far as the temporal body was concerned; that body should be consigned to the tomb, from which it could not be resurrected until the redemption was effected. To effect this resurrection, before man was placed upon this earth, before Eve was exposed to the temptation of the adversary, God prepared a Redeemer in the person of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. . . . Thus has a means been prepared by which the spirits—our spirits and the spirits of all men—should come forth and receive tabernacles, and a work of probation commence here upon the earth. (Jan. 18, 1885, DW 34:50)

Now the penalty of the sin that our father Adam committed was death—"In the days that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die" (Genesis 2:17) was the proclamation of the Creator; and when Adam sinned, he paid the penalty and died and entailed death upon every generation of his posterity, and that sleep of death would have been eternal had it not been for the death of the Son of God. (July 14, 1872, JD 15:114)

Earth cursed by the fall. The earth has been cursed because of man's transgressions. When the earth was first organized and man was placed upon it, everything was lovely and beautiful. The earth was fair and yielded its fruits in great abundance. Every living thing dwelt on the earth in peace. But man soon began to listen to Satan, and broke God's laws. The evils which now exist then commenced to appear.

When men began to steal, blaspheme, quarrel, hate one another and murder, then love and peace were withdrawn, and enmity also extended to the animals and birds. Earthquakes tore up the face of the ground, and mountains and valleys were seen. Floods came, and the sea spread and covered parts of the earth and divided it up. Fruitful spots were turned into deserts and many changes took place all over the earth, through God's judgments being poured out upon wicked men. Man's sin changed earth in many places from a heaven into a hell. (Dec. 15, 1866, JI 1:95)

Atonement should be understood. The atonement of the Son of God is a principle that should be clearly understood by us, because unless there is an intelligent comprehension of it, we fail to appreciate the value of the salvation that has been extended to us through the atonement of our Redeemer. It is a great mystery to many people that Christ should die and that through His death redemption should come; and because it is a mystery and they cannot comprehend it by their human wisdom, they are inclined to reject Him as their Savior. Now, there are many things connected with life that we cannot understand, and, of course, there are many more things connected with eternal salvation that in our present finite condition we cannot grasp.

Necessary to walk by faith. It is necessary that human beings should walk by faith, that they should have faith in God and in the plan of salvation that He has revealed. It being an infinite plan, a divine plan, a plan prepared by the Creator for our salvation, it would be presumptuous in us to imagine that we can comprehend it all at once, or that failing to comprehend it, or failing to have it fully explained to us, we are therefore at liberty to reject it.

Man in his present condition is not equal with God. He cannot grasp the fullness of the plan of salvation. It reaches into eternity; and . . . it had its origin before the earth was framed. It was necessary that there should be, in the wisdom of God, an infinite atonement, that a Being pure and holy, such as the Son of God was, should come here and die, in order to make amends for the broken law. (May 10, 1891, MS 53:561-62)

Jesus subject to temptation. Jesus, our Great High Priest and Elder Brother, when He was upon the earth, had to contend against evil. He was not free from temptation. He was tempted in all things like unto us, but He differed from us in being able to overcome temptation, in being sinless through the power that He had through His sonship. But He set us the example. He knows, through that which He had to contend against, the weakness of human nature. He stands as mediator at the right hand of the Father pleading for his brethren and sisters who, like Himself, are subject to the trials, temptations and afflictions that exist in this mortal life.

But because of this shall we say that God does not speak? Because we do not see His face, shall we say He does not exist? Because we do not hear His voice, shall we say He has no voice? Because we do not see His hand or His arm, . . . shall we say that He has neither hand nor arm? Certainly not. (Apr. 24, 1881, JD 22:239)
