Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 3

Death and the Resurrection

Reincarnation a false doctrine. That a belief in reincarnation should prevail among the Latter-day Saints seems strange for there is nothing in the Gospel, as taught in the Bible, in the Book of Mormon, in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants or in the teachings of inspired men, that furnishes the least foundation for such a conception. It is true that preexistence is taught; but the pre-existence in which we believe is confined to our first estate. We are taught that our present life is our second estate, and this is a probation given unto us in which to gain experience and to be tried and purified to prepare us for our next estate. The teachings of men who have had a deep understanding concerning the purpose of our Great Creator in placing us here in this condition of existence show that this is the grand opportunity which is given to man—an opportunity which he must not fail to avail himself of as it is the only opportunity that he will have on the earth; his earthly existence is confined to one appearance in the flesh.

When a child comes forth, it possesses a tabernacle. That tabernacle is the house of its spirit, intimately associated with the spirit, separated, it is true, for a time by death, but designed to be re-united in the great hereafter. The Savior says that His disciples looked upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies to be a bondage. . . . We are taught that all holy beings looked forward with joyful anticipation to the time when their bodies and spirits will be re-united in the resurrection. They do not look forward to reincarnation or to another birth as a baby but to the union of their spirits and their bodies—the bodies that they possessed and in which they had passed through all the trials and temptations and vicissitudes incident to a mortal career.

This is the doctrine taught in the Gospel; and the doctrine of reincarnation is utterly foreign to every principle which God has revealed in the last days to His Church.

Since the revelation of the Gospel to the world through the Prophet Joseph Smith, there has been a great disposition manifested by many people to investigate the oriental religions and to appropriate from them strange ideas entirely foreign to those that have been believed in by the people of Christendom. An itching for something new seems to have been the incentive in many instances to adopt strange views and to announce beliefs that are antagonistic to Christianity. Prompted by this feeling numbers have adopted Buddhism and other forms of oriental belief.

In this way Satan seeks to divert the children of men from the truth; for although his power is not visible to mortal eyes, yet he exercises it to a wonderful extent, and the children of men are led hither and thither by his influence and the agencies through which he operates. When Latter-day Saints do not escape these false doctrines, how much less likely to resist error are those who do not know the truth as revealed in these days from heaven?

The Latter-day Saints should be warned on these points and not be carried about by "every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive" (Ephesians 4:14), but cling to the simple and plain truth, as God has revealed it and as He teaches it unto those who will receive it, not seeking to dive into mysteries and to adopt strange and startling ideas but confining themselves to that which God has written, cultivating within themselves continually His Holy Spirit that through it they may be led into all truth. (Nov. 1, 1893, JI 28:675-76)

The value of life. It is a dreadful sin for one to destroy his own body. Everything should be done among us to show the abhorrence of the people to the practice and how great a crime it is in the sight of heaven. No man has the right to rush unbidden out of this life into the life beyond. God has given us a probation, and He has had a wise purpose in doing this. A man who, when sent on a mission, leaves his post and returns home contrary to the counsel of those who preside over him is held by the Latter-day Saints as a deserter and as unworthy of the Priesthood. Dishonor attaches to such conduct, and men who do this among us are viewed as weak and unreliable. But this is a trivial act compared with the taking of one's own life and leaving the place which God has assigned to us in this world by an act of self-destruction. Human life is too sacred to be extinguished in this manner without incurring the severe displeasure of heaven.

We should by every means in our power impress upon the rising generation the value of life and how dreadful a sin it is to take life. The lives of animals even should be held far more sacred than they are. Young people should be taught to be very merciful to the brute creation and not to take life wantonly or for sport. The practice of hunting and killing game merely for sport should be frowned upon and not encouraged among us. God has created the fowls and the beasts for man's convenience and comfort and for his consumption at proper times and under proper circumstances; but he does not justify men in wantonly killing those creatures which He has made and with which He has supplied the earth.

Much less can anyone be justified for wantonly taking human life, as it can scarcely be compared with the life of animals. Man is the lord of creation. He has descended from God, and having received a tabernacle of flesh he should value it as beyond price and do all in his power to preserve it. God has given us laws and instructions concerning the best manner of preserving our bodies, and at no time has He given the least encouragement to anyone to destroy the temple of the spirit which He has provided for them. (Apr. 15, 1896, JI 31:218-19)

Suicide is murder. Man did not create himself. He did not furnish his spirit with a human dwelling place. It is God who created man, both body and spirit. Man has no right, therefore, to destroy that which he had no agency in creating. They who do so are guilty of murder, self-murder it is true; but they are no more justified in killing themselves than they are in killing others. What difference of punishment there is for the two crimes, I do not know; but it is clear that no one can destroy so precious a gift as that of life without incurring a severe penalty. (Sept. 15, 1886, JI 21:275)

Funerals of suicides. Anyone committing this crime should not expect a public and honorable funeral. There is a wide distinction between the condition of one who dies a natural death and one who dies by his own hand. No one should be led to believe that if he commits this sinful act he will still receive the same respect and honor at his burial from the Priesthood and people of God that others do who die as faithful members of the Church.

No encouragement of this kind should be given to anyone who has an inclination to commit suicide. For this reason a person who commits suicide should be buried privately and without ostentation, and certainly the funeral services should be conducted without the authorities of the Church lending their presence to the funeral. All should be taught that it is a sin of great magnitude to take the life which the Creator has given to them. (June 1, 1893, JI 28:352)

Who resurrected Jesus? In dealing with this subject, care should be taken not to advance mere opinions. It is a very important subject and one that should be treated with the utmost seriousness, and no one should indulge in theories outside of the written word concerning it. There is plenty written upon this subject to give food for reflection and to furnish comfort for mankind, and there is not the least necessity to go beyond that which the Lord has made plain upon it.

It is recorded that Jesus said,

Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up. . . . But He spake of the temple of His body. (John 2:19, 21)

Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live. For as the Father hath life in himself; so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself; and hath given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man. Marvel not at this: for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the grave shall hear his voice. (John 5:25-28.)

Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father. (John 10:17-18.)

From these passages it is evident that the Savior had the power of the resurrection within Himself and held the keys. This power He has received from His Father; for as He says: "As the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself." (John 5:26.)

Jesus was, as He says, "the resurrection and the life." (John 11:25.) (Apr. 1, 1891, JI 26:219-20)

The resurrection—to be universal. Concerning the resurrection of the dead the word of the Lord is very clear and definite. It leaves no room to doubt that through the redemption of the Son of God all the children of men will be resurrected. . . .

The word of the Lord being so plain and free from doubt upon this subject, can anyone, after this, question the completeness of the redemption of our Savior or place a limit upon the number of the children of men to be resurrected? The deeds of men, whether good or evil, cannot prevent the resurrection of their bodies. Their resurrection will be accomplished without any agency of theirs and independent of them. But their deeds can hasten or delay that event; and to that extent only is their resurrection affected by that which they themselves do. The spirits of the righteous will be resurrected with their bodies much speedier than the spirits of the wicked will be; in other words, death does not have power to retain the bodies of the righteous for any great length of time in its grasp. But not so with the wicked for the Lord says: "These are the rest of the dead; and they live not again until the thousand years are ended, neither again, until the end of the earth." (D&C 88:101.) Yet then they all will be brought forth by the power of the Lamb of God. (June 15, 1891, JI 26:378-80)

The resurrection as affecting the sons of perdition. In many minds there has been a great misapprehension on the question of the resurrection. Some have had the idea and have taught it that the sons of perdition will not be resurrected at all. They base this idea and draw this conclusion from the 38th and 39th verses of Section 76 of the book of Doctrine and Covenants, where the Lord says: "Yea, verily, the only ones who shall not be redeemed in the due time of the Lord, after the sufferings of his wrath. For all the rest shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead, through the triumph and the glory of the Lamb, who was slain, who was in the bosom of the Father before the worlds were made."

A careful reading of these verses, however, and especially of the preceding verses will show that the Lord does not, in this language, exclude even the sons of perdition from the resurrection. It is plain that the intention is to refer to them explicitly as the only ones on whom the second death shall have any power. . . .

This is by no means to say that they are to have no resurrection. Jesus our Lord and Savior died for all, and all will be resurrected—good and bad, white and black, people of every race, whether sinners or not; and no matter how great their sins may be, the resurrection of their bodies is sure. Jesus has died for them, and they all will be redeemed from the grave through the atonement which He has made. . . .

It is abundantly evident that all mankind will be redeemed from death and the grave, and all will stand before the judgment seat of God to be judged for the deeds done in the body. It is therefore an entirely false conception of the great and divine plan of existence which is entertained by those who believe that there will be no resurrection of the body in the case of the sons of perdition. (Feb. 15, 1900, JI 35:123-24)

The destiny of sons of perdition. As to the future punishment of the sons of perdition, the Lord says that they shall go away into everlasting punishment, to reign with the devil and his angels. But, He adds:

The end thereof, neither the place thereof, nor their torment, no man knows; neither was it revealed, neither is, neither will be revealed unto man, except to them who are made partakers thereof. Nevertheless, I, the Lord, show it by vision unto many, but straightway shut it up again; wherefore, the end, the width, the height, the depth, and the misery thereof, they understand not, neither any man except they who are ordained unto this condemnation. (D&C 76:45-48.)

Some have entertained the idea that after being resurrected the sons of perdition would be deprived of their bodies and forever be companions to the devil and his angels, being like them without a body. . . . But some others equally as intelligent believe that the sons of perdition would never be raised, or if they were, the spirit would then be destroyed and go back into its native element, and this would be the second death and of course the end of their torment.

In view of what the Lord says upon this subject, these ideas are, to some extent at least, speculative. Where the Lord has shown something concerning this by vision to those whom He had favored in this respect, they would not be justified in making it known. But the Elders are entirely safe in confining their views and teachings to the written word. That the sons of perdition will be resurrected there can be no doubt if we rely upon what has been said by many of the Prophets and Apostles, as well as the Savior Himself. Argument beyond this concerning their future can scarcely be profitable. (May 1, 1892, JI 27:287-88)

Not heirs of salvation. They will be redeemed and brought forth, but they will not be brought forth in the manner that we will be resurrected; they will not receive that redemption which the rest of the children of men will receive. God, in this glorious revelation through His servant Joseph, taught this to us, that there will be a time when every human being, except the sons of perdition, will partake of the salvation of our God. And even it is said concerning them of the telestial glory that they are heirs of salvation. But the sons of perdition are not heirs of salvation; they will not receive redemption, they having committed the unpardonable sin, from which they never can be redeemed, so far, at least, as God has taught us in His revelations. . . .

No matter what a man's sins may be, whatever crimes he may have committed, the resurrection of the mortal body is assured to him by the redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ. But after that comes the second death; and they who are sons of perdition will partake of that. . . .

All men will come forth from the dead regardless of their condition, regardless of their sins, the just and the unjust; all will stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and they will have His judgment passed upon them. Some will receive and have pronounced upon them the blessings of eternal lives, as promised to the faithful, and be exalted; another class will not receive exaltation, but they will nevertheless be redeemed, and there will be degrees in the condition of the children of men there, just as there are degrees in our condition here. There will be this difference, however; the righteous and the wicked will not mingle together as they now do, but a great separation will take place. (Oct. 6, 1889, DW 39:594)

Death holds no terror for righteous. Many people in the world are afraid of death. They think of it with terror. But it should not be a cause of dread to Latter-day Saints. And it is not. No true Saint is afraid to die. The Saints know that God is their friend. When they pass from this life, they go home to Him. He has promised that they "shall not taste of death, for it shall be sweet unto them." (D&C 42:46.) He smooths their pathway to the spirit world and makes it a pleasant one for them to walk in; they can tread it without fear. But He says, respecting them who die not in Him, "wo unto them, for their death is bitter." (D&C 42:47.)

How is it with the wicked and the apostate? They have no real joy or satisfaction in this life. In their secret hearts they despise themselves, and they are despised and distrusted by others. Their lives are miserable, and, then, with what horror and dread do they look forward to the time of their death! In their sight death is a grim and terrible monster. They have no cheering promises of God to lean upon. The road before them, which leads to the spirit land, is dark and dismal; they have a foretaste of that which awaits them, and they shrink back with affright. (July 1, 1868, JI 3:100)

A tangible faith in resurrection. We know when a man dies, inasmuch as he dies faithful to the truth, having kept the commandments of God and obeyed the ordinances of the house of God as far as they have been revealed and as he has had an opportunity, that he is secure, that his future is assured. He goes, as we are taught, to the Paradise of God, there to await the morning of the first resurrection. We know that his body will be called forth from the dust and from the tomb and that his spirit will re-animate it, and he enter upon that glorious condition of existence concerning which so many promises have been made. In this respect the faith of the Latter-day Saints is not a chimera; it is something tangible. . . .

A promise to the faithful. It is not a strong assurance or hope that the Latter-day Saints have that they will receive these blessings in the eternal worlds; but when the promise is sealed upon their heads that they shall come forth in the morning of the first resurrection and be crowned with glory, immortality and eternal lives, there is a testimony from God, our Eternal Father in the heavens above, which rests down upon them and confirms the truth of these words upon the soul of a faithful man or woman. They know, when words are pronounced upon them by a man who has the authority, sealing upon them blessings, keys, thrones, principalities, powers and exaltations in the eternal Kingdoms of God our Father, . . . that these words are not the words of men but that they are the words of the Spirit of God inspiring that man and that God takes a record of that ordinance in the heavens and that it is seated upon them and upon their children and that they will actually come forth in the morning of the first resurrection according to the promise. Hence, there is no fear of death in the minds of the Latter-day Saints.

If the stake was standing before us prepared for our execution—if we had that faith that we should have and which animated the Saints of God in ancient days—we would walk as calmly to that stake and be bound to it as we would walk to eat a meal of victuals, knowing that God, our Heavenly Father, will bestow all the blessings that have been sealed upon us.

This was the faith which animated the ancients and sustained them in the midst of persecutions, and this is the faith that we should cherish and cultivate as a people and as individuals. Woe to the man who has lost that faith! Dreadful is his condition if he has not that faith living within him. Woe to that man, for his condition is far worse than his first condition, that is, before he had these blessings sealed upon him. (July 19, 1874, JD 17:136-38)

The doctrine of translation. "Does translation imply an entire change in the body?"

There is nothing written upon this subject concerning Elijah, who was translated. But we have the words of the Lord in the Book of Mormon concerning the three Nephites unto whom the promise was made, in the words of Jesus, "For ye shall never taste of death." They were told that they should "never endure the pains of death," but when Jesus should come in His glory they were to "be changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to immortality." They were not to have pain while they should "dwell in the flesh, neither sorrow save it be for the sins of the world." (3 Nephi 28:7-9.) They were caught up into heaven, and it is recorded that they could not tell whether they were in the body or out of the body; "for it did seem unto them like a transfiguration of them, that they were changed from this body of flesh into an immortal state." In speaking of them, the Prophet Mormon says, "Whether they were mortal or immortal from the day of their transfiguration" (3 Nephi 28:15, 17) he knew not. The Prophet Mormon afterwards added that he had enquired of the Lord concerning these three Apostles, and He made it manifest unto him "that there must be a change wrought upon their bodies, or it needs be that they must taste death; therefore, that they might not taste of death there was a change wrought upon their bodies, that they might not suffer pain nor sorrow save it were for the sins of the world." But, he adds, "this change was not equal to that which should take place at the last day." By this change "Satan could have no power over them, that he could not tempt them; and they were sanctified in the flesh." At the judgment day of Christ, however, "they were to receive a greater change." (3 Nephi 28:37-40.)

This gives us a clear idea of the change that was wrought in these three Apostles. In the translation of Elijah and others who may have been translated there doubtless were similar changes made such as the Prophet Mormon describes as having taken place in the case of the three Nephites. (Jan. 15, 1898, JI 33:75)

Transfiguration. The evangelists Matthew and Mark give an account of the Transfiguration of our Lord Jesus Christ. . . . Both the narratives are very brief but very significant. It is stated that "his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light." (Matthew 17:2.) This was a transfiguration in the appearance of His person and raiment and not of the form of either. This change was of a heavenly character but not one of continued duration.

This circumstance is one of the most wonderful and instructive incidents in the life of our Savior. The scene was at the top of a "high mountain" but the name of the mountain is not given. It has been supposed by some biblical scholars to have been Mount Tabor, but as this height is fifty miles from Caesarea Philippi, where Jesus last taught, it is now believed that it was a mount less distant, possibly Mount Hermon. It may have been neither, and nothing forbids us to imagine that it was that "exceeding high mountain" (Matthew 4:8) from whence the devil showed the Redeemer the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them. However that may be, it was without doubt on a mount that was not the resort of the multitude but a place removed from the familiar haunts of men.

There is nothing said by either of the evangelists of any preparatory arrangements for this important visit of Jesus and His three specially chosen disciples, Peter, James and John. That arrangements had been made there can be but little doubt. The top of the mountain was reached. A supernatural light enveloped the scene; a divine radiance pervaded the countenance of Jesus and His garments were matchless in their whiteness. Near Him were disclosed two personages from the world of spirits in the person of Moses and Elias. The Elias being, as the Prophet Joseph Smith informs us, John the Baptist. (JST, Mark 9:3.) These heavenly messengers came without doubt in answer to prayer. What they said and what they did is not revealed. But the glory of God overshadowed and overpowered the three Apostles insomuch that they were sore afraid; and Peter who apparently thought it was his duty to say something, but not knowing exactly what, proposed that they erect three tabernacles. Then they heard a voice in this excellent glory saying, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him." (Matthew 17:5.) This voice was no other than the voice of God the Father bearing record of His only begotten Son. What transpired between Jesus and His heavenly visitors the Apostles were forbidden to tell until He had risen from the dead.

The difference between resurrection and transfiguration appears to be this: the former implies an entire change in the body, while the latter leaves the body unchanged and implies only an enveloping of the body by divine glory for the time being. The only instance besides the transfiguration of Christ of which we have any record in the old Scriptures is of Moses who, when coming from the presence of Jehovah, was obliged to cover his face for it shone so brightly with the divine glory that the people could not look upon him. (Jan. 15, 1898, JI 33:74-75)
