Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 4

Zion and Its Redemption

An important period of earth's history. We are living in one of the most important periods of the earth's history. Events are of such a character connected with us as to excite the greatest interest, and no one connected with this people who feels as he or she should can help being interested in the way in which this work is progressing and attracting attention throughout the earth. . . .

God is dealing with us in a most remarkable manner and is fulfilling, through His people, the predictions of the holy Prophets, and we behold on every hand, when we open our eyes to see and our hearts to understand, the great events which God said should transpire in some day and age in the future. (Oct. 11, 1874, JD 17:260)

This continent is Zion. The whole of this continent is the land of Zion. But it is impracticable to organize Wards and Stakes in the old states. There has been a peculiar providence manifested in the gathering of the Saints to new or unoccupied lands where they could live together and have the organizations which the Lord has instructed His people to enter into. A populous state—such as are all the old settled states from which the Saints have been gathered—is not a fit place in which to organize Wards or Stakes. There could be no separation between the members of the Church and those who are not of the Church. This would defeat the purpose of the Lord; for the object of the gathering is to have the Latter-day Saints gather together in places where they can have such organizations as they now enjoy.

In the due time of the Lord the whole land of Zion will be occupied by the Church of Christ. When that happy day arrives, the organizations of the Church will be carried out in perfection. But a great many things must take place and a great many changes must be effected before that day arrives. (Aug. 1, 1898, JI 33:539)

Both Jerusalems to be restored. At the present time the sites of both the Old and the New Jerusalem are occupied by strangers. Israel has not yet been gathered home, and the Latter-day Saints are still awaiting permission to go back to Missouri. But the day is at hand when the Lord will restore these places to their rightful owners, and then there will be manifestations of divine power equal to those shown ancient Israel, combined with the integrity, the virtue and the unfaltering faith of those who sought to establish Zion in this dispensation. (Oct. 1, 1898, JI 33:668)

Redemption of Zion not understood. The Lord acts with us as we act with our children, to some extent. He does not tell us everything. I suppose that if the early Elders of this Church could have seen all that we had to pass through and the length of time that would elapse before the redemption of Zion was achieved, they would have fainted by the wayside and have felt that human nature could not endure such trials.

I know, in my early recollections of the teachings of the Elders, they imagined, judging from their remarks, that it would be only a few years before Zion would be redeemed. When we were coming to these valleys, I happened to be present when some of the Twelve Apostles were talking concerning the future, and the recollection of that conversation is in my mind now; and I know that, though they were inspired men and filled with revelation, they did not conceive, as we now can conceive, of the events that would take place before Zion would be redeemed. It was necessary, seemingly, according to the mind of the Lord, that they should be encouraged with the hope that their efforts would result in complete triumph. . . .

Many revelations not obeyed. Well, many were tried because those revelations concerning the order of Enoch were not carried out, and they thought that Joseph was not a true prophet. They argued in this way: "God knows His children, and if He gives a revelation to His children, He knows whether they can carry it out or not. Now, if Joseph were a Prophet and inspired of God, he would know whether the people were prepared for this, and the Lord would not have inspired him to give a revelation if they were not prepared," and the failure of the people to do this was laid to Joseph's charge, as though he had received false revelations and had attempted to do something that ought not to have been done.

The facts are that God reveals His truth continually to His children, and He lays before them principles to obey as they are able to obey them. So it has been from that day until the present. There have been a great many revelations given to us that we have not had faith to carry out as they should be. (Nov. 1, 1891, MS 54:2, 16)

Redemption of Zion deferred. I do fear that we will defer the redemption of Zion indefinitely through our unwillingness to do the things that God requires at our hands. I have not an earthly doubt that this revelation given in 1834 would have been fulfilled to the very letter had our people obeyed the Lord as He desired; neither do I believe now that the redemption of Zion will be long deferred if the people will obey the Lord and keep His commandments. But the difficulty is, our hearts are hard and almost impenetrable in many instances. . . .

Some to live to help build center stake. Let us labor continually for the redemption of Zion and for the time when the promises which God has made to Zion will be fulfilled that we may build the center Stake of Zion and rear the house of the Lord there. There are men standing in this generation that will see it accomplished; but we do not want it put off to the very last. Let us all strive to fit and qualify ourselves and our families by obeying the commandments of God to the fullest extent so that we and our families may be remembered among those who shall be counted worthy to take part in the glorious work of redeeming Zion and enjoying the blessings thereof. (Oct. 8, 1899, CR 50, 53)

Preparation for Christ's coming. God in His revelations has informed us that it was on this choice land of Joseph where Adam was placed and the Garden of Eden was laid out. The spot has been designated, and we look forward with peculiar feelings to repossessing that land. We expect when that day shall come that we will be a very different people to what we are today. We will be prepared to commune with heavenly beings; at any rate the preparation will be going on very rapidly for Jesus to be revealed.

We expect that a society will be organized there that will be a pattern of heavenly society, that when Jesus and the heavenly beings who come with him are revealed in the clouds of heaven, their feelings will not be shocked by the change, for a society will be organized on the earth whose members will be prepared through the revelations of God to meet and associate with them, if not on terms of perfect equality, at least with some degree of equality. (Mar. 3, 1867, JD 11:337)

When will Zion be redeemed? When will the saints possess the Kingdom? Of this we may rest assured, they will not possess the Kingdom, if by that is meant the power to rule and exercise dominion over the earth, until they themselves have made such progress in the knowledge of God and the principles of truth as to be willing to yield an implicit obedience to Him and to be governed in all things by his laws. No matter how long a period may elapse before the Saints attain unto this condition, they must attain unto it (whether it be they who are now recognized as Saints or their children or another people who may be raised up) before the important and immense interests which God has promised shall yet be in their hands can be entrusted to them. If it were otherwise than this, the triumph of the Kingdom of God would be anything but a blessing to His people, for the power they would thus obtain they would not know how to use, except for their own destruction.

Before the Kingdom of God can have the power which every Saint anticipates and desires to see enjoyed, there must be a growth and development of the whole people suited to the new power and position which will be laid upon them. It is not only necessary that the authorities of the Church should comprehend the truth and be willing to be governed by its laws, but the whole people must become educated in the truth and be equally obedient to its requirements. The Kingdom cannot have power only as the people are willing to be governed by its laws.

However desirous the Almighty might be to bestow power and dominion upon the people, He could only do so, to be consistent with His designs, in proportion to their willingness to be thus governed; and they cannot be thus governed until among the people of God themselves there shall be found a majority of the Saints understanding the truth and having faith in the work and willing to render unmurmuring obedience to every requirement that may be made of them. When the time shall come—if it has not already come—when the majority of the people are in this condition and the remainder are approximating towards it, then may we indulge in the hope that the redemption of Zion and the triumph of the Kingdom are nigh at hand. . . .

It is folly for the Saints to neglect their duties and still think, while doing so, that within some given period Zion will be redeemed. Zion will be redeemed, and it may be within the period estimated by them; but they will not be in a position to be benefited by it if they are neglectful and dilatory in seeking for and acquiring that knowledge of the truth which their position and relationship to God and His work admits of their obtaining. (Aug. 31, 1861, MS 23:563-65)

A duty to build up Zion. Joseph said in the beginning that it was the duty of the Elders of this Church to labor constantly to build up Zion and not to build up that which is opposed to Zion. . . . God has not required it of me that I should build up anything that is opposed to Zion but on the contrary that I should always keep in my thoughts and be influenced by it in my actions that which will advance the cause of Zion and that which will not retard it or operate against it in any manner. (Aug. 26, 1883, JD 26:320)

I do not know any better thing that we can engage in than to build up the Zion of God. It is as good and as great a labor as we can be engaged in; in fact, it is the labor which God has assigned unto us as a people and as individuals, and if any of us are engaged in anything else, we are not in the line of our duty, and we should turn aside from that and pursue the path which God has marked out. (Oct. 11, 1874, JD 17:263)
