Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 5

The Last Days—A Testimony of Judgments

Prophecies fulfilled by natural means. Even Latter-day Saints have, doubtless, in many instances entertained erroneous views respecting the fulfillment of revelation and prophecies of the Bible. . . .

The Lord works in the midst of this people by natural means, and the greatest events that have been spoken of by the holy Prophets will come along so naturally as the consequence of certain causes that unless our eyes are enlightened by the Spirit of God and the spirit of revelation rests on us, we will fail to see that these are the events predicted by the holy Prophets. . . .

They will come along in so natural a manner, the Lord will bring them to pass in such a way that they will not be accepted by the people, except by those who can comprehend the truth, as the fulfillment of the predictions of the Prophets. It requires the Spirit of God to enable men and women to understand the things of God; it requires the Spirit of God to enable the people to comprehend the work of God and to perceive His movements and providences among the children of men. The man who is destitute of the Spirit of God cannot comprehend the work of God. (Nov. 2, 1879, JD 21:266-67)

Fulfillment of prophecy. A reader of the prophecies of ancient and modern times would naturally imagine that when the stupendous events which they mention should take place the world would be convinced of the work of God and would repent of their sins. But it is a remarkable fact that prophecy may be fulfilled in the plainest and most unmistakable manner and yet the great bulk of mankind refuse to believe that that which they see is the fulfillment. . . .

The Prophets have plainly predicted that before the coming of the Lord there should be a variety of signs given to the people by which the righteous might know that the day of the Lord was near at hand. The Savior Himself predicted that before His coming wars and rumors of wars should be heard, the whole earth should be in commotion, and men's hearts should fail them. Through the Prophet Joseph the Lord has told the people that after the testimony of the servants of God in these days wrath and indignation should come upon the people; there should be the testimony of earthquakes, that should cause groanings in the midst of the earth; there should be the testimony of the thunderings, of lightnings, of tempests, the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds, and all things should be in commotion. Through Joseph also the Lord says that He would say to the nations of the earth:

How oft have I called upon you by the mouth of my servants, and by the ministering of angels, and by mine own voice, and by the voice of thunderings, and by the voice of lightnings, and by the voice of tempests, and by the voice of famines and pestilence of every kind, and by the great sound of a trump, and by the voice of judgment, and by the voice of mercy all the day long, and by the voice of glory and honor and the riches of eternal life, and would have saved you with an everlasting salvation, but ye would not. (D&C 43:25.)

A voice of warning. From these things it appears that not only are the inhabitants of the earth called by the mouth of God's servants, by the ministering of angels, and by His own voice, but also by the voice of thunderings, and lightnings, and tempests, and earthquakes, and great hailstorms, etc., all these judgments proclaiming the will of God to the people and bearing testimony to them as a voice of warning.

Yet, notwithstanding these things have been fulfilled no attention is paid to them. The inhabitants of the earth are deaf and blind to all these evidences of God's displeasure and warning.

One of the most notable features in the news of the day is the frequency with which catastrophies of various kinds are published. The inhabitants of the earth are suffering from judgments of the most terrible character; but they appear to make no impression upon them. The remark is frequently heard, when allusion is made to these events, "Oh, these disasters always have occurred. We hear more of them now because of the telegraph, which collects details from all parts of the earth."

In this way mankind console themselves with the idea that there is nothing in these occurrences to be startled at, and their hearts are hardened against the testimony of the servants of God and the testimony of God's judgments. . . .

So it will be to the end. The Lord calls in vain upon the impenitent and the wicked. They will not listen to His voice nor to the voice of His servants nor to the voice of His judgments but are determined to harden their hearts and go on their way in the downward course. If we did not have evidence of this blindness on the part of the people, it would be almost impossible to convince anyone that it could exist and that men could be so stupid and obstinate as to resist testimonies of so wonderful a character, especially when they have been foretold with such great plainness. (Aug. 15, 1890, JI 25:527-28)

An age of disasters. An age of disasters is the present. All the signs foretold by the Savior and the Prophets which were to precede the second coming of the Lord are being witnessed at the present time. The news that comes to us every day over the wires brings word of calamities of every description. We hear of cyclones, of shipwrecks, of floods, of the sea heaving itself beyond its bounds, of earthquakes, of collisions upon railroads, of murders and suicides, of wars and rumors of wars, until the ear is vexed with the tidings. We read of more calamities in one day than formerly were known in a month. Yet, these things have come along so gradually that men attach no importance to them. Though they are intended as signs of the coming of the Lord and the near approach of the end, mankind fail to perceive in these events any of the signs which the Prophets have described. (Oct. 1, 1889, JI 24:452)

The testimony of judgments. The scriptures inform us that there will be earthquakes and other terrible calamities given unto man for the accomplishment of the purposes of the Almighty; but they do not lead us to expect that repentance and an acknowledgment of the hand and the power of the Lord, on the part of mankind, will follow these visitations. They intimate, on the contrary, that feelings directly the opposite of these will be indulged in and that men will feel more like cursing God and dying than repenting.

Jesus predicted to his disciples that there should be "famines, and pestilences, and earthquakes in divers places" (Matthew 24:7-8); but these were to be only "the beginning of sorrows." They were to be testimonies to men given in the language of Almighty power. When the voice of heaven-inspired man failed to have the desired effect upon his fellow-man, and the latter resisted his testimony and warning because he was a man like himself, then there was to be heard and felt testimonies and warnings in voices of a more potent and terrible character. The earth itself, at the impulse of its Almighty Creator, should be moved to add its testimony in language peculiar to itself—language of terrible significancy and portentous character—to its inhabitants. Universal creation should join to testify unto blind and self-righteous and conceited and rebellious man, in manifestations and voices of awful and sublime power, to the truth of the words declared in meekness unto them by their fellow-mortals, who had been inspired and sent forth by the Almighty with the message and warning.

The Lord has said unto his servants that "After your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon the people, for after your testimony cometh the testimony of earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and men shall fall upon the ground and shalt not be able to stand. And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the voice of the waves of the sea heaving themselves beyond their bounds." (D&C 88:88-90.) (Oct. 24, 1863, MS 25:682)

As it was in the days of Noah. The inhabitants of the earth did this in the days of Noah. They did not believe there would be any flood. They went on enjoying themselves in their way, notwithstanding the message that Noah delivered to them. But still the flood came, and the hardened nations were drowned, and the earth was cleansed from their presence.

In these last days the Lord has made many predictions concerning the judgments with which mankind shall be visited if they would not repent. Destruction should come upon them as a whirlwind. In the very beginning and before this Church was organized the Lord foretold what would happen if the people hardened their hearts against the testimony of His servants. He said:

For a desolating scourge shall go forth among the inhabitants of the earth, and shall continue to be poured out from time to time, if they repent not, until the earth is empty, and the inhabitants thereof are consumed away and utterly destroyed by the brightness of my coming. Behold, I tell you these things, even as I also told the people of the destruction of Jerusalem; and my word shall be verified at this time as it hath heretofore been verified. (D&C 5:19-20.)

These are the words of Him who rules and who does not speak in vain. Whether the world heed or believe them or not, they will be fulfilled as surely as were the words of the Lord in the days of Noah. (Dec. 15, 1900, JI 35:825)

Plagues and scourges. The Lord has spoken very plainly on the subject of pestilences, and many predictions have been made concerning the dreadful judgments that will fall upon mankind. In one revelation the Lord says: "There shall be men standing in that generation, that shall not pass until they shall see an overflowing scourge; for a desolating sickness shall cover the land." (D&C 45:31.)

The generation referred to here is the generation in which the Gospel was to be revealed—in these last days. In another revelation the Lord says: "For I, the Almighty, have laid my hands upon the nations, to scourge them for their wickedness. And plagues shall go forth, and they shall not be taken from the earth until I have completed my work, which shall be cut short in righteousness." (D&C 84:96-97.)

Among the other judgments which were to come, the Lord said in the revelation concerning our Civil War, was plague. The inhabitants of the earth, through plague and other judgments, were to be made to feel the wrath of an Almighty God.

In another revelation the Lord says that His "scourge shall pass over by night and by day, and the report thereof shall vex all people." (D&C 97:23.)

The righteous to escape. From all these predictions it is very evident that among the many judgments which were to fall upon the wicked in these last days plagues or, in other words, pestilences are to perform an important part. The Lord's disciples were promised that they "shall stand in holy places," in the midst of these judgments, "and shall not be moved; but among the wicked, men shall lift up their voices and curse God and die." (D&C 45:32.)

Of course, if the disciples shall stand in "holy places," they must obey the commandments of God. They cannot hope to escape without such obedience, for the Lord, in connection with these predictions, has said concerning judgments:

"Nevertheless, Zion shall escape if she observe to do all things whatsoever I have commanded her. But," the Lord continues, "if she observe not to do whatsoever I have commanded her, I will visit her according to all her works." (D&C 97:25-26.) She was to be visited with pestilence and plague in case she should prove disobedient. . . .

If we escape these dreadful judgments which the Lord has said He will pour out upon the wicked, we must keep His commandments and obey Him in all things. This is our only safety. The Lord has given unto us "A Word of Wisdom" (D&C 89:1), and He has said concerning this that "All saints who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in their navel and marrow to their bones; and shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden treasures; and shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint; and I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them." (D&C 89:18-21.)

To fully understand the meaning of this promise about the destroying angel passing by them, our juveniles should read the 12th chapter of Exodus. There they will get a full understanding of what the Lord means by this promise; for there they will see that through doing what the Lord commanded the destroying angel did pass by all the houses of the children of Israel. (Oct. 15, 1899, JI 34:624-25)

Predicted judgments will come. Because the Almighty does not proceed to execute His decrees in the manner that men anticipate, many fall into the error of supposing that He governs the universe by great and inflexible laws without regard to the events that are taking place among men. The Elders of this Church, inspired by the Almighty, have made many predictions in this nation concerning the judgments which the Lord was about to pour out upon the people if they did not repent. This has been more especially the case since the martyrdom of the Prophet and Patriarch and other faithful Saints and the expulsion of the Church of Christ from the lands which they occupied. A civil war has rent this nation, and the blood of thousands has been freely shed. The nation has recovered so rapidly from the effects of this war that men cease to took upon it in the light of a judgment but rather as a natural consequence which attends the growth of all nations.

So with all the calamities that are taking place. They are attributed to every cause but the true one. For instance, these dreadful cyclones of which we read in every issue of the daily papers which are so destructive in their effects upon life and property are undoubtedly a part of those judgments which God inspired His servants to foretell. But who, outside of the members of this Church, looks upon them as a fulfillment of the word of God? Who thinks that the predictions of the Elders of this Church are being fulfilled in these destructive storms? Who imagines that the shedding of the blood of a mighty Prophet and of faithful followers of Jesus Christ, or the mobbing and persecuting and driving out of the people of God, has anything to do with the occurrence of these dreadful disasters? Yet, they are a part of those calamities which the Lord has said He will pour out upon the people if they do not repent. (July 1, 1883, JI 18:200)

A spiritual destruction. It is true, He is not coming out in every case in His anger to destroy us; but the work of destruction is operating silently among us. I do not mean physical destruction altogether but spiritual destruction. It is operating among us, and because of the process being silent, the people do not perceive it. Men and women are dropping off like worm-eaten apples from our trees. They are losing their faith and their standing; and family after family, member after member is disappearing and being forgotten. I call this a work of spiritual destruction, for when men and women lose their faith, they are spiritually destroyed. Their names are blotted out of the records of the just, and their condition is a most awful one. (Nov. 2, 1895, DW 51:803)

Famine and pestilence. Famine is one of the dreadful scourges which the Lord has told us by the mouths of His servants will fall upon the inhabitants of the earth in the last days. It is often accompanied or followed by pestilence; and no widespread famine can occur in any country without the danger of pestilence following in its train and carrying off thousands upon thousands of unhappy victims. . . .

It may be that our land in its turn will also receive some of the scourges which are to come upon the earth in the last days. It seems scarcely possible, in so fruitful a land as America, that there should be famine; yet we have good reason to believe that sooner or later even this country, now so bountifully supplied with every product of nature, may be visited by famine; and we should not waste the bounties of the earth because of their abundance and their cheapness. We should garner our grains and the fruits of the earth and preserve them so that we may have on hand sufficient to meet our wants should crops fail for one or more seasons. This is true prudence on our part and should be acted upon by every wise man and woman in this country, especially those who have faith in the prediction of God's servants. (Nov. 1, 1891, JI 26:666)

Two years' supply of food. The Lord has only to let loose the grasshoppers throughout this country, and we should soon have a famine for food. Many may think this will never come, that it is folly to talk about a famine in this land. . . . If grasshoppers were let loose, they could soon spoil the prospects for crops in those regions where food has hitherto been so plentiful. But whether this shall come or not, I think it a wise precaution for the Latter-day Saints to keep a year or two's bread-stuff on hand. (Aug. 6, 1893, DW 47:347)

Do not forget the teachings you have heard and which have been repeated in our hearing for so many years; I refer to the saving and storing of grain. The day will come when you will see the wisdom of doing so, and many of you will doubtless wish you had profited by it. For I tell you that wars and desolation will cover the land just as Prophets have declared they would; and these are coming, coming, coming as plainly and as surely as the light comes in the morning before the sun rises above the summit of yonder mountains and before we see his rays. (July 21, 1878, JD 25:258-59)

A class-war foreseen. Secret organizations are also multiplying in number and increasing in power—a menace and a sign concerning which the Latter-day Saints have had full notice from the beginning. Year by year these organizations increase in magnitude and in boldness, and the difficulty of dealing with them is made more apparent. The relations of employers and employed become more and more strained, even in prosperous and peaceful times, and there is an ever-present threat of outbreak and violence. A general conflict between these classes, such as might occur at any time, would be so dreadful and far-reaching in its effects that no parallel in history could be found for it. Even the rising of slaves against their masters, of which the records of the past furnish us some examples and which is a conflict notoriously cruel and ferocious, gives only a feeble idea as to what this class-war might become because of the strength and organization of the respective parties and the bitterness of feeling which has been engendered.

A social volcano. A thought as to what the future may bring forth in this respect adds another to the many fears which already oppress men's minds. If to the dread and misgiving which mankind feel as to the fury of the elements be added the feeling that the people of many civilized governments today are walking upon the thin crust of a slumbering social volcano, it will be easy to see how men's hearts shall fail them and they be found running here and there in the search for safety, which they know not how to find. (Sept. 15, 1900, JI 35:616)

War a scourge for shedding innocent blood. There is no sin that a nation can commit which the Lord avenges so speedily and fearfully as He does the shedding of innocent blood or, in other words, the killing of His anointed and authorized servants. No nation which has been guilty of this dreadful crime has ever escaped His vengeance. The thunderbolts of His wrath have been always launched forth for the destruction of the perpetrators of such wickedness. It is a rank offense against the majesty of Heaven and the authority of the Creator which He never suffers to pass unrebuked, for such men act in His stead and are His representatives on the earth. . . .

Men acting in this ambassadorial capacity for the Lord, having been selected by Him to officiate in His name, were sent to the people of the United States. After diligent labor and the endurance of indignities and wrongs of a very gross character, the principal ones were at last cruelly murdered, others were persecuted to their graves and all were threatened with the most dreadful and outrageous violence if they persevered in their mission of mercy in the name of heaven's King. By these acts the authority of the Almighty was defied and treated with the greatest possible contempt, and they could not, consistently, be overlooked by Him; for He had declared to them beforehand what the results of such a course of conduct would be to them if they adopted it. . . .

Innocent blood, the blood of Apostles and Prophets, has been shed, and it must be avenged. That vengeance cometh speedily upon the nation who suffers such crimes to be perpetrated in its borders without taking steps to punish the guilty; for we live in a day when God's work will be cut short in righteousness. The land of America, also, is a land upon which such wickedness cannot long flourish unpunished. It is written respecting that land, in the record of it which has been preserved, that the Lord has sworn in His wrath that whoso should possess that land from that time henceforth and forever should serve Him, the true and only God, or they should be swept off when the fullness of His wrath should come upon them; also, that "cursed shall be the land, yea this land (America), unto every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, unto destruction, which do wickedly, when they are fully ripe; . . . for this is the cursing and blessing of God upon the land. . . ." (Alma 45:16.)

America will yet emerge from the dreadful difficulties in which she is now involved [Civil War] and will yet obtain that position which has been designed by God for her to hold. She will yet occupy the chief place among the nations and enjoy a form of government that will be copied, as a model, by surrounding peoples. But England stands, at the present time, in a slippery and dangerous path; she is encircled by evils and dangers that seriously threaten her peace and security and from which she will yet find that it will require more than the wisdom of her statesmen to deliver her. Instead, therefore, of deluding herself with the idea that she enjoys an immunity from the evils which afflict other nations, rather let her examine well the causes which have involved them in trouble, and seek to profit by their experience. (June 4, 1863, MS 26:361-64)

England to suffer and mourn. There is a time coming and not far distant, as sure as God has spoken it, when all the nations of the earth shall fall in pieces before the Kingdom of the great I AM, and all that compose the image which Daniel saw shall crumble in fragment before the advancing march of the Kingdom of God. Let no man, therefore, glory in man nor make the arm of flesh his strength for the sword of God's justice shall fall upon all the nations of Babylon.

Hear it all ye people, as an Apostle of Jesus Christ I prophesy in the name of my Master that England will suffer and mourn even as America is now doing and as all other nations shall do unless they repent and receive the message that has been sent unto them. They shall weep tears of blood and bewail in bitter anguish the miseries which they shall be forced to endure. The blood of the Prophet Joseph and the Patriarch Hyrum and of the martyred Apostles and Saints who have been slain for the truth's sake cry aloud for vengeance to heaven, and the Lord will demand a just retribution. You may think and say that the American nation is alone guilty and that the Lord will demand retribution from them alone, but all nations who viewed the persecutions we have endured and looked on with admiring gaze participated in the guilt by consenting to the act in their feelings. . . .

The hour is rapidly approaching when all nations shall feel the sword of God's justice. If the storm has burst in the United States, the clouds which presage its near approach are rapidly gathering over the nations of Europe. . . . In a few years you will see the entire prediction fulfilled as you have already seen it fulfilled in part. The sign which God said should warn mankind of the approach of these things was the rebellion of South Carolina. God said these scenes of war and misery should commence there, and all nations should know of it. . . .

It shall be but a short time till the sword of justice shall fall upon her as well as upon every other nation that will pursue a similar course. As England rejects the Gospel, she must bear the same load of misery which other nations shall be compelled to endure. (Jan. 5, 1862, MS 24:725-27)

We can perceive the judgments of God coming upon the nations as clear as the sun that shines in the heavens, yet the people shut their eyes and will not see them. Because you have enjoyed peace in this land [England] so long, the people do not think it will ever be any different. They imagine it will be so all the time, as the inhabitants of the United States believed it would be with them. But it will not always be peace and prosperity for this land. There is a day of trouble and gloom awaiting England such as she never saw since she was a nation, a day of wrath and misery fearful to contemplate. (Aug. 10, 1862, MS 24:551)

There will be no peace. It is worse than useless for men to cry "peace, peace," when there is no peace or to flatter themselves that the terrible issue of war can be avoided. The decree has gone forth respecting the nations of Christendom. War in their midst is inevitable unless they take the course pointed out by the Lord which, however, they seem determined not to take. They are to be wasted away by war. . . .

Babylon must fall; no power can avert her destruction. Machines of warfare, machines of offense and defense of every description will be needed in great abundance to complete her destruction; and it must be confessed that the nations of which she is composed are doing all in their power to furnish them for the occasion. . . . Until Babylon meets with her long-promised fate, the manufacture of machines and weapons of war will be continued and peace may be looked for in vain among the nations of the earth. (Sept. 21, 1861, MS 23:612)

Peace congresses to fail. Elaborate and beautiful theories may be constructed, but they will crumble to atoms before the stern logic of facts and leave those who adopt them in a worse predicament than they were in before they attempted to put them into practice. While man remains as he is and as he has been since God's revelations and direct manifestations and guidance have been withheld from him, all such schemes as these for Peace or International Congresses must be barren of all good and permanent results. . . .

The demon of war, when once aroused, cannot be easily exorcised, as Europe will yet find to her cost. The political elements are thoroughly disturbed, and it is not too much to assert, in the presence of the events that are crowding prominently forward and the knowledge which the Lord has revealed upon the subject, that complications are likely to arise at any moment which may destroy the peace of Europe and enkindle a conflagration in which several nations may be involved who now deem themselves secure from peril.

Only way to avert war. Conferences and Congresses are but a delusion and a snare in the present condition of affairs in Europe; they serve to lure their authors and participants and all who place confidence in them into greater and more inextricable difficulty and are more than likely, in the most of instances, to bring about that which they are designed to avert. God's fiat has gone forth concerning Babylon, and no man or nation or combination of nations can prevent its fulfillment.

War is one of the scourges which man, by his sinfulness, has brought upon himself. There is one way—and but one way—to avert it and that is for the people to obey God's commands, through whose power alone can this and other threatened evils be stayed. This is too simple for the great men of the earth to believe. Like their class in every preceding generation they view such a proposition as ridiculous and treat it with contempt, practically asserting by their actions that they consider their wisdom and plans as being infinitely superior to the Lord's. The day will come when they will see their folly and be constrained to acknowledge it; but in the most of instances it will be when they will not have the power to avail themselves of the knowledge.

There was a king in ancient times who learned the lesson and profited by it during his lifetime. His sentiment was "Believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established; believe His Prophets, so shall ye prosper." (2 Chronicles 20:20.) (May 28, 1863, MS 26:346)

Counsels of Church leaders to be sought after. Just as sure as we live and as the Lord has spoken this people will at some time—and the distance of that time depends upon our faithfulness—be sought after; their counsels will be sought for, and men will say, "Those Latter-day Saints are capable of governing themselves and of maintaining good government; they love their fellow men and respect their rights, and we want to live among them, or we want to have their influence among us."

The time will come in this land—I tell you now, ye fainthearted ones—the time will come when the counsels of the servants of God will be sought for in our own land and in all the states where our people live because our conduct and our management will stand out in such bold relief in comparison with the management and conduct of others that they will want to get our counsel and our help in their extremity. This will be the case not only right here but elsewhere. (Apr. 5, 1897, DW 54:676)

You will see the day, and it is not far distant, when these mountains will be the stronghold of a free people, and when men will come here because the principles of the Constitution will be maintained here; and they will be protected in their political and religious rights. (July 21, 1878, JD 25:260)

Thousands to flee to Zion. If all those who had embraced the Gospel from the beginning of the Church until the present time had remained true and faithful to their covenants, what a mighty host they would be! If every man who has been warned had warned his neighbor, as the Lord has required, how few of the children of men there would be left who would be ignorant concerning this great latter-day work! As it is, millions have been warned and are left without excuse for their rejection of the work of God. The Elders have traveled and preached and borne testimony, and their fame has gone to the ends of the earth. There are but few people who have had opportunities of reading who have not heard something of what the Lord is doing.

Our enemies have greatly helped to advertise us, and while they tell the most abominable lies and misrepresentations, still they make us known, and many people suspect that their statements concerning us are mainly false. When the judgments of the Almighty shall be poured out in such a manner as to cause men to took around for a place of peace and safety to which they can flee, then will the testimony of the Elders come vividly to their minds. They will cast their eyes towards Zion, and thousands will yet flee there to enjoy the blessings God will vouchsafe to His people but which will be denied to those who live among the ungodly.

While people are rich and prosperous, they seldom care about the eternal riches to be found in the Gospel. It is when they are poor and in straitened circumstances that the Gospel is listened to as a message of glad tidings. Let calamity fall upon this nation, as it most assuredly will, then the warnings of the Elders will be remembered and people will inquire for them that they may receive the ordinances at their hands. Proud cities will be humbled; judgments will fall upon them, and though the people may say it is long delayed, it will nevertheless come, just as the Lord has said. (Mar. 15, 1884, JI 19:85)

Safety in Zion. I look for the time to come and expect to see it when a great deal of wealth will roll into this community because of the probity and honesty of the Latter-day Saints—because they can be trusted to do that which is right and not take advantage of their neighbor. I say, the people of the nations will turn their eyes to Zion and admire the good qualities developed in the Latter-day Saints and enter into dealing with them; therefore, the Latter-day Saints should do nothing to injure their credit, their name, nor the Kingdom of God. The time will come, as predicted, when all those who will not take up their sword against their neighbor must flee to Zion for protection. They will bring their wealth with them. This prediction was made a great many years ago, but it will have its fulfillment. . . .

Those desiring peace . . . will come to Zion for personal safety and for personal liberty. Zion will be the only place where peace can be found on the earth, and people desiring peace will come here and bring their wealth with them in order that it may be put in a place of safety. (July 5, 1891, MS 53:500)

Wicked must be destroyed. We have in the neighborhood of two thousand Elders out in the world preaching the Gospel. All the Christian world have thousands of ministers laboring among the nations. What do they accomplish? Are the inhabitants of the earth, take them as a whole, any better? We have to confess they are not. Then, what are we doing with our Elders? Why, the Lord has sent them forth with a message and to gather in the honest. What for? To separate them from the wicked.

We have been gathered for this purpose, that we may stand in holy places and, if faithful, escape the judgments that are about to be poured out upon the nations. There is no other way of cleansing the earth. Preaching does not do it. Ministers of religion have been engaged in preaching now for hundreds of years, and they must confess, if they are honest, that their efforts have failed to bring about a better and purer state of society. Consequently, if purity ever reigns on this earth, if righteousness ever prevails, there will have to be a destruction of wickedness and of those who practice it. . . .

I do not level these remarks at any particular class of society. Every man can be a righteous man, if he wishes to. The Latter-day Saints have not got the exclusive patent to this for themselves. It is for everybody—Jew and Gentile. All can embrace righteousness; all can forsake iniquity; all can turn to the Lord. And those who will not but will continue to practice iniquity, I tell you, as a servant of God, they will be destroyed, whether they be "Mormons" or non-"Mormons". Those who wish to have themselves and their posterity perpetuated in the earth must practice righteousness, for righteousness alone will save the people from the calamities that are coming upon the earth. (DEN, Jan. 27, 1900)

Wicked to be destroyed by fire. I expect that before Satan is fully bound the wicked will be destroyed. You are familiar with the history which the Book of Mormon gives of that period. There was a great destruction among the people. The Lord visited them in a most terrible manner. Dreadful calamities fell upon them, and the wicked were literally wiped out, just as much as the antediluvian world was wiped out by the flood. That wicked generation was completely extirpated, and those only were left who were righteous.

I look forward to the same kind of destruction preceding the glorious events that will take place in the near future. The earth will be visited by fire. President Smith yesterday told us that "he that is tithed shall not be burned at His coming." (D&C 64:23.) I believe that there will be literal fire come upon the earth and calamities and destructions of so universal a character that the earth will be burned, so to speak, so that there will be but few men left. . . .

In coming to these mountains we hoped to find a place where we could live secluded from the abominations of Babylon. But here in this secluded place wickedness intrudes itself and is practiced in this land which we have dedicated to the Lord as a land of Zion! How can this be stopped? Not while those who have knowledge of these filthy crimes exist. The only way, according to all that I can understand as the word of God, is for the Lord to wipe them out, that there will be none left to perpetuate the knowledge of these dreadful practices among the children of men. And God will do it as sure as He has spoken by the mouths of His prophets. He will destroy the wicked, and those who will be left will be like the Nephites after the wicked were all killed off; they were righteous men and women who lived for over two hundred years according to the law of heaven. . . .

Details of wicked practices to be kept secret. When will these things end? When God visits the wicked with His judgments, as He will do. Then these practices and the wicked and the knowledge of their wickedness will be destroyed. Then, I hope, the filthy details and the exact forms and methods of these abominations will be kept secret, as the Prophet Alma counseled his son Helaman concerning the secret oaths and covenants of the Jaredites that had come down from the days of Master Mahan, of whom we read in the new translation and who was the head of that secret organization that banded themselves together to commit murders and works of darkness. Alma said to Helaman: "Therefore, ye shall keep these secret plans of their oaths, and their covenants from this people, and only their wickedness and their murders and their abominations shall ye make known unto them; and ye shall teach them to abhor such wickedness and abominations and murders; and ye shall also teach them that these people were destroyed on account of their wickedness and abominations and murders." (Alma 37:29.)

So, I trust, it will be with us. The knowledge of the wicked and their destruction will be preserved in our midst; but the abomination and the wickedness itself will be concealed from human knowledge so that wickedness may be abolished in the earth and the reign of righteousness be ushered in. . . .

Church being cleansed. Now, if we want our generations to live in the earth and to have them go down through the thousand years, if we want to have representatives among the children of men during that happy period, we have to lay the foundation for that now. . . . The day of the Lord cometh; it is near at hand; and if we and our children live, it will be because we try to be pure. No generation from this time forth can live for any length of time unless they are pure; God has said it, and His word does not return unfulfilled.

Even now you can see how this Church is being cleansed as we go along. Look at the families that we have known in the Church, and see how they are being thinned out, just as though we were passing through a sifting machine. And when we see how few of those whom we have known have clung to the iron rod and maintained their faith, we are led to ask, "who then can be saved?" Then, how many families there are who, after the death of the father and mother, are not numbered among the Saints of God! This is a cleansing process which is going on, and it will continue to go on more and more, because we are advancing. The Lord will hold us to a stricter accountability than He ever has done because we have more light and because of the near approach of the end. (Oct. 6, 1897, CR 52-54)
