Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 6

The Lord's Second Coming

The second coming of the Savior. If we take the revelations which the Lord has given unto us, it appears that nothing plainer can be set forth than the great truth that the coming of the Lord will precede the Millennium or the thousand years of rest. Those interested in this question can find what the Lord has said upon this subject in many sections of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. (D&C 29:9-11; 33:7-9; 43:17-29; 45:36-50; 88:87-110; also others.)

It would appear very plain that before the coming of the Lord there will be signs in the heavens and in the earth of blood and fire and vapors of smoke; the earth will tremble and reel to and fro as a drunken man; the sun will be darkened, the moon turned into blood and the stars fall from heaven. The Saints also who are alive upon the earth will be caught up to meet the Lord in the clouds, as well as those who have slept in their graves; their graves will be opened, and they will be brought forth at the sounding of the trump of the angel. Satan will be bound and will not be loosed for one thousand years, and a reign of righteousness and of peace will prevail for Satan will have no place in the hearts of the children of men. (Feb. 1, 1892, JI 27:92-93)

Time of coming not revealed. We have had no authority given unto us, no message to designate the hour nor the day, nor even the year when the Lord would make His appearance. That has been kept by the Father. The angels did not know the hour nor the day when our Savior spoke the words that I have read in your hearing (Matthew 24) and if the angels have since been informed of it, we have not been advised to that effect. (Dec. 7, 1884, JD 26:40)

I will tell you what men can know. They can know that such and such a time is not the time. Men can prophesy that 1891 is not the year. Although they cannot tell you the day nor the hour, they can tell you that He will not come this year or next year according to the words of God already given. There are several revelations which speak plainly upon this point. . . .

There are a great many events to take place that have not yet occurred, and the Savior will not come until they do take place. Be assured of this and be not concerned in your minds and agitated on these matters; it is easy to understand that there are many things yet to be fulfilled before that grand and glorious event will come. Yet, as he has told us, He will come as a thief in the night. He will come when the inhabitants of the earth are unprepared for him. . . .

God works in natural ways. You need not look for the coming of the Son of Man either this year or next. Though we cannot prophesy the day or the hour, we can prophesy some things concerning His coming—that is, that will take place before His coming. God has not left us in doubt upon these points. . . .

Therefore, Latter-day Saints, go ahead and perform your duties carefully, consistently and with a determination to do that which God requires at your hands. Do not look for some great cataclysm to occur which will show all the world that this is the Kingdom of God. Perhaps such a thing will occur; but I will tell you what I have observed during my life, that God works in natural ways. His purposes come around seemingly perfectly natural—so natural that the world cannot see the hand of God in them. It requires faith and the Spirit of God to show these things. . . .

My conclusion is that God works in this way among the children of men, and they will continue to harden their hearts against all the evidences of the divinity of this work, notwithstanding the continued fulfillment of the prophecies of the Elders of this Church. The inhabitants of the earth are not converted by the fulfillment of the prophecies because they come along so naturally. (Oct. 5, 1890, DW 41:652)

A means of measuring our readiness. That the Lord will appear when his people are prepared for His presence is a gladdening truth; that that day is rapidly hastening on is fully evidenced by the progress of the Saints and the development of Jehovah's purposes among the nations. . . . There is a means by which we can measure our progress to meet that auspicious event. If the breach is daily widening between ourselves and the world, as it is between the community of the Saints and the world, then we may be assured that our progress is certain, however slow. On the opposite hand, if our feelings and affections, our appetites and desires, are in unison with the world around us and freely fraternize with them, if our faith and our actions are cold and barren of good fruit, we should do well to examine ourselves. Individuals in such a condition might possess a nominal position in the Church but would be lacking the life of the work, and, like the foolish virgins who slumbered while the bridegroom tarried, they would be unprepared for His coming when it bursts upon them unexpectedly. (Oct. 5, 1861, MS 23:645-46)

The coming of the Lord is near. I have had resting upon my mind now for some time a feeling to call upon the Latter-day Saints and tell them that the coming of the Lord is near, even at our doors. I have been greatly impressed with this feeling. . . .

Many who are now within the sound of my voice have been promised that they shall live, if they have faith, to behold the second coming of the Lord. The Lord has also promised that certain events shall take place while men that are standing in the generation in which these promises were made will yet be alive. . . .

This land has been warned. This land has been warned. I feel that we can stand before the judgment seat of our great Creator free from the blood of this generation in these United States. It is true we have not told every man, woman and child about these things. God requires us to preach His Gospel and to warn the inhabitants of all lands, and then if they do not take warning and warn their neighbors, their sins rest upon their own heads, and our garments are clean.

How long has this great work which God has established been a theme for newspaper writers? Ever since we came to these valleys they have known about us; they have had thousands of testimonies borne to them concerning this work; they have seen it grow and spread; they have seen and heard of our Elders traveling through their cities and visiting foreign lands. . . .

The Lord's judgments are following the warning voice that has been raised by the Elders of this Church. If another Elder did not lift his voice and if another tract were not distributed in this land of ours, the Elders have done their duty, and this nation cannot in the day of judgment rise up against the Elders of this Church and say that they did not bear testimony to them concerning this work. I am now telling you my own views. . . .

Blood of martyrs a testimony against wicked. In this land of ours what warnings there have been. The blood of the martyrs shed upon this soil is crying to God. The expulsion of the Saints from Ohio, the expulsion from Jackson County, from Clay County, from Caldwell County, in Missouri and from Illinois—are they not testimonies? I take it that they are, and God will hold them as testimonies against the guilty men and women who have done these things, as well as against those who have never lifted their hands or their voices to redress any wrong that has been practiced upon the Latter-day Saints. Then, since we came to these mountains, this whole nation has been almost convulsed by this Mormon question. It has agitated the people everywhere. All the newspapers in the land have discussed it in all its phases. Is not this a warning? What more can we do than we have done in this direction? Or shall we all go out and allow ourselves to be martyred. . . .

Many nations yet to be warned. There are many nations yet to be warned, and we have this work to do. I will not say that we ought to do it before the Lord comes, for I do not know when He will come. But this duty is incumbent upon us; by people out of every nation under heaven Zion is to be built up. Every land and every nationality will have to contribute of its strength and numbers, in greater or lesser degree, to fulfill the words of God concerning the building up of Zion. Oriental lands now untouched by the Elders of the Church have to be penetrated and sought out. In this work God will precede His Elders. He will send His angels before them, as He has done, to prepare the people to receive them and to listen to their message.

Send Gospel to lands where tyranny reigns. My feeling is that we should withdraw our efforts to a great extent from the countries where we have been spending so much time and means with so little fruits. Let the Gospel be sent to lands afar off where tyranny reigns; and when the Gospel goes there, God will soften the hearts of the rulers and greater freedom will follow. It has been so in Germany; it will be so in Russia, in the Latin countries and in the countries of Europe. God is working with the nations, and He will work with us if we will do our duty. Then, we can stand before our Father with our skirts clean from the blood of this generation, having done our whole duty.

We must be willing to sacrifice lives. If it should cost us our liberty, as it may do at times, if it should cost us our lives, as it may do to carry this Gospel to every land, it would be no more than others have suffered in the same cause. God has said: "And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall find it again, even life eternal. Therefore, be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found worthy." (D&C 98:13-14.)

And again he says: "And all they who suffer persecution for my name, and endure in faith, though they are called to lay down their lives for my sake yet shall they partake of all this glory. Wherefore, fear not even unto death; for in this world your joy is not full, but in me your joy is full."(D&C 101:35-36.)

In another revelation the Lord tells us: "Let no man be afraid to lay down his life for my sake; for whoso layeth down his life for my sake shall find it again. And whoso is not willing to lay down his life for my sake is not my disciple." (D&C 103:27-28.) It is a test by which His disciples may be known. But while we should not shrink from complying with every requirement, we ought to avoid persecution and death by every means in our power that would be honorable and consistent with our duties and obligations. But in preaching this Gospel to the nations of the earth we ought not to be afraid of our liberty or our lives. (Oct. 7, 1900, MS 63:17-20, 33-35, 50)
