Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 7

Angels, Spirits, and Spirit World

The angels who visit us. In the broadest sense, any being who acts as a messenger for our Heavenly Father is an angel, be he a God, a resurrected man or the spirit of a just man; the term is so used in all these senses in the ancient scriptures. In the stricter and more limited sense an angel is, as the Prophet Joseph states, a resurrected personage, having a body of flesh and bones. But it must be remembered that none of the angels who appeared to men before the death of the Savior could be of that class for none of them were resurrected. He was the first-fruits of them that slept. He Himself appeared often to His servants before He took His mortal body—for instance, to the brother of Jared, to Abraham, to Moses, to the seventy Elders of Israel and to many others. The Holy Ghost, who, we are directly informed, has never yet taken a body, was seen and conversed with by Nephi, who bears record, "that he was in the form of a man." (1 Nephi 11:11.)

We have no doubt of the correctness of the statement of the Prophet Joseph Smith that "there are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do belong or have belonged to it" (D&C 130:5); but that does not necessarily imply that they did not belong to the earth before they took a mortal body. In our opinion they belonged to this earth from the time of its creation, when they covenanted to come and take bodies thereon, at the time that the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy. In just this same way was Jesus "the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." (Revelation 13:8.)

We are taught to believe that Adam was the first man who took a body on this earth. There was no death before he fell. Who, then, was the angel who taught him the law of sacrifice, or of faith and baptism, or who was the cherubim with the flaming sword who guarded the tree of life? We cannot admit that the scriptures are false and that these beings were not angels; neither can we admit that Adam was not the first man and that the Savior was not the first-fruits of the resurrection. Therefore, we are forced to the conclusion that the word "angel" is used in the scriptures for any heavenly being bearing God's message or fulfilling His commands; and, further, all beings who were created with the design that they should inhabit this earth belong to it and to no other planet. Taking this view all difficulty in understanding this matter vanishes. On the other hand, if this is not the case, how can the sayings of Joseph and the scriptures—the Bible, Book of Mormon and modern revelation—be harmonized as these all declare that angels were frequent visitors to this earth from the time of the creation to the days of the coming of the Redeemer? (Jan. 15, 1891, JI 26:53-54)

Do angels have wings? It is an erroneous idea to believe that angels have wings.

It is true that in Isaiah's vision the "seraphim" is described as having "six wings; with twain he covered his face, with twain he covered his feet, and with twain he did fly." (Isaiah 6:2.)

It is not, however, upon this statement of Isaiah's that the popular idea of angels having wings is based, because if modern artists described them with wings at all, it is only with two wings.

The early artists, long centuries ago, are credited with the idea of painting angels with wings. They represented angels as human beings in form but with the addition of wings springing from the shoulders and halos round their heads—symbols of their higher nature.

From that time to the present this has been accepted as the proper form in which to present angels. It has become a firmly fixed tradition in the Christian world that angels must have wings. Yet, there is nothing in the scriptures to justify the idea. All the descriptions that we have of the visits of angels to the servants of God make them to appear in the image of man.

The people of Sodom saw nothing unusual in the appearance of the two "men" who visited Lot at that place, yet in our translation of the Bible they are called "angels." (Genesis 19:5, 1.) It is very probable that if they had appeared in any but a human form, the men of Sodom would have refrained from conducting themselves as they did. Jacob is said to have wrestled with "a man" (Genesis 32:24); but we are led to believe that he was an angelic being. The angel who appeared to Joshua outside of Jericho, described as "a man . . . with a sword drawn in his hand" (Joshua 5:13), was not known by Joshua to be an angel until he had announced himself; then Joshua recognized him.

Daniel says of the visit of Gabriel to him, "there stood before me as the appearance of a man." (Daniel 8:15.) The angel at the sepulchre of the Savior is described by Matthew in this language: "His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment white as snow." (Matthew 28:3.) Mark, in describing the same, says, "They saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a long white garment." (Mark 16:5.) Luke says, "two men stood by them in shining garments." (Luke 24:4.) John's description is, "two angels in white." (John 20:12.) When Peter was released from prison by an angel, there is nothing said to convey the idea that he was in any other form than that of a man; but when he appeared, it is said "a light shined in the prison." (Acts 12:7.)

In the various accounts given of angels visiting men, there is nothing to impress the reader with the idea that they appeared in any but human form.

The Prophet Joseph gives us his description of angelic ministrations. Other Elders also have described the appearance of angels; for many have been ministered unto by angels in our generation. The Prophet has told us, "When the Savior shall appear, we shall see him as He is. We shall see that He is a man like ourselves." (D&C 130:1.) In answer to a question which was asked of him he said, "There are no angels who minister to this world but those who do belong or have belonged to it;" (D&C 130:5), that is, they had been mortal men but after each death were immortal. No wings had grown upon them subsequent to their departure from this life; but they appeared in the form which they possessed while on earth. Of course, they were glorified and changed in that respect. An angel that has been resurrected has a body of flesh and bones. In this respect they are like the Savior, who, when He appeared to His disciples, said:

"Handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have." (Luke 24:39.)

A just man made perfect, who has not received the resurrection, if he appears, will be seen in his glory; for that is the only way he can appear. (June 15, 1897, JI 32:387-88)

Ministration of angels not expected. We often talk about and desire to see angels. Every person who has joined this Church has had a desire to have revelations from God our Heavenly Father and have knowledge poured out upon him as it was poured out in abundance upon the Prophets of old. I merely suppose that this is so with everybody else because I have these feelings myself and judge others in this respect by myself. But, until we can learn to control and resist those evil influences that are now invisible, I think it would be unprofitable to have the administration of angels personally or visibly unto us. Until we can do this, I do not expect that we can have those other blessings profitably bestowed upon us. I do not expect that in the providence of God we will be favored with those other blessings until we can listen unto and obey the counsels of those appointed to preside over us.

I know it is natural for people to be anxious to have some ministered spirit wait on them and reveal itself unto them. For my own part my reflections have caused me to view this in a different light than I viewed it in the beginning. I then thought it would be a great blessing to have that favor bestowed upon me. But when I have reflected upon the character and calling of the men whom God has called and sent in this generation, when I have thought of Brother Joseph Smith and his greatness, his magnanimity and his faith, I have thought and still think it is one of the greatest blessings of God upon me to have been permitted to behold his face and to listen to his teachings. I feel the same now towards the present leaders of Israel.

Must appreciate living Prophets. I am satisfied that this generation has been honored by as great Prophets as ever stood before God upon the earth, excepting the Lord Jesus Christ; and, how could I expect, if I disobeyed Brother Joseph Smith's counsel, that I could be favored with the presence and instruction of any being further advanced than he was when he was in the flesh? And, so I feel in relation to Brother Brigham, whom we now have with us; he is one of the noblest sons of God, a man whom God has endowed with the wisdom of eternity, with the power in part that is exercised in its fulness by the Gods of eternity. If we disobey his counsel, disregard his warning voice and are careless respecting his teachings and the teachings of those associated with him, we are indeed unworthy of the presence of personages who have been glorified and who now dwell in the presence of God.

I do not expect the day to come when this people will be favored with the administration of angels—with the presence of those holy and immortal beings—until we can learn to appreciate the teachings and instructions of the men of God in our midst. When that day does come that this people will implicitly obey the voice of those whom God had placed over them and give heed to every instruction imparted to them by the spirit of revelation through the servants of God, then I shall expect visits from holy angels and the glory and power of God to rest upon us to that extent it has never done hitherto; but I cannot well expect it before that time arrives; if these blessings were to be bestowed upon us before we are prepared to receive them, I should fear they would turn to our condemnation as they have done to many in the early history of this Church. (Nov. 13, 1864, JD 11:30-31)

The world of spirits. Alma. . . states: "The spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, yea, the spirits of all men, whether they be good or evil, are taken home to that God who gave them life. And then shall it come to pass, that the spirits of those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness, which is called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they shall rest from all their troubles and from all care and sorrow." (Alma 40:11-12.)

We are asked how this can be reconciled with the statement of the Savior . . . when He told the penitent thief on the cross, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise" (Luke 23:43); and His other statement . . . where He says to Mary, after His resurrection, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God." (John 20:17.) In this connection also reference is made to the statement of Peter, where he says that "Christ also . . . went and preached unto the spirits in prison; which sometime were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by water." (I Peter 3:18-20.)

Though there may seem to be some conflict between these passages, it is only seemingly so for there is no real conflict between these various statements. Alma, when he says that "the spirits of all men, as soon as they are departed from this mortal body, . . . are taken home to that God who gave them life," has the idea, doubtless, in his mind that our God is omnipresent—not in His own personality but through His minister, the Holy Spirit.

He does not intend to convey the idea that they are immediately ushered into the personal presence of God. He evidently uses that phrase in a qualified sense. Solomon . . . makes a similar statement: "Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit shall return unto God who gave it." (Ecclesiastes 12:7.) The same idea is frequently expressed by the Latter-day Saints. In referring to a departed one it is often said that he has gone back to God, or he has gone "home to that God who gave him life." Yet it would not be contended that the person who said this meant that the departed one had gone where God, the Father Himself is, in the sense in which the Savior meant when He spake to Mary. . . . Neither is it to be supposed that Alma made this declaration in such a sense. In fact, this is demonstrated by what he says afterwards. . . . Alma says plainly that the spirits of the righteous go into a state of happiness, etc. He says the spirits of the wicked are cast into outer darkness, etc. Now, then, how can those spirits who are cast into outer darkness be in the personal presence of God? God does not dwell where they are, and they certainly do not go where He is.

And yet He is there by His Spirit and by His power, for as the Psalmist David beautifully expresses in . . . his 139th Psalm:

Whither shall I go from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there: if I make my bed in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; even there shall thy hand lead me; and thy right hand shall hold me. If I say, Surely the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee. (Psalm 139:7-12.)

Now, respecting the words of the Savior to Mary recorded by John, to the effect that He had not yet ascended to His Father, even though He had been resurrected, it is plain that He meant, in this expression, that He had not met His Father personally.

Alma understood this matter and makes it very plain. Alma harmonizes with Christ. Christ harmonizes with Alma. Alma says the righteous go to paradise. Christ said the thief would go to paradise. Whether the thief, because of his penitence, may be classed with the righteous or not is not altogether clear. Probably the Savior considered him worthy to go to paradise. At any rate, it is evident that He accepted the thief's humble petition, "Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdom" (Luke 23:43), and He gave him the assurance that he should be with Him in paradise. It may be possible that the word "paradise," in this instance, is a mistranslation, and that the spirit world is meant. [^1] An evidence in favor of this is the statement by Peter that Jesus, while His body lay in the tomb, went and preached unto the spirits in prison. Be this as it may, however, there is no doubt that Alma perfectly understood that there were places prepared both for the righteous and the wicked and that the latter class, at least, would not go where God is as soon as they departed this life. (June 1, 1891, JI 26:353-54)

Our ties with spirit world. We are in reality, while in this mortality, aliens and strangers. We are far distant from our Father's house, living in a cold world far removed from those affections which we doubtless have experienced in the spirit world and which we will again enjoy if we are faithful to the trust reposed in us on the earth.

In one of the revelations given to Enoch it is said: "And the Lord said unto Enoch, then shall thou and all thy city meet them there, and we will receive them into our bosom, and they shall see us; and we will fall upon their necks, and they shall fall upon our necks, and we will kiss each other; and there shall be mine abode, and it shall be Zion, which shall come forth out of all the creations which I have made, and for the space of a thousand years the earth shall rest." (Moses 7:63-64.) This quotation describes how happy will be the meeting of the faithful with their Father in heaven. Our old affections, of which we know but little at this time, will be revived, and we shall enjoy ourselves with a joy that to us is inexpressible now.

It is right that the ties should be strengthened between us and the spirit world. Every one who departs from this mortal state of existence only adds another link to the chain of connection—another tie to draw us nearer to our Father and God and those intelligences which dwell in His presence. . . .

Death stimulates interest in spirit world. Those of us who have lost children, brothers, sisters, and parents feel an increased interest in the spirit world; the ties between such and the spirit world have become binding, and we can contemplate, if not with delight, at least with no great sorrow, our removal from this state of existence to the next. In the providence of God it is right that these earthly ties should be weakened to convince us that we are not in the condition the Lord wishes us to remain. We are here in a state of temptation, sin and sorrow, and He desires us to look forward to a better world—to a state of happiness far beyond that which we at present enjoy. As our friends continue to pass from this state to that better world, we who remain feel an increased interest therein and feel stimulated to look forward with increased joy to the time when we shall be united. . . .

The Latter-day Saints have hopes and anticipations which none besides them can indulge in because we have a knowledge of the Gospel which buoys us up under these earthly afflictions and assures us that we shall be united with our friends again. It is not a matter of doubt or speculation with us; it is with us a matter of knowledge. God has given us the testimony of His Spirit, which bears witness to our spirits that we shall again be united with our departed friends after death. Our mortal tabernacles may sleep, but our spirits are eternal, and, if faithful here, we shall enjoy an immortality in the presence of God that will amply reward us for all that we may suffer on the earth. (Nov. 29, 1864, DNW 14:82)

Our condition in spirit world. We shall enter into the other sphere of existence with the same spirit that we have here. If we were animated by the spirit of the Telestial Kingdom we shall have that, if by the spirit of the Terrestrial Kingdom we shall have that, if by the spirit of the Celestial Kingdom we shall have that. We shall go from this condition of existence into the other sphere with the same feelings, to some extent at least, as we have here. If we have had knowledge, we shall have it there.

There will be just as much distinction between spirits there as you find between spirits here. Those who have made good use of their opportunities here will have the benefit of their diligence and faithfulness there. Those who have been careless and indifferent and have not acquired knowledge and power through the exercise of faith will find themselves lacking there.

We will have to work there to grow and to make progress just as we have here, though the facilities will be better there than they are here. If we can only pass into the paradise of God without Satan having any power over us, our condition will be a very happy one. But we shall find that knowledge and power will not come to us there as the rain that falls upon us, without any effort of ours to acquire them. We shall have to exercise ourselves and exert our powers there just as we have to here. We shall be rewarded according to our diligence and faithfulness in the exercise of our agency. (Nov. 2, 1895, DW 51:803)

Our memories to be quickened. Memory will be quickened to a wonderful extent. Every deed that we have done will be brought to our recollection. Every acquaintance made will be remembered. There will be no scenes or incidents in our lives that will be forgotten by us in the world to come. You have heard of men who have been drowning or have fallen from a great height describe that in about a second or two every event of their lives passed before them like a panorama with the rapidity of lightning. This shows what power there is latent in the human mind, which, when quickened by the power of God, will make men and women recall not only that which pertains to this life, but our memories will stretch back to the life we had before we came here, with the associations we had with our Father and God and with those bright spirits that stand around His throne and with the righteous and holy ones. (Apr. 7, 1889, DW 38:677)

Death has no terrors for righteous. How delightful it is to contemplate the departure of those who have been faithful, as far as their knowledge permitted, to the truth which God has revealed! There is no sting nor gloom nor inconsolable sorrow about the departure of such persons. Holy angels are around their bedside to administer unto them. The Spirit of God rests down upon them, and His messengers are near them to introduce them to those who are on the other side of the veil. . . .

Satan has power here over us to a certain extent. He can afflict us; he can tempt us; he can annoy us in many ways. These are the consequences of the fall and for a wise purpose belong to our probation here in the flesh. But, if we listen to the Lord, if we strive to keep His commandments, if we seek to be governed by His Spirit, when death comes, Satan's power ceases. He can no more afflict or torment or tempt or annoy those who are thus faithful. His power over them ceases forever.

But not so with those who disobey God, who keep not His commandments, who yield to the power and spirit of Satan. They are his servants; they are under his influence. He takes possession of them when they pass from this mortal existence, and they experience the torments of hell. (Sept. 1, 1885, JI 20:264)

Satan has no power over faithful dead. Satan is bound as soon as the faithful spirit leaves this tabernacle of clay and goes to the other side of the veil. That spirit is emancipated from the power and thraldom and attacks of Satan. Satan can only afflict such in this life. He can only afflict those in that life which is to come who have listened to his persuasions, who have listed to obey him. These are the only ones over whom he has power after this life.

The Latter-day Saints who have been faithful, the men and the women who have kept the commandments of God, those who have lived according to the light that they have had, whether it be much or little, when they leave this state of existence, they are placed in such a position that Satan has no power over them; he cannot tempt them; he cannot afflict them; he can do nothing to interfere with their happiness; but the wicked, those who list to obey him, those who give heed to his spirit, will only be still more completely in his power in the life that is to come. . . .

Already we have a foretaste of it. You watch the men who yield to the temptations and allurements of Satan; you watch the men and women who give heed to his spirit, and you will find written legibly upon their faces that misery that awaits them in the world to come. (July 6, 1884, DNW 33:498)

If you are faithful to the truth, . . . you will then be ushered into the presence of the holy and the just. You will dwell in the paradise of God, waiting with delightful anticipations the time when your spirits and your bodies will be reunited, and when you shall dwell together with the holy, the just and exalted ones in the presence of God and the Lamb, nevermore, as the Prophets have said, to depart or to go out thence. . . .

Those who are unfaithful, those who will listen to Satan, who will lend a willing ear to his blandishments and to his allurements, when they go from this state of existence, they go into a condition where they are subject to his power. They will dwell in darkness, and according to their sins their punishment will be. Some will be consigned to "outer darkness," where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth; and they will remain in that condition until they will be visited by some servant of God to unlock the prison doors to them and to preach to them again the Gospel of salvation, through repentance and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

The condition of these spirits will be similar to that described by Alma. You remember when he was stricken down to the earth, in company with the sons of Mosiah. He was visited by an angel of God. His astonishment was so great that he became dumb, and they carried him home. His father and his brethren prayed over him and for him. After they had fasted and prayed two days and two nights, Alma was restored. He then described the agony of mind and the torment that he had endured. He was in hell during that period. His "soul was racked with eternal torment." (Mosiah 27:29.) While he was in this condition, he remembered that his father had taught about one Jesus, who should come as a Savior; and when that thought came across his mind, he clung to it, and he besought Jesus to come to his deliverance and deliverance came.

So it will be with those who are damned in the way that I have described and who are consigned to torment. They will remain in that condition, according to the enormity of their offenses, until punishment will be meted out to them sufficiently to bring them to a condition that they will receive the Gospel of salvation. That Gospel which is taught to us will be taught to them, and they will have an opportunity of obeying it in their damned condition and through repentance will receive salvation.

Confess sins daily. Now, how much better it is for us, while this day of probation lasts and while God gives us life and power and opportunities, to live according to the laws of God, so that every day our sins will be remitted. Let us confess our sins to our Father every day, and if we have sinned against our brethren and sisters, obtain forgiveness of them. Then, when the hour of death approaches, no matter where it may find us, we shall be found prepared to enter into the presence of our God. How much better it is to be in this condition than to lead a life of sin and then go into torment and remain there till we embrace the opportunities that we now reject. (1890, Contributor 11:478-79)

A prison house for the unrighteous. The first resurrection, we are told, will be in the beginning of the Millennial era. One thousand years will elapse before the wicked will have the opportunity of coming forth; they will sleep in their graves for that thousand years, and they will await with dread the time when they shall receive punishment for their sins. In the meantime they will be in a state of utter darkness, where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth.

The Latter-day Saints do not believe, however—God having taught us better things—that there is a place of torment to which the souls of the children of men will be consigned throughout the never ending ages of eternity—that is, those who have not committed the unpardonable sin. He has revealed to us a sufficient amount to show us how dreadful is the condition, even under the best of circumstances, of those who sin against light and knowledge and break the commandments of God.

We are told that those who lived in the days of Noah who refused the Gospel, the message of life and salvation that He offered to them, were consigned to a prison house, that they remained in that prison house until the time when Jesus descended into hell and unlocked the door and preached to them the Gospel of repentance. Twenty-five hundred years—according to our chronology—had elapsed since those spirits had been consigned to this place of torment, this prison house, from which they could not emerge, into which no heavenly messenger had access. There they were locked up in the prison house of God for this long period of 2500 years.

With what expectations they must have awaited the arrival of some messenger who had the power to unlock the door and enter into this house and bring them some comfort and some help. How much better for them to have obeyed the message of God through His Prophet Noah! How much better it would have been to have repented and borne all the afflictions, all the pain and all the persecution that Noah and his household bore or that any servant of God had borne than that they should be in such a condition as this! (July 6, 1884, DNW 33:498)

Gospel preached to spirits of damned. The spirits of the damned—those who have committed abominable crimes—will have this doctrine preached to them, and they will be kept in torment until they repent of their sins. The labors of the men who have received the Priesthood in this life will be continued in the life to come in this glorious work of carrying the glad tidings of salvation to those who sit in darkness because of their sins, who may be in the condition of the antediluvians, whom the Lord consigned to prison after destroying them with a flood because they rejected the testimony of Noah and those associated with him.

The Lord had promised His servants, however, that these people should be visited after they had atoned to some extent for their violation of His laws; and this was the glorious mission of our Lord and Savior Jesus while His body lay in the sepulchre. He went into the spirit world and visited these spirits in prison, unlocked the doors of their prisons and started again the work of preaching salvation to them to see whether, after having endured the wrath of God from the time when they were overwhelmed with the flood until then, they would receive the Gospel of salvation and repent of their sins. That is the labor that we have upon us as a people, both here and hereafter. (Jan. 22, 1898, MS 61:115-16)

Invisible spirits around us. I believe there are places and circumstances in which people can be placed where there are influences brought to bear upon them that are more difficult to resist than there would be under other circumstances and in other places. I have often heard it remarked by the brethren, and I have remarked it myself, that in some places there is a greater disposition entertained by the people to commit adultery and indulge in kindred sins of this description than there is in this country. There seem to be influences in the atmosphere in those lands of such a character that unless a person is on his guard and constantly watching and resisting them he will be led down to destruction by them. A spirit and disposition will creep over the people unless they are careful to lead them astray. . . . This is undoubtedly the case. There are spirits in the atmosphere that are filled with that disposition and who seek to influence those with whom they are brought in contact, impressing those who are in the tabernacle of flesh to indulge in the same sin.

There are influences in the atmosphere that are invisible to us that, while we are here upon the earth, we ought to resist with all our might, mind and strength—influences which, if we would be led by them, would lead us to destruction—influences that are opposed to the Spirit of God—influences that would bring upon us destruction here and hereafter if we would yield to them. These influences we have to resist.

We have to resist the spirit of adultery, the spirit of whoredom, the spirit of drunkenness, the spirit of theft, and every other evil influence and spirit that we may continually overcome, and, when we have finished our work on the earth, be prepared to govern and control those influences and exercise power over them, in the presence of our Father and God. I have no doubt that many of my brethren and sisters have sensibly felt in various places and at various times evil influences around them.

Prophet Joseph's explanation. Brother Joseph Smith gave an explanation of this. There are places in the Mississippi Valley where the influence or the presence of invisible spirits are very perceptibly felt. He said that numbers had been slain there in war and that there were evil influences or spirits which affect the spirits of those who have tabernacles on the earth. I myself have felt those influences in other places besides the continent of America; I have felt them on the old battle grounds on the Sandwich Islands.

I have come to the conclusion that if our eyes were open to see the spirit world around us, we should feel differently on this subject than we do; we would not be so unguarded and careless and so indifferent whether we had the spirit and power of God with us or not; but we would be continually watchful and prayerful to our Heavenly Father for His Holy Spirit and His holy angels to be around about us to strengthen us to overcome every evil influence.

Numerous agencies at work. When I see young men indulging in drunkenness and in stealing, I come to the conclusion that they are led captive by the evil spirits around them. We call it the spirit of the evil one; but he has numerous agencies at work even as the Lord has numerous agencies to assist Him in bringing to pass the consummation of His great designs. The adversary has numerous agencies at his command, and he seeks to control and lead to destruction the inhabitants of the earth who will be subject to them.

If we could see with our spiritual senses as we now see with our natural senses, we should be greatly shocked at the sight of the influences that prompt us to disobey the counsels of God or the Spirit of the Lord in our hearts. But we cannot see them for they are spiritually discerned; and he who discerns the most is the most fully impressed by the Spirit of God; he who does not discern has not profited by the instructions given to him and yields to those evil influences in an unguarded moment and is taken captive in his blindness.

He who is imbued with the Spirit of God is sensibly aware when the evil power approaches, but he does not welcome it to his bosom; he resists it with all the might and strength God has given unto him; he obtains power over it, and it no more troubles him; if it does, its influence is more weakened than previously. (Nov. 13, 1864, JD 11:29-30)

God's care for all his creations. The agencies which our Father in heaven has at His control are utterly beyond our conception. Every department of His heavenly and illimitable Kingdom is under the immediate supervision of His agents. . . .

Lord Jesus plainly informs us concerning certain agencies which the Father uses to watch over his little ones—guardian angels, who always behold His face in heaven. They watch over those who are put in their charge, and no one can offend or despise them with impunity.

What a consolation is this knowledge to the people of God. In distress, in trouble, in the midst of affliction or of persecution, they can go with confidence to the Lord. They can cry unto Him with faith, knowing that He will hear their supplications. They know, too, that His angels have charge concerning them and that they can have access to their Father in heaven in their behalf. Despised though they may be by the wicked, insignificant even in their own estimation, they may rest assured they are not overlooked or forgotten. The Lord watches over them; nothing can befall them without His knowledge. This is a glorious position to be in. (Jan. 15, 1889, JI 24:37)

Powers of heaven at work. There are agencies laboring for the predictions of the holy Prophets of which we have but little conception at the present time. . . .

There are powers engaged in preparing the earth for the events that await it and fulfilling all the great predictions concerning it which we know nothing of, and we need not think that it depends upon us Latter-day Saints alone and that we are the only agents in the hands of God in bringing these things to pass. The powers of heaven are engaged with us in this work. (June 29, 1873, JD 16:120-21)

God is doing a great work among us, much greater than many of us imagine. We do not see Him, but He is nevertheless in our midst. We do not see Jesus, but He is nevertheless in our midst. We do not see angels, but they are nevertheless in our midst. God is working to get this people to the perfection that He desires them to attain. . . . God demands of us a holiness of life that we cannot conceive of at the present time. . . .

A contest between God and Satan. There are unseen influences on both sides. There are unseen and invisible agencies that God our Heavenly Father has brought to bear upon this work to aid us, and there are on the other side those unseen agencies of evil. We can tell them by their fruits and by the results of their actions upon the children of men.

Let us remember that it is not that which is before us alone that we have to contend with but that there are powers behind those that we see in the flesh, and those powers are determined to destroy this work. It is a contest between Satan and God, and there can be no doubt as to the result. (Sept. 2, 1883, JD 25:1-3)

Invisible influences. Those evil spirits, . . . invisible to our eyes, yet palpable to our senses, are constantly seeking to instill into our minds evil thoughts and wrong desires, to prompt us to commit sin and thereby grieve the Spirit of God and to lead us, as Cain was led, to perpetrate crime which resulted in his becoming Perdition. But there are also angels around us. Though invisible to us they are continually inviting us and pleading with us to do that which is right. The Spirit of God, too, rests upon us, and it prompts us to keep the commandments of God. By means of these influences, therefore, we are receiving experience and we are growing in knowledge. (May 19, 1889, DW 39:17)

A man that has had the light, the truth, the Spirit of God and has grieved that Spirit, when the other spirit takes possession of him, there is a complete transformation. Those who know see it in his face and feet it in his spirit. They cannot associate with him without discerning that there is a spirit of darkness and evil taken possession of him, and so it is with all who take this course. They already begin to have a foretaste of that dreadful misery that awaiteth those who break the commandments of God and listen to the spirit of the evil one. (July 6, 1884, DW 33:498)

Hell a real place—many to go there. I have thought sometimes that some of our people are inclined to think there is no hell and that nobody is going to hell. I tell you there will be a large number of people go to hell; they will suffer torment and will go where there is weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth; they will be in outer darkness and suffer far beyond anything we can conceive of. Latter-day Saints especially who commit sin, if they die in their sin, will go to hell, and they will suffer torment there until the day of redemption. But think of the length of time during which they will be in this torment!

You remember what the Lord said to Martin Harris when He told him that unless he repented his sufferings would be sore—"how sore you know not, how exquisite you know not, yea, how hard to bear you know not! . . . of which in the smallest, yea, even in the least degree you have tasted at the time I withdrew my Spirit." (D&C 19:15, 20.) If any of you have the Spirit of God withdrawn from you, you can have a little foretaste of what the punishment of sinners will be. (Feb. 16, 1896, DW 52:388)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] 1. The Prophet Joseph, in commenting on this passage, said this: "What is paradise? It is a modern word: it does not answer at all to the original word that Jesus made use of . . . There is nothing in the original word in Greek from which this was taken that signifies paradise; but it was-This day thou shalt be with me in the world of spirits: then I will teach you all about it and answer your inquiries. . . . What is hell? It is another modern term, and is taken from hades. . . . Hades, the Greek, or Sheol, the Hebrew, these two significations mean a world of spirits. Hades, Sheol, paradise, spirits in prison, are all one: it is a world of spirits. The righteous and the wicked all go to the same world of spirits until the resurrection." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 309-10.)
