Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 8

The Millennium—A Thousand Years of Peace

How Satan will be bound. We talk about Satan being bound. Satan will be bound by the power of God; but he will be bound also by the determination of the people of God not to listen to him, not to be governed by him. The Lord will not bind him and take his power from the earth while there are men and women willing to be governed by him. That is contrary to the plan of salvation. To deprive men of their agency is contrary to the purposes of our God.

There was a time on this continent, of which we have an account, when the people were so righteous that Satan did not have power among them. Nearly four generations passed away in righteousness. They lived in purity and died without sin. That was through their refusal to yield to Satan. It is not recorded that Satan had no power in other parts of the earth during that period. According to all history that we have in our possession Satan had the same power over men who were willing to listen to him. But in this land he did not have power, and he was literally bound. I believe that this will be the case in the Millennium. (Oct. 6, 1897, CR 52)

Man's agency to bind Satan. Satan only gains power over man through man's exercise of his own agency; and when Satan shall be bound, as the Lord says he will be for a thousand years, one of the great powers that will help bring this to pass will be man's agency. The Lord has never forced men against their will to obey Him. He never will do so. If Satan, therefore, has power with man, it is because man yields to his influence.

Children can resist Satan. They can obey the Lord. They can be righteous. They can take a course which will give them power over Satan. And every child which takes this course helps bring to pass the fulfillment of the words of the Lord concerning the binding of Satan.

Satan loosed at end of Millennium. When Satan will be bound, he will have no power to tempt the children of men. This happy period will cover one thousand years. Then Satan will be loosed again. Why will he be loosed again? Because a generation will arise, some of which in the exercise of their agency will listen and yield to him. Thus he will have power over them. They will become his willing servants. In this way wickedness and all the evils under which the earth now groans will be introduced among men; for whenever men will listen to Satan and exercise their agency in that direction, wickedness flourishes and righteousness lessens.

Destruction of wicked to end Satan's power. The time is not far distant when great judgments will be poured out upon the wicked inhabitants of the earth. Every Prophet who has looked forward to our day has seen and predicted that the wicked would be destroyed. Their destruction means the destruction of Satan's power. The righteous will be left, and because of their righteousness the Lord will have mercy upon them; they, exercising their agency in the right direction, will bring down His blessings upon them to such an extent that Satan will be bound. (Nov. 15, 1891, JI 26:693)

Satan bound by living gospel. My view of the Gospel is that when it is obeyed by mankind the power of the devil will cease. That is my view respecting a part of the power that will be brought to bear to bind Satan. Satan will be bound because he will not have power over the hearts of the children of men. Why? One reason will be because they will have obeyed the more perfect law which will have relieved them from his power. . . .

In the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ as God has revealed it unto us there are laws so perfect that when this people called Latter-day Saints shall obey them they will be so far lifted up above the power of Satan that he will have but little power to tempt them. We never shall be emancipated from the power of Satan until we do obey these laws of God. An obedience thereto will bring emancipation to us and to every human being on the face of the earth, and it is upon no other principle that emancipation can be brought.

It will not be as many suppose by our being withdrawn without volition on our part from the influences of Satan; but it will be by our obedience to the laws of God, by our conforming to the requirements which He makes of us, by our putting into practice all those higher laws which God has revealed and which He designs we shall practice. Any soul that is waiting for some outward deliverance, waiting for some time to come when by some extraneous means and independent of our action and the exercise of our agency deliverance will be brought, will wait in vain, I am afraid.

Not that I would convey the idea that God is not going to help us, that God is not going to do it by His power; I would not convey any such idea because I know and you know that without God's help all our efforts are powerless, and it is vain to seek to do anything in and of ourselves; we cannot do it. Human nature is too fallible to do anything of this kind; but we must exercise the powers God has given to us by obeying His law, by conforming to His requirements.

In this way we will be emancipated through the blessing and aid of God upon us, and in this way the earth will be redeemed from the power of Satan. The more people obey the laws of God as God has revealed them and as they are embodied in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the nearer they approach unto God, the more they become like Him, the more power they get over themselves and over the adversary. (May 6, 1883, JD 24:145-46)

Binding Satan in homes. By the Saints refusing to be led by the influences of Satan and not yielding to his seductive temptations, he is virtually bound so far as they are concerned; and, when the head of the family can attain unto this power and persuade his wife and family to do likewise, the power of Satan will be bound in that habitation, and the Millennium will have commenced in that household; and, if all should take this course, man and the earth would soon be prepared for the coming of Jesus and the ushering in of the full millennial glory and the complete binding of Satan, all of which glory they would already have a foretaste. (July 17, 1863, MS 26:514)

Destructions to cleanse the earth. If the destruction of the wicked among the Nephites was necessary in order to bring about a reign of peace and righteousness for three or four generations, do you not think that there will have to be great and overwhelming destructions to cleanse the earth of the wicked and to lay the foundation of a thousand years of peace and righteousness? Will wickedness be allowed to flourish? I tell you, no.

The wicked will be destroyed, according to the words of all the Prophets, and the righteous only will survive. There will be a cleansing of the earth from the wicked as great in its place as the cleansing of the earth by the flood that came in the days of Noah, though this time it will be by fire. Malachi says the day will come when the wicked shall be ashes under the soles of the feet of the righteous.

Already, as I have said, you can see the operation of this cleansing process among us. The wicked are gradually being purged from among us. It is not very perceptible; we have got to think about it and call it to mind to become aware of it; but we can become aware of it if we will reflect. And this will be more and more the case as the power of God increases and the responsibility of the Latter-day Saints becomes greater.

Therefore, I am looking for destructions and for judgments; I am looking for the cleansing power of God among us as well as among the nations of the earth, in order that the foundation of that great and glorious time shall be laid when Jesus shall reign upon the earth. (DEN, Sept. 21, 1895)

Millennial conditions. Now, how will it be on this earth when Christ reigns? . . . When the Millennium dawns, Satan bound and the elements of the earth at our disposal and under our control, there will be no hunger, no thirst, no nakedness, no vagrants, no houseless people; all will have that which is necessary to supply their physical wants. But there will be no waste. One man will not be allowed to lord it over another and take possession of more than he needs; but all will have a fulness, Satan will be bound. He will not have power to inflict the misery he has done and is doing.

But how has Satan obtained such power? By men obeying him instead of God. That is the root of all the misery that comes upon mankind. When Satan is bound, this will be stopped. He will not be able, for a thousand years at least, to inflict upon mankind the misery and the sorrow that they have suffered through their obedience to him.

After the thousand years he will regain some of his present power. It will be as it was among the Nephites. . . . Men will arise who will object to working for the benefit of others; class distinctions will once more make themselves apparent; Satan will regain his power and will maintain it until the great battle shall take place which is spoken of in the scriptures.

We have a good prospect before us. We are at the beginning, not the end, of the thousand years of peace. If we are faithful, we are to be the happy pioneers of this new order of things that is to be established upon the earth. Our children, if they are faithful, will live generation after generation in this glorious condition. (Apr. 16, 1899, MS 61:631)

We shall build temples, and we shall go forth in peace and in righteousness, doing the works of redemption that have to be done for those that have died in ignorance of the Gospel and without receiving these saving ordinances. We shall find plenty of employment during the thousand years in doing these works, and the earth will be cleansed from sin. . . . There will be no war, for swords will be beaten into plowshares, and spears into pruning hooks, and there shall be peace from one end of the earth to the other. (Oct. 9, 1892, DW 45:620)

The earth to be renewed. The tenth Article of Faith of the Latter-day Saints states among other things their belief "that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory." The question is sometimes asked if this change is to take place before the millennial reign of peace, during that period or afterwards.

That the earth is to be renewed and glorified is evident from the words of the New Testament writers. The Savior told His disciples that "heaven and earth shall pass away." (Matthew 24:35.) John the Revelator says that in his vision of future events he "saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away." He continues by describing the glories of the holy city, the New Jerusalem which should come down upon this new earth "from God out of heaven." (Revelation 21:1-2.) The Revelation of St. John depicts both past and future events. These events are evidently set forth by the Apostle in the order in which they should occur. According to the order of description the renewing of the earth is to take place after the millennial reign, for the occurrences of the thousand years of peace, as well as those that should follow that glorious era, are mentioned before the event of the earth passing away and being restored as the glorified abode of immortal beings.

The revelations given to the Prophet Joseph Smith make it clear that the earth is to be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory after the peaceful reign of a thousand years is past. In a revelation given him in September, 1830, are recorded these words: "When the thousand years are ended, and men again begin to deny their God, then will I spare the earth for a little season; and the end shall come, and the heaven and the earth shall be consumed and pass away, and there shall be a new heaven and a new earth, for all old things shall pass away, and all things shall become new, even the heaven and the earth, and all the fullness thereof, both men and beasts, the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea." (D&C 29:22-4.) (Mar. 1, 1899, JI 34:139-40)
