Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 9

The Glory of the Future

Perfect justice. The Lord says that He is coming "to recompense unto every man according to his work, and measure to every man according to the measure he has measured to his fellow man." This is in keeping with the words of Jesus: "Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: give, and it shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For with the same measure ye mete withal it shall be measured to you again." (Luke 6:37-38.)

This is perfect justice. No one can complain with any good cause if he is recompensed according to his works or if he receives the same measure that he measures to his fellow man. But do we always think of this in all our transactions? If we all do, then we are in a happy condition and will not be afraid to meet the consequences of all our acts when the Lord judges us.

But that there is such a judgment coming too many forget; at least it would appear so from their conduct. Would any man do a wrong to his fellow man or take advantage of his fellow man in any direction if he had in mind the great fact that the Lord is coming and that He will repay him according to his works and measure back to him as he has measured to his fellow man? If it is not forgotten by many, then they do not act as though they believed that the Lord would do any such thing. (Oct. 1, 1891, JI 26:604)

Judgment according to law. The Gospel of Jesus Christ teaches that all will be judged according to the law that has been taught unto them. . . . "This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light." (John 3:19.) "Where no law is," the Apostle says, "there is no transgression." (Romans 4:15.) Men cannot be held accountable for that which they never knew. God will never consign his creatures to a never-ending misery for not obeying the Gospel of His Son when they never had it taught unto them, and it is as great a fallacy and as great a libel on our God as ever was propagated about any being to make such an assertion. . . .

God's salvation is not confined to this brief space which we call time, but as He is eternal, so are His mercy, love and compassion eternal towards His creatures. . . .

Saints held to stricter accountability. Who are they who are under condemnation and who need fear at the prospect of the same? Men and women who, living in the day when the Gospel is preached in its fullness and purity, hear it and reject it. Against such the anger of God is enkindled, and they are in a far worse condition than those who die and never hear it. Says Jesus, "It were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depths of the sea" (Matthew 18:6), than to do such and such things; and in another place He says, "It had been good for that man if he had not been born." (Matthew 26:24.) Why? Because light having been presented to him and truth proclaimed in his hearing, he rejects the same.

The Latter-day Saints, I hold, will be held to stricter accountability than any other people on the face of the earth. . . . We must be a pure people or we will be scourged; we must be a holy people or God's anger will be kindled against us. . . . In proportion to the light which men have will they be judged, and God will reward them according to the deeds done in the body. (July 14, 1872, JD 15:118-19)

Desire for salvation should dominate lives. We have started out to obtain salvation. Everything on the earth ought to be brought into subordination to this. It should be the dominant feeling of our hearts. The love of this Gospel, the love of our standing in the Church of God, our love for the fellowship of the Saints ought to be uppermost within us. . . .

Is there anything that you love more than you do this work? Is there anything that you love more than your standing in this Church? If there is, then I am sorry for you for I think there is nothing that ought to be more desirable than salvation and exaltation in the Celestial Kingdom. (Apr. 21, 1895, DW 51:291)

Salvation is Individual. Each individual should seek to do that which he himself knows to be right regardless of what others do. We should have clear convictions as to the truth and then carry out those convictions in the proper spirit. . . .

It is our duty to do that which we ourselves know to be right. What matters it to me if man chooses to do a thing which is not right? Is it for me to do as he does? No! It is for me to conceive correctly that which is right, then carry it out in my life and teach others to do the same. Until we do this we shall never attain unto that glory that He has promised.

God has made great promises to us connected with the Celestial Kingdom. Some have imagined that as soon as they leave this state of existence they enter upon celestial glory, especially after they get their resurrected bodies. I do not believe that we will ever reach there unless we develop within us those qualities which will fit us for that exaltation. The promise is given to us, but we must live so as to realize it. No being can be exalted only by self development and self exertion. God will bestow His blessing, but we must be developed under His power and blessing upon us. . . .

Must do as Savior did. If we are to associate with our Father in heaven and with the Savior, it must be because we become like them. If there is a quality which Jesus possesses, we must possess it. If there is faithfulness which He has exhibited, we must exhibit it. If there is obedience which He has manifested while in the flesh, similar obedience must be shown in our lives. We must do all this or we will not be like Him.

I would like to impress this truth upon the minds of the Latter-day Saints that they need not fold their arms and imagine because they are members of the Church that that is all that is necessary. We can see for ourselves the powers that God had endowed us with. We are conscious that God has endowed us in a very wonderful manner. When our minds are lit up with the Spirit of God, we are filled with exalted ideas. It is right that we should exercise these powers.

I would not, however, by any expression of mine convey the idea to you that it is a difficult matter to do what I have been talking about and to serve God. Jesus said His yoke was easy and His burden was light. It is so. The weakest of us carry it. God stands ready on our right and on our left to give unto us all the aid that we need; but He wants us to exercise faith and the powers that He has given unto us and not follow someone else blindly and do things that are wrong because others do them. . . .

Our reward carried with us. Each will have to stand for himself or for herself, and each will receive reward or punishment. We carry our punishment with us; we cannot escape it. We carry blessing with us. We carry heaven or we carry hell with us. Heaven is not altogether a question of locality, neither is hell. Hell is with the individual that deserves it. He may go where he pleases; hell will be with him. If he deserves heaven, wherever he goes heaven will be with him.

Of course, it is a desirable thing to be in good society, and people who keep the laws of God will be in the society of heavenly beings and live in heavenly places eternally, and it will intensify their pleasure and happiness. We know this by experience in this life. But you put a man who is a sinner and who is carrying the penalty of his sins into the society of heavenly beings, and he could not endure it; he would be in hell. (Oct. 14, 1894, MS 56:754-56)

Individual salvation most important. I would like to have the power to impress upon your minds the importance of this great truth. There is nothing as important to me as an individual as my own salvation. This is the most important thing to me that can be—that I myself shall be saved, that I myself shall so live as to be counted worthy by the Almighty to receive an exaltation in His Kingdom. This is of the utmost importance to me individually. . . .

After all, the great labor, the most honorable labor that any person can perform is . . . to improve ourselves, to be Latter-day Saints in deed and in truth, to live our holy religion. (Oct. 5, 1879, JD 21:79-80)

Reward according to works. I tell you that God's providence is over all His children, and He will reward every man and every woman according to his or her works, and He will reward those who have lived exemplary lives, those who have been moral, whether they be heathen or Christian, whether they have known the name of Jesus or not, whether they have the Bible or the Koran or some other book or no book at all; whatever may have been their condition and circumstances, if they have lived according to the light that God has given them and to laws that they understood, God will reward them and will eventually bestow every blessing upon them which they are capable of receiving. (Nov. 9, 1884, JD 26:82)

The importance of small things. We are often indifferent to the importance of small things. . . . All that we will know at the end of our lives will be the sum total of the ideas we have daily accumulated. In like manner our moral characters are made up little by little from the impressions we receive from our surroundings.

For these reasons every act of our lives is of some importance, for it helps to shape our destiny or that of those around us. The accumulated good works of our lives must be the measure of our salvation in the world to come. . . .

Surrounded by witnesses. We are evidently surrounded by a cloud of witnesses. Every act of our lives, no matter how secret we have thought it, has had its witnesses. Every act of our lives is a testimony to those numerous witnesses of the spirit and motive that actuate us. If all our acts are in the spirit and power of the Gospel, then we are constantly bearing the testimony of Jesus to all the intelligences, good or bad, that surround us. Thus we show by our lives that we have received the testimony of Jesus, which is another essential condition for gaining a part in the resurrection of the just. It is by these testimonies that we will be judged, not altogether by what mortal man may see us do. . . . (June 1, 1880, JI 15:126)

A glory suited to our condition. We shall have the spirit of that glory which we shall attain unto; and just as there are grades in this life among men, so it will be in the resurrection. There will be grades of happiness, of glory and of exaltation. You put a man that has not lived so as to receive the spirit of a certain glory with those who have received that glory, and he would be entirely out of his element and unhappy. God will give to every man a glory that will be suited to his condition. So, if a man obeys every law that God gives and maintains his integrity, he will receive the highest glory that God has to bestow, even the celestial glory.

There are some who cannot do this. As the revelation that Joseph received teaches us, there are honorable men who do a great many good things but who have not faith enough to receive the Gospel in its fulness. All of us have met such individuals. We have also seen men and women who gladly obeyed the Gospel when they heard it. They were baptized; they had hands laid upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost; but they did not have faith enough to go beyond this. . . . Such persons will receive a reward in proportion to their obedience.

You will find others who have faith enough to obey the first principles of the Gospel and perhaps receive the Priesthood and gather with the Saints; but when they are taught the doctrine of tithing, they have not faith enough to obey that; or if they do pay tithing, they pay but very little. Persons who have no more faith than this will not get a reward like those who are obedient to tithing.

So with all these works that God requires at our hands. There are some men that have not faith enough to go upon missions when they are called, and they offer excuses. They will get their reward according to their diligence and faithfulness; but they will not get the reward of the man who is always willing to do that which he is required to do and whose life is crowded with good works, who is liberal to the poor, honest in his dealings, just and merciful in his actions and who is willing to suffer wrong rather than do wrong. . . .

Judged according to willingness to obey. There are some laws that we are prevented from obeying that have been declared to be necessary to exaltation in the Celestial Kingdom of our God. What will be the condition of those who do not obey these laws? God, knowing all our desires, if He should see a spirit of willingness and obedience in our hearts, will judge us accordingly. That which we cannot do we are not expected to do. God does not ask impossible things from His children. But He asks us to be obedient to Him and to carry out His laws in our lives; and if for any reason we cannot do this but are willing to do it, He will accept the offering and the good desires that we entertain in our hearts. . . .

The widow's mite is as much as the thousand dollars of the rich man, if it is only given in the right spirit. The Lord looks at the hearts of His children. The woman who is poor but who gives to the extent of her ability, God accepts that, and she is blessed accordingly and will be rewarded just as much in her place as the rich man that has done to the extent of his ability. Our God is a just God, and He deals with His children in justice and mercy. (Oct. 9, 1892, DW 45:618)

Salvation by use of agency. It is a remarkable fact that there is no blessing that God has promised unto us that any human being, that any angel or any devil can take from us. There is no power of that kind that can take it from us. But a man himself, by sinning, can rob himself of his blessing; he can prevent its fulfillment; but no human being can do it beside himself.

Remember this, Latter-day Saints; remember it and treasure it up in your hearts that you have salvation within your own keeping. If you are damned, you damn yourselves; you will be the instrument of your own damnation. It will not be because God will damn you; it will not be because Satan has such power that he can take away every blessing from you; it will not be because of anything of that kind.

How will it come about? It will come to every soul by wrongdoing on the part of that soul. He or she alone can bring condemnation on himself or herself. There is no other power can do it. Hence, if we are damned we shall have no one to blame but ourselves; we shall have no one to condemn but ourselves; it will be the result of our own agency, the exercise of that power which God gave to Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden. . . . Every one of us will bring upon ourselves either salvation or condemnation as the case may be, according to the manner in which we exercise our agency before God. It is by this Priesthood and the exercise of it that the blessings of God will flow up to us. . . .

Promised blessings for righteous. A man who practices wrong may have all these blessings pronounced upon him; he may have been baptized and have had hands laid upon him; he may go through the temple and have wives sealed to him and have every blessing promised unto him that is promised to the most faithful of the children of God, and yet, if he does not live so as to be worthy of these blessings, he will not receive them; he will, sooner or later, be bereft of them and left destitute.

This is the glorious feature of this great tie that God has restored to the earth. It only binds the righteous. It does not bind the wicked to the righteous. It does not bind the wicked to the wicked. Its power and saving force can only be exercised or enjoyed where righteousness prevails. Hence, when the people of God come forth in the resurrection, they will come forth pure. There will then be a separation of the wicked from the righteous. The righteous will enjoy their own society. (Oct. 18, 1884, JD 26:249-50)

Heaven is what we make it. There are a great many people who are thinking all the time about the celestial glory and want to get there. It is a very good wish. It certainly is a most desirable blessing. But do you know that if we were in the celestial glory and were not fitted for it, we would not enjoy it?

Whence comes your enjoyment? Whence come the glorious feelings that you have when you feel the best? Do they come from the outside? Do external circumstances produce real happiness of the kind that I describe? Doubtless, they contribute to happiness; but the purest joy, the greatest happiness, that which is most heavenly proceeds from within. A man must carry the principles of happiness and the love of God in his own breast, or he will not be happy.

It is not true enjoyment when it comes from any other source. Not from without, therefore, must we expect happiness and exaltation but from within. Deity is within us, and its development brings happiness and joy inexpressible. (Jan. 14, 1894, DW 48:350)

More than a good moral life necessary. The idea is quite popular in the Christian world that belief in Jesus and sincerity of heart are the only necessary requisites to insure an entrance into the Kingdom of heaven. The expression is heard from hundreds of mouths, "Oh, if I live a moral life, if I do unto others as I would be done by, I think it will all be right with me. God is a Being of mercy, and He will not cast off any one who leads a moral life." Hundreds delude themselves with this idea and pass through life without making an exertion to obey a single given law of the Lord other than to be what they consider honest and neighborly. They seem to entirely overlook the fact that God is a Being of justice as well as mercy, that He is a God of truth and cannot lie, and that were He to do as they expect He will towards them, He would divest Himself of the attributes which constitute Him a Being worthy to be adored and would, therefore, cease to be God.

All laws must be obeyed. The Lord has revealed certain laws which He says in plain and unmistakable language must be obeyed, or the being who dares to disobey must suffer the consequences. . . . Jesus told Nicodemus that "except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." (John 3:5.) An entrance into the Kingdom of God, then, cannot be obtained by a man who has not been born of water and of the Spirit. Neither sincerity nor morality will avail, except these essential ordinances have been attended to. Though the Lord is full of mercy and love for His creatures, yet His justice and truth would not permit so flagrant a violation of His laws, as the neglect of these ordinances would be, to pass unpunished; much less would He break His own word . . . by admitting them therein. . . .

There are some who call themselves Latter-day Saints who seem to think that if it is not quite convenient for them to attend to all the requirements which the Lord has made of them that it will all be right; they need not be at any particular trouble to attend to these things as the Lord will overlook any negligence they manifest in this respect, and they will get the reward they are looking for. "Ah," say such individuals, "I know that such and such things are right and ought to be attended to; but my circumstances are such that I cannot do it; when it comes convenient, I will attend to it." Their circumstances not coming convenient, the performance of these things is put off, the time of probation is frittered away, and they come short of obtaining the blessings and the reward they might have received had they been faithful and diligent.

Learn to control circumstances. There may be circumstances of such a nature that the person who is subject to them cannot do as he would wish; but in the great majority of instances it is for us, if we expect to gain a celestial glory, to exercise such faith that we can control circumstances and make them subservient to our purpose. It would be folly for men to expect, in the great day of reward, that the excuse of their circumstances not being convenient for them to obey the law which the Lord says must be obeyed by all those unto whom it is revealed would cause Him to bestow the same reward and exaltation upon them that he would upon those who obeyed it.

The Lord says in explicit terms that we must abide that law and that covenant, or we cannot enter in or attain to His glory. Can we expect, then, to enter therein and not obey it? The Lord cannot falsify His word but will be compelled to exclude from celestial glory all those who do not comply with the laws which He has sent forth.

The requirements of every law of God are inexorable and cannot be set aside. He never gave a commandment unto the children of men without opening a way by which they could fulfill it; if they do not fulfill it, therefore, through lack of diligence or faith on their part, they must be the losers. He has done all that He can, consonant with justice, in revealing the law, with the rewards and penalties attached to obedience and disobedience, and in promising the necessary assistance to enable them to fulfill it if they will but seek for it. All who have ever sought for this assistance have obtained it and have proved for themselves that the Lord requires nothing of mankind but what, if they seek it, he gives them power to perform; and there are no circumstances—however seemingly difficult—which conspire to prevent them from obeying His commandments but what the Spirit of the Lord will enable them, in His own due time, to surmount and control. . . .

Procrastination to be repented of. Those who are guilty of procrastination in regard to these principles and commandments, thinking that there will be a time in the future when they can better attend to them, will come short of the glory of God unless they heartily repent. Celestial glory, which is the burden of all our prayers, will be obtained by none such; for those who obtain this glory permit no circumstances to deter them, no fears to assail them but rise superior to every obstacle, putting their trust in their God and, Abraham-like, obey every commandment and ordinance so soon as it is revealed to them. Experience will yet teach mankind that strict obedience to every law of God is the only means by which they can obtain a seat and an exaltation in His Kingdom and that disobedience or neglect of these laws—however sincere or moral the person who does so may be—will effectually exclude them from a participation in the fulness of His glory. (May 1, 1857, WS 402-5)

How to obtain celestial glory. There is, Paul says, one glory of the sun or the celestial glory. Who shall attain unto that? Those who keep the law that pertains to that glory; those who do everything that is commanded them of God; those who are willing to endure everything for His sake and to do that which He requires at their hands. There have been, no doubt, millions of people on the earth who have had this willingness. They will attain, we are told, unto the celestial glory. (Apr. 27, 1890, DW 40:835)

We have but entered upon the path that leads to the exaltation we anticipate and desire; and the individuals who believe, when they have been baptized into the Church, that they have done all that is requisite to secure their salvation have made but a poor commencement and understand but very little of the nature of the work in which we are engaged.

What, then, is there for us yet to do? We have to become acquainted more and more with the principles which govern the heavenly beings, to put them into practice, each day bringing us fresh duties and new responsibilities, as principle after principle is revealed to us, the righteous fulfillment of which will bring us ever increasing happiness. (Nov. 10, 1861, MS 23:796)

Must be willing to sacrifice all. We must obey the Holy Priesthood, which He has placed in our midst, at the cost of everything, if it be required, and not allow any sordid or self-aggrandizing feeling to enter into our hearts or to have place therein. I cannot conceive of any man being able to attain unto celestial glory who is not willing to sacrifice everything that he has for the cause of God. If I have a piece of land, house, money, cattle, horses, carriages or powers of mind and body and am not willing to devote any or all of these to the rolling forth of the work of God, as they may be required by Him, I cannot conceive that it will be possible for me to enter into the Celestial Kingdom of God our Heavenly Father.

Do you understand, do you comprehend that everything we have is required by God our Father, to be laid upon the altar? (June 29, 1873, JD 16:116-17)

Must endure to the end. They are the ones who shall be saved—those who endure to the end, faithfully keeping the commandments of God, not those who run well for a season and then cease to run or endure and yield to temptation and sin. They cannot be saved; better for them if they had never heard the Gospel; better for them if they had never, I was going to say, been born. Indeed, I think I might say it correctly. (May 26, 1889, DW 38:709)

To be tested to utmost. God will have a tried and peculiar people. We have been tried to some extent but not to the extent which we probably will be; there are many things in which we will be greatly tried before we get through. Every Latter-day Saint who gains a celestial glory will be tried to the very uttermost. If there is a point in our character that is weak and tender, you may depend upon it that the Lord will reach after that, and we will be tried at that spot for the Lord will test us to the utmost before we can get through and receive that glory and exaltation which He has in store for us as a people. When we think about the character of the exaltation promised unto us, we can understand why this should be the case. . . .

When we talk about celestial glory, we talk of the condition of endless increase; if we obtain celestial glory in the fullest sense of the word, then we have wives and children in eternity; we have the power of endless lives granted unto us, the power of propagation that will endure through all eternity, all being fathers and mothers in eternity, fathers of fathers and mothers of mothers, kings and queens, priests and priestesses, and shall I say more? Yes, all becoming gods. For this is the power of God; it is the power by which God presides over the universe and fills the universe with power and which we pray unto Him to bestow upon us.

This being the case, do you think that we are going to attain unto these things without we show ourselves perfect before the Lord? Do you expect that God will save you and me and exalt us and give unto us this inestimable, this indescribable glory if we are full of sin, if we yield to temptation and are not tested and are not tried in all these things? . . .

Must be perfect in our sphere. The words of Jesus which he spoke unto his disciples are intended for us: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect." (Matthew 5:48.) We, as a people and as individuals, should seek to attain to that perfection, to be as perfect in our sphere as God our Eternal Father is in His; and we cannot attain to that exaltation and glory which He has promised unto us unless we are thus perfect. . . .

I, therefore, do not expect that any man will ever enter into the Celestial Kingdom of our God until he is tested and proved in all things. Some men think they can slip around—I have heard such men talk—they think they are going to get into the Celestial Kingdom without obeying the law of celestial marriage. I do not have any such ideas about exaltation; and yet I am perfectly satisfied there are men who will be counted worthy of that glory who never had a wife; there are men probably in this world now who will receive exaltation who never had a wife at all, or probably had but one. But what is necessary for such a case? It must be perfection before God and a proof of willingness on their part if they had the opportunity. . . .

Complete subjection to will of God. If we live in the flesh, you may depend upon it we shall be tried in all things. If I have an appetite, if I have a passion, if I have an inclination which is in conflict with the law of God, if I do not subdue it and bring it into complete subjection to His law, I do not see how I can enter into celestial glory. . . . I must bring every appetite, I must bring every passion, I must bring every desire of my being into complete subjection to the will and mind and law of God, or I cannot receive the exaltation He has promised unto His faithful children. . . . If there is anything about us, if there is selfishness in us, if there is a disposition in our hearts not to yield upon a certain point or to have our own way and own will and carry that will into effect in opposition to the will of God, we cannot in that condition receive exaltation at His right hand. And if we die in that condition, we will have in some other state of existence to get rid of it, or we cannot get exaltation. . . .

If there is anything that stands between me and the will of God which would prevent me from doing that will perfectly as He requires of me, if there is anything which I love more than God, I am not in a condition to receive that glory. If I think more of my own life, if I think more of my own will, if I think more of a wife or child or of all my wives and children or of my property or of my time or of anything over which I have control or which belongs to me and is part of me than I do of God, then I am not in the condition to receive the exaltation; I am not worthy to receive it; I am not willing to bring everything I have or which belongs to me into complete subjection to Him and to what He requires of me. When He says, "Go," to go; when He says, "Come," to come; to do that which he requires or to refrain from doing so as He may require and to do this not only when He, Himself, tells me I must do it but to do it also through the voice of those whom He has chosen to hold control. (Oct. 31, 1880, JD 22:123-25)

Many Saints won't attain celestial glory. Experience has proved that it is not all of those who are called Latter-day Saints who cry "Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven" (Matthew 7:21), for there are many who have a nominal membership in the Church of Christ who will never succeed in entering that "strait gate" and "narrow . . . way" (Matthew 7:13-14) which would lead them to an exaltation in the Celestial Kingdom of our God.

When we realize what is required on the part of the Saints to constitute them worthy to receive and enjoy all these glorious blessings and then contrast it with the works which their actual lives afford, wonder need not be indulged in even if some of them come short of celestial glory. When we see a so-called Saint indulging in a spirit of fault-finding, murmuring against his brethren who bear the Priesthood and talking about the follies of every one with whom he is connected, the conclusion that we are forced to adopt is that he must repent and thoroughly reform or he can never enter into the celestial glory of God.

When we hear a so-called Saint parading his little acts in favor of the Work of God, talking about the efforts which he has made in paying money to sustain it or in giving the Elders a meal or two occasionally, as though he had done something that was very meritorious indeed and for which he should receive great praise, then we are compelled to think that unless he gets rid of feelings such as these and cultivates a different spirit, he can never enter into the strait gate and pursue the narrow path which leadeth to the exaltation and glory of God. . . .

A life of devoted service required. Brethren and sisters, be not deceived upon these points. Flatter not yourselves with the idea that ye can enter into the Celestial Kingdom of our God and hug to your bosom those weaknesses and impurities which characterize fallen human nature. Purity and perfection can alone enter there. Our lives and all that we have must be devoted to the service of our Maker. We must be filled with a steadfast integrity which nothing can move. And we must not only labor cheerfully and gladly in doing those things which God has commanded, but we must be anxiously engaged in the good cause and do many things and bring to pass much righteousness of our own free will for the power is in us. "He that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned." (D&C 58:29.)

The man who seeks for the possession of celestial glory is not content with treading the well-beaten road traveled in by the world, but his mind soars aloft with an intense desire to comprehend and put into practice every law pertaining to exaltation, though it may be far off in the (to him) dim future. His continual struggle will be to obey those higher laws which can only be perceived and understood by those who attain unto very powerful faith. (Feb. 7, 1863, MS 25:88-90)

Few to attain celestial glory. There will be but comparatively few of the human family that will attain to celestial glory because they will not listen to the voice of God. Many there will be that will fall by the wayside and will yield to an influence that is not of God, and the result will be that they will lose that exaltation which God is desirous to bestow upon His children. (Aug. 26, 1894, DW 49:450)

The price of such a glory is great for the reward is great, and much is required from our hands before we can obtain it. We must lay everything upon the altar, subdue every evil desire and the propensities common to our nature before we can dwell in the exalted presence of God. (Dec. 31, 1863, MS 26:83)

The exaltation which God has attained to has been through obedience to these self-same laws that are now taught to us. (Jan. 6, 1884, JD 25:26)

The glory of the future beyond comprehension. Why, human imagination fails. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him." (1 Corinthians 2:9.) In our present condition we cannot conceive of these things because they are beyond our comprehension. But we have a foretaste of that glory given unto us in the outpouring of the Holy Spirit when it rests upon us. You have felt, no doubt, many times in your lives as though you were filled to overflowing and had no room for another drop of happiness. The peace and love of God have filled your hearts. Of course, we are but mortal beings at the present time, and we are not prepared for that glory and immortality that God has in store for us. But we will grow up to it, and we will be prepared for it when it comes. . . .

To be made gods. God has removed doubt from our hearts and our minds concerning these things. We know them. The testimony of God is with us. He bears testimony to us that we are His children. And he wants to draw us to Him, in His arms of love. He wants to save us and exalt us and make us like Himself, clothe us with glory and make us indeed gods in the eternal world, wielding dominion and power. For this purpose He has sent us here. For this purpose He has given us His laws, which we understand to some extent. (1890, Contributor 11:480)

The joys of the future estate. There is something tangible about the views of the Latter-day Saints concerning the future. We do not expect to sit upon a cloud, playing a harp throughout the endless ages of eternity. There will be work for us to do—work of the most glorious and exalted character. Oh! what joy will fill the hearts of those who are faithful when they meet the Lord, and He welcomes them back to His presence, having been true and unswerving in their integrity while they were in the flesh.

You welcome your sons home from missions; gladness inexpressible fills your hearts if they have been faithful to the cause of God and have magnified their Priesthood. By this you can have a faint idea of the joy that our Father in heaven will have over us if we are true to Him and go from here pure. And think of our joy! Though we have been separated from our Father, though there has been a veil between Him and us in order that we might be tested and proved, now the mission is ended, the probation has been performed and we go back emancipated from the power of Satan. (Feb. 27, 1898, MS 60:215)

Indescribable glory. God our Eternal Father intends to endow those of His children who are faithful to Him in their second estate with indescribable glory. Even if the human mind could conceive, the human tongue could not describe that glory. We cannot, though our minds be fully illumined by the Spirit of God, conceive in our mortal estate the greatness of the glory that God has in store for His faithful ones. When we even approach the understanding of it, it must be by vision. Yet, to those who are true to Him in the midst of the numerous temptations that abound in the world that glory will be given. (Aug. 26, 1894, DW 49:449)

Future is glorious to faithful. We may have our trials and afflictions here. But let our eyes look forward with faith to that glorious future that God has prepared for us and the great reward that He will bestow upon us. For we shall have crowns; we shall have thrones; we shall have dominion; we shall have power. God will give all this to us just as fast as we are prepared for it; and if we enter into these holy temples and receive there the ordinances that He has commanded His servants to give, these promises will be fulfilled to the very letter, if we are faithful. Not one will fail.

How was it when you were baptized by one having authority? Did you not have the testimony that your sins were remitted? God accepted the offering. He accepted the administration of the ordinance. He accepted the laying on of hands, and He gave the Holy Ghost to those upon whom hands were laid. And when you come to the altar, and the servant of God says, "I seal upon you the blessings of the holy resurrection with power to come forth in the morning of the first resurrection clothed with glory, immortality and eternal lives, and I seal upon you the blessings of kingdoms, thrones, principalities, powers, dominions and exaltations, the blessings of Abraham and of Isaac and of Jacob," when the servant of God pronounces these words upon those who come to the altar and he seals the wife to the husband, just as sure as God lives, just as sure as the heavens are above our heads and the earth beneath our feet, so sure will those words be fulfilled upon the heads of those upon whom they are pronounced, if they are faithful to the covenants which they make; and they will come forth in the morning of the first resurrection clothed with glory, immortality and eternal lives.

Death has lost its sting. When we lay down our dead after having received these holy ordinances—our husbands, our wives, our children, our fathers, our mothers—we lay them down without a shadow of doubt in our hearts as to the future. "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" (1 Corinthians 15:55.) Under such circumstances as these death has lost its sting; the grave has lost its victory; it is robbed of its terrors by the glorious promises that God has made unto His servants and His children. Others may fear death. Others may dread the future. Others may think that it is a leap in the dark. But not so the Latter-day Saints!

The future is illumined by the glory of God and the promises that He has made to us; and when the time comes for us to lay down these mortal lives, we will do so just as we do when we go on missions and the time comes for us to return home; we will go home, with regrets of course for those we leave behind but with gladness and joy to think that our missions are ended and that we have been faithful, and we will be welcomed by our brothers and sisters and our families. We will look forward with joyful anticipation to the delightful reunion that we will have with those whom we have left, who have been our fellow laborers and companions in the afflictions of this life, and it will be a heavenly time. Therefore, I say that death has lost its terrors, and the grave no longer triumphs over people who have received such blessings as these. (Oct. 9, 1892, DW 45:621)

Sons and daughters of a King. It is a glorious thing . . . to know that our religion is true and given us from God and that in obedience to it we may attain to the exalted position occupied by Him and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. . . . We are of the race of God, the sons and daughters of a King. What monarch's children do not hope and look forward to sovereignty. May we, who are the offspring of the Almighty King, not hope for crowns and kingdoms in eternity?

Our eternal destiny. Some believe our eternal destiny is to sit upon clouds, thrum harps and sing forever. What an occupation! What a monotony! No matter how sweet this music might be it would become very wearisome if extended so long. But such is not our destiny. Our mission hereafter is to perpetuate and continue the work of our Father and our God, to perpetuate our species and to create worlds from the elements by which we are surrounded.

Go out at night and behold the starry firmament. The millions of shining orbs we see are the work of God—worlds created and peopled by the Almighty. Such works are for us to do. Eternity is before us, and every man and every woman will find ample room for the exercise of every faculty he or she may possess. How glorious to think that we have the spark of divinity within us. (DEN, March 28, 1881)

All the Father hath. Speaking of those who receive the testimony of Jesus and who overcome by faith, the Lord says: "They are they who are the church of the Firstborn. They are they into whose hands the Father has given all things."

Now, these are not idle words given merely to round out a sentence; but they are full of meaning.

They are they who are priests and kings, who have received of his fulness, and of his glory; and are priests of the Most High, after the order of Melchizedek, which was after the order of Enoch, which was after the order of the Only Begotten Son. Wherefore, as it is written, they are gods, even the sons of God wherefore, all things are theirs, whether life or death, or things present, or things to come, all are theirs, and they are Christ's, and Christ is God's. (D&C 76:54-59.)

I wish to emphasize the following: "And also all they who receive this priesthood receive me, saith the Lord; For he that receiveth my servants receiveth me; and he that receiveth me receiveth my Father; and he that receiveth my Father, receiveth my Father's kingdom; therefore all that my Father hath shall be given unto him." (D&C 84:35-38.)

Notice the last clause, "All that my Father hath"—not a part, but "all that my Father hath shall be given unto him." That language admits of no mistake. It corresponds with the other language that I have read in your hearing. It also corresponds with what the Lord says in Section 93: "I give unto you these sayings that ye may understand and know how to worship, and know what you worship, that you may come unto the Father in my name, and in due time receive of his fulness. For if you keep my commandments you shall receive of his fulness, and be glorified in me as I am in the Father; therefore, I say unto you, you shall receive grace for grace." (D&C 93:19-20.)

This same revelation goes on to say: "The Spirit of truth is of God. I am the Spirit of truth, and John bore record of me, saying: He received a fulness of truth, yea, even of all truth; and no man receiveth a fulness unless he keepeth his commandments. He that keepeth his commandments receiveth truth and light, until he is glorified in truth and knoweth all things." (D&C 93:26-28.)

These are sufficiently plain to reveal to us that which God has in contemplation for His faithful children. The Latter-day Saints are promised, if they are faithful, that they shall receive the fulness as Jesus received it; and Jesus received it as the Father received it. In the words of Paul they become "heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ." (Romans 8:17.) There is nothing that the Savior has attained unto that God's faithful children are not promised. They are promised the same blessings, the same power, the same authority, the same gifts, the same graces.

An equal interest in power and authority of God. I know that we are apt to think that heaven is a sort of spiritual place. It is spiritual; but God our Eternal Father is a being of power. He controls the earth and the inhabitants thereof; He controls the elements of the earth; and we are promised that we shall be sharers with Him. He will give us an equal interest in all this power and authority. What is more desirable to man, generally speaking, than to wield power? Mankind aim for it. To what lengths will ambitious men go to wield power, to sit upon thrones and to wield a sceptre of authority. History tells us that men have been willing to wade through seas of blood to gratify this ambition.

Now, this ambition can be gratified righteously by keeping the commandments of God; and a righteous man will exercise righteous authority. That is the object God had in view in sending us here. Through faithfully keeping His commandments we may attain unto power—not illegitimate power, but lawful power—and wield it for our own exaltation and for the exaltation of other human beings.

Priests and kings upon thrones. It is God's design to make us priests and kings, not to have an empty title, not to sit upon thrones without power but to be actually and really priests and kings. The promise is that all things that He hath shall be given unto us. We will be His heirs; we will be (if I may use the term without irreverence) co-partners with Him in all this power and authority. . . .

Consecrate all to God. Those who have faith and who rise to the comprehension of the dignity and exaltation that God intends to bestow upon us will not hesitate to give everything they have to the Lord, but it requires faith. The Lord might require us to lay down our lives. That would require faith, would it not? Yes. But what is the promise? That we shall have eternal life and be exalted in His presence. Therefore, those who wish to attain to this exaltation must cherish sublimity of feeling, sublimity of self-sacrifice. They must not only be willing to pay their tithing but be willing to give everything they have got on the earth—wives and children and everything else. If I cannot give up my wife and all my children, if required, if I cannot lay down my life, if necessary, God help me. I do not know what I might do, but God help me to do it if the test ever comes. But if I am not willing to do this, I cannot hope to attain to that exaltation and receive that fullness which the Lord has promised unto us, if we are faithful. . . .

I say to you this day, in the presence of God and the holy angels and of this assembly, if we expect to attain the fulfillment of the promises God has made to us, we must be self-sacrificing. There is no sacrifice that God can ask of us or His servants whom He has chosen to lead us that we should hesitate about making. In one sense of the word it is no sacrifice. We may call it so because it comes in contact with our selfishness and our unbelief; but it ought not to come in contact with our faith. . . .

Trials are for our own benefit. Why did the Lord ask such things of Abraham? Because, knowing what his future would be and that he would be the father of an innumerable posterity, he was determined to test him. God did not do this for His own sake for He knew by His foreknowledge what Abraham would do; but the purpose was to impress upon Abraham a lesson and to enable him to attain unto knowledge that he could not obtain in any other way. That is why God tries all of us. It is not for His own knowledge for He knows all things beforehand. He knows all your lives and everything you will do. But He tries us for our own good that we may know ourselves; for it is most important that a man should know himself.

He required Abraham to submit to this trial because He intended to give him glory, exaltation and honor; He intended to make him a king and a priest, to share with Himself the glory, power and dominion which He exercised. And was this trial any more than God Himself had passed through? God the Eternal Father gave His Only Begotten Son to die for us; and He wanted to see whether Abraham was as willing to sacrifice his son of promise as He Himself was to sacrifice His well beloved, His first born, Jesus Christ.

And what of Isaac? Josephus tells us that Isaac was old enough to carry the wood for the sacrifice; and after his father had told him what the Lord wanted, Isaac, in the spirit of submission that such a son had for such a father, said to him, "If the Lord had not commanded you to do this, father, I would have been willing to have done whatever you required of me." In this Isaac exhibited a spirit akin to that manifested by the Lord Jesus; and Abraham showed a willingness akin to that exhibited by the Father in offering up His Only Begotten Son for the rest of His brethren and sisters. (Apr. 9, 1899, CR 64-67)

Heirs of God. Remember the word! If we are heirs of God, why then we shall inherit the power and the blessings and the glory of God our Eternal Father. This is what the Latter-day Saints ought to have constantly in view, "How can I live so as to become an heir of God and a joint heir with Jesus Christ? What course can I take to secure to myself celestial glory—a never-fading crown?" Not an empty bauble, not a barren sceptre but a sceptre of power, a sceptre of dominion, a crown that means something real, a throne that means the kingly and queenly authority. This is what the Latter-day Saints have in view when they have their hearts fixed as they should be and their eyes open to the glory that God has in store for the faithful. (Apr. 27, 1890, DW 40:836)

To have extensive dominions. If we are heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, we expect to have control over many things, and there is reason to believe that our dominion will be very extensive. But before we attain to that dominion we must learn to be wise rulers over the few things that God has placed in our charge and to use them for His glory and the advancement of His purposes on the earth.

When He sees that our eyes are single to His glory and that our hearts are pure and free from avarice and every sordid and selfish feeling, He will multiply His blessings upon us because He will then know by testing us that we are fit to be trusted; and it will be said to us according to the words of the Scriptures, "When he shall prove himself faithful in all things that shall be entrusted unto his care, yea, even a few things, he shall become ruler over many." (D&C 124:113.) (Apr. 21, 1867, JD 12:43)

We talk about kings and nobles, and we have admired their glory; but the day is not far distant when there will be thousands of men in Zion holding more power and having more glory, honor and wealth than the greatest and the richest of the nobles of the earth. The earth and its fulness are promised unto us by the Lord our God as soon as we have the wisdom and experience necessary to wield this power and wealth. (Oct. 8, 1865, JD 11:175)

Kings with kingdoms. We build temples and we administer and submit to ordinances and perform those things within them which will prepare us to dwell eternally with our God, with Jesus and the Apostles in the heavens. There each man will have his family and kingdom. It is said that God is Lord of lords and King of kings; but how can He be King of kings unless there be kings under Him to give Him homage and pay respect unto Him and acknowledge Him as their Lord and their King?

When God led forth Abraham and told him that as the stars of the firmament were innumerable so should his seed be, He proclaimed to him the greatness of his kingdom in eternity. He told Abraham that he should be a king over this innumerable host; for, if Abraham were not to be king over them, of what use or glory would his posterity be to him? When God pointed Abraham to the sand on the sea shore and told him that as it was countless so should his seed be, He told him in accents that could not be mistaken of the future glory of his eternal kingdom. And if all mankind attained to the same promises as Abraham, they also would have an innumerable posterity to reign over. (Apr. 8, 1871, JD 14:128)

Reign on the earth. Many men wonder how it is that we can believe in celestial marriage. We believe in it because it lies at the foundation of all future greatness. If a man rules in heaven, he will rule over his own posterity. The Apostle John said that they sang a new song in heaven—"And hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and we shall reign on the earth." (Revelation 5:10.) Reign on the earth! This was the song. Over whom were they to reign? Over whom more properly than their families? (Aug. 10, 1873, JD 16:143)

The glory of an endless increase. As the Prophet says concerning our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, "of the increase of his government . . . there shall be no end." (Isaiah 9:7.) It shall go on increasing with every cycle of eternity as long as time endures. There shall be no end to the increase of His Kingdom. His glory consisted of this; and the glory of God consists in the number of His posterity; and as generation succeeds generation, until the earth is filled and glorified, other worlds will be rolled into existence upon which the posterity of God, our Heavenly Father, shall increase throughout the endless ages of eternity. . . .

The godlike power has been given us here on the earth to bear and perpetuate our own species. Shall this power, which brings so much joy, peace and happiness, be confined and limited to this short life? It is folly to talk about such a thing; common sense teaches us better. It teaches that we have been organized not for time alone, that we have been endowed as we are in the image of God not for thirty, forty, fifty, seventy or a hundred years but as eternal beings, exercising our endowments and functions for all eternity, if we live faithful or take a course that God approves. Therefore, there is great sense, beauty and godliness in the idea that God taught Abraham with respect to his posterity becoming as numerous as the stars of the firmament. . . .

We look forward to the time when this earth will be redeemed from corruption and cleansed by fire, when there shall be a new heaven and a new earth and when the Saints shall possess their native inheritance purified from sin, redeemed from corruption, with the power of Satan curtailed and when we shall be able to increase and multiply and fill this earth, go to other earths and carry on the work of emigration through the endless ages of eternity. (Apr. 8, 1871, JD 14:128-29)

He has revealed to us that these relationships that are so tender and that make life so delightful will exist beyond the grave. Wife will be united to husband. Children will be united to parents. The family relationship will exist in eternity, and the glory of a man and a woman will be in dwelling in the midst of their posterity and seeing that posterity increase. For after God seemingly had exhausted every blessing that He could give to Abraham or that human heart could desire, He took him out and showed him the stars of heaven and said to him: "In blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea shore." (Genesis 22:17.) That seemed to be the crowning blessing—the blessing of all blessings—that He pronounced upon His faithful servant Abraham, after he had expressed a willingness to sacrifice his son Isaac.

And this is the blessing that God has promised to every faithful man and woman—that to the increase of their seed there shall be no end. This will constitute the great glory of eternity—the man presiding over his family and being lord over them. Thus it is that Jesus is called Lord of lords. He is Lord of lords because His brethren will exercise this power and authority over their posterity. And then what? Why, the creative power will be given to men. . . .

Other worlds to be created. What will be their occupation? The exercise of that creative power that our Father and God has exercised in preparing this earth as the abode for man. He called together the elements and formed the earth as a habitation for man; and man, if he is faithful, will progress until he will do that very same thing for his posterity.

Abraham, standing at the head of an innumerable posterity, will find it necessary to have room. He will want to emigrate after awhile from this earth and find a new habitation for there will not be room enough on the glorified earth for him and his posterity in the coming eternity. Thus it is that the heavens are bespangled with the glorious orbs that we see at night—the creations of God, peopled by the children of God.

And all this God promises to us, if we are faithful. He says, "You shall be kings; you shall be queens; you shall sit upon thrones; you shall sway scepters, and you shall have power and dominion, if you prove yourselves faithful and true to Me; and you shall be My heirs, and joint heirs with My beloved Son, Jesus Christ, your Redeemer." (Oct. 9, 1892, DW 45:619-20)

No standing still. There is progress for our Father and for our Lord Jesus. There is no such thing as standing still in the eternal work of our God. It is endless progress, progressing from one degree of knowledge to another degree. Thus the children of men will be continually exalted and drawn up toward God. (Jan. 22, 1898, MS 61:117)

Heaven a place of activity and progress. Heaven is something to be desired; . . . heaven is a place of activity, a place of progress; that which furnishes man his highest enjoyment on the earth, that which develops and calls out his highest and noblest qualities, we are to have in heaven. And this is no new revelation; but it is beclouded and misunderstood by the world.

"He hath been faithful over a few things, . . . and he shall be made ruler over many" (D&C 132:53), the Scriptures say. What does that mean? That the man who had done his duty in his sphere here on the earth faithfully will have an enlarged sphere hereafter, will have greater power, more opportunities for development, shall have every God-like power, every power and attribute that we have derived from our ancestry—that is, from God our Eternal Father. We shall have room for infinite gratification, unlimited gratification, going on from one degree of power to another and exercising it as our Father exercises it in the midst of the eternities. Is there not something delightful in this thought and in the contemplation of such a future?

Power of procreation promised. If I have children, if I have a wife, I shall have them in eternity. I shall preside over that family no matter how small it may be or how large it may extend. They will be my kingdom; for this is the promise of God. What is there that is more delightful in the contemplation of the future than this thought, that those with whom we are associated here, with whom our lives and happiness is entwined, who give unto us the greatest pleasure because of the love we have for them and they have for us, that that union shall be perpetuated throughout eternity and that there shall be an increase of that love and of that union and an increase also of that power, because the power of procreation is promised—the greatest power that man possesses on the earth. That is promised unto those who are faithful.

I know the world say this is materialistic, that we take wrong views of this, that we are not spiritual enough. Well, I am willing to have that charge leveled against me. I want to be materialistic in this sense. I want to enjoy that which we enjoy here, purified, exalted and increased beyond my comprehension or your comprehension at the present time; and we are to have this glory and this power; the Lord promises it unto us.

Therefore, it can be said of us as it was said of our Lord and Savior, "of the increase of His government there shall be no end." (Isaiah 9:7.) Why? Because of this principle that I spoke of—the principle of procreation. By it and through that principle the worlds are peopled. The planetary orbs which stud our heavens so gloriously are peopled by that principle—the principle of procreation. God possesses it, and we as His children inherit the power. If we do what is right, He promises to bestow it upon us.

A spiritual heaven. Our heaven, then, is materialistic in this sense; it is not altogether spiritual. But it is spiritual also. We shall have spiritual joy; we shall have spiritual pleasures such as have been described to us this day, for it is the highest pleasure or joy the human soul is capable of to worship God, to do His will, keep His commandments and to serve Him. This is the highest pleasure that human beings can attain unto, and we shall have it in eternity, and it shall be the chief source of our enjoyment and of our happiness in the world to come. (Apr. 6, 1899, CR 19-20)

Endowments necessary for celestial glory. Can a man attain unto celestial glory without receiving his endowments? Under some circumstances he can. If he should die, as some of our faithful brethren have, before endowments were given, no doubt he would be judged by the Lord according to his opportunities and his willingness. But speaking generally, men and women cannot receive celestial glory without having the ordinances that pertain to the endowments. Men and women cannot be united for eternity unless they are united by the Priesthood of God in the place appointed for the administration of that ordinance. The union of husband and wife, of parents and children depends upon obedience to law, and they cannot get into the Celestial Kingdom without they obey these laws. Other commandments of the Lord might be mentioned in this connection. We are commanded to live by every word that proceedeth from the mouth of God. We must do this. The Lord reveals His word to His Church; that word must be obeyed, if we expect to reach the celestial glory. (Apr. 1900, CR 54-55)

Sustaining the Immortal body. We can have but little conception at the present time of the life that lies beyond. The sustaining of the immortal body, we have reason to believe, will not involve the toil and the other burdensome conditions which the sustenance of the mortal body does. It is by obedience to law that immortality is brought to pass, for the Lord has said, "that which is governed by law is also preserved by law, and perfected and sanctified by the same." Laws are given, but unto every law there are certain "bounds and conditions." Those who abide those conditions are justified and preserved.

It will be by a comprehension of and obedience to certain laws that immortality will be preserved. The immortal body will, doubtless, derive its sustenance from the elements as the mortal does; and those elements will be applied to immortal man's use and benefit by the knowledge which he will possess in the same manner as the mortal body derives its benefits from the knowledge which mortal man possesses of those earthly elements to which he has access and over which he exercises control. (Mar. 15, 1895, JI 30:186)

Who can become a devil? God has not predestined any of us to be damned. On the contrary He has desired and does desire the salvation of all the children of men; and He will save all with certain degrees of salvation if they do not go so far as to commit the unpardonable sin. Some people think they have done this when they have not. A man must have attained to considerable knowledge about God and eternal things before he is in a condition where he can commit the unpardonable sin. . . . There are comparatively few who get so far as this.

A man must have sufficient knowledge to make him a God in order to be a devil. Lucifer had to be a great and a powerful being. He stood high in the presence of God, and his fall was greater than it would have been if he had occupied an inferior station. Therefore, the more we know concerning God, the more power and the more gifts we get from God, if they are abused, the greater will be our condemnation and the greater will be the depth to which we shall fall when we do fall.

On the one hand there is glory and exaltation in proportion to faithfulness, to knowledge and to gifts and opportunities enjoyed. On the other hand there is damnation and a withdrawal of these blessings, and the depth to which that soul will fall will be in proportion to the knowledge, to the understanding, to the gifts, to the opportunities and to the blessings that he possessed and that he enjoyed. . . .

God has devised a plan of salvation that will bring us all to a certain amount of glory, and each one of us will receive a glory far beyond anything that we can possibly conceive of, even if we have been sinners. But it is far better to repent of our sins and have them blotted out, so that we may receive the greater glory and the greater exaltation. (May 10, 1891, MS 53:577-80)

No forgiveness for murderers. The Apostle John says: "Ye know that no murderer hath eternal life abiding in him." (1 John 3:15.)

The Prophet Joseph, speaking upon this subject, says as follows:

Remission of sins by baptism was not to be preached to murderers. All the priests of Christendom might pray for a murderer on the scaffold forever, but could not avail so much as a gnat towards their forgiveness. There is no forgiveness for murderers; they will have to wait until the times of redemption shall come, and that in hell. Peter had the keys of eternal judgment, and he saw David in hell, and knew for what reason, and that David would have to remain there until the resurrection at the coming of Christ.

No Elder in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who understands his duty would baptize a man who had been guilty of wilful murder. For such a crime, according to the law of God, his blood should be shed; it is a crime which tears and repentance alone cannot entirely wash away. What a horrible doctrine it is to teach that men who have been steeped in vice all their days and been guilty of the most horrible crimes are going, when they die, into the society of the holy and the pure and of those whose entire lives have been devoted to works of righteousness! Jesus and many of the Prophets and Apostles were killed for their righteousness; how could men strangled for their murders and other abominable crimes abide their presence? (Dec. 15, 1883, JI 18:376)
