Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

SECTION 2

FUNDAMENTALS OF MORMONISM

The Lord is the same yesterday, today and forever. This is the corner-stone, it may be said, of our faith. It is upon this foundation we have built; that He is an unchangeable God; that He does not manifest His mind and His will in plainness and simplicity to one people, and hide the same from a succeeding people who are equally faithful. . . . God is no respecter of persons; He is today as He was yesterday and as He ever was, and He will continue to be the same Being as long as time endures or eternity continues. —GEORGE Q. CANNON] Journal of Discourses 21:72-73] October 5, 1879

CHAPTER 10

Deity—The Mormon Conception

The basis of true intelligence. God is the fount of all true knowledge. Belief and faith in Him is the basis of all true intelligence. To know Him is the greatest of all knowledge, to lose Him is to incur a penalty from which no worldly learning can save. By proper conduct every soul may learn to know Him with as much certainty as anything that can be seen with the eyes or felt with the hands. (Mar. 15, 1892, JI 27:184)

One of the great duties devolving upon us is to teach the world that there is a God and that he has power to save today, as much as in ancient days, those who are willing to trust him. It is this peculiar feature that makes everything connected with this work so incomprehensible to men. (July 12, 1874, JD 17:123)

Kind of God the Saints believe in. We who belong to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believe in God, not a God who lived a few thousand years ago but a God who lives today, a God who has a voice with which to speak today and who has arms and a head and bodily as well as spiritual powers, who can communicate His mind and His will unto His children with the same facility in the days in which we live as He did in the days of the Savior and His disciples or in the days of the Prophets. . . .

Jesus Christ a man like us. Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ whom we worship as God, was a man like unto us, so much so that His divinity was not recognized through any external signs by the Jews. There was nothing about His person that they could discover that would make Him a God, the creator of the heavens and the earth. . . . He was in all respects a man, so far as the outward appearance was concerned; His exterior was that of a man; but, nevertheless, He was a God. He was the first begotten Son of the Eternal Father, who sits enthroned in glory and majesty, surrounded by burning fire. He was the Son of that Being and was the express image of His person, like Him, having a head, having the senses that men have, having all the bodily features that we have, and His Father was precisely like Him, or He, in other words, was precisely like His Father. (May 4, 1884, JD 25:149-55)

A true conception of God necessary. Now, it was meant that this knowledge should be restored first of all. It seems so, at least, from the fact that God Himself came; it seems that this knowledge had to be restored as the basis for all true faith to be built upon. There can be no faith that is not built upon a true conception of God our Father. Therefore, before even angels came, He came Himself accompanied by His Son and revealed Himself once more to man upon the earth.

Prophet Joseph laid the foundation. The set time had come, the instrument had been born—the instrument that had been selected doubtless as much as the Son of God had been selected to accomplish His mission—that is, He had also been selected from before the foundation of the world to come and to be the instrument in the hands of God to again lay the foundation of His Church upon the earth—that instrument had been born and the set time had come for the establishment of the work of the Lord.

Joseph Smith had the necessary gifts and qualifications by which he was enabled to seek unto God with such irresistible faith that God heard his prayer and granted unto him the desire of his heart by revealing Himself unto him and giving unto him the instructions which He did. This was followed by other ministrations—the ministrations of angels. . . .

Angels not feathered beings. When Joseph received the ministrations of an angel—or angels, for he was visited by more than one—he saw that they were men and that they had not feathered after death, that they did not have wings, but that they were glorified men, or men who had received glory from God; they were personages like they were on the earth. Thus, a true conception began to dawn upon the minds of at least a few individuals who believed Joseph's testimony concerning these beings. (Sept. 2, 1883, JD 24:372-73)

An unchangeable God. The Lord is the same yesterday, today and forever. This is the corner-stone, it may be said, of our faith. It is upon this foundation we have built, that He is an unchangeable God, that He does not manifest His mind and His will in plainness and simplicity to one people and hide the same from a succeeding people who are equally faithful. The great truth has been impressed upon us, the great truth that runs through all the writings of every man of God concerning whom we have any account from the beginning down to the last revelation that has been given, that God is no respecter of persons, that He is today as He was yesterday and as He ever was and that He will continue to be the same being as long as time endures or eternity continues. . . .

We worship Him; we adore Him; we lift up our eyes to Him; we rely upon Him as the Supreme Being, the Creator of the heavens and the earth, the Founder of the universe, the Builder of the planet which we inhabit and which we tread, the Being over whom centuries have passed without making any change to His injury; eternity has rolled and continues to roll and will continue to roll without in the least affecting His power or His capacity for good; His eye does not grow dim by the lapse of ages; His ear does not become heavy by the passage of time; neither does His arm become short or feeble.

He is the God whom we worship. When we call upon Him, though he may be remote from us, dwelling in His holy habitation in the midst of the eternities, the very thoughts of our hearts, the very conceptions of our minds, the feeble whisperings of our voices, they ascend to Him, are carried to Him; His ear comprehends them; His bowels of compassion are moved towards us His children; His all-piercing eye penetrates eternity, and the glance of His vision reaches us.

There is not a single thought of our hearts which He does not comprehend; there is nothing connected with us He does not know. We may hide ourselves in the bowels of the earth, but we cannot conceal ourselves from His all-piercing sight. We may climb the highest mountains or descend into the deepest valleys, or we may go to the uttermost parts of the earth; but wherever we may go, He is there; His power is there; His vision is there to hear and to comprehend the desires and the wishes of our hearts. (Oct. 5, 1879, JD 21:72-73)

God has a father. Jesus, our Lord and Savior, was once a child upon the earth as you are now. He was the Son of God on earth, and He is now God in heaven. It was He who spoke to Moses in the wilderness, and it was He who revealed Himself to the brother of Jared and came to him before He was in the flesh. He gave revelations to His servants in ancient days; and He afterwards came upon the earth just as you have done. He came here, was born, had a father and mother like you have. Well, who was His father? Why God was His father; and who was God's father? Why God had a father like you and I have.

Now, what I want to say in connection with this is, it is your privilege to become just what Jesus and God our Heavenly Father have become, if you, while on earth, take a course to serve God and keep His commandments; for He is actually the Father of your spirits, just as your earthly parents are of your bodies. (June 4, 1871, JI 6:155)

Heavenly Father once a mortal man. Every child knows that its earthly father had a father, and its grandfather had a father, and so on back as far as they can be traced; it can believe also that if it lives to become a man or a woman, it will also have children.

The Prophet Joseph teaches us that our Heavenly Father was once a man and dwelt on an earth like we do upon this [^1] and that He has gone on from step to step, from one degree of glory and exaltation to another, until He now rules and governs.

Now, with this information children can begin to understand something about their Heavenly Father. They can see that if Jesus is His Son, and we are His sons and daughters, that He must be the Son of some other personage, [^2] for He could not beget Himself, but must have a father even as He is our Father. (Sept. 11, 1869, JI 4:148)

God has trod this same path. Our Heavenly Father is a loving and a kind and beneficent Parent. He, Himself, has trod the path we are now treading. He is familiar with every step of the road, with all the meanderings of this life, for He has had the experience in it. He knows how to guide us and how to time His blessings to our wants; and when you feel impatient and dissatisfied because He does not give you more than you now have, and when you are afflicted and bowed down in sorrow and pain, let the reflection enter into your hearts to comfort you that our Father and God, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, trod the path we are now treading, that there is no affliction and sorrow that we are acquainted with, or can be, that the Lord has not already had an experience in; and He knows our condition; He knows what is good for us. If we need a gift and a blessing, He knows when to bestow it upon us. (Oct. 8, 1865, JD 11:174)

The family of God. The Mormons believe that all men were born in the spirit world of the union of the sexes, having a literal father and a literal mother before coming to this world, that the spirits are just the same in appearance as the body, that God is a married Being, has a wife at least, as Jeremiah said the angels were offering incense to the queen of heaven. The Latter-day Saints believe that God is an exalted Man, and that we are the offspring of Him and His wife. (Apr. 15, 1884, Salt Lake Herald)

The "Mormons" believe that God is the Father of our spirits—that we are His offspring; and we think it just as consistent and reasonable to believe that He has a partner or partners as to think that He sits, isolated and solitary in lonely grandeur, in a state of bachelorship, and yet a Parent of so innumerable a progeny. (Mar. 29, 1856, WS 47)

Offspring of Deity. There are many people who imagine that we are the children of God because He is our Creator. But we differ from all other people in this respect. We believe that we are the literal descendants of our Eternal Father, that we are the offspring of Deity, that those aspirations which man has and which cause Him to perform the mighty works that we see on every hand as we travel throughout the earth are inherited from our Eternal Father. They come to us by descent; or, to use another phrase, they are hereditary. The doctrine of heredity is manifested in the works of man. We descend from this great Father who formed the earth and who governs this universe. Therefore, it is natural that man, being His offspring, should have these glorious aspirations which prompt him to attempt these wonderful works and to succeed in carrying them out.

This is the belief of the Latter-day Saints; and, having this belief, we should have with it a corresponding desire that, when we shall see our Father, we shall be like Him. If we have this hope within us, we will seek to purify ourselves, even as He is pure, that we may be counted worthy to come into His presence. . . .

A God of revelation. We believe in a God of revelation. We believe in a God who communicates His mind and will to His children. And if we seek for it, we believe that He will reveal Himself more and more unto us and in greater and greater fulness, until we shall comprehend Him as well as it is possible for mortal man to comprehend God. We do not worship a Being that we have created in our own imaginations; we worship a Being who has revealed Himself to us—a Being who has communicated to us His character and His attributes and revealed unto us the greatness of His Godlike character.

It was necessary in the very outset of this work that there should be a revelation of this character. Up to that time men for generations had been ignorant of the character of God. It was believed, as many now believe, that He was a Being diffused through space—a spiritual Being, without an entity or without a tabernacle. But the first revelation that was given in our day, in answer to the prayer of the boy, Joseph Smith, Jun., and seemingly the most necessary one that could be given to lay the foundation of faith in the human mind, was the appearance of God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ. . . .

There were two Personages appeared unto Joseph Smith, Jun.,—God the Father and His Son Jesus Christ. Whatever errors had existed, whatever doubts had prevailed up to that time concerning the being of God were swept away, never to return, from the minds of those who believed in that revelation at that time. God was then understood to be the Being who walked in the Garden of Eden and spoke with a voice—Whose finger was seen by the brother of Jared and Whom the Prophets declared to be the Being that He is. This testimony came with power on this occasion. . . .

In the very outset of this work the Father and the Son were revealed in ineffable glory, and they were seen by mortal man; his testimony stands on record today, corroborated and sustained by the testimony of others who have since seen the Lord Jesus Christ and who are living witnesses that He lives and that He is indeed the Son of God and one of the two Personages that form the Godhead. . . .

As man is God once was. Among the Latter-day Saints there is a knowledge concerning the Personage of God. We have some conception of Him. We know that He is a Being of tabernacle. A remark suggests itself to my mind which I heard a few days ago from one of our Apostles—Brother Lorenzo Snow. it was something to this effect: That as God now is, we will be; as man is, God was. It is very comprehensive. And we descend from this Father. We are His offspring. We possess His attributes. It is true they are not developed, but we possess them; and He desires to lead us forward until we shall be like Him. This is the object of the Gospel.

Men talk about evolution. This is the true evolution—being such as we are and developing and advancing and progressing in that upward and onward career until we shall become like Him, in truth, until we shall possess the powers that He possesses and exercise the dominion that He now exercises. This is the promise that is held out to us. It is an incentive to faithfulness on our part. (Apr. 7, 1889, DW 38:675-76)

Progression from an infant to a God. What is there more helpless, weak, puny, insignificant, it may be said, in many respects, than a human being when it is born into the world. Yet that being, if nurtured properly, if trained as it should be, has before it a career of never-ending glory. That little pulling infant may become, in the eternity of our God, a god, to sway power and dominion in the eternal worlds, to be the father of unnumbered millions. Yet at its birth who would anticipate such a future for it. (Oct. 5, 1884, JD 25:319)

Jesus the God of ancient Israel. There is in modern Christendom a strong tendency to ascribe to the Father visits and communications with mankind that were really made by the Lord Jesus. There is even a respectable percentage of the members of His Church, established in these days, who have the idea that it was the Father and not the Son who appeared to the Patriarchs and Prophets of old, who delivered Israel from Egypt, who gave the law on Sinai, and who was the guide and inspirer of the ancient Seers. This was not the understanding of the true servants of God either before or after His coming.

Those who preceded that advent of the Messiah understood that He whom they worshipped as Jehovah should in due time tabernacle in the flesh, and the writings of Justin Martyr and other of the early fathers show that this was the belief of the early Christian Church on the eastern continent. The writings of the Hebrew Prophets, as we have them in the Bible, are perhaps not as plain on this point as are those of the Nephite Seers that are revealed to us in the Book of Mormon. But we have in this latter record some quotations from the earlier Hebrew Prophets that make this point very clear. Nephi writes:

And the God of our fathers, who were led out of Egypt, out of bondage, and also were preserved in the wilderness by him, yea, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, yieldeth himself, according to the words of the angel, as a man, into the hands of wicked men, to be lifted up according to the words of Zenock, and to be crucified, according to the words of Neum, and to be buried in a sepulchre, according to the words of Zenos. . . . (1 Nephi 19:10.)

About four hundred years later another Nephite seer, King Benjamin, testifies that an angel came to him and made this glorious promise:

For behold, the time cometh, and is not far distant, that with power, the Lord omnipotent who reigneth, who was, and is from all eternity to all eternity, shall come down from heaven among the children of men, and shall dwell in a tabernacle of clay, and shall go forth amongst men, working mighty miracles, such as healing the sick, raising the dead, causing the lame to walk, the blind to receive their sight, and the deaf to hear, and curing all manner of diseases. (Mosiah 3:5.)

A little further on he says:

And he shall be called Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the Father of heaven and earth, the Creator of all things from the beginning; and his mother shall be called Mary.

And lo, he cometh unto his own, that salvation might come unto the children of men, even through faith on his name; and even after all this, they shall consider him a man, and say that he hath a devil, and shall scourge him, and shall crucify him. (Mosiah 3:8-9.)

But we have the word of the Savior Himself on this point that puts controversy to an end. When, after His resurrection and ascension into heaven, He first appeared to His Nephite disciples on this land, He declared: "Behold, I am Jesus Christ, whom the prophets testified shall come into the world. . . . I am the God of Israel, and the God of the whole earth, and have been slain for the sins of the world." (3 Nephi 11:10, 14.)

Later during His ministry among the Nephites he affirms: "Behold I say unto you that the law is fulfilled that was given unto Moses. Behold, I am he that gave the law, and I am he who covenanted with my people Israel; therefore, the law in me is fulfilled." (3 Nephi 15:4-5.)

Should any still have a lingering doubt that the Jehovah who revealed Himself to Abraham, to Moses and to others was any other than He who we know in the flesh as Jesus Christ, that doubt is set at rest by the revelations given in these days. In the vision seen by the Prophet Joseph Smith and by Oliver Cowdery in the Kirtland Temple, 3rd of April, 1836, the following appears:

We saw the Lord standing upon the breastwork of the pulpit, before us; and under his feet was a paved work of pure gold, in color like amber.

His eyes were as a flame of fire; the hair of his head was white like the pure snow; his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun; and his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even the voice of Jehovah, saying:

I am the first and the last; I am he who liveth, I am he who was slain; I am your advocate with the Father. (D&C 110:1-4.)

Somewhat curiously an ancient Syriac manuscript has within the last few months been unearthed that is known as the Gospel of the Twelve Apostles. Whether the Twelve Apostles had anything to do with writing it has nothing to do with the point under consideration. The writing was originally in Hebrew, and what we wish to draw attention to is that, whenever this manuscript was first written, the writers of the original believed that Jesus was he who spake with the ancient Israelites. It commences:

The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, according as it was said by the Holy Spirit, I send an angel before his face, who shall prepare his way.

It came to pass in the 309th year of Alexander, the son of Philip the Macedonian, in the reign of Tiberius Caesar, in the government of Herod, the ruler of the Jews, that the angel Gabriel, the chief of the angels, by command of God went down to Nazareth to a virgin called Mariam, of the tribe of Judah the son of Israel (her who was betrothed to Joseph the just), and he appeared to her and said, Lo! there ariseth from thee the one who spake with our fathers, and he shall be a Savior to Israel; and they who do not confess him shall perish, for his authority is in the lofty heights, and his kingdom does not pass away. (Feb. 1, 1900, JI 35:90-91)

The Savior seen—a personal testimony. I know that God lives. I know that Jesus lives; for I have seen Him. I know that this is the Church of God, and that it is founded on Jesus Christ, our Redeemer. I testify to you of these things as one that knows—as one of the Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ that can bear witness to you today in the presence of the Lord that He lives and that He will live, and will come to reign on the earth, to sway an undisputed sceptre. (Oct. 6, 1896, DW 53:610)

The worship of female deities. In the days of Jeremiah the Prophet the worship of "the queen of heaven" (Jeremiah 44:17), a feminine deity, was very common. The people of Judah attributed great power to this female deity, so much so that Jeremiah declared the word of the Lord unto them concerning their idolatrous practices and their departure from the true God. . . .

It appears from the record of Jeremiah that it was chiefly the women who worshiped this deity. . . . It was in vain that the Prophet of the true God pled with them and endeavored to show them that they were deceived and that by continuing this course they were sure to bring down the anger and the hot displeasure of the true God. . . .

It has not been uncommon for different nations to worship female deities. Pele, a female deity, was worshiped by the Sandwich Islanders. In ancient days Isis was the principal goddess worshiped by the Egyptians. . . . Perhaps this was the deity whom the Israelite exiles worshiped in Egypt, they living at Pathros, in Egypt, at the time when the interview took place between Jeremiah and them, though Aphrodite is said to have been worshiped by the Israelites in the days of their idolatry. . . .

The Greeks and Romans also indulged in the worship of female deities. Juno, a celebrated deity, was worshiped by both Greeks and Romans. Ceres was the goddess of Corn, Clio of History, Diana of the Chase, Erato of Lovers, Hygeia of Health. Minerva was also a noted name in their mythology. She was supposed to represent Wisdom, War, and the Liberal Arts, as Pallas also did Wisdom, and as Vesta did the domestic hearth. . . .

The tendency to attribute God-like powers to members of the female sex is exhibited nowadays in the adoration which is paid to the mother of the Savior, the Virgin Mary. . . .

That great care must be exercised among the Latter-day Saints upon this point there can scarcely be a question. . . . There is too much of this inclination to deify "our mother in heaven". . . . As Latter-day Saints we cannot be too careful concerning the use of language that may lead to wrong impressions, especially regarding the Being whom we worship.

One of the great commandments which the Lord gave to Israel after He led them out of Egypt and from the midst of the idolatrous people of Pharaoh, who had many false gods, was: "Thou shalt have no other gods before me." (Exodus 20:3.) The Lord also told the children of Israel, "I, the Lord, am a jealous God." (Exodus 20:5.)

The most terrible woes which came upon Israel during their career in the land of Canaan were the result of departing from the worship of the true God and bowing down to idols and false gods.

The worship of the true God has been revealed to us. He has revealed Himself in our day. Mortal men have beheld the Eternal Father and the Redeemer, Jesus. And we know that they live. We know also that our Father in heaven should be the object of our worship. He will not have any divided worship. We are commanded to worship Him, and Him only.

In the revelation of God the Eternal Father to the Prophet Joseph Smith there was no revelation of the feminine element as part of the Godhead, and no idea was conveyed that any such element "was equal in power and glory with the masculine." (Elizabeth C. Stanton, The Woman's Bible.)

Therefore, we are warranted in pronouncing all tendencies to glorify the feminine element and to exalt it as part of the Godhead as wrong and untrue, not only because of the revelation of the Lord in our day but because it has no warrant in scripture, and any attempt to put such a construction on the word of God is false and erroneous. (May 15, 1895, JI 30:314-17)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "God himself was once as we are now, and is an exalted man and sits enthroned in yonder heaven. . . . I say, if you were to see him today, you would see him like a man in form. . . . He was once a man like us; yea, God himself, the Father of us all, dwelt on an earth, the same as Jesus Christ himself did." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 345-46.)
[^2] 2. "Where was there ever a son without a father? And where was there ever a father without first being a son?" (Ibid., p. 373.)
