Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 11

Free Agency, Foreordination, and Predestination

The free agency of man. We must remember, to begin with, that God our Eternal Father has given unto each of us our agency. There is no human being born on the earth from whom God has withheld his or her agency. We have as much right to exercise our agency in our sphere as God the Eternal Father has to exercise His agency in His sphere, just as much. It is not sacrilege, it is not any infringement upon the power of our God to indulge in this thought or to have this belief. It does not detract in the least from His glory, from His power, nor from our dependence upon Him as an infinite and almighty Being to entertain this view of ourselves. . . .

Adam and Eve exercised agency. It was so in the beginning—in the very commencement of the work of our God upon the earth when He placed Adam in the garden and gave Eve unto him for a wife. He set before them the principle of knowledge—that is, He told them what they should do; He told them what they should refrain from doing. He told them that if they did certain things, certain penalties should follow. . . . There was no attempt on the part of our Father to interfere with the agency of Adam in this respect. He left him perfectly free, and in the exercise of that freedom Adam did partake of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. His wife, Eve, was deceived in eating of the fruit; she partook of it, being beguiled, yet in the perfect exercise of her agency, and after she had partaken of it and become subject to the penalty that God had pronounced—the penalty of death and expulsion from the garden—then she came and told Adam what she had done. (Sept. 28, 1884, JD 26:188)

Free agency a necessary part of plan of salvation. Men could not be perfectly happy and could not be heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ if they did not have their agency. Satan exercised his agency and became the devil. He loved evil and chose it. We have no doubt that in the beginning, before he became totally abandoned, he was taught the right way, he was pled with, entreated and prayed for. The revelations teach us that he was an angel of God, that he was, in fact, a son of God. He had the same opportunity of choosing the good that Jesus had; but he was disobedient and rebellious. He fought against the Father and became a fallen angel, even a devil. He could do this, because he was a free agent.

All the sons and daughters of God are also free agents. Satan, therefore, tempts them. It is necessary they should be tempted. Without this the plan of salvation would not be perfect. On the one hand the Father entreats us to obey His laws, to keep His commandments and to cherish His Holy Spirit. On the other hand Satan tempts us to do wrong, to commit sin, to disobey God. He spreads temptations before men to lead them astray. We are not compelled to listen to him. He cannot force us to do evil. If we do wrong, it is because we choose to do so, for we are free agents.

The Lord Himself will not compel us to serve and obey Him. It is pleasing to Him to have us do so. But, when we do so, it is because it is our choice and in the exercise of our agency. If, then, we should be so blessed as to hereafter reach the heaven where God the Father dwells, it will be because we have obeyed His laws and not because He has forced us to go there. . . .

To enjoy the sweet, mankind must know something about the bitter. They must have the opportunity of exercising their faculties and testing their powers. Unless they were exposed to temptation they never could know themselves, their own powers, their own weaknesses nor the power of God. If Satan had no power to tempt mankind, they would be in a state where they could neither know good nor evil; they could not know happiness nor misery. All their powers would lie dormant, for there would be nothing to arouse them. They would be destitute of that experience which prepares men to become like God, their Eternal Father.

We may depend upon it, therefore, that the proper way to take away the power from Satan is to teach mankind not to listen to him. They are free agents. They can reject him. He has no power to lead them astray if they will not listen to him. When they cease to listen to him, he will be bound. The time is coming when for one thousand years Satan will be bound. (Jan. 1, 1880, JI 15:6)

Principle of free agency. This is a fundamental principle of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, and we as His followers should clearly understand it. If we do wrong (and we have it in our power to do wrong) we must be responsible for that. We do it because we elect to do it and not because we are compelled by some power over which we have no control to commit this wrong. On the other hand, if we do right, it is because we exercise our agency in that direction and not because there is a power exercised over us which compels us to do right. . . .

A Gospel of perfect freedom. The Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ is one of perfect freedom. Every soul has the right to choose whom he will serve, whether God or Baal, and no individual who does that which is wrong can reproach God therefor. Unfavorable circumstances may surround human beings at their birth which may have influence upon their subsequent careers. But our Great Creator in judging His children will make full allowance for these. Man, having his agency, need not, unless he so wishes, become the entire creature of these circumstances. It becomes his duty to contend against that which is evil and, by the help of God, to overcome evil inclinations and rise above evil surroundings.

It is for this purpose that God gives His Holy Spirit unto His children, that under its influence and by its power they may be able to resist evil, to overcome the temptations that may be in their pathway and to strengthen themselves in the practice of those virtues which He has enjoined upon us as necessary to make us acceptable in His sight. (Apr. 27, 1890, DW 40:833)

Salvation depends on exercise of agency. We have the choice in the exercise of our agency. Man can be saved if he will. There is no power on earth or in hell that can prevent his being saved, if he exercises his agency to that end. Do you understand that? If you ever go to hell, it will be because you yourselves choose to go there and not because any power forces you to go there. There is no power on earth or in hell that can compel a man to go to hell or to be damned if in the exercise of his agency he chooses to serve God. Therefore, when men lift up their eyes in torment, the misery of their torment will be increased by the knowledge that they themselves through their own action and through the exercise of their own agency have brought upon them this condemnation and not because any human being forced them there, for there is no such thing possible.

There may be circumstances that are unfavorable to man. . . . His punishment will be according to the knowledge possessed, to the light he has, to the opportunities that God has given unto him—his punishment will be in accordance therewith. (Jan. 18, 1885, DNW 34:50)

A free exercise of agency. If, when He sends forth his Prophets, He were to manifest His power, so that all the earth would be compelled to receive their words, there would be no room then for men to exercise their agency, for they would be compelled to adopt a certain course and to receive certain teachings and doctrines regardless of their own wishes and will. . . .

This agency God has given unto man, and hence it is that when He sends his truth and His servants to declare it unto the people, He does it in such a way that man is left to the free exercise of his agency in receiving or rejecting them; at the same time we are assured that whoever receives that truth will also receive the convincing power of the Spirit of God to bear testimony to him that it is divine. . . .

When the people demanded miraculous signs of Joseph Smith to convince them of the truth of his testimony, they would not or did not exercise their agency but wanted some overpowering evidence to convince them. The Lord does not operate in that way among the children of men. He sends forth His servants with the truth. (Mar. 23, 1873, JD 15:369-70)

All mankind elected to be saved. All mankind are elected to be saved. No man is a tare unless his conduct makes him such. He is not predestined to be a tare or to be damned, but he is predestined to receive, if he will, salvation and glory in the presence of God. . . .

We shall stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and each of us will have to answer for the deeds done in the body, whether they be good or whether they be evil; the judgment that will be pronounced upon us will be a righteous judgment. If we have done wrong, we shall have to atone for that wrong. If we have done that which is right in the sight of God, if we have walked before Him uprightly, confessing our sins and obtaining the forgiveness of them as we have gone along from day to day, then the reward that will be bestowed upon us will be because of our faithfulness in keeping the commandments of God. (Feb. 17, 1895, DW 50:417-18)

Obedience to Gospel an exercise of free agency. When a man yields complete obedience to the will of the Lord in all things, some pretend to think that he must of necessity lose his free agency and at once become a puppet for others to handle. Those who hold this idea must entertain a very low estimate of human nature, for they would have us believe that to love sin and delight in its practice is the natural condition of the human family; nor do they appear to be willing to admit that a man may freely and without constraint love God and keep His commandments. But we contend that the idea that the sinner is the only free agent is entirely false and further that it is the sinner who is the slave; and he who dances on the devil's ground and keeps step to his music has to serve a hard taskmaster. . . .

On what grounds can we assume that the obedient man uses his agency any less freely than he who chooses to disobey? Because a man or a youth chooses to serve God and obey His laws, is he any less free in doing so than his unwise fellow who prefers to live without God in the world? Cannot a man as freely serve God as he can the devil and tread the path to heaven as voluntarily as he can descend the road to hell? We think so; why not?

The fact is that some who take no pleasure in doing the will of God confound ideas when they talk about entire and unreserved obedience to God destroying man's free agency. They really mean that he who keeps God's laws has no license to sin; but it is this license to sin and not the power, permission and opportunity to choose between right and wrong that is withdrawn. A man is just as much a free agent in avoiding sin as in committing it, in doing good, as in doing evil. . . .

The laws of the Lord are perfect; they are adapted to our eternal natures and worthy of our divine origin; they are to us peace and salvation, and we see nothing unworthy of our manhood in choosing to obey them. It is they who reject so great a salvation that manifest their blindness and folly and show how great is their ignorance of true and heavenly wisdom.

Obedience to Priesthood necessary. Here someone may assert that he has not one word to say against a man being obedient to God, but it is this obedience to other men to which he objects. Who is meant by this expression "other men"? We reply, the Holy Priesthood—the servants of God. Just as well might a man say he believes in obeying the king but does not believe in obeying his ambassadors or his representatives. How can a man obey God and disobey the Priesthood, who teach God's will? They are the channel of communication between heaven and earth; they are the mouth pieces of Jehovah, and when we hearken to them, we obey Him. (June 20, 1874, JI 9:150)

Foreknowledge and foreordination. People confound foreknowledge with foreordination. Because God foreknows a thing, it does not follow that He has foreordained it. He foreknew that Pharaoh would fight Israel and would reject the testimonies which Moses and Aaron bore to him. But Pharaoh had the full use of his agency. It was in his power to have accepted the message which Moses delivered; it was in his power also to reject that message. He chose to reject it, and God magnified His name in the earth by showing His wonderful works among the Egyptians. But He did not foreordain Pharaoh to be damned. His foreknowledge extends to the uttermost end of life. He knows all about us.

Jesus knew that one of His Apostles would be a devil. But it was not foreordained that Judas should be a devil. He chose that part himself, in the exercise of his agency. He betrayed the Son of God and brought upon himself the dreadful fate which befell him. So with Esau. He had equal opportunities with Jacob. Cain had equal opportunities with Abel. God told him that his offering would be accepted if he would do right. God pled with him; his father, no doubt, also pled with him to forsake sin and unrighteousness. But he took the other course.

Do not be deceived and allow any such thought to enter into your hearts that you are fated to be damned, that you are fated to commit sin, that you are fated to be surrounded by inextricable circumstances which break you down. There is no such doctrine in the Gospel of the Son of God. We have our free and unfettered agency. (Apr. 7, 1889, DW 38:677)

Foreknowledge and predestination. I would like you to clearly understand that foreknowledge is one thing and predestination is another, and there is a great distinction between the two. They must not be confounded one with the other. . . . That men are foreordained there can be no doubt entertained by those who believe the Gospel but not to be damned. Every human being is ordained to be saved, if he will be. If he is damned, it is because he chooses the path that leads to condemnation. . . .

Have we not seen in our day men violate the commands of God in, what some might term, little things and go on, step by step, from one degree of sin to another, until they would betray the Lord's Anointed? And can any who were familiar with such cases and who watched the gradual descent of these men to evil, doubt for a moment that they had their agency? They chose to commit sin. They had their agency in doing so. They did not repent, and the most dreadful results followed.

God knew His Son Jesus Christ before He was born in the flesh, and He was ordained before the foundation of the earth was laid. He was the Lamb slain, we are told, before the foundation of the earth. That is, it was known that He would be slain; it was known that a generation would be found upon earth at the time the Savior came who would be so hard in their hearts that they would reject Him and crucify Him. God foreknew this. He predicted it. . . . But you must not imagine that because of this those who murdered the Savior were predestined or compelled to do what they did. On the contrary, they did it because they wished to do it. In the exercise of their agency they chose evil rather than good. They hated virtue; they hated purity. Full of the traditions of their fathers, they hated the Son of God, and they hated Him to prison and to death. . . .

All foreordained to do good. We were sent here on earth foreordained to do good, to keep the commandments of God and to be saved; for God loves all His children and would save every human soul. He would not that any one should be lost; but He desires the salvation of all. All will be saved except the sons of perdition. This is the grand truth that God has revealed unto us in these last days, that every human being wilt be saved except a certain class who commit the unpardonable sin—they who shed innocent blood, they who are accessory thereto, or who consent to the shedding of innocent blood. For them there is no salvation, we are told. . . .

Punishment affixed to every sin. Every sin not of this unpardonable character will receive forgiveness, sooner or later. But will it not be punished? Yes. There is punishment affixed to every sin. No man can commit sin without receiving the punishment therefor. He will have to expiate that sin, either in this life or in the life to come. For there is a penalty affixed to every transgression of the laws of God, and we shall have to pay the penalty unless we repent of our sins, and by going forth into the waters of baptism, obtain a remission of them, according to the promise which God has given. In this way our sins can be remitted and be blotted out, and we be relieved from the penalty that is affixed to sin. . . .

Meaning of eternal punishment. Because God's punishment is eternal punishment, it does not necessarily follow that the being who receives it is consigned to it eternally. For instance, a prison might stand for a hundred years. It might be a place of punishment. A person consigned to that prison might go in there and expiate his crime in the prison by suffering a certain punishment, and after the time pronounced as the punishment had expired he could emerge therefrom. Still the prison exists.

So it is with God's punishment. His punishment is eternal punishment, because He is eternal; but it does not follow, as the Lord has said with great plainness, that a person who is consigned thereto will endure it eternally. The Lord Jesus Christ has died for all men, and He will draw all men unto Him. But there are degrees of punishment affixed to sin; and in proportion to men's crimes they will be punished. But they will not be consigned to endless punishment—that is, to suffer it eternally. (Apr. 27, 1890, DW 40:834-35)

Predestination a false doctrine. While we believe fully in foreordination, we do not think it wise to carry this idea to the extent that we are told that some . . . have carried it. That a man's time of departure is absolutely and unchangeably fixed by Providence is not warranted by the word of God.

One of the commandments which Moses was inspired to give to the Children of Israel was: "Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee." (Exodus 20:12.) What is implied by this commandment? It is that length of days is given to the obedient child who honors his parents and that the disobedient and rebellious child should not live long upon the land.

Solomon says, "The fear of the Lord prolongeth days: but the years of the wicked shall be shortened." (Proverbs 10:27.) The Bible is full of promises to the righteous and of warnings to the wicked. Length of life, the good things of the earth and a peaceful departure when this life is ended are all promised to the righteous. If the time of man's departure from this life were unchangeably fixed, of what use would it be for men to live lives of temperance with the hope that they would prolong their days thereby?

The Lord, in the Word of Wisdom, gives a promise to those who will observe that Word and who remember to keep and do His sayings. He says: "I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them." (D&C 89:21.)

It is clear from this that length of life is promised to those who keep this word of counsel. Others may fall a prey to the destroyer, but they will escape and will live on the earth to an age that is not promised to ordinary men. The teachings of the Elders constantly to the people are to live in obedience to the word of the Lord and they will have health and strength given to them; they will run and not be weary; they will walk and not faint. . . .

Our children should be taught to have faith so that like the young men of whom Helaman writes they will escape, even in deadly battle, the fate that more wicked people, or people of less faith, meet. . . . How incorrect an idea it is to suppose that each man has his hour of death fixed, from which he cannot escape. (June 15, 1889 JI 24:276-77)
