Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 12

Faith and Trust in God

Faith is our strength. The strength of the Latter-day Saints is their faith. By that they can accomplish anything they set their hearts to do if it is right. God will be with them and sustain them. He has done it all the time. We have accomplished apparent impossibilities through the power and blessing of God and the faith of the people. If we have faith, we can accomplish all things that are required at our hands. . . . We can do everything that is required of us by the principle of faith actively exhibited in works. (Oct. 6, 1898, CR 5)

It has been my experience and observation that whenever the Latter-day Saints are called upon to perform a work and they go to with their energy, their might and with the spirit of union to accomplish that work, the effects upon their character are always of a beneficial nature. It results in great good to the individual and to the people. . . .

God intends that we shall be a people of great faith—a people of such faith that we shall carry to a successful termination any labor or duty that He may require at our hands. . . .

Zion to be built by faith. It is time, with the experience we have had now as a Church, that we should be a people of unbounded faith, willing to believe that all things are possible with God and that when He commands us to do anything, we should go to with our might and with unyielding determination to accomplish that end according to the mind and will of God. This is the kind of people God expects us to be. If we are going to build up Zion in power and in great glory upon the earth, it will be by this principle of faith, by putting our trust in God, listening to His word, receiving it in the proper manner from that authority which He has placed on the earth to give His word unto His people. Zion cannot be built up in any other way. . . .

The earth is the Lord's. The heaven of heavens is the Lord's. The cattle on a thousand hills, the fish that swim in the sea and everything there is upon the face of the earth—all are His. He has His agents by the thousands ready to do His bidding and to interpose in behalf of His children. They are invisible to us perhaps, though occasionally one may see them; but they are nevertheless around us, and we can feel their heavenly presence. Now, how easy it is for them to overrule and control and shape things to suit the Lord and His purposes.

He has done this all the time in connection with this work. He has turned aside our enemies when it has seemed as though we should perish. He has made the wrath of men to praise Him. He has defeated their machinations, and their well-laid plans He has brought to naught. And He is able to do this always and will do it if we will only have faith in Him and believe that He can do this and put unfaltering trust in Him.

All that is necessary is to know what is the right thing to do. How shall we know it? We can know it by receiving it through the constituted authority that God has placed on the earth to represent Him. When the word of the Lord comes through that authority and a command is given to us to do a certain thing, let me tell you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, that can be done if we will do it. . . . If we will do this, there is nothing that can prevent the accomplishment of the work that is entrusted to us. (Apr. 17, 1898, DW 56:705-7)

Our faith in the Almighty. Obedience to the Gospel brings men into very close and intimate relationship with the Lord. It establishes a close connection between men on the earth and our Great Creator in the heavens. It brings to the human mind a feeling of perfect confidence in the Almighty and in His willingness to listen to and answer the supplications of those who trust in Him. In times of trial and difficulty this confidence is beyond price. Trouble may come upon the individual or upon the people, disaster may threaten and every human hope may seem to be overthrown, yet, where men have availed themselves of the privileges which obedience to the Gospel brings, they have a sure standing place; their feet are upon a rock that cannot be moved.

This is the secret of the wonderful calmness and serenity of mind which the Latter-day Saints have shown in the midst of the persecutions through which they have passed. They have had unshaken confidence in the ability and willingness of God to save them.

It has been a matter of surprise to many people that the Latter-day Saints should feel as they did when they were driven forth as homeless wanderers into the wilderness. . . . Trusting in the Lord and in His providence, they launched forth into the wilderness, feeling unshaken confidence in the Lord's willingness to lead them to a land where they could live in peace, undisturbed by enemies. . . .

While they did not have a clear understanding as to the exact point to which they were aiming or the character of the country which they would reach, still the testimony of the Spirit of the Lord was such that they could not hesitate about starting. They felt sure they would be led to a suitable place. They had the same confidence then which they have had in all their trials since. (Oct. 15, 1893, JI 28:639)

Developing faith like the ancients. The Lord has shown His people that He is able to take care of His own work, to carry out His own purposes, and to fulfill His promises. . . . The testimonies of the servants of God have been amply sustained wherein they have said that whatever might occur, and however fiercely the work of God might be warred against, it would stand impregnable and unshaken and would proceed in its onward march unchecked by the attacks that should be made upon it. This is an ought to be a great source of comfort to all who are connected with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

God has spoken. He has laid the foundation of His work. He has promised that it shall be built up and that no power shall prevail against it. As one of the Prophets has said, "What shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? That the Lord hath founded Zion, and the poor of His people shall trust in it." (Isaiah 14:32.) This prediction is literally fulfilled in our case. We do put our trust in Zion, the Lord having founded it. (Jan. 1, 1893, JI 28:24)

Teach children to have faith. Let us, as a people, cling to the old faith, to the old doctrine that has come down to us through the Bible that God is, that He is today as much as He ever was and put our trust in Him. Let us train up our children to the faith that He is a God who hears and answers prayer, so that they will have faith in Him, that in times of trial, in times of difficulty, when they are encircled by danger and it would seem as though there were no possible way of escape from the danger with which they are threatened, they can humble themselves and call upon God with a faith that cannot be overcome, to deliver them and to give unto them those blessings which they need. It is the greatest comfort that a human being can have to be in close communion with his Father in heaven or her Father in heaven. (June 27, 1880, JD 22:57-58)

Faith—the foundation. Faith lies at the foundation of our religion, and it is impossible to grow in a knowledge of the truth or to please God without it. A person who has not faith walks by sight, and he is harassed with doubts and fears. Appearances are nearly always against the work of God and the fulfillment of His purposes, for His ways are not man's ways, and His thoughts are not man's thoughts.

It is frequently the case that that which man would desire and advise is the very thing that would bring disappointment; and that which man would often imagine to be fraught with evil is controlled by our all-wise Creator for the accomplishment of His purposes in the advancement of His glory and the salvation of His people. . . . Many movements that the Church has been compelled to make through the persecutions of the wicked and which were intended by the wicked as deadly blows against the work of God have been converted into means of doing great good and enlarging the work and bringing to pass the Lord's purposes. We have been forced to do things that, if left to ourselves, we would not have done, and yet they were necessary to be done to bring to pass the fulfillment of the word of God. (Feb. 1, 1890, JI 25:84)

God will not be dictated to. God by His infinite power can bring to pass marvelous changes and that, too, in a short space of time. He has His own way of doing things, and all that He asks of His people is to follow His guidance. This is His work, and He will care for it. He will not be dictated to by man as to how He shall proceed; but He will show man that having laid the foundation of this work He is able to carry it through.

Every man who has observed the progress of events must be impressed with the shallowness of human wisdom and foresight and how utterly unable man's power is to cope with the circumstances which are from time to time thrown around the Church of God. We are compelled to seek for refuge in the wisdom and power of our God; and though many things may be done that are contrary to the way we would have had events controlled, it takes but a little time to show the faithful that the way that God has wrought is infinitely superior to the way man would have done. It was true inspiration which prompted the poet to write:

God moves in a mysterious way His wonders to perform. . . .

It is a blessed consolation to know that God possesses such power that He can fulfill every promise that He makes and that He not only has the power but that He is willing to hear the humblest of His children and to respect their supplications and give them the righteous desires of their hearts. (Jan. 1, 1892, JI 27:20)

God's own way of building up Church. God has taken His own way to build up His Church and to accomplish that which He seeks to bring to pass. . . . It is a cause of stumbling among the nations of the earth that God does not accompany the work that He has established by such signs as they think He has the power to give. They say, "If God the Eternal Father has the power that is attributed to Him and this is His work, why does He not accompany it by manifestations and signs that would carry irresistible weight and conviction to the minds of all those unto whom it is brought. It would be a very easy thing for Him," they say, "if He wished to convince the world of the truth of this being His Gospel, to give such signs and manifestations as would compel men and women to receive and to believe it to be His work."

This is man's idea about the work of God. But God, our Eternal Father, has not seen fit to take this method. He places us in circumstances where we are compelled to exercise faith, to put our trust in Him and to seek by faith for that knowledge which He is willing to bestow; and it is not His object, neither would it be consistent with His purpose to convince all men and all women concerning His work whether they would be convinced or not. (Jan. 18, 1885, DNW 34:50)

It is natural for human beings, when in difficulty and surrounded by unpleasant circumstances, to form an idea in their own minds as to the manner in which they would like to be extricated and to come off triumphant; and this has proved a means of disappointment to a great many members of our Church in times that are past. The Lord has not saved them in the manner that they felt was best, He has not come up to their expectations, and they have not had faith enough to trust Him to the uttermost. Now, it is in this manner that the patience and faith of the Saints are tried. It is most presumptuous for man to mark out the line of deliverance which God shall adopt. Man with his human knowledge cannot possibly comprehend all the influences that are at work or the purposes to be accomplished. (Jan. 15, 1890, JI 25:38)

Make God your friend. If men do not suit you, make God your friend. He says: "Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arm." (Jeremiah 17:5.) The man that trusts in his fellow man is likely to be deceived. Men will fail, husbands will fail, wives will fail, children will fail, parents will fail, but God never fails. He never grows cold or indifferent. He is always the same unchangeable being, and His promises can be relied upon to the very uttermost. . . . We should be pure in thought, pure in the sight of the eye and the conception of the thought, pure in act and pure in word. If we live this way, God will dwell with us, and He will be our friend all the days of our lives. He will not leave us in the midst of trouble. We may go through six troubles, and He will be with us in the seventh. He will be with us in the deep water. He will be with us in the fiery furnace. He will be with us under all circumstances if we serve Him. I bear testimony to this. (Dec. 13, 1891, DW 44:5)

God's requirements for His people. Now God requires of us, as His people, that we shall do that which He commands us to do, no matter what that may be. The Lord never had a people on the face of the earth without making requirements of them. He required Noah to do a certain work; He required Abraham to do a certain work; He required certain things to Joseph, Moses and the children of Israel; and in every age when He has had a people on the earth He has required them and His servants to depart from the path trod by men generally who followed their own devices and who were guided by their own wisdom and counsel.

He has made these requirements upon all His people, not upon the Latter-day Saints alone, not for the first time upon us who live in this generation but in every age and generation when He has had upon the earth a people whom He recognized He has given them peculiar commandments and made requirements of them that called for the exercise of faith and that tested their courage and also their sincerity in the cause which He had established. The history of God's dealings with the children of men are full of incidents of this character. . . .

Showing faith by works. God requires that we who live in this generation shall show our faith by our works. It is an easy thing in one respect for people to float with the tide, to sail with the stream, to have their sails spread to catch the popular breeze and to go along with the current as it flows. This is the way the great majority of mankind has gone; it is the broad way to which Jesus referred, when He said so many walked therein; but He designated the path which led to Him as a straight and narrow path, a path upon which few entered, for it was a path upon which those who walked would be tried and tested, and their sincerity proved. And this is the path He calls upon us as a people to walk in. (Aug. 23, 1874, DNW 23:530)
