Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 13

Obedience—Heaven's First Law

Obedience is heaven's first law. The Lord has shown in all His dealings with the children of men that He places a high value upon obedience. We frequently hear it stated that "order is heaven's first law." This is a quotation from the English Poet, Pope; but the statement is a mistake. Obedience must precede order, and order is the result of obedience. Careful reflection leaves no doubt that obedience is heaven's first law. . . .

Obedience is a great lesson that children should learn. Every child should obey with the greatest respect the commands of his parents. A child should listen with humility to its parents' teachings and should constantly honor its parents. In like manner, as they grow to manhood and womanhood, they should listen to and honor the counsel of the Priesthood. Our Father in heaven has bestowed His Priesthood upon men, and if we would honor Him, we must honor the authority which He has bestowed, namely, the Priesthood. (Apr. 1, 1886, JI 21:104)

Obedience a most important principle. No principle pertaining to the Gospel is of greater importance than obedience, for without obedience no blessing can come upon the people. Men may talk all their lives about their faith; but, if they do not obey, they can not obtain the promised blessings. For instance, a man may say that he believes in Jesus and that He is the Son of God; he may believe in baptism and the laying on of hands; but can he get his sins remitted or receive the Holy Ghost if he should not obey baptism or the laying on of hands? . . .

What is the nature of the obedience that children should show to their parents? Can they stop and argue with them and say, when they are told to do a certain thing: "Father, or mother, would it not be better to do this in some other way?" No well-behaved child will do this, but he will go promptly and do what is required of him. Children may not understand everything their parents ask them to do; but still this should not prevent them from obeying. Parents ask their children to do many things which they, probably, fully understand but which their children do not. A child who has good parents and has been properly trained has faith that its parents will ask it to do nothing but what is right, and the spirit of obedience is so strong within it that it goes without hesitation and obeys their commands.

It is in this manner that God should be obeyed. To begin with, we must have faith in Him. When we have a proper degree of faith, it is easy and joyful to obey every requirement of God, whether we understand it or not. God's ways cannot be fully understood by man; they are frequently beyond our comprehension; though if we try to do as He tells us, He gives us such pleasure and peace that we are convinced we are right. . . .

It is this kind of faith and obedience that is needed in these days. God has given us a Prophet to lead us. We must obey him, if we would have the blessing of God to rest upon us. Never let doubts arise in your hearts about him or his teachings and counsels; for, if Satan can persuade you to doubt, he has gained a great victory over you, and he will lead you captive as he will. (Sept. 25, 1869, JI 4:156)

All of God's creations obedient except man. By this principle of obedience order is maintained throughout the universe amid all the creations of our God. Even the animals obey the laws of their creation, and there is no plant or creature, no element with which we are acquainted which disobeys or breaks the laws of its creation, which God has given for its government. Man alone of all the creations of our Father exhibits disobedience and fails to observe the laws which his Creator has given unto him. By obedience he can ascend from this condition of existence to dwell with his Father eternally in the heavens to become, in fact, a god; but he can by disobedience sink far below all created things. The earth is cursed because of man's disobedience. Even the animal creation suffers from it. But the day is coming when man's obedience will be the means of blessing the earth and all the animal and vegetable creations. . . .

Disobedience to counsel displeasing to God. There are great promises made to those who are obedient. The Lord told the children of Israel that if they honored their fathers and mothers they should live long in the land. He has said unto us in His revelations that "the willing and obedient shall eat the good of the land of Zion in these last days." The obedient are numbered among the children of Ephraim, and the Lord says that "the rebellious are not of the blood of Ephraim." He further says that "they shall be plucked out." They "shall be cut off out of the land of Zion, and shall be sent away, and shall not inherit the land." (D&C 64:34-36.)

From the beginning of this Church until the present the men and women who have been obedient to the counsel of God's servants have always been the most favored. President Young, during the lifetime of the Prophet Joseph, was always noted for his strict obedience to the Prophet. Brother Joseph never made any requirement of him that he did not strictly comply with. The same may be said of the other faithful men who, during his lifetime, were associated with him. But the disobedient and the rebellious have been, as the Lord said they should be, cut off. Oliver Cowdery was with Joseph when John the Baptist came to them and ordained them to the Aaronic Priesthood. He was the second Apostle in the Church also and a witness of the Book of Mormon, the angel of the Lord having shown him the plates. But he was disobedient to the Prophet, and he could not stand. It might be thought that he was so near to Joseph and so favored of God that it was not necessary for him to do exactly as the Prophet told him but not so. There is an order in the Church of Christ which all must observe, and no one can be disobedient without bringing the displeasure of the Lord upon him. This is a principle which all should learn. . . .

Remember that God has chosen men to be His servants and has given them power to regulate His Church and to lead and guide His people, and He will honor them if they do right, and those who refuse to obey them He will condemn; and no man in this Church, from the beginning until the present time, ever refused to obey the counsel of God's servants without losing His Spirit, and where they have not repented with heartfelt sorrow, they have lost their standing in the Church. . . .

Not to be commanded in all things. Our Heavenly Father requires something more of us than to be merely obedient to a commandment when he gives it to us. He desires us to strive to do good of ourselves without waiting to be commanded to do so. He says, "It is not meet that I should command in all things; for he that is compelled in all things, the same is a slothful and not a wise servant; wherefore he receiveth no reward." He adds that "men should anxiously be engaged in a good cause, and do many things of their own free will, and bring to pass much righteousness; for the power is in them." He says also: "He that doeth not anything until he is commanded, and receiveth a commandment with doubtful heart, and keepeth it with slothfulness, the same is damned." (D&C 58:26-29.) (Sept. 18, 1875, JI 10:222)

Blessings the result of obedience to law. Among the important items of instruction given by Joseph the Prophet on April 2, 1843, . . . are these words: "There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before the foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are predicated—and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated." (D&C 130:20-21.)

This statement is beautifully in harmony with the teachings of the holy scriptures, and it will serve as a most useful guide to all who are in search of the blessings which the Lord has in store for those who serve Him.

If we enjoy bodily health, we know it is through obedience to the laws of our physical nature; and no one can reasonably expect to retain health of body and mind if he neglects to conform to those laws. The same rule will apply to spiritual matters. If we have received a knowledge of the truth of the Gospel of Christ, it has been obtained through obedience to its rules, as it is only on condition of such obedience that this knowledge is promised. If we have received a forgiveness of our sins, it is by repenting of them, for we know that there is no remission of sins without repentance.

If we desire further blessings of the Lord, we should not expect to receive them only upon further compliance with His laws. Obedience to one requirement does not entitle us to all blessings; and yet we should seek to gain all the blessings promised to the faithful. The gifts of our Heavenly Father ought to be highly prized by everyone, and they should be diligently sought after. Just how they are to be obtained is made plain by the Prophet in the words already quoted—"When we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law upon which it is predicated."

In the revelations of the Lord given to the Church in our day are many commandments which the Saints are required to observe, and accompanying these commandments are most glorious promises to all who will obey; and if it requires any sacrifice on our part to observe these laws, the reward that follows is a hundred-fold recompense for such sacrifice. (Oct. 1, 1900, JI 35:655)

Obedience in all things. The Latter-day Saints ought to know that obedience to the first or primary principles is not all that is required of them. Every principle of our whole religion teaches us that we must progress from one degree to another, until we shall see as we are seen and know as we are known; and, in fact, until we fully comprehend all truth, and obey every ordinance necessary to fit us for a residence in the Kingdom of God. (Mar. 22, 1856, WS 43)

Disobedience only thing to be feared. There is only one thing connected with this work—speaking for myself individually—concerning which I have any fear, and that is ourselves. I never had any feeling of fear while I was at Washington, and the clouds were dark and menacing, and our enemies were threatening and active in their preparations to assail us; I never had, I can truthfully say, any fear as to the result of their operations so long as the Saints at home were united and were seeking to keep the commandments of God. . . .

God . . . has plainly given a promise unto this people, this Church:

But verily I say unto you, that I have decreed a decree which my people shall realize, inasmuch as they hearken from this very hour unto the counsel which I, the Lord their God, shall give unto them.

Behold they shall, for I have decreed it, begin to prevail against mine enemies from this very hour.

And by hearkening to observe all the words which I, the Lord their God, shall speak unto them, they shall never cease to prevail until the kingdoms of the world are subdued under my feet, and the earth is given unto the Saints, to possess it forever, and ever. (D&C 103:5-7.)

Now, here is a promise that the Lord has given, He says, by a positive decree. It is a promise given with conditions, and if the conditions should be observed, we may rest assured that the promise in its entirety will be fulfilled. There are no reservations about it, only the reservation connected with the condition upon which it is made. "They shall prevail"—that is if they keep His commandments and if they observe the counsel which He has given unto us. Now in the next paragraph He says: "But inasmuch as they keep not my commandments, and hearken not to observe all my words, the kingdoms of the world shall prevail against them." Our fate, therefore, as a people—that is, as individuals at least—is plainly pointed out unto us in these two or three paragraphs. . . .

Saints to prevail through faithfulness. There has never been an hour since the Lord gave this work unto the Church—not one hour—that they have not prevailed over His enemies when they have hearkened unto His words and kept His commandments. . . . We know by experience that when the Latter-day Saints have been most faithful, have been most diligent, when they have been most zealous in preaching the Gospel, in building temples, in carrying out the word of our God as He has given it unto us, then the anger of our enemies has been most fierce against us. But notwithstanding the fierceness and the heat with which it has burned, it has been powerless against this people to injure us or to interfere in any manner with our growth and with the accomplishment of the purposes of God entrusted to us. (Dec. 2, 1883, JD 24:359-60)

The obedient are happy. My theory is that when a man is conscious or a people are conscious that he or they are in the path of duty, doing that which is right in the sight of God, they should always be happy, no matter what the circumstances may be which surround them. I think that God has created us to be happy [^1], and my belief is that he placed happiness within the reach of all, and it is man's own fault if he is not happy and does not enjoy himself every day of his life. This is one of my reasons for liking my religion, this system called "Mormonism," because it bestows full happiness and joy upon its believers. They can be happy in the midst of the most adverse circumstances; they can rejoice when their lives are imperiled. (July 12, 1874, JD 17:121)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Happiness is the object and design of our existence; and will be the end thereof, if we pursue the path that leads to it; and this path is virtue, uprightness, faithfulness, holiness, and keeping all the commandments of God." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 255-56.)
