Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 14

Repentance—The Pathway to Happiness

All may receive blessings of repentance. Repentance will always bring a blessing. Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ will always bring a blessing. I do not care what nation a man may belong to nor what church he may enter, if he will only repent of his sins, it will bring a blessing to him. . . . God will accept the repentance of His children. No matter what a man's standing or what his connections may be . . . if he truly and sincerely repents of his sins, the blessing of repentance will rest down upon him. This may seem strange to you; it is nevertheless true.

Of course, if he were a Mohammedan, he would not have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; he would not believe in the Son of God as the Redeemer of the world; but so far as repentance goes and turning away from sin with a determination to live a purer and better life, the blessing of God would rest upon that individual. If he believed in Jesus, then the blessing of that belief would rest upon him; and the man who is in that condition of faith has the advantage, so far as that goes, over the unbeliever.

But will repentance save people? Is that all that is necessary for salvation? No! That is only one of the requirements which the Lord makes of us. He requires of us that when we hear the name of Jesus and are taught the mission of Jesus we shall accept Him as our Savior, as the Son of God, as our Redeemer, and have faith in Him. Then we are required to repent of all our wrongdoing. How shall we know that which is wrong? Do we derive the knowledge of it from books alone? No! (Dec. 31, 1893, DW 48:162)

Only one plan of salvation. I doubt not that hundreds, in various nations and generations, who have been in ignorance of the true Gospel and far removed from those who had authority to administer its ordinances, have had their sins blotted out. God has looked in mercy upon them and on account of their sincerity has witnessed unto them that He accepted the broken spirits and contrite hearts which they offered unto Him. I cannot doubt this; but wherever the Gospel of Jesus Christ is preached in its fullness, none can obtain the remission of sins only in the way that God has pointed out, and that is by baptism by one having the authority from God to administer that ordinance. (July 14, 1872, JD 15:115)

All are sinners and need repentance. We cannot commit sin and retain His Spirit. That is an impossibility. Apostles have tried it; others who were men of God have tried it; but they have signally failed. They could not retain the Spirit of God and at the same time commit sin. . . . No man can hope to enjoy the favor and blessing of God who commits sin and does not repent of it. And it will be so unto the end of time. There are two things that are irreconcilable—sin and the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God will not tolerate sin. Therefore, if we hope to escape darkness and apostasy, we must refrain from sin.

Of course, every human being is a sinner. No man or woman ever lived on this earth, excepting the Son of God, who was not a sinner. The Presidency of this Church, the Twelve Apostles and all the Prophets that ever lived upon this earth are and have been sinners. It is one of the consequences of the fall. We are subject to sin and temptation. But, while this is the case, it is the privilege of every human being to live so that his sins will be forgiven and not be held against him.

It should be the aim of all who desire to live in the enjoyment of the Spirit of God to try and retain that Spirit in its fulness; for when the Holy Ghost is with us, then God is with us; and when we are in the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, we are in the fellowship of the Father and the Son.

While I say we are sinners, I believe it is possible for us to live so as to have no sin held against us. We should have the spirit of repentance constantly in our hearts. Our hearts should be touched and softened by it, so that we will be mellowed under its influence and that we shall have such a horror of sin and such a desire for righteousness that when we become conscious that we have thought or said or done anything contrary to the mind and will of God, we will instantly bow down and acknowledge our sins before the Lord and repent of them with all our hearts and obtain forgiveness for them. (Nov. 2, 1895, DW 51:802)

Gospel principles same in all ages. If it was necessary in the days of Jesus and of His Apostles that men should believe in Jesus and repent of their sins, it is necessary today; and no human judgment nor human council can do away with that necessity. God is the Being to grant salvation, and He is the Being to withhold salvation, and He is the Being to pronounce the terms upon which salvation shall be obtained. Therefore, as God did make faith in Jesus a doctrine that was necessary for man's salvation, it is still necessary. Though ages may have passed, this has not changed. It cannot be changed.

It takes as much to save a man in this generation as it did eighteen hundred years ago. There may be any amount of enlightenment, of wisdom and of knowledge, but however great this may be, it does not affect in the slightest degree the principle that men must believe in Jesus as the foundation of their faith and of their salvation. They must also repent of their sins. No sophistry, no human wisdom, no human device can remove from the plan of salvation the necessity of the repentance of sin; the Gospel of Jesus Christ demands absolutely that sin must be forsaken, and in order for it to be forsaken it must be repented of.

Therefore, if men say that you can be saved without faith and without repentance, or if the whole world should say this, would it affect in the least degree the salvation of men? Would men be saved because the whole world said they could be without these vital principles? Certainly not. God, who grants salvation, and who is the Author of salvation, has placed these principles in His Gospel as essential to salvation. (Sept. 18, 1892, DW 45:450)

Seeds of wrongdoing sown in heart. We have compared the word of God to a seed. We can also compare wrongdoing to a seed. The seeds of wrongdoing are sown in the human heart. If there is not care taken to uproot these seeds, they also will grow; and if permitted to go on unchecked, if nourished and cherished, they will increase and become strong, and they will bring forth fruit also—the fruit of evil.

How shall we prevent the growth of this evil seed? How shall we cherish the growth of this good seed? . . . Prayer, coupled with repentance, is one of the means of doing this. God extends His arms of mercy and loving kindness to all His children and beseeches them to turn to Him and repent of their sins. Our sins may be as scarlet, but if we will repent of them, He will make them white as wool. No matter what our sins may be, save the unpardonable sin, if we will repent of them with all our hearts and confess them in humility before God and make atonement for them to the extent of our ability, He will forgive them. Be comforted, then, all ye penitent sinners! Be comforted, all ye people; for there is none of us but has committed sin. We are all offenders in the sight of God's exalted purity. (Feb. 17, 1895, DW 50:419)

All wrongdoing must be forgiven. Nothing will escape the recollection of Jehovah; no act of our lives can be hidden; no word that we have ever spoken that has been harsh, cruel and wrong will ever be forgotten or blotted out, unless we have obtained forgiveness for it. . . . We will get the measure measured to us that we measure to our fellow men, just as sure as God has spoken.

If we have been merciful, kind, sympathetic, filled with charity and love, we will have these repaid to us; but if we have not exercised these heavenly qualities, we may depend upon it, unless we have repented and made atonement, they will be measured to us in the same manner that we have measured them to others. God is just, and He cannot even wink at iniquity, much less countenance it. (Jan. 14, 1894, DW 48:350)

Repent daily and enjoy happiness. When we get up in the morning, let us examine ourselves to see whether the Spirit of God is with us and so at night before we commit ourselves to slumber, review the acts and words of the day and ask God to show onto us wherein we have come short that we may repent; thus, repenting every day and having the forgiveness of our sins every day, there will be no account recorded in heaven against us to be expiated after this life.

If we indulge in an improper thought, ask God to forgive us and not rest satisfied until we are forgiven. Let us live the lives of Latter-day Saints so that every one of us will exemplify in our lives the principles of the Gospel. (Feb. 16, 1896, DW 52:387)

Let us repent of our sins as we go along, and not let them accumulate against us. Let us be able to look our brethren and sisters in the face and feel that we have done them no wrong. If we have done wrong, confess that wrong and obtain forgiveness from our brethren and sisters; then we can go to God and ask Him to accept of us and blot out that transgression that it shall not be held against us. If we live this way, our lives will be happy, peaceful and full of joy. We will diffuse happiness and good feeling all around us. Our children will feel the influence of that spirit which we carry, and they will imitate us.

Develop a keen sense of justice and of righteousness in our children, and the son will say, "Why, my father would not do such a thing, and I will not do it;" or, "My mother would not do such a thing, and I will not do it." . . . Thus righteousness will be perpetuated in the land. (Jan. 14, 1894, DW 48:351)

It is not repentance at the time of baptism alone. Some people have an idea that because they have entered the waters of baptism and repented of their sins then that is an end of it. What a mistake! We need to have this spirit of repentance continually; we need to pray to God to show us our conduct every day. Every night before we retire to rest we should review the thoughts, words and acts of the day and then repent of everything we have done that is wrong or that has grieved the Holy Spirit. Live this way every day and endeavor to progress every day. We may indulge in many things that are not right, indulge in wrong thoughts, be actuated by wrong motives, may have wrong objects in view. . . .

Therefore, we need to repent every day and every hour, everyone of us. There is none of us so perfect but that we need to do it, and if we do not we will grieve the Spirit of God and check our progress. We need not hug the delusion to our bosom that because we are members of the Church and hold the Priesthood, therefore we can do things that other men cannot do and not grieve the Spirit and be condemned therefor. We cannot. I bear testimony to that. (Jan. 22, 1898, MS 61:117-18)

No New Year's resolutions. Among Latter-day Saints there ought to be no occasion for what is called "swearing-off" or for the general making of resolutions of improvement on New Year's day. Every day should witness with them a determination to lay aside weaknesses and take on more of the graces of godliness. Each day furnishes opportunity to look closely into one's habits, to examine and discard the worthless and cleave unto that which is elevating and holy.

The partaking of the Sacrament in the Sunday Schools and Ward meetings, when done worthily, of itself implies an earnest endeavor towards improvement. Every time a true Saint, whether old or young, kneels in prayer, he or she should consider anew the duty of leading a better life, one more in conformity with the precepts and example of our Great Master. Not alone on New Year's, therefore, but on every day, should people seek to effect an improvement in their habits of life. (Jan. 1, 1897, JI 32:23)

Reformation is progression. There exists, so long as mankind are imperfect, a continual necessity of reformation. When a Latter-day Saint ceases to perceive the necessity of reformation or doing better than he has been doing, it should be an evidence to him that he has not the light of the Spirit as he should have it and that he has ceased to progress. If he is fully possessed of the Spirit of the Lord, he will progress, and, if he progress, he will see ample cause to do better today than he did yesterday, this week than last week and the present year than the preceding year. His experience, if he should live his religion, will increase daily, and with the aid of that experience he will comprehend more perfectly the duties devolving upon him and will be more capable of discharging them every day that he lives than the preceding one. So, the man or the woman who is living up to the light of truth is continually reforming—progression implying reform. . . .

No man or woman who has not ceased to progress and who has no need of deep and heartfelt repentance will ever allude to any previous period of their lives as a time of superior enjoyment—so far as the Spirit and power of God are concerned—to that then experienced. For, however unfavorable the circumstances by which they may be surrounded, if they undeviatingly pursue the course which the Lord has pointed out, present light, intelligence, gifts of the Spirit and happiness will contrast very favorably with the amount of these blessings experienced by them at any previous time. If it were not so, could the people of God be said to progress, increasing in faith and preparing for the revelation of the Lord Jesus? The Saints may put it down as a truth that if they do not feel to enjoy the power of God more at the present time than they ever did in their lives before, there is something wrong, and they have need to critically examine themselves and repent with all their heart, or they will get worse and worse until they are completely destitute of the light and intelligence of the Lord. (Jan. 31, 1857, WS 326-27)

Penalty for sin must be paid. There is connected with every crime and every sin that man commits a penalty. This is an inexorable law, an unchangeable law, and the effect of it cannot be avoided. We must endure the penalty of our sins. . . . We have to endure the penalty of the violation of the laws of God. There is only one way in which the punishment can be avoided, and that is by obeying the law that God has given. That law is a superior law. He says:

"Believe in my Son Jesus Christ, repent of your sins, be baptized by one having authority, and you shall have the remission of your sins." This is the only way by which we can escape the penalties of violated spiritual laws.

The Lord has made this exceedingly plain in these days so that we can understand it. Those who take a wrong course must endure the consequences of their wrong. . . .

Therefore, when we commit sin, we should understand that we have to expiate that sin. We cannot transgress the laws of God with impunity; and if we commit certain sins, we are debarred from entering into the presence of God and into that glory that He has in store for His faithful children. (Apr. 27, 1890, DW 40:836)

Individual salvation our greatest work. This work of self-improvement, under the power and influence of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, is a work given to each of us. It should be the great work of our lives; it should be the chief thought of our hearts. There is nothing greater. . . .

The greatest work we can do is to so live that we ourselves shall be saved, that our own acts shall be correct and our will and desires and passions be brought into subjection to the will of God. There is no work that I know of so great and important to me as this. . . .

This Gospel of ours is a practical Gospel. It is not like our Sunday apparel to be put on today and put off tomorrow; it ought to be carried with us in all the transactions of life, applied to everything we think, say and do and always be remembered by us. (July 27, 1879, JD 20:291)

Salvation an individual matter. The great duty devolving upon you and me is to see that we are individually saved. . . . It is for each of us to took at ourselves and examine our own hearts, look at and scrutinize our own conduct, doing that which is right in the sight of God ourselves.

Are we individually complying with those requirements which Jesus gave his Apostles? If we are, it is well with us. If we are not, it matters not how many others are doing wrong; it does not help my case or excuse you in the least degree. But it is for me to do right by myself; it is for me to carry out and practice in my life the principles revealed and which I know to be true; and then whether those on the right or those on the left do wrong, it makes no difference so far as my individual salvation is concerned. . . .

The duty of self-examination. It is our duty to indulge in and practice self-examination and self-condemnation if necessary. The man that looks at himself in the light of the Spirit of God and who is a humble man will not find much fault with his fellow-man; for the presence of his own faults arise before him continually when he sees another man's weaknesses, and instead of filling him with self-pride and self-justification and feeling self-righteous, it produces a feeling within him of commiseration for others, and the spirit of charity takes possession of him, and undoubtedly a prayer ascends from his heart to God in behalf of him who had given way to weakness, desiring the Lord to deliver him that he might not be left to be overcome by the adversary. (Sept. 15, 1878, JD 20:95-96)

No guarantee of faithfulness to the end. If we will pray unto God continually to show unto us our weaknesses and shortcomings by the light of his Holy Spirit, we then may hope that we will be able to persevere until the end of our lives. I can say for the encouragement of all who are struggling that God is very, very merciful. He is willing to forgive all who come unto Him in humility. All who will ask Him for light, He will give light. All who ask Him for strength, He will give strength. All who ask Him for peace, He will give peace. All who ask Him for joy and happiness of soul, to them He will give these blessings. None will go away unsatisfied.

This is the way to preserve ourselves in the truth so that we can walk without deviation in the straight and narrow path that leadeth unto God. The humblest can do it. The most ignorant can do it. The child can do it. It is not for the wise alone. It is not alone for those who have experience. It is not alone for those who have talent. Every soul can do it, no matter how unlearned or how weak that soul may be. And unless we do this, there is no guarantee for any man in this Church, no matter how great his office may be, that he will be faithful to the end unless he keeps the commandments of God, so that God will be with him.

I believe, however, there are men that have obtained such faith with God that he would not allow them to go astray; He would take their lives from the earth before He would suffer it. As our beloved President has often said to us himself, the Lord would not permit him to do anything that would lead this people wrong. I believe that with all my heart. . . .

Keeping commandments the best course. But it is far better for us to live. God does not want us to die until we have filled our missions. He does not want to take us away to prevent us from apostatizing. Better to stay here and battle with sin and show our integrity and faithfulness to the very last moment of our existence than have to be taken off to save us. Of course, this is far better than to live and deny the faith; but the best thing is to live and keep the commandments of God, enjoying the fellowship and communion of the Holy Ghost all our days. This is the better course for us to take, and by our faithfulness set an example to our children and to everybody else. (Feb. 17, 1895, DW 50:419)

Only sin can injure this work. There is only one thing that can injure this work, and that is the sins of the people themselves. You can injure it—that is, you can injure yourselves in connection with it. There is no man can prevent another from receiving salvation. God has not placed it in the power of man to prevent either a man or a woman or a child from receiving salvation. He has placed that within the power of the individual himself or herself. If a man be damned, it is because he takes a course to be damned; he breaks the laws of God. . . .

Church to be cleansed of sinners. There are practices being indulged in among us that are sins in the sight of God, and the officers of this Church will be held accountable for them unless they take a course to eradicate them from the midst of the Saints.

There should be no man allowed to remain in this Church who is a Sabbath-breaker, and when you know that there are men and women or children who are Sabbath-breakers, you should take steps to have them warned, to have them reproved and if they will not repent to have them severed from the Church of God.

No man in this Church should be allowed to have a standing in it who is a drunkard; God does not approve of drunkenness; and if there are any drunkards remaining in the Church, hear it, O ye Bishops, and O ye officers, you will be held accountable for their sins—the condemnation will rest upon you.

The same with men who blaspheme, either young or old, who take the name of God in vain, they ought not to be permitted to remain in the Church. It is a sin in the sight of God, and He will visit a people with condemnation who permit these things to exist in their midst.

And so with fornication. No fornicator, no adulterer nor adulteress should have a place among us. They should be warned; they should be dealt with; they should be cut off from the Church. And so with every other sin. We have been too lenient, and have permitted things to exist which are wrong in the sight of God. (Dec. 7, 1884, JD 26:46-47)
