Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 15

Baptism—A Covenant with God

Baptism the same in all ages. The Gospel, like its Author, is unchangeable and everlasting; it is the same in time and eternity. So, necessarily, are its laws and ordinances. The Gospel was preached to Adam, and he was baptized. The results of baptism were then, as they have ever since been and are now, admission into the Church of Christ and the remission of sins. Baptism was recognized as an ordinance in the service of the true God by the Antediluvians, the Hebrews, the Nephites and by all who worshiped Him correctly, as much so before the advent of the Savior in the flesh as in these latter days. Those who, in those earlier years, sincerely repented and were baptized by one having authority received the remission of their sins, equally with ourselves who accept that ordinance in this dispensation. (Feb. 1, 1894, JI 29:78)

Our covenant with God. When we went forth into the waters of baptism and covenanted with our Father in heaven to serve Him and keep His commandments, He bound Himself also by covenant to us that He would never desert us, never leave us to ourselves, never forget us, that in the midst of trials and hardships, when everything was arrayed against us, He would be near unto us and would sustain us. That was His covenant, and He has amply fulfilled it up to the present time and has shown that we can tie to the promises that He has made. We have proved these things through experience. (Aug. 6, 1893, DW 47:346)

Being born again. Who that is old enough, that can recollect his baptism or her baptism or their first association with the Church and their first enjoyment of the truth, whose hearts do not burn today at the recollection of the feeling they had of the sweet and heavenly influence that came to them when they first became acquainted with the everlasting Gospel as preached by the Elders. There was, as it were, a new life opened before them, even the gates of heaven seemed to be opened to them, and they saw the Kingdom of God as they never had seen it and never had understood it. Truths that they had read carelessly and indifferently, without comprehending them, came to their minds with an assurance and with a strength and force and power that they never had comprehended previously. (Aug. 23, 1884, JD 25:297)

Ordinances are necessary. Although an individual who does not believe in obeying ordinances but who is moral and conscientious is more to be admired than the man who, though obeying ordinances, is neither moral nor conscientious, yet this does not make the ordinances nugatory. Such a man we may admire; but, though we may admire and prefer his honesty before the hypocrisy of the other, yet this does not argue that the observance of ordinances ought to be slighted or that he would not be still more admirable and preferable were he obedient thereto. Neither can mankind, if ordinances have been made obligatory, be justified for refusing to become obedient to them because there is a spirit of contention and strife indulged in by professing followers of Christ. (May 10, 1856, WS 101-2)

Baptism only one round of Gospel ladder. Baptism is . . . only one of the rounds in the Gospel ladder which reaches from the depth of the degradation into which poor humanity has fallen to the Celestial Kingdom of God. But the poor prisoner who wishes to escape from his dungeon must take step after step up the ladder until he reaches the top and can breathe once more the free air of heaven, or he will not be benefited; the ladder is his means for attaining the desired end—liberty. The Gospel is our means of gaining our important end—salvation. But we must obey every principle, or we cannot be saved; we must take every step up the ladder, or we cannot get into the Celestial Kingdom. The moment we set bounds to our faith and works, that moment our salvation ceases. . . .

No individual is justified in neglecting a present duty in order to be better able, as he thinks, to perform a future one. No man can be depended on to do his duty in another sphere or position in life if he does not do so in the one he at present occupies. We must keep our path clear as we go. Let the pages of our lives be free from blot or stain every day, or else the record of our folly and neglect of duty may stare us in the face some day when we shall bitterly regret having given way to such weaknesses. (Mar. 28, 1863, MS 25:202-3)

The age of accountability. The revelations of God to the Church in relation to little children are as comforting as they are clear and definite. They are indeed rays of pure light, contrasted with the darkness of the creeds of men. . . .

The word of the Lord through the Prophet Joseph Smith dissipates all doubt and sets at rest all disputes, where it is fully understood. In a revelation given in September, 1830, the Lord said: "But, behold, I say unto you, that little children are redeemed from the foundation of the world through mine Only Begotten; wherefore, they cannot sin, for power is not given unto Satan to tempt little children, until they begin to become accountable before me." (D&C 29:46-47.)

In a revelation given in April, 1830, we find this: "No one can be received into the Church of Christ unless he has arrived unto the years of accountability before God, and is capable of repentance." (D&C 20:71.)

In another revelation given in November, 1831, the following law is declared:

And again, inasmuch as parents have children in Zion, or in any of her stakes which are organized, that teach them not to understand the doctrine of repentance, faith in Christ the Son of the Living God, and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands, when eight years old, the sin be upon the heads of the parents.

For this shall be a law unto the inhabitants of Zion, or in any of her Stakes which are organized;

And their children shall be baptized for the remission of their sins when eight years old, and receive the laying on of the hands.

And they shall also teach their children to pray and walk uprightly before the Lord. (D&C 68:25-28.)

It will be seen from a careful reading of these passages that no special age is set as the time when children "begin to become accountable" before the Lord, yet—though there is as much difference in the capabilities of children to comprehend, as there is in their size and complexion—it is made clear they should be baptized at eight years of age. The Redeemer of the world was sinless, yet He was baptized to fulfill all righteousness.

Parents' responsibility. We think it safe to say no condemnation will attach to children for acts committed by them prior to their reaching the age of eight years. As soon as children can understand the difference between right and wrong, they can and should be taught the doctrine of repentance, also faith in Christ the Son of the living God and of baptism and the gift of the Holy Ghost. And sin will be on the heads of their parents if they do not teach their children those principles of salvation. Children who understand right from wrong and are taught the law of God in reference to faith, repentance and baptism are accountable for their own sins and also for refusal to submit to the ordinances of the Gospel.

When parents teach their children a right and set them a good example and exercise proper parental influence over them, the parents are not responsible for the sins of the children. When parents neglect these duties, the sin of that neglect will rest upon them, and they will have to answer for it.

All intelligent beings are accountable for the exercise of the agency given to them. Responsibility increases with the development of the creature, and condemnation comes in proportion to the sin, which is gauged by the understanding of wrong and the intent and purpose of the transgressor. (Aug. 1, 1896, JI 31:449-50)

Proper wording of baptism ordinance. The form of baptism given by the Lord for the baptism of those who are entering into the Church is found in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants. This is the form which should be followed in the baptism of all who present themselves for admission into the Church.

Under President Young's administration, when action was being taken in regard to the United Order, he taught some of the brethren to use the words "into the United Order" in the ceremony of baptism. In the same way the words "for the renewal of your covenants" were used at the time of the Reformation in 1856.

It is always safe, however, for those who officiate in baptisms to confine themselves to the written word. The Lord has given the form, and unless there is some special occasion, when the man holding the keys suggests another form, it is unsafe and unwarranted to depart therefrom. (Apr. 1, 1891, JI 26:218)

The man holding the keys has the right to instruct the Elders to modify or change that form, according to circumstances which may arise from time to time in the Church; but where no such modification is given, the safe and proper course for the Elders and Priests in baptizing is to follow the words which the Lord has given. (Sept. 1, 1891 JI 26:535)

Baptism for remission of sins. Baptism is commanded of the Lord and is the ordinance given by Him by which His children can enter into covenant with Him and obtain the forgiveness of their sins. After having obeyed this ordinance and become members of the Church, if people commit sin, they should repent and confess their sins. If they have sinned against their brethren or their sisters, they should confess their wrongdoing to those whom they have wronged, and if to the Lord, they should confess their sins to the Lord and obtain forgiveness; for the Lord has promised to forgive all those who truly and sincerely repent of their sins. . . .

Renewal of covenants by re-baptism. There have been times in the Church when the Prophet of the Lord has been led to call upon the people to reform and to repent of their sins, and the people have been aroused from their lethargy and seen their sinfulness, and they have been permitted to renew through baptism their covenants with the Lord. This was notably the case after the Church was led to the valley of the Great Salt Lake. After the lengthy and trying journey across the plains, in which the patience of the people was tried and their faith was severely tested and improper things were done in many instances because of peculiar circumstances in which the people were placed, the Saints desired to renew their covenants with the Lord. The Prophet of the Lord, himself, set the example, and it became a custom for all who came across the plains in those weary and trying days to renew their covenants by baptism upon their arrival in the valley.

There were cases also of persons committing sins of such a character that after they had confessed them their brethren and sisters felt they could fellowship them better and more cordially if they would renew their covenants by baptism. There were other instances where persons absented themselves from the Wards and from association with members of the Church and were gone some time, living under circumstances where they became cold and indifferent, if not sinful, and when they returned and became convinced that they had not lived as they should have and made confession of this, they desired to be re-baptized.

Other persons may have been baptized in their childhood and grown to be men and women without having seriously thought of their religion or the duties devolving upon them as members of the Church; on becoming convinced of the error of this indifference and neglect, they naturally desired to renew their covenants by baptism in order to regain the fellowship of the Saints. There would have been no impropriety in re-baptism in those or in other cases of that kind.

But is far better for the Latter-day Saints to live day by day so as to not be under the necessity of renewing their covenants by this means. If the Church observes the sacrament properly, sins are confessed and forgiveness is obtained before partaking of the bread and the contents of the cup. (Apr. 15, 1895, JI 30:242-43)

Transgression and rebaptism. It is not necessary for men and women who transgress to always be re-baptized. A transgressor should make a confession of his sins as publicly as they are known; that is, to use the language of the Lord, in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, "If thy brother or sister offend many, he or she shall be chastened before many. And if any one offend openly, he or she shall be rebuked openly, that he or she may be ashamed." (D&C 42:90-91.)

If any one entertains the idea that by baptism alone he can obtain forgiveness and be restored to the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, he is much mistaken. Repentance and the confession of sin are necessary in the case of a man who violates the law of God; and no matter how often he may be baptized without these conditions being observed, he is not promised that his sins will be forgiven. The Lord says also: "If any shall offend in secret, he or she shall be rebuked in secret, that he or she may have opportunity to confess in secret to him or her whom he or she has offended, and to God, that the church may not speak reproachfully of him or her." (D&C 42:92.)

Upon these points the law of the Lord is very plain. If these conditions be complied with—that is, repentance and confession of sin—the members of the Church are assured that they will be forgiven.

Whenever the ordinance of baptism is administered, it should be made plain to those who are candidates that to have it attended with the desired blessing there must be sincere and heartfelt repentance. (Jan. 1, 1892, JI 27:27-28)

Repentance and confession necessary. It is repentance from sin that will save you, not re-baptism. If you have been baptized, then, if you commit sin, repent of the sin, confess it and make the confession as broad as the knowledge of the sin; confess it to your brethren and sisters, and ask their forgiveness; and do not imagine that when you commit sin you can slip into the waters of baptism and you are all right again. Do not delude yourselves. . . . Sinners, be not deceived by such a fallacy. Something more than this is necessary. We need to repent of our sins and to confess them to God. We need to come before the Lord with broken hearts and contrite spirits and before the Church with the spirit of confession. We should not be afraid to confess our sins; for there is no man among us that is not a sinner. . . .

The Lord, also, is moved with compassion; the angels are moved with mercy and sympathy; and the Lord Jesus, who stands as a mediator between our Father and ourselves, is filled with compassion for His brethren and sisters when they commit sin and repent of it. Oh! all heaven is moved by the repentance of a sinner and stirred up with a desire to help the poor creature who confesses his sins and repents truly and sincerely. (Oct. 6, 1897, CR 55)
