Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 16

The Birth of the Spirit—The Spirit of God

Ordinance of confirmation to be unchanged. We should seek to preserve the ordinances which God in his mercy has restored in their ancient power to the earth pure and free from any innovation and change. By so doing the blessings which are to be obtained through that medium will be bestowed, accompanied by the power in which they are desired and sought.

The greatest blessing that can be pronounced upon the heads of those who are being confirmed as members of the Church is to seal upon them in the name of Jesus and by the power of the Holy Priesthood the Spirit of the Lord. All that is said in addition to this at such times has too frequently the effect of feeding the vanity of the persons thus blessed. What necessity is there for more than this?

Can an Elder seal upon the head of any individual any blessing or gift which the Holy Spirit cannot bestow? If not, which all must admit, when the Holy Spirit is sealed upon a person's head, they have received that which comprehends within itself every other blessing which is in the power of the Priesthood at that time to bestow. (Feb. 15, 1862, MS 24:107)

Words used in confirming. The words used in the temple in confirming members in the Church are, "Receive ye the Holy Ghost," and though there may be some deviation from that by some persons, that is the phraseology used not only in the temple but by the Elders generally; for the First Presidency have so instructed. (Sept. 15, 1900, JI 35:617)

The new birth of the Spirit. The gift of the Holy Ghost is given to all those who obey the commandments of God. If grown persons or children of a proper age are baptized, having repented of their sins, the Lord has promised to give them the Holy Ghost. Under the influence of this Spirit they become new creatures. They are born again. Their hearts are changed. The old desires and feelings that they have had are either changed or brought into subjection to the will of God.

If this change does not take place, it is because the person who has been baptized and who has had the laying on of the hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost has not sought for these blessings with diligence. Everyone who submits to the ordinances of the Gospel with sincerity and determination to serve God will undergo this change. All such will be delivered from the bondage of sin, and the consequences of the fall will be mitigated.

It is very desirable that the Latter-day Saints should understand that by obeying the Gospel it is their privilege to become new beings. They should exert themselves to obtain all the blessings and gifts which God has promised to those who take this course. He will give them power through the aid of the Holy Ghost, to overcome every evil inclination.

Angels obeyed Gospel. We think angels are very holy beings. How did they become holy? How can they dwell in the presence of God? They have become holy through obeying that Gospel which is taught to us. Every child who obeys that Gospel can become an angel in character and disposition. There was a time when angels were mortal as we are, and they were tempted as we are. But they resisted temptation. By the aid of God's Holy Spirit they conquered their evil inclinations. They were born again and continued to resist evil until they became angels. (Dec. 15, 1900, JI 35:823)

Cornelius and the Holy Ghost. A great many, to prove that baptism and laying on of hands are not necessary, have cited the case of Cornelius, who, though he was not baptized, received the Holy Ghost. The case of Cornelius is the only case of the kind on record, and there were strong reasons why it should be as it was with him. The Gospel and its ordinances were administered only to the Jews; Cornelius was a Gentile, and between the two races strong prejudices existed, the Jews looking upon the Gentiles as far inferior to them. Cornelius and his household were the first Gentiles to whom the Gospel was preached; they received it, and the Lord, to show to the Apostles that the Gentiles were entitled to the ordinances of salvation as well as the Jews, if they were willing to comply with the requirements of the Gospel, conferred the Holy Ghost upon Cornelius and his family. . . .

Peter took this, as the Lord intended it, as an evidence that the Gentiles as well as the House of Israel were entitled to the Gospel. And he had them baptized and without doubt laid his hands upon them to confirm upon them the gift they had received.

Had Cornelius, at that hour, stood upon his dignity and said, "There is no necessity for me to be baptized for the remission of my sins, God having given me the Holy Ghost without obeying that ordinance, and having already received the Holy Ghost, I have no need to have hands laid upon me," there is not a doubt in my mind but what that precious and inestimable gift would have been withdrawn from him, and he would not have enjoyed it after. It could only be continued to him on condition of his obeying the ordinances which God had placed in his Church and which he required all the inhabitants of the earth to submit to without hesitation; and without doubt Cornelius wisely went forward and obeyed those ordinances. (Aug. 15, 1869, JD 14:50-51)

Oneness an effect of Holy Ghost. One of the peculiarities of the Holy Ghost, as we read of its effects in the scriptures, was to unite the hearts of those who received it and to make them one. . . .

All that is recorded leads us to suppose that if the Holy Ghost were to be bestowed upon an inhabitant of Europe, upon another person in Asia, another in Africa, and upon a fourth in America and again upon another on the islands of the sea, that these individuals, were they to come together and converse upon the plan of salvation, would entertain precisely similar views respecting that plan. To think otherwise would be to make God, our Heavenly Father, the author of strife and division. (Jan. 31, 1869, JD 12:363)

A spirit of heavenly peace. What joy, peace, love and union have been bestowed upon those who have embraced the Gospel of Jesus Christ! What light has been shed upon their minds in relation to the Scriptures! No sooner have they gone forth into the waters of baptism for the remission of their sins and had hands laid upon them for the Holy Ghost than it has seemed as though a heavenly peace has taken possession of them. . . . It has been "like the dew from heaven descending." It has descended upon the people and filled them with peace and has knit their hearts together in love; and they have rejoiced in the power which God has manifested in their behalf. (Jan. 31, 1869, JD 12:370)

The test of a true Prophet. In all the churches, of which we have any knowledge there has yet to be heard the promise made by one of its ministers to the humble believer who submits to its ordinances that he shall receive the Holy Ghost as they did in ancient days, with its accompanying gifts and blessings and powers. . . . Joseph Smith made this promise. The world have the opportunity of testing it. If people did not receive the Holy Ghost, then he was an imposter. If they did receive it, then his ministry was sealed by the power of God, and it was indisputable.

The best possible means was given to the human family of testing his claims and his statements. He was either an impostor, trying to deceive the people, or he was a man of God; for it cannot be supposed that heaven would lend itself to an impostor or that heaven would aid in any manner in fostering a deception. (May 27, 1883, JD 24:136)

Gospel truth spiritually discerned. Hence, for men spiritually unenlightened to be unable to comprehend the things of God is not peculiar to the dispensation in which we live, but it has been so in every age when God made known His will to the children of men. Such individuals may come in contact with the greatest of Heaven's children and may associate with them day by day, and yet through not having that spirit they will fail to recognize their nobility of character and that they are divinely inspired. . . .

No man with his natural wisdom can comprehend the things of God; man never did do it and never can do it. Priests may study all the arts and sciences and finally graduate at a theological college; and after they have passed through it all, they have no more conception of God and the things of God than if such a Being had never existed. A man filled with the power of God might go to them, and they would not understand him; if he told them the most precious things ever uttered by mortal lips, they would not comprehend it and would be far more likely to reject him than not, because they are imbued with prejudices and preconceived ideas respecting God and His works. (Mar. 3, 1867, JD 11:334)

Spirit of God strives with all men. We have the sweet influence of the Spirit of God pleading with us to do that which is right, pleading with every human being that does not drive it from him, for every human being has a portion of the Spirit of God given unto him. We sometimes call it conscience; we call it by one name, and we call it by another; but it is the Spirit of God that every man and woman possess that is born on the earth. God has given unto all His children this Spirit. Of course, it is not the gift of the Holy Ghost in its fullness, for that is only received by obedience to the commandments of God—to the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But it is a Spirit that pleads with men to do right.

The heathen have it. There is no degraded Indian in these mountains or valleys who does not have a portion of that Spirit pleading with him to do that which is right. It pleads with all the heathen, the Pagan as well as the Christian, the Methodist and Baptist as well as the Latter-day Saints. Everywhere through the earth where man dwells this Spirit rests upon him. It comes from God. It pleads with man to do right. It pleads with man to resist the blandishments of Satan. No man ever did a wrong but that Spirit warned him of it to a greater or less extent. (Sept. 28, 1884, JD 26:191)

The voice of conscience. Some call it the light of conscience, the voice of conscience. No man ever committed a wrong that listened to that voice without being chided for it, whether he be Christian or heathen, whether he has lived according to the light of the Gospel or been in entire ignorance of it. Every man has within him a spirit which comes from our great Creator, and if we grieve it not, it leads us, guides us, though we may not know the Gospel, as has been the case with many thousands and millions of human beings. It leads all the children of men when they listen to it; it leads them in the path of peace, in the path of virtue, and in the path of happiness; but if they violate that spirit or grieve it, if they go contrary to its monitions, if they harden their hearts against and sin against it, then it departs, and another spirit takes its place, namely, the spirit of the evil one. (Nov. 9, 1884, JD 26:85)

A witness of truth. This is not, as I say, confined to one class, nor to one nation nor to one creed; it is as extensive as the human family. Wherever the human family live, they have that spirit with them. Hence it is that when the Gospel is preached, when the Elders bear testimony to the truth of the Gospel and men and women hear it, they will be judged by that testimony; that is, that testimony will stand against them unless they listen to it and obey the Gospel.

Therefore, the servants of God in ancient days, as in our day, could go to the various nations of the earth and proclaim the truth and warn the people, and the people would be under condemnation if they did not receive the testimony of the servants of God; for the witness of the Spirit would be in their own hearts and it would testify to them.

God has not left any of us without a witness. He may withdraw it from us through our hardening our hearts and committing sin, and we may be left in the dark; but otherwise, there is in every human breast a witness of the truth. (Dec. 31, 1893, DW 48:162)

A still small voice. It requires the utmost care upon the part of the people who have received the Spirit of the Lord by the laying on of hands to distinguish between the voice of that Spirit and the voice of their own hearts or other spirits which may take possession of them. Experience and watchfulness will enable the Saint to recognize the voice of the Holy Spirit.

It is a still, small voice in the hearts of the children of men. It is not boisterous, loud or aggressive, and if those who receive it carefully watch its suggestions, it will develop more and more within them, and it will become an unfailing source of revelation. But the necessity always remains of exercising care in distinguishing its voice from the voice of other influences in the heart. (Dec. 1, 1886, JI 21:364)

Walk in the light. We see the power of Satan, the knowledge of Satan and his cunning. He understands the avenues through which he can approach us best; he knows the weaknesses of our character, and we do not know the moment we may be seduced by him and be overcome and fall victims to him. Our only preservation is in living near to God, day by day, and serving him in faithfulness and having the light of revelation and truth in our hearts continually so that when Satan approaches we will see him and understand the snare that he has laid for us, and we will have the power to say, "Oh no, God being my helper, I will not yield to it; I will not do that which is wrong; I will not grieve the Spirit of God; I will not deviate from the path that my Father has marked out for me; but I will walk in it."

Can we do this without the light of the Spirit? No, we cannot see where the path upon which we have entered will lead to; we cannot tell what the results will be; but when the light of the Spirit of God illuminates our minds and we are enlightened by it, we plainly see the results; and if we do not see them at the time, the Lord soon reveals them to us and shows us that if we continue to take that course we will grieve his Spirit and fall victims to the adversary. (Oct. 8, 1865, JD 11:173-74)

Spirit of God produces happy feelings. Do not allow darkness and gloom to enter into your hearts. I want to give you a rule by which you may know that the spirit which you have is the right spirit. The Spirit of God produces cheerfulness, joy, light and good feelings. Whenever you feet gloomy and despondent and are downcast, unless it be for your sins, you may know it is not the Spirit of God which you have. Fight against it and drive it out of your heart. The Spirit of God is a spirit of hope; it is not a spirit of gloom. (Jan. 14, 1894, DW 48:351)

There is nothing on earth, nothing that man can taste or experience that is so sweet, so happifying, so full of delight, as the presence of the Spirit of God. It fills the soul with joy that is inexpressible. (Oct. 6, 1895, DW 51:644)

The right course to take. And when you are disturbed in your feelings and assailed with doubt and do not feel happy, withdraw yourselves from the world, leave the cares that press you, lay them aside, withdraw to your secret chamber, and bow yourselves down before your God and entreat him, in the name of Jesus, to give you his Spirit, and do not leave your chamber until you are, as it were, baptized in the Spirit of God and full of peace and joy, all your cares and troubles dissipated and dismissed. This is the course we should take as Latter-day Saints. (July 12, 1874, JD 17:130)

A test of the Spirit. Paul advised the people to whom he wrote to try the spirits, whether they were of God or not; and one of the signs—a most important one in that day—was whether the spirit would confess that Jesus was the Christ. That was the crucial test in those days because Jesus had been born a little while before and had been crucified, and He was denounced as an impostor and a man worthy of death. Therefore, the Apostle could well say, "Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God." (1 John 4:2.) But that rule would not apply today with the same force that it did then because the belief in Jesus is almost universal. Times have changed. Jesus is now accepted, and there are comparatively few men who will openly avow their unbelief in Jesus. But the same reasons exist now for trying the spirits that did then to see whether they are of God or not.

I hope no one will think I am sacrilegious or that I am lowering my Savior when I say that when I hear a man confess that Joseph Smith is a Prophet I think he has some of the Spirit of God within him, because it is a good deal of a test nowadays. A man who will admit that a man who lived such a life as Joseph Smith is reported to have lived and died such a death as he did is a Prophet of God satisfies me as to whether he is speaking by the Spirit of God or not.

Tests vary according to times and circumstances. That which might have been a very excellent test 1900 years ago might not be so much of a test now. Yet when a man today confesses Jesus he does speak by the Spirit of God. There is no doubt about that. That has not changed. It is the Spirit of God that prompts men to acknowledge Jesus, just as much now as it ever did. But it is not such a test now as it was in ancient days. There were very few then that dare do it; and whenever they did it, they did it, it may be said, almost with the fear of their lives before them, because the whole world was arrayed against the Savior and ready to pounce upon any man who acknowledged Him to be the Son of God.

All good cometh from God. But we can test the spirits now. Everything that is good cometh from God, I care not where it may be. Do other churches have good in them as well as the Church of Christ? Certainly. . . . There is truth throughout the earth. Men are possessed of it everywhere. Even the pagans possess it, and according to the light which they have and their lives being in accordance with that light, they are accepted of God.

Every sincere man who lives up to the light that he has is accepted of God to that extent. Before God in his infinite wisdom and mercy revealed the everlasting Gospel in this dispensation, there were great numbers of faithful men and women living on the earth, and according to the light they had, lived acceptably to God. . . .

The earth had many, many such people in it, and the various sects had these people in them. So it is today. Our Elders are commanded to go out and find these people; to find the honest, the meek, the humble and the people who want to know about God. (Sept. 18, 1892, DW 45:451)

God to reveal Himself. Now, listen to the voice of His Spirit. Cultivate that Spirit and seek for it by night and by day. If you will do this, I say to you that God will reveal Himself unto you as He has never done before; the visions of eternity will be open to you; angels will minister unto you, and the power of God will descend upon you, as individuals and as a people. I tell you this in the name of the Lord and as His servant. This will most assuredly be the case with this people if they will do as the Lord requires at their hands and exercise faith and put away evil from them. (Apr. 17, 1898, DW 56:708)

Straying from the truth. It requires continual vigilance on the part of those the Lord has placed as authorities in His Church to prevent the growth of fashions and forms that are contrary to the spirit of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. Incidents frequently occur in the experience of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints which illustrate the manner in which the primitive Church, established by the Savior, fell into the grievous errors that resulted in the withdrawal of the power of God from it. It requires constant watchfulness now to prevent aberrations from the right path, even with the full organization of the Priesthood in the Church.

In the ancient Church the Head of the Church—the Savior Himself—was slain; His Apostles whom He had chosen to take charge of the ministry and to build up His Church in the earth were also slain; and every man that had that authority was taken from the people. Little by little the organization strayed from the truth and from the correct manner of administering ordinances, etc., and darkness soon prevailed.

In our own day the same results would follow if it were not for the authority of the Apostleship exercising continued watchfulness over the Church. Paul pointed out the necessity of this authority always being in the church. . . . (Ephesians 4:11-14.)

Avoid use of prepared ordinance forms. The Lord Himself has given us, by revelation, the manner in which we shall ask a blessing in administering the sacrament and the form of words that we shall use in baptizing. Moroni has, also, in the Book of Mormon, told us how Priests and Teachers were ordained among the Nephites. Beyond this the Lord has not gone.

The Holy Ghost has been given for the express purpose, among other things, of inspiring men to perform all the duties which belong to the Priesthood; and it is but little less than sacrelige for any man, in and of himself, to fame a form of ordination for others to adopt. Where this has been done, it has doubtless been done with the best of intentions, but, nevertheless, is it not an assumption of one of the functions which belong to one of the Godhead—the Holy Ghost? Where these forms are adopted, those who use them are in a position where, if the Holy Ghost should inspire them to say anything to a person whom they were ordaining or setting apart or blessing, they could not do so without departing from this prepared form. . . .

Speak by power of the Spirit. Now, there can be no objection to the Elders thoroughly studying every principle which belongs to the gospel and in mastering all the proofs within their reach that will sustain the truth of those principles. It is the duty of every man bearing the Priesthood and who ministers the word to do this and to fill his mind with all the good things he can obtain to give to the people. But it is contrary to the instructions which the Lord has given and to the practice of the servants of God to arrange beforehand what they shall say to the people while ministering the word of God unto them. It is true there may be some special occasions when it may be necessary for men to speak on certain subjects; but even when this is the case, if they do right, they will leave it to the Spirit of God to direct their minds as to the manner in which they will present the subject. Under the guidance of the Holy Ghost they may speak upon collateral subjects or even upon subjects that had not been thought about by them.

No man can be a true minister of the word of God who does not leave himself to be dictated by the Spirit of God. Whenever he attempts to arrange beforehand what he shall say to the people and the manner in which he shall treat the subject, he checks the Spirit to that extent and prevents the free flow thereof to him. The Lord does not want His servants to talk mechanically to the people but to speak to them under the influence and by the power of the Holy Ghost. It is that power and that alone that can give to the speaker the bread of life which the people stand in need of. And when the servants of God are dictated by that Spirit, the people who listen to them are edified, and convincing power attends their words, and the Elders themselves are also benefited by that which the Lord gives. (Mar. 15, 1898, JI 33:212-14)
