Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 17

Miracles and Signs—Gifts of the Gospel

God performs no miracles. God always acts in accordance with well-defined and understood laws and does not violate the laws of nature in the least in performing all his wonderful works. Because men, not comprehending how such works are performed, term them miraculous, it does not necessarily follow that there is a suspension of the laws of nature in such cases; neither does it follow, because men can partially comprehend a law according to which certain results are produced, that God has nothing to do with it. Everything that the Lord himself performs or which he commands his servants to perform is plain and simple and easily understood by Him—it is no miracle to Him, because He comprehends the law by the observance of which such things are produced.

Mankind term such works miracles and supernatural, because they have not progressed sufficiently to understand how they can be done without the suspension of the laws of nature. Did they fully understand all the laws of nature, however, they would then perceive that in the performance of these "miracles" no law of nature is in the least violated but rather that they are produced by the superior knowledge of these laws which the person has who works them or the Being who permits them to be worked. (Nov. 1, 1856, WS 235-36)

It was no suspension of law on the part of our Savior that caused Him to gather from the elements the bread and the fishes necessary to feed the multitude. It was no suspension of law that caused Him to open the eyes of the blind or to cause the sick to be healed. (May 4, 1884, JD 25:150)

Cessation of miracles was gradual. Speaking of the cessation of miracles in the early Christian church, Burton, in his Ecclesiastical History (Vol. II, page 233) remarks that "their actual cessation was imperceptible, and like the rays in a summer's evening, which, when the sun has set, may be seen to linger on the top of a mountain, though they have ceased to fall on the level country beneath."

There has been an impression in many minds that miracles ceased with the death of the Apostles and that they were not designed for the Church or its officers after their day. . . . But Burton, in the words we have quoted above, truly describes the manner in which these miraculous gifts and powers disappeared from among men. They were not withdrawn all at once; but they gradually faded away like the rays of the declining sun until they disappeared altogether and darkness set in.

There was a cause for this. Faith had decreased. Mankind would not have the pure word of God. They persecuted and slew the men who had the Priesthood and who received revelation from God. The result was the Church was gradually overcome, the authority which the Lord acknowledged was withdrawn and spiritual gifts departed.

Spiritual gifts common for two centuries. For upwards of two centuries after the birth of the Lord Jesus these spiritual gifts were common in the Christian Church.

Justin Martyr, one of the early Christians, published a composition which is called "Dialogue with Trypho," in which he defended Christianity against the attacks of Judaism. This was not far from the year A.D. 150. In this "Dialogue" he says: "Among us also you may see both males and females possessing gifts from the Spirit of God."

In one of his "Apologies" the same writer says: "For many of our Christian people, exercising in the name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, have cured, and are even now curing, many demoniacs in your own city and in all parts of the world, though these persons could not be cured by all other exorcists, and enchanters and sorcerers. But ours have overcome and driven out the demons that possessed these men."

It seems from this testimony that in Justin Martyr's time, upwards of one hundred and fifty years after the birth of the Lord, the spiritual gifts were in the Church and also the power to cast out devils.

Quadratus, who was Bishop of Athens in the early part of the second century, is credited with the power of working miracles. One of the old writers, who had the works of Papias before him, states: "(Papias) relates that a dead man was raised in his time, and moreover that another wonderful thing occurred to Justus, who was surnamed Barsabas, namely, that he drank a deadly poison, and suffered no unpleasant effects, on account of the grace of the Lord."

The writer does not say how it was that Justus came to drink this poison; but if it is true that he did drink it, it is altogether likely he did it without knowing what it was and not to give the people a sign or to show them the power that the Lord had given to him.

Irenaeus speaks of miracles as still common in Gaul (the land now known to us as France) when he wrote, which was nearly at the close of the second century. He says:

On this account also His true disciples, receiving grace from Him, perform miracles in His name for the benefit of men, as each of them has received the gift from Him. For some truly and really expel demons; . . . and others have foreknowledge of the future, and visions, and prophetic utterances. Others heal the sick and make them well, by the imposition of their hands. And even now, as we have said, the dead have also been raised, and have remained with us many years.

He says again: "As also we have many brethren in the church having prophetic gifts, and speaking in all foreign tongues, and bringing to light the secrets of men, for a good purpose."

Tertullian and other writers of about the same period are witnesses to the continuance at their day of the power of casting out devils.

Papias, Quadratus, Justin Martyr and Irenaeus, whose names we have mentioned, were all martyred on account of their religion. Most of those in eminent positions in the Church in that day were martyred. The world hated not only the Apostles but all who held the Priesthood and destroyed them from the face of the earth.

Persecution ceased with loss of gifts. The testimony of these men concerning the spiritual gifts which were in the Church is important. Is not the cause of the disappearance of these gifts plain to be seen? How could these heavenly gifts be continued in the Church when all who possessed them were hunted and slain?

Persecution of the Church ceased when there were no more victims to be offered up, when no man remained who received revelation from heaven, when the Church no longer possessed spiritual gifts. The Church and the world were then alike reduced to a dead level, true faith no longer remained and the causes of hatred with the world against the Church had all vanished.

If they vanished like the rays of the setting sun, shall they not return like the rays of the rising sun? (Dec. 15, 1888, JI 23:376)

Some miracles a result of faith. That men, unauthorized of God, will in Christ's name perform wondrous works, is evidenced from the words of the Savior. He tells us that in the great hereafter men will come to him and say, "Have we not prophesied in thy name? and in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful works?" And He will say unto them, "I never knew you: depart from me, ye that work iniquity." (Matthew 7:22-23.) They had never received authority from Him to use His name. Nevertheless, they will state they had used it and that, too, if they can be believed, effectually in performing many wonderful works.

We hear of miracles being performed in the Roman Catholic, the Methodist and other churches. Some of these, doubtless, were works of impostures, but all were not. In many cases they were the result of true faith in the power of Jesus' name; in many instances those who received the blessings were living up to the best light they had, dim though it might be. (Mar. 1, 1894, JI 29:144-45)

Gospel not dependent on miracles for support. The Gospel of Jesus was not and is not dependent on miracles alone for the evidence necessary to support its truthfulness. . . . By a careful perusal of the Scriptures we find that Jesus did not work miracles to convince the people of the truth of His system, neither did His Apostles. If they had recognized this as being the correct way of converting men, they certainly would have adopted it; and no man could have been condemned for not embracing their doctrines who had not beheld a supernatural (as we have it) exhibition of power. He, however, before His ascension into heaven, in speaking to His disciples, plainly and pointedly said that these signs or exhibitions of power should follow them that believed—they were to be the consequences of faith and not the only foundation for faith to be based upon. . . .

Although miracles may be performed independently of a correct system, yet, we do maintain that whenever the Gospel of Jesus is preached in its purity, they must also of necessity—if there can be any reliance placed on the words of our Savior—accompany it. The principle of faith and obedience to the commandments always did and always will produce this power; and when obtained and enjoyed by these means, it will be one evidence, among a host of others, that the doctrine they have embraced is an emanation of the Deity. We can not conceive how men can prove to their own satisfaction that the Gospel of Christ as recorded in the Bible is true or that the Bible itself is what it purports to be on any other principle than this; indeed, it is the only principle upon which definite knowledge can be obtained. If the miracles recorded in the Bible were the only evidence that we had to rely upon for the truth of these things, we should consider our faith had but a poor foundation, and we certainly should be fearful of an attack upon it. (Mar. 8, 1856, WS 20-21)

Signs alone do not give a testimony. The healing of the sick and the speaking in tongues are two of the gifts which the Lord has promised to those who obey His Gospel. Where these gifts exist in the Church, they are, as far as they go, evidences of the true Gospel. But while that is so, there have been cases of the sick being healed by those who were not members of the Church of Jesus Christ; and there have been cases in our own Church where persons have spoken in tongues under a wrong influence and spirit. Therefore, these signs alone do not give a testimony of the truth of the Gospel; neither are they a testimony that the person or persons who do these things are true servants of God.

The signs which Jesus said should follow the believers are a great comfort to those who possess them, and they are a cause of rejoicing to those who witness them. But experience has taught the Church that those who embrace the Gospel because they see signs, and depend upon them alone for evidence of the truth of the Gospel, do not have a good foundation for their faith, and they frequently fall away. Something more than these is needed as a foundation for faith and as a testimony of the truth of the Gospel. The reliable testimony must come from within—that is, the Saint should have the testimony of the Holy Ghost within. Outward signs and evidences go to corroborate and strengthen the inward testimony.

After this explanation we may . . . say that the seeing of the sick healed and the hearing of one speak in tongues and these alone are only a partial testimony of the truth of the Gospel. In and of themselves they are not sufficient to furnish such a testimony as Latter-day Saints ought to have. (July 15, 1898, JI 33:513)

Signs not given to convert people. Jesus Himself gave no signs to convince unbelievers. When applied to Himself to give a sign, He said it was a wicked and an adulterous generation that sought for a sign and no sign should be given them. And on one occasion, when He visited a certain place, it is recorded of Him that He did no miracle because of the unbelief of the people. Now, it would seem that if signs had to be given to convince the people that would have been the best place Jesus could have labored, a place where unbelief was most prevalent, and where He himself was appealed to. But He refused to do so.

He did not come for the purpose of giving men signs. They were told in the Scriptures that "these signs shall follow them that believe" (Mark 16:17); they should not come to convince men and to make them believe. . . .

Miracles wrought by false prophets. In fact we are told in the scriptures that the day would come when miracles should be wrought by false prophets, and men would be deceived by false evidence of this character. It is an easy thing to deceive the senses; we see it every time our theatre is occupied by a magician—we see things done that hoodwink our senses. Our eyes are deceived; our ears are deceived; all our senses are deceived by shrewd, cunning men, by men who are experts in manipulating various articles, and if they were to set themselves up as the apostles of some system and declare that these were the evidences of the divinity of that system and we should believe this sort of evidence, we might be converted to error.

All those who are familiar with the Bible know the experience of Moses before Pharaoh. There was scarcely a miracle that Moses wrought that the magicians of the king did not imitate, and every miracle that was wrought only tended to harden the heart of the king and make him determined that he would not let the children of Israel go; so we see that miracles in and of themselves are no evidence of the divinity of any system, nor of the power and the authority from God of the men who work them. . . .

Those converted by signs weak in faith. I do not believe that men can be convinced as they should be convinced by such manifestations. It has been a matter of remark among those who have had experience in this Church that where men have been brought into the Church by such manifestations, it has required a constant succession of them to keep them in the Church; their faith has had to be constantly strengthened by witnessing some such manifestations; but where they have been convinced by the outpouring of the Spirit of God, where their judgment has been convinced, where they have examined for themselves and become satisfied by the testimony of Jesus in answer to their prayers and to their faithful seeking unto the Lord for knowledge—where this has been the case, they have been more likely to stand, more likely to endure persecution and trial than those who have been convinced through some supernatural manifestation of the character to which I have alluded. (July 24, 1881, JD 22:360-62)

Gifts given for perfection of Saints. The Prophet Moroni explains more fully even than Paul does concerning these gifts. He said "that if the day cometh that the power and gifts of God shall be done away among you, it shall be because of unbelief." (Moroni 10:24.) Not because God is not willing to bestow gifts upon His children, for as this Prophet says, "God is not a partial God, neither a changeable Being; but he is unchangeable from all eternity to all eternity." (Moroni 8:18.) His dealings with the children of men are alike. If they come to Him with faith and obey His Gospel, He is bound by the promises that He has made to bestow upon them the same blessings and not to discriminate between His children; for if He did so, He would not be a just Being. But justice is His attribute, and He deals justly with His children. He gives unto them His gifts and blessings according to their faith. To one He gives one gift, to another He gives another gift.

These gifts are given by Him for the perfection of His people, that in this vale of tears, shut out as we are from His presence, a veil of darkness having been drawn, as it were, between us and Him, those who will exercise faith in His promises and will keep His commandments may receive the aid that is necessary to enable them to walk before Him and to enjoy His power. . . .

Gifts distinguish Saints from the world. He can receive the evidences from the Lord, by the exercise of faith, that will convince him of the existence of his Father in heaven and also of His willingness to hear and answer the prayers and supplications which are addressed to Him in sincerity.

It is for this purpose that these gifts are bestowed, that those who do obey the commandments of God shall have privileges, blessings and powers that those who do not take this course cannot have. The bestowal of these is to create a distinction between the people of God and those who are not His people, to give them that superiority which the enjoyment of these gifts bring. . . .

Our duty to seek after gifts. How many of you are seeking for these gifts that God has promised to bestow? How many of you, when you bow before your Heavenly Father in your family circle or in your secret places, contend for these gifts to be bestowed upon you? How many of you ask the Father in the name of Jesus to manifest Himself to you through these powers and these gifts? Or do you go along day by day like a door turning on its hinges, without having any feeling upon the subject, without exercising any faith whatever, content to be baptized and be members of the Church and to rest there, thinking that your salvation is secure because you have done this?

I say to you, in the name of the Lord, as one of His servants, that you have need to repent of this. You have need to repent of your hardness of heart, of your indifference and of your carelessness. There is not that diligence, there is not that faith, there is not that seeking for the power of God that there should be among a people who have received the precious promises we have. . . .

If any of us are imperfect, it is our duty to pray for the gift that will make us perfect. Have I imperfections? I am full of them. What is my duty? To pray to God to give me the gifts that will correct these imperfections. . . . They are intended for this purpose. No man ought to say, "Oh, I cannot help this; it is my nature." He is not justified in it, for the reason that God has promised to give strength to correct these things and to give gifts that will eradicate them. . . . That is the design of God concerning His children. He wants His Saints to be perfected in the truth. (Nov. 26, 1893, DW 48:34-35)

The Lord has said in a revelation to the Church that the Saints should "seek ye earnestly the best gifts, always remembering for what they are given; for verily I say unto you, they are given for the benefit of those who love me and keep all my commandments." (D&C 46:8-9.) How many Latter-day Saints are there who supplicate the Lord for the gifts which they need? . . .

Every defect in the human character can be corrected through the exercise of faith and pleading with the Lord for the gifts that He has said He will give unto those who believe and obey His commandments. (Oct. 1, 1896, JI 31:572)

We all need gifts. Is there any one among us that does not need these gifts? I need prophecy. How can I magnify my office, how can I stand in my calling, how can I do my duty to the Latter-day Saints in the office to which God has called me, unless I have the gift of prophecy? That gift I should seek to have increase upon me. The gift of revelation should increase within me. I should seek for the gift of wisdom, to have it increase within me, the gift of knowledge also. Should we not all do so?

You need to have patience, long-suffering, forbearance. A presiding officer in the Church needs the gift of instruction, the gift of counsel and, when needed, the gift of reproof and warning. He needs to understand the plan of salvation and what constitutes godliness; he needs to have the gift of healing and the gift of the discernment of spirits.

We all need to have the gift of a broken heart and a contrite spirit, for that is the offering that is acceptable to the Lord. When we come to Him with broken hearts and contrite spirits, He hears us, and He accepts the offering. It is the offering that He asks at our hands. . . .

Gift of tongues. If I were called on a mission to a people speaking a foreign language, I should pray constantly for the gift of tongues and for the gift of the interpretation of tongues. . . . I know that such a gift is within the reach of those who seek for it. It is not alone given to us to get up in our testimony meetings and speak in tongues and somebody interpret it. That is very comforting and a very desirable gift when it is governed properly. It appeals to many people; they think it is a wonderfully great gift. But in my experience it is a gift that is apt to lead people astray unless it is properly controlled. Under its influence people sometimes give way to a wrong spirit. . . .

This gift, as I have said, is a desirable gift; but it is especially desirable for our Elders who go to foreign lands. They should seek for it with all earnestness and faith, I testify to you that there is such a gift as the gift of interpretation of tongues.

So in relation to all these precious gifts. Why, what is our religion if we divest it of these gifts and we do not possess them? It is a powerless thing. But with the bestowal of these gifts, with the Lord giving them to us according to our needs, each one in his or her place, there is power in our religion.

Gifts for mothers. The sisters have as much right to these gifts as the brethren. They have the right to go unto God and ask Him in the name of Jesus to bestow upon them such gifts as they need. How good a gift it would be for a mother to have the gift of governing her children, the gift of wisdom to train them and to point out to them the path that they should pursue. The mother who seeks for these gifts and exercises them before the Lord will have great joy in her children and will get amply rewarded for all the faith that she has exercised and the prayers she has offered in their behalf. . . .

Patience and Integrity. The Lord said to Joseph in the beginning, "Be patient in afflictions; for thou shalt have many." (D&C 24:8.) So it is with all of us. We have great afflictions from time to time. It seems to be necessary that we should be tried and proved to see whether we are full of integrity or not. In this way we get to know ourselves and our own weaknesses; and the Lord knows us, and our brethren and sisters know us.

Therefore, it is a precious gift to have the gift of patience, to be good-tempered, to be cheerful, to not be depressed, to not give way to wrong feelings and become impatient and irritable. It is a blessed gift for all to possess.

The gift of integrity also is a splendid gift. Men may do many wicked things, and repent of them and the Lord will forgive them, if they have integrity. I value that gift exceedingly. . . . The gift of integrity is a good thing. It is good also to have steadfastness, valor and courage in the hour of trial and danger—in the hour when men's lives are in danger. (Feb. 12, 1899, MS 62:355-57)

Discerning of spirits. One of the gifts of the Gospel which the Lord has promised to those who enter into covenant with Him is the gift of discerning of spirits—a gift which is not much thought of by many and probably seldom prayed for; yet it is a gift that is of exceeding value and one that should be enjoyed by every Latter-day Saint. . . . No Latter-day Saint should be without this gift, because there is such a variety of spirits in the world which seek to deceive and lead astray. In a revelation to the Church upon the spirits which have gone abroad in the earth the Lord says:"Behold, verily I say unto you, that there are many spirits which are false spirits, which have gone forth in the earth, deceiving the world." (D&C 50:2.)

The Lord warns the Saints and says: "Beware lest ye are deceived." (D&C 46:8.) And that they may not be deceived, He commands them to seek earnestly the best gifts.

The Apostle John says: "Behold, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world." (1 John 4:1.) This counsel of the beloved Apostle applies as much to us in these latter days as it did to the Saints of his age. All manner of spirits have gone forth to deceive, to lead astray and to obtain possession of the children of men; and many people yield to them because they are invisible and cannot, perhaps, think that they can be possessed by invisible influences. Anger, backbiting, slander, falsehood and various passions are manifested by people under the influence of false and deceptive spirits. . . .

Now, the gift of discerning of spirits not only gives men and women who have it the power to discern the spirit with which others may be possessed or influenced, but it gives them the power to discern the spirit which influences themselves. They are able to detect a false spirit and also to know when the Spirit of God reigns within them. In private life this gift is of great importance to the Latter-day Saints. Possessing and exercising this gift they will not allow any evil influence to enter into their hearts or to prompt them in their thoughts, their words or their acts. They will repel it; and if perchance such a spirit should get possession of them, as soon as they witness its effects they will expel it or, in other words, refuse to be led or prompted by it.

The gift of discerning of spirits, also, is one that is of great importance to the Elders who are laboring in the ministry. We have known Elders become so filled with zeal and so desirous to do good, or what they supposed to be good, that they exposed themselves to the influence of the adversary. They would be filled with a species of what has been called "wildfire," and, carried away by zeal, they would go too far; they would say and do imprudent things and yet, being prompted by the purest and best motives, would feel entirely justified in their course. In the history of the Church there have been many illustrations of this. Elders can work themselves up beyond that which is proper and wise and be led to say and do many imprudent things and overstep the line of propriety. Now, the gift of discerning of spirits is necessary to keep these kind of feelings in check.

The gift of discerning of spirits is not only necessary for this purpose, but it is necessary in the branches of the Church. Newly baptized members, anxious to obtain the gifts, are liable sometimes to be taken advantage of by the adversary and to imbibe or yield to a wrong spirit. A newly organized branch of the Church, where the gifts are manifested, especially the gift of tongues, has to be watched with great care. The Elders laboring in the branch or presiding in the conference must be in a position to discern between the Spirit of the Lord and other spirits that may seek to steal in. . . .

In all the situations in life, therefore, in which Latter-day Saints can be placed there is great need for them to possess the gift of discerning of spirits. Fathers and mothers need it for their own benefit. They need it in their families, in the training of their children. All Saints need it to enable them to escape from the many evil influences that are abroad. The Elders need it for their own sakes; they need it also in the government of the branches, of the conferences, of the wards, of the stakes and, indeed, the entire Church. It is a great and blessed gift, and it should be sought for by all. (Oct. 1, 1896 JI 31:572-74)

Gifts of Gospel not confined to General Authorities. I hope the idea will never prevail among our people that God confines his gifts and graces to the First Presidency or to the Twelve Apostles or to the Seven Presidents of Seventies. I know that God is the God of this people, and every young man or middle-aged man or aged man who will seek for the power of God can obtain it, and he can declare the truth of God in the power and demonstration of the Holy Ghost, and it is just as good as if it were told by the President of the Church or by one of the Twelve Apostles. . . .

The field is white for the harvest, and laborers are wanted. It is beyond the power of the First Presidency and Twelve to do all the labor. Therefore, the Elders are called to the ministry, and they should seek for the gifts and for the power and authority of the Holy Priesthood and exercise it and not think because they are not Apostles or Presidents that therefore they have not the right to teach and to speak with authority. If you have any doubts upon this, read . . . what the Lord says upon this point. (D&C 68:2-12.) (Oct. 5, 1894, DW 49:642)
