Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

SECTION 3

AUTHORITY AND COMMUNICATION FROM GOD

The Priesthood of the Son of God. . . is the power by which all things were created and are held in their place. Shall I startle you when I say that our Father Himself controls the universe and occupies His exalted station because of the Priesthood? Whether it is startling or not, it is nevertheless true. Our Eternal Father is the Creator of all things through the power of the everlasting Priesthood—that Priesthood which has been bestowed upon and exercised by the servants of God in our day. —GEORGE Q. CANNON Deseret Weekly 55:354 August 22, 1897

CHAPTER 19

Priesthood—Power and Authority from God

The power which controls universe. What is that power? It is the Priesthood of the Son of God. It is the power by which all things were created and are held in their place. Shall I startle you when I say that our Father himself controls the universe and occupies His exalted station because of the Priesthood? Whether it is startling or not, it is nevertheless true. Our Eternal Father is the creator of all things through the power of the everlasting Priesthood—that Priesthood which has been bestowed upon and exercised by the servants of God in our day. (Aug. 22, 1897, DW 55:354)

Necessity of Priesthood. It is a well authenticated and indisputable fact that God never had a people on the earth in any age whom He recognized as His peculiar people without having in their midst those who had the authority and the right to officiate in His name. They were the bearers of His Priesthood—the recipients of the power which He bestows to enable man to act in His stead and to transact that which was necessary to be transacted to fit and prepare His people to enter into His presence. For, as the Scriptures plainly teach, the Lord revealed unto the children of men, by His own voice and by the voice of His Spirit and His servants, ordinances which He expected them to observe before they could be permitted to partake of His glory.

And, as it was incompatible with His designs for Him, His Son or His angels to come down and administer in these things, it was necessary that His power should be bestowed upon men who were counted worthy, by Him, to receive this great and exceeding honor, that they might go forth in His name as His ambassadors or ministers among their fellow men and officiate in all these necessary ordinances and thus be the means, in His hands, of preparing their brethren and their sisters to inherit the glory and the exaltation which He wished to bestow upon them.

They attained unto this honor and power by their worth and faithfulness in doing the will of their God; and it was only by maintaining this character that they were enabled to retain this authority. Their words, while acting in this capacity, were as the words of God unto the people—salvation, honor and heaven's approving smiles being bestowed upon those who obeyed them, and destruction, dishonor and heavenly disapprobation following those who disobeyed; God continually manifesting His determination to honor Himself by honoring those to whom He had delegated a portion of His power.

God controls its bestowal. Hence, we read, in the history of God's dealings with the children of men, that whenever an individual or a nation came in contact with one of God's anointed ones—the bearers of this Priesthood or authority—it was equivalent to coming in contact directly with Himself and the consequences were equally terrible. The Almighty always reserved to Himself the right to bestow this authority upon whomsoever He would and never recognized a man as His minister who did not obtain it by the legitimate and only correct means and from the proper source.

When this Priesthood was taken from the earth and was not in the possession of man, if God wished to again bestow it upon him, to fulfill His designs, it was always done by the direct manifestation of His will by His own voice and by the ministration of His angels, to the individual selected. When, on the other hand, this power was upon the earth, held by those whom the Lord recognized and approved as His servants and ambassadors, for an individual to obtain it it was always necessary for the one who held it, before he could with propriety confer it, to obtain a knowledge from the Lord that He approved of the individual as one worthy to hold this dignity—as one upon whom the power should be bestowed to go forth and act in His name and stead among the people. These were the only means through which this power and authority could be obtained, and any man who claimed this Priesthood or who professed to act by this authority, who had not obtained it through either of these processes, was condemned as an impostor, and everything that he did was unrecognized and disapprobated by the Lord. . . .

The correct mode to obtain it. Paul, in writing to the Hebrews upon the subject of Priesthood, alludes to the correct mode of obtaining it in these words: "No man taketh this honour (Priesthood) unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron." (Hebrews 5:4.) Now, every reader of the Bible knows that Aaron was called to this honor through the revelations of God to Moses and that Paul . . . and . . . all the Apostles were called in like manner . . . And when men were called and set apart in this manner, all their acts, while officiating in the sphere of their Priesthood, were sanctioned by the Lord—the Being in whose name they acted. When it was necessary for them to attend to any of the ordinances which the Lord had instituted for His creatures to obey, the person who submitted to it in the proper spirit obtained a knowledge from the Lord that He had approved and blessed the operation; thus, every one of His people knew that the men who were officiating in their midst as His representatives were empowered by Him so to act; therefore, there existed no doubt as to their right to dictate and control the affairs of the Kingdom of God on the earth, and all knew that implicit obedience was both expected and necessary. The people who had in their possession knowledge of this nature were easily governed and always presented the characteristics which we find attributed to the people of God, whenever He had a people on the earth. . . .

A true church to have divine authority. Who is there that has been taught to believe the Bible that can reflect dispassionately and unbiased by prejudice upon these subjects and not be convinced in his own mind that if there be a Church of God upon the earth, there must be men in that Church who are endowed by Him with the authority to act in His name in all the ordinances pertaining thereto and to whom He will make known His mind and will in the government thereof? They must also be convinced that if there be such a Church in existence, its members, so long as God maintains His character for being unchangeable, must, of necessity, enjoy the gifts and blessings which the members of His Church anciently did. (Oct. 18, 1856, WS 225-30)

Succession of Priesthood. There are many churches that consider this question of succession of authority as unworthy of attention. . . . There are hundreds of churches which profess to be of Christ, and yet they differ very widely in their teachings and in their religious practices. They cannot, in the very nature of things, all be right; in fact, it is contrary to the whole spirit of the Savior's teachings to imagine that there can be more than one church which He would call His. It is simply ridiculous to suppose that the Savior who prayed so earnestly to His Father for union among His disciples would fail to desire and to command that His people should be one or that the Holy Ghost would rest upon thousands of people of different denominations and teach them to be divided and disunited.

Nothing more clearly sustains the position that the Latter-day Saints take and the testimony that they bear concerning the establishment of the Lord's Church in these last days than the diversity of sects and of doctrines that are taught in the so-called Christian world. What possible hope could any earnest seeker after truth receive from these different denominations when the lack of authority is so apparent? It is not to be wondered at that sincere Protestants turn their eyes toward Rome and many of them take refuge in that church because there is a consistency in the claims of the Church of Rome to Apostolic succession. But those claims are not supported by the facts of history. That church lost the authority of the Priesthood through transgression. The Priesthood was undoubtedly taken back to God. The men who bore it were slain and none were left to continue its succession.

Hence, the position that our Church occupies is the only logical position. The Prophet Joseph Smith testified that he and Oliver Cowdery were ordained by men who once held the Priesthood on the earth. John the Baptist, who held the authority to baptize and who did baptize the Son of God himself, came and laid his hands on the heads of Joseph and Oliver and restored to men on the earth the authority which he held while in the flesh. In like manner the Apostles Peter, James and John appeared unto them and ordained them to the Apostleship and Priesthood which they held. By means of these ordinations the authority was once more restored which was necessary for the organization of the Church and for the administration of the saving ordinances of the Gospel.

We are relieved, therefore, as a people, from the necessity of discussing Apostolic succession and from contentions whether it is necessary for men to be ordained by proper authority in order to become ministers of Jesus Christ. All doubt and uncertainty concerning these points were swept away by the knowledge that the Apostleship has been restored to the earth from a source which leaves its validity without question. The position of this Church on these points is impregnable.

The proofs of what the Lord has done in restoring the authority to man on the earth again are found in the fruits which have followed its restoration. All the evidences of God's favor which attended the Church in ancient days under the administration of the Apostles of the Lord Jesus are to be found in and accompanying The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. That Church is distinguished from all other churches on the earth in that it possesses in fullness the gifts and graces and the divine manifestations of favor which the Church of Jesus Christ of Former-day Saints possessed. (Oct. 15, 1896, JI 31:609-10)

On threshold of a new era. We live on the threshold of a new era; the work that God has established in our day shall never be given to another people. The Priesthood which God has restored—the authority by which men can administer in the ordinances of God—that Priesthood shall never be taken from the earth. . . .

There is no power on earth nor in hell that can destroy the Church that God has established nor obliterate the Priesthood from the earth again as it was obliterated in ancient days. It was necessary when this Church was started that angels should come to restore that which was taken away, the everlasting Priesthood, but there will be no future necessity for this. We are at the threshold of a thousand years of peace; we are engaged in laying the foundation of that work which shall stand forever, not only the thousand years but as long as time shall last and as long as the earth shall endure. This is the consolation we have that our predecessors did not have. (Aug. 3, 1879, JD 20:250-51)

Peter held same Priesthood. The Latter-day Saints lay claim to having received the same Priesthood and authority which was held by Peter and his brethren—they claim nothing less than this. The power which Jesus bestowed upon them, the Latter-day Saints assert and testify, has been again restored to the earth and is now held by the present Apostles of the Church of Christ. The head of the Church upon the earth at the present time holds the same authority which was held by Peter, the head of the Church in ancient days. He is invested with the same power, holds the same keys, and his counsel is equally as binding as Peter's was when he occupied the same position. (July 10, 1857, WS 470)

Ordination of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery. There is nothing in writing or that has come to us orally as to why Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery should ordain each other to the Priesthood they received under the hands of both John the Baptist and Peter, James and John. But the reason which appears plain to the First Presidency, with whom I have conversed on the subject, is that it was necessary, after the Priesthood had been restored from heaven by the administration of holy angels, that mortal men should ordain each other and baptize each other and lay hands upon each other for the reception of the Holy Ghost. This appears to be a sufficient reason for this action on the part of the Prophet Joseph and Oliver Cowdery.

To Joseph the keys were given. He stood at the head. And it was proper that the ordination of all who belonged to the dispensation should come through him; and it appeared to be just as necessary that he himself should be ordained by a mortal in order to observe the order of heaven. (Jan. 1, 1891, JI 26:13)

Priesthood and preexistence. We are asked if it is true doctrine to teach that those who hold the Priesthood now in the flesh held it in the spirit world before they came here. . . . We know of nothing that has been revealed and written which warrants any one in teaching as doctrine that men who hold the Priesthood here were ordained to the Priesthood before they came here. Such ideas should not be advanced in public or in private. (Aug. 15, 1895, JI 30:497-98)

Joseph Smith foreordained. The Prophet Joseph and many others were ordained before the foundations of the world were laid to come forth and accomplish the labor and the work that they did. There is no room for doubt in regard to the truth of this statement that is so frequently made. In the early boyhood of the Prophet Joseph was moved upon in a mysterious manner to seek unto God. By the exercise of a faith that was uncommon . . . unknown upon the earth, he was able to receive the ministrations of God the Father and of His Son Jesus Christ, thus showing in the very beginning of his career that he was a man or a spirit that was highly favored of God—a man to whom God desired to give particular manifestations of His kindness and goodness and power, and this was followed up from that time until his death by continued manifestations of the favor and the will and the power of God unto him.

A fact to remember. But it is a remarkable fact, and I wish to impress it, I think it is worthy of remembrance by all of us that notwithstanding the Prophet Joseph had all these manifestations and was a Prophet and Seer and a Revelator, he never attempted—notwithstanding the ideas that were so prevalent among mankind, and especially in the region where he lived and where he received his education—to officiate in any of the ordinances of the house of God or of the Gospel of salvation until he received the everlasting Priesthood. When that was bestowed upon him, when he received the Priesthood after the order of Aaron and was ordained by the angel who alone held the keys, who was a literal descendant of Aaron and by virtue of that descent entitled to the keys of that Priesthood, having exercised the authority thereof while in the flesh, then and not till then did he administer the ordinance of baptism for the remission of sins.

Then he refrained from acting in ordinances belonging to the Melchizedek Priesthood, that higher Priesthood by the authority of which the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost is administered unto the children of men. Having authority to baptize in water given unto him, he did not go any farther until the Lord in His kindness and mercy bestowed upon him, through the administration of the Apostles who held the keys till the death of our Savior, the authority to administer in those higher ordinances and to exercise the power and authority of this higher Priesthood.

This illustrates most perfectly how careful men ought to be in acting in the name of God not to overstep the bounds of the authority conferred upon them but to carefully keep within those limits that are assigned to them in which to exercise authority. It is a lesson unto us as a people. We should be particular ourselves and should impress every man with the great care that he should exercise to confine his acts to the authority which he has received from the Almighty. . . .

Priesthood withdrawn from earth. We are building temples at the present time in which we have ordinances administered unto us for those who have died. Why is this necessary? It is because the Priesthood of the Son of God was withdrawn for a long period of time from the earth. The children of men have been born; they have lived; they have died without any of the ordinances being administered unto them by those who held the Priesthood of the Son of God.

It is true that many sought after God in a certain manner and according to the light they had, and many obtained some degree of knowledge concerning God. Some of them had a testimony of Him through their faith and died at peace with God. Many of our ancestors lived in this condition, and God bore witness to them by His Holy Spirit that He was pleased with them. But what of that? Is that all that is necessary to place them in a saved condition? By no means. Something more than that is necessary to obtain for them the full remission of their sins and to place them in a condition where they can be saved and exalted in God's presence.

Reformers lacked Priesthood. Something more was necessary for Joseph than that he was a Revelator, a Seer and a Prophet to constitute him a servant of God empowered to administer the ordinances of life and salvation. A Wesley, a Luther, a Calvin, a Wycliffe and a host of others who have arisen in the world, imbued with the highest and purest motives and the highest and most intense desires for the salvation of their fellow men, have labored zealously to turn men to God and to bring them to a knowledge of the Savior; but they have not had the authority of the Holy Priesthood.

They themselves could not usher people into the Church of God. They could not legitimately administer an ordinance pertaining to the salvation of the human family. Yet, God, in many instances, accepted of them where they sought unto Him according to the best light they possessed; He accepted of them and their labors, and He witnessed unto them, by the outpouring of His Spirit upon them, that He was pleased with them and He whispered peace to their souls.

Many favored people in all nations. In every land, in every nation and among the people of every creed, men and women of this kind have been found, and according to their faith and diligence their works have been acceptable to our Father. Men have thought that the Christian lands and the Christian people, so called, have been the most favored of God in this respect. No doubt they have because they have had knowledge concerning the Savior that other lands and other peoples have not had; but in pagan lands, in lands where the name of Jesus has never been heard, men have sought after God and endeavored to live according to the light that He has given unto them and the Spirit that He has bestowed upon them and which He bestows upon every man and woman born into the world. He has accepted of them, and in the day of the Lord Jesus, the heathen will have part in the first resurrection.

Necessity for temples. Our ancestors have, in common with others, been destitute of the power and the authority of the Holy Priesthood. Hence, we build temples; hence, we go into these temples and attend to the ordinances of life and salvation for our kindred who have died in ignorance of this power or were in a position where they could not have it exercised in their behalf. They could not be baptized for the remission of their sins; they could not have hands laid upon them for the reception of the Holy Ghost; they could not have any other ordinance administered unto them because the authority to administer was not upon the earth, and whatever might be done in the name of God or in the name of Jesus by those who thought they had the authority or who assumed to possess it was of no avail so far as salvation was concerned; so far as acceptance by the Lord our God is concerned it was as though nothing had been done.

Hence it is that in these last days, God having in His great kindness and mercy opened the heavens once more and sent from heaven that authority which has so long been withdrawn, God having done this, we are put in the possession of the authority to administer to each other the ordinances of life and salvation and not only to administer to each other but to exercise that authority in behalf of those who have lived before us, lived in ages that are past, so that we can connect generation unto generation until we reach back to the time when our ancestors did hold the Holy Priesthood.

In this manner the work of salvation will progress until throughout the Millennium temples will be built and the servants and handmaidens of God will go into these temples and officiate until all who have been born upon the face of the earth who have not become sons of perdition will be redeemed and the entire family be re-united, Adam standing at the head. . . .

Importance of knowing line of authority. I believe the time will come when it will be necessary for every man to trace the line in which he has received the Priesthood that he exercises. It is therefore of great importance in our Church that records should be kept and that every man should know whence he derives his authority—from what source, through what channel he has received the Holy Priesthood and by what right he exercises that authority and administers the ordinances thereof. I believe this is of extreme importance and that where there are doubts as to a man's legitimately exercising that authority, that doubt should be removed.

Every man should be careful on this point to know where he gets his Priesthood, that it has come to him clean and undefiled, legitimately; and when men are cut off from that Priesthood by the voice of the Servants of God, there is an authority on the earth which God recognizes in the heavens and that man is cut off from the Priesthood. He said in ancient days in speaking to His Apostles: "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained." (John 20:23.) "Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven." (Matthew 16:19.)

In these last days God has, in like manner, restored this same authority of the Holy Priesthood. He has restored to man the power to bind on earth and it shall be bound in heaven. . . .

Priesthood acts binding. That which is done in the name of the Holy Priesthood will stand and will be fulfilled both in the world and out of the world, both in time and in eternity. Hence it is that when an Elder goes forth in the authority of the Holy Priesthood and baptizes a candidate who has repented of his sins, God confirms that ordinance; God remits the sins of that individual; God by bestowing His Holy Spirit witnesses unto that soul that his sins or her sins are remitted.

In like manner when an Elder lays his hands upon the head of a man or a woman who has been thus baptized and says unto that individual, "receive ye the Holy Ghost," God in heaven, bound by the oath and the covenant that He has made, bound by all the conditions that pertain to the everlasting Priesthood, will cause the Holy Ghost to descend upon that soul, and he or she will be filled therewith. He receives the baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, and it stands on the earth, and it stands in heaven recorded in favor of that soul if he continues to observe the conditions under which that baptism and confirmation are administered. There is no human power that can deprive that individual of the fruits of that blessing which has been thus sealed upon him by authority of the Holy Priesthood.

So with other ordinances. When men go forward and attend to other ordinances such as receiving their endowments, their washings, their anointings, receiving the promises connected therewith, these promises will be fulfilled to the very letter in time and in eternity—that is, if they themselves are true to the conditions upon which the blessings are promised.

And so it is when persons go to the altar and are married for time and eternity. When the man who officiates says: "I seal upon you the power to come forth in the morning of the first resurrection, crowned with glory, immortality and eternal lives," just as sure as that promise is made and the persons united (to whom the promise is made) conform with the conditions thereof, just so sure will it be fulfilled. There is no power anywhere in existence that can invalidate the force, the efficacy or that can prevent the fulfillment of that promise when it is pronounced upon a man and woman by the authority of the Holy Priesthood—that is, there is no power but that which they themselves can exercise. (Oct. 18, 1884, JD 26:243-49)

Necessity of honoring Priesthood. God has shown that however weak and imperfect a man may be, if he will seek to magnify that Priesthood, God will honor and sustain him. This the whole history of the Church has proved, and its truth has been illustrated by innumerable cases; while on the other hand, innumerable instances are found in the history of the Church where men have lost the Spirit of God and gone into darkness through treating the Priesthood of God with contempt.

In the early days of the Church the Prophet Joseph gave it as a certain sign that could be depended upon, that whenever men were found finding fault with and murmuring against the bearers of the Priesthood, especially those whom God had chosen to lead His people, apostasy would inevitably follow if not speedily repented of. The indulgence in such a spirit is most dangerous and has been attended up to the present time and will be attended hereafter with fatal consequences to the faith of those who indulge in it.

Men have said concerning servants of God: "Oh! These men are but mortal; they are very fallible, and they are as liable to do wrong as anybody else." This may be true. At the same time God does not sustain those who imagine they have a right to criticize, find fault with or in this manner condemn His servants. They are weak and fallible; but they bear the Priesthood. The Priesthood cannot be separated from the men; and in attacking the men it is evident from the results which have followed such a course that the Lord views such attacks as being made upon His authority. . . .

If Satan can only destroy the confidence of the Latter-day Saints in the Priesthood which God has bestowed, his end is accomplished, for it is against the Priesthood that he has made unceasing warfare. Much blood has been shed under his instigation for the purpose of destroying the authority by which the Church of Christ is established and the great works of God are accomplished.

The Latter-day Saints should reflect upon this. If we believe that our Father in heaven has visited the earth to open this dispensation and has sent angelic messengers to bestow the Priesthood upon men, can we suppose that He will not see that that Priesthood is not misused and that the men who bear it do not use it for wrong purposes? To have any other idea than this is to suppose that the Lord has either gone to sleep or taken a journey or has lost His interest in the great work which He has founded.

The revelations of the Lord through the Prophet Joseph plainly intimated to him and to the Church that if he did not do right he would be removed. President Young often told the people that the Lord would not permit him to lead the people astray. Presidents Taylor and Woodruff have made the same statement. And that which is true concerning the men who hold the keys is true in relation to the other officers of the Church.

The Lord will take care of His people, and He will not suffer His work to be thwarted. When men standing in high places do wrong, He will deal with them. He will not suffer them to persist for any length of time in wrong-doing, withdrawing His Spirit and His power from them and removing them out of their places. He has done this in the past; He will continue to do it in the future, until the Lord himself shall come to preside over His people. (Feb. 15, 1896, JI 31:101-2)

Endowments too easily obtained. I believe that our endowments are too easily obtained. Men and women go to the temples who do not understand the value of the precious blessings that are bestowed upon them, and I have felt for years that something should be done to change this so that instead of it being necessary for a man to receive the Melchizedek Priesthood, he will first manifest his efficiency in the Aaronic Priesthood and show his capabilities and good desires before receiving the higher Priesthood. I firmly believe that this will be so some time and that men will not get the fullness of the endowment with the ease that they have done but will receive that part which belongs to the Aaronic Priesthood. These blessings become so common that many people do not value them or know how to use them.

When the Prophet Joseph first communicated that the Lord had revealed to him the keys of the endowment, I can remember the great desire there was on every hand to understand something about them. When the Prophet would speak about his desire to complete the temple in order that he might impart unto his fellow servants that which God had delivered to him, a thrill went through the congregation and a great desire for this filled their hearts. . . .

Then, when he did communicate the endowments to a few persons before the temple was completed, the whole people were moved with desire to complete the temple in order that they might receive these great blessings therein. They were valued beyond price. A man that could go in and get his endowments was looked upon as though he had received some extraordinary blessing—something akin to that which the angels received—and it was estimated and valued in that way.

How is it now? There is a complete indifference, it may be said, in relation to it. Young people go there stupid, with no particular desire only to get married, without realizing the character of the obligations that they take upon themselves or the covenants that they make and the promises involved in the taking of these covenants. The result is, hundreds among us go to the house of the Lord and receive these blessings and come away without having any particular impression made upon them.

I think that this is deplorable. When men have gifts and blessings bestowed upon them and they do not value them, they become a cause of condemnation rather than blessing. It seems to me that there should be exceeding great care taken in this respect. I would rather—though I would not like it—a son of mine be married by a Bishop than to have him go to the temple in an unfit condition and receive these blessings. It would be far better for him.

Priesthood not fully appreciated. This Priesthood that the Lord has restored is a far more important thing than even the most advanced of us can appreciate at the present time. We who bear this Priesthood act in God's stead in the midst of the people; we are the representatives of God—the ambassadors, so to speak, of the Savior, who has given us this Priesthood; and the duties of this calling are most important because they affect the salvation of the children of men. (Jan. 14, 1894, DW 48:349-50)

I say, every man, not any one class of men but every man bearing the Priesthood of the Son of God in this Church, should feel that there is a responsibility resting upon him and that perchance if he be not careful he may wake up in eternity and find himself under serious condemnation for having neglected to do his duty to his fellowman and to magnify the holy Priesthood that God has placed upon him. (Sept. 2, 1889, DW 39:461)

Failure to magnify Priesthood brings damnation. We must honor the Priesthood we hold or that Priesthood, instead of exalting us, will be the means of damning us; instead of exalting us at the right hand of God, for which it was given, it will drag us down to a depth of misery and woe such as we never would have reached if we had not received it and failed to honor it. It is a fearful thing to receive the Priesthood of God and not magnify it, and the man who receives it should not do so to gratify some feeling he may have that he would like to hold authority that would give him some dignity or place him in a position above others of his brethren and sisters but with the consciousness that if he does not bear off the responsibilities which are involved in receiving it, it will lead him down to the depths of misery and anguish. (Aug. 10, 1862, MS 24:548)

More than ordination necessary. If men or women become members of the Church and receive the Holy Ghost, their work does not end there; it has hardly begun. They have taken merely the first steps and have scarcely passed the threshold, and before them is stretched out a field of labor of unlimited extent. If men have been ordained, the mere ordination does not bestow upon them all the knowledge and power they need, only as they live for it, constantly striving to obtain it by the cultivation of that which they already have in their possession.

It is folly for any man to think that the Priesthood will be a source of advantage or honor to him or that it will increase his knowledge or his influence, if he himself does not apply himself to the labor by diligently seeking for these blessings by faith and works. So with members. If they do not cultivate the Holy Spirit, it will not increase in them; neither will the gifts and blessings of the Gospel increase within them. (Aug. 24, 1861, MS 23:538)

Faithfulness rather than position brings exaltation. There is no Elder, Priest, Teacher or Deacon that can increase in the power of God and the faith of the Lord Jesus Christ unless he magnifies his Priesthood and honors that which God has bestowed upon him; and the Deacon who is faithful in his calling and honors his Priesthood is far more acceptable in the sight of God than the Elder, High Priest, Seventy, or even Apostle who does not magnify his Priesthood, and he will receive an exaltation which they will not receive, for they have failed to honor the covenants they have made with God. . . .

The works of an humble, faithful brother or sister are more pleasing in the sight of God than those of the smart people, who are at one time faithful and full of great zeal and in a short period become dilatory, careless and measurably forget God and His works. . . . There are Elders who are faithful men . . . and who have always done everything that was required of them, attended to every duty placed upon them, yet they have been humble and have attracted very little attention, while other men have made a great stir and have been conspicuous among the people whose course has not been so upright. Is there any doubt as to which of these two classes is the more acceptable in the sight of God?

The man or woman who has been faithful before the Lord, I care not who they may be nor what their Priesthood may be, they may have little or no Priesthood, but the prospects of that individual are brighter before the Lord than those of the person who does not live up to the light which God has communicated unto him. I would like to have this thought fasten itself deeply in the minds of the Saints that God will reward every man and woman according to their works. If they are faithful, they will be exalted, and, I care not what their position may be nor what Priesthood they may have, if they are unfaithful, they will receive no reward. (Aug. 10, 1862, MS 24:547)

Be content to serve anywhere. If there be one duty of more imperative importance than another which the Elders of Israel should learn, it is that they should be at all times perfectly content to fill any calling and labor in any capacity that the Lord through His servants may designate. . . .

The only principle upon which position should be sought and held by the servants of God is that they might thereby be more useful—that the field of their usefulness might be enlarged. No man should seek to hold a position to gratify a vain ambition to excel. And whatever the position that may be assigned him, he should therewith be content. If an Elder's happiness be affected by the prominence or obscurity of his station, it is an evidence that he is dependent upon something beside the Spirit of God for happiness; if he be appointed to labor in a humble position by those who have the authority and he strives to fill that appointment honorably, he will be happy—his happiness will be perfect; his joy will be full; should his station be ever so exalted, he could be no more than this. . . .

It is not in occupying this or the other honorable and prominent station that the Elders should find gratification alone (though, of course, it is gratifying to them to know that they have the confidence of the Lord and their brethren); it is in knowing, whatever their station or calling may be, that they are in the position which the Lord, through His servants, wishes them to occupy and that they have His approval and His sweet and precious Spirit imparting unto them happiness and peace.

An Apostle, however eminently gifted, can act without the least loss of dignity or without derogating in the least from his high office in any position or calling connected with the salvation of the children of men or the building up of God's Kingdom upon the earth. And though others of more limited experience and holding only a portion of the Priesthood held by him may, while he is thus acting, be acting in more prominent positions, yet it does not in reality detract an iota from his dignity, his usefulness or the reward which, if faithful, is promised to him. If this is true respecting an Apostle, it is true respecting a High Priest, a member of the Seventies, an Elder or any of the bearers of the Priesthood. (Aug. 23, 1862, MS 24:536-38)

Church leaders need business qualifications. Now, it is doubtless a fact that in selecting men to hold ecclesiastical positions some attention is paid to their energy and business qualifications. The Latter-day Saints need men who are capable of managing affairs and sustaining themselves creditably to be their guides and to take the lead in temporal things, as many Bishops have to do. It would not be wise to disregard business qualifications, when coupled with other characteristics that are suitable, in choosing a man to hold as important an office as that of a Bishop or President of Stake. But it certainly would not be proper to select men for their business qualifications or their money-making faculty alone. Such men would prove failures as leaders of the people in the things of God. And the history of our people proves that men have not been selected for position because of these qualities alone. . . .

Business capacity, talent for management and skill in the accumulation of property are gifts not to be despised; and when a public man possesses them and has, in addition, a love for the truth and a determination to serve God and keep His commandments and deal justly with his neighbor, they certainly are no disadvantage whether possessed by an Apostle, a President of Stake, a Bishop or any other officer in the Church but are decidedly an advantage to him and to the community over which he is called to preside. (Mar. 15, 1887, JI 22:50-51)

Promises to those who magnify Priesthood. To the Latter-day Saints this Gospel and this Priesthood come on the one hand accompanied by great blessings and promises and great power and exaltation, and on the other hand they come accompanied by dreadful penalties, by degradation and condemnation greater than it would be possible for any being to reach unless he had had the opportunities which the Gospel and the Priesthood bring and afford. . . .

We are promised in the plainest of all language that those who receive this Priesthood receive the Lord. . . . They are to receive the Father's Kingdom, and if they receive the Father's Kingdom, they are to receive all that the Father hath for all that he hath will be given unto them.

Can you conceive of this? Can any human being conceive of the immeasurable extent of the glory here promised—the immeasurable extent of exaltation here offered unto all those who receive the Priesthood of the Son of God and who magnify it? It is impossible for mortal man to have the least conception even when his mind is enlightened by the Spirit of God—that is, the least conception compared with the immeasurable extent of the glory that is here promised. We can have some conception of it; we can have some foretaste of it when we receive the Spirit of God, when it rests down upon us in power; but to conceive of the fullness of this glory is impossible for any being in this mortal condition of existence. . . .

Higher Priesthood necessary for exaltation. Now, this Priesthood which God has restored in these last days through Peter, James and John is the Priesthood that continueth in the Church of God in all generations. The Church of God cannot be without it; for without it the power of Godliness is not made manifest to man in the flesh. A people can progress to a certain extent with the Aaronic Priesthood, but there is a limit to their progress. There are bounds beyond which they cannot pass. They cannot attain to the fullness of the glory of God the Eternal Father without the presence of the Melchizedek Priesthood. . . .

Without this Priesthood, without its ordinances, without its powers, without its gifts, "no man can see the face of God, even the Father, and live." (D&C 84:22.) Therefore, it is essential that if a people should be exalted unto the presence of God, they should have this Melchizedek or greater Priesthood and the ordinances thereof, by the means of which they are to be prepared or they shall be prepared to enter into the presence of God the Father and endure His presence. . . .

Priesthood must be obeyed for fullness of glory. God designs to have us led in that path which will bring us into His presence. He designs that this whole people called Latter-day Saints shall have the laws of His Celestial Kingdom revealed unto them line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, until they are brought into His presence, until every man and woman and child who belongs to this Church shall be able to endure the presence of God and live, until by means of this Priesthood, this higher Priesthood, every man will be prepared to receive the fullness of the celestial glory and this by obedience to law, not by hardness of heart, not by rebellion, not by rejecting the counsel of God through His servants, not by taking our own way. . . .

These Latter-day Saints must obey the Priesthood of the Son of God and be led by it in all things, or they never will enter into the presence of God our Eternal Father, never, worlds without end. God has placed this Priesthood in the Church for the express purpose of leading His people forward, just as Moses endeavored to lead the children of Israel forward by giving unto them His law, by revealing unto them His will, by instructing them in the things of righteousness and leading them forward until they should attain unto the fullness of His glory. (Aug. 31, 1884, JD 25:290-94)

Necessity of faith in authorities. A faithful Latter-day Saint may not be able to understand all the movements of the Church nor all the motives of the authorities of the Church in giving counsel or in taking action upon different questions; but will a man of this character censure them, assail them or condemn them? Certainly not. He will be likely to say: "I do not understand the reasons for this action; I do not see clearly what the presiding authorities have in view in doing this; but I will wait and learn more. This I do know, that this is the work of God and that these men are His servants and that they will not be permitted by Him to lead the Church astray or to commit any wrong of so serious a character as to endanger its progress or perpetuity." This would undoubtedly be the feeling of a man living close to the Lord, because the testimony of God's Spirit would bring this to His mind and make him feel sure that God had not forgotten nor forsaken His Church. (Oct. 15, 1896, JI 31:618)

God blesses those who magnify calling. He is ready to bless every man in His Church who will magnify His office and calling. He is ready to bestow the gifts and qualifications of that office upon every man according to his diligence and faithfulness before Him. But the idle man, the slothful man, the man that shirks his responsibility, the man that avoids duty . . . every man that does this God will take from him His gifts and His blessings; He will withdraw them and give them to the faithful one. He will clothe His faithful servants with the power that belongs to the Priesthood in proportion to the diligence and faithfulness in seeking to magnify their calling and to live near unto their God. Mark this and let it bear with weight upon your mind for I tell you it is so.

You may ordain a man to be an Apostle, but if he does not seek to magnify that office and Priesthood, the gifts of it will not be with him as they would be with a man who does seek to magnify his calling; no matter how great his ability, the power of God will not accompany him unless he seeks for it for God will be sought after, and God will be pled with for His gifts and graces and for revelation and knowledge; He will be sought after by His children, and then when He is sought after, He will bestow. (Dec. 14, 1884, JD 26:62)

The Priesthood will never mislead people. Why we had better distrust the solid earth itself on which we stand and think it trembling and unreliable than to think that the Priesthood cannot be relied upon—that Priesthood which God Himself, accompanied by His Son Jesus, came to earth to prepare the way for its restoration. I would just as soon think of the starry heavens falling into chaos; I would just as soon think that the throne of our Father in heaven was in danger of being shaken to its foundations as I would think that the Priesthood of God . . . would be permitted by the Lord to mislead this people. Never! Never!

The Father did not come down from heaven Himself, accompanied by His Son Jesus, for any such purpose as this. The Lord did not pour out His Spirit as He has done upon the honest in heart wherever the Elders have gone to leave his work alone, to be mismanaged and the people to be led astray. The Lord has not led us to these mountains and blessed us as He has done for this purpose. No, no!

Though impenetrable darkness should surround us, we ought, as a people and as individuals, to cling to that truth which the Lord has revealed concerning this work; cling to the Priesthood; cling to the "rod of iron," which is the word of God, and the word of God comes through the Priesthood. Let each one say, "I will serve God no matter what happens; I will cling to His Priesthood, which God has put in His Church to govern it, no matter what the consequences may be." That is the integrity we should cherish and which we should teach to our children. Unless we do, we will never accomplish that which God designs for us. . . .

Those who oppose Priesthood to be cursed. It is a serious thing to fight against the Priesthood of the Son of God, no matter who holds it. The men who do bear it are fallible men and when they bear it properly, are conscious of their own weaknesses and infirmities. They feel not only as if they were utterly unworthy of the authority the Lord has placed upon them but incapable of exercising it. But they have been chosen by the Lord, and He will sustain them and bear them off triumphant always, as He has done thus far. And no man can lift his heel against the Priesthood of the Son of God without the curse of Almighty God coming upon him, unless he repents. . . .

It is a dreadful sin to fight against or in any manner oppose the Priesthood of the Son of God, and everyone of us should repent of such opposition with all our hearts. . . . When men have attempted to exercise the authority of the Priesthood in an improper manner, the Lord has withdrawn His Spirit from them. . . . He will have a pure people, who will be led by His servants. When a man ceases to be a true servant of the Lord, the Lord withdraws His Spirit from him, and leaves him to himself. Happy would that man be if he should die before he did this. (Apr. 5, 1897, DW 54:674)

Proper method for ordaining. We have been asked by several different persons whether, in ordaining a brother, it is right to confer the Priesthood first and then ordain him to the particular office to which he is called or to directly ordain him to that office in the Priesthood. That is, in ordaining a man an Elder, should the one officiating say: "I confer upon you the Melchizedek Priesthood and ordain you an Elder, or, I ordain you an Elder in the Melchizedek Priesthood, or whatever the office conferred may be?"

So far as we know, the Lord has revealed no particular form or words to be used in the ceremony of ordination to the Priesthood as He has done in the rite of baptism, neither has He given any direct instructions on the point presented by the enquirers. Certain it is that both forms have been and are being used by those officiating, and it is equally certain that the Lord recognizes and honors those ordained in either way. Consequently, we are of the opinion that both are acceptable to Him and will be until it pleases Him to give the Church further light on the subject, either by direct revelation or by inspiring His servants of the First Presidency of the Church to direct exactly what shall be said. [^1] (Feb. 15, 1894, JI 29:114)

A stream cannot rise higher than its fountain. The question is asked if there are any cases on record in the Church where men holding a lesser degree or office in the Priesthood are authorized under any circumstances to ordain to the greater offices in the Priesthood and it be lawful and right.

There is no record or book or history which authorizes or justifies such action. A stream cannot rise higher than its fountain. In the affairs of the Kingdom of God a man cannot bestow that which he has not received. This is illustrated in the history of all religious movements since the days when the true Priesthood was taken from the earth. Men have endeavored to ordain their fellowmen to an authority which they themselves did not hold. The result has been failure. God does not acknowledge the bestowal of any authority which He does not authorize; and before a man can legally in the sight of heaven ordain his fellowman to an office, he must have the authority himself from God. In other words, he himself must have been ordained to that office of the Priesthood which he attempts to bestow. (Jan. 1, 1891, JI 26:13)

The power in ordination. Some brethren are appointed to preside over missions, and very likely they feel entirely inadequate to the labor; the duties seem far beyond their ability to perform; but they are set apart for that calling by the servants of God, and they go forth trusting in the Lord. Does any one know of an instance where a faithful man thus appointed ever found himself lacking in the performance of his duties? No; I am sure the universal testimony would be that every man thus appointed and set apart has been made capable of filling his office and calling to the acceptance of the Lord, to the satisfaction of his brethren and to his own happiness. . . .

We see the same effect at home. Let a man be ordained to the office of a Bishop or a Bishop's counselor or a High Councilor and in every instance, if he be a faithful man, the spirit, power and gifts of his office will rest upon him. He will be filled with the same spirit which inspires the Prophet of God and those associated with him.

So with an Apostle. Let the Lord select a man out of the body of the people and make him an Apostle and what a change takes place. The spirit of the Apostleship rests upon him; the gifts of that Priesthood and calling descend upon him, and he becomes a changed man in consequence of the bestowal of those powers upon him. He receives authority; he enjoys the spirit of revelation; he is upheld by the people as a Prophet, Seer and Revelator. If he be a faithful man, he receives the gift and power of a Prophet and a Revelator and perhaps of a Seer. These are his rights because he has been ordained to that office; and God has promised that if men will serve and obey Him in all things, He will give them the necessary power and gifts. (DEN, July 14, 1900)

Power attends actions of conferences. It is always an impressive sight to me to see a congregation numbering so many people as this does raise their hands before the Lord to sustain the names of men who are presented to them as holding office in the Church; and though we do this semiannually, in our general conferences for the General Authorities and quarterly, that is, four times a year for the local authorities, it should not be in our feelings nor in our practice the performance of an empty form but should be done in a spirit that will be acceptable unto our Father and in consonance with the responsibility that devolves upon the men whom we sustain. For when we thus sustain these men, it means more than the mere lifting of our hands or at least should do so.

It means the sustaining of these men by our faith and by our prayers and so far as works are required, by our works; and when we thus vote and thus act, there is a power and an influence accompanying such action . . . that are felt by those in whose favor we vote; they feel strengthened, and God our Eternal Father seals His blessing or causes it to descend upon those who are voted for, and there is a spirit that rests down upon them from that time forward, so long as they are faithful and are thus sustained, that manifests itself unto all with whom they are brought in contact. . . .

God confirms authority of those sustained. Men may sneer at the Latter day Saints and say this is but an empty form and that it is all pre-arranged. Men may say what they please about this. It is pre-arranged according to the Spirit and mind of God, so far as that can be ascertained. When men are chosen for office, the Spirit of God is sought for by those who have the right to select, and if there be doubt upon certain points, men are not chosen; but when they are chosen and the mind of the Lord is sought for to know whether it will be agreeable to Him that they receive this office or that they should act in those positions, and when they are thus selected and thus submitted . . . to the Conference, then if they themselves live so as to have the Spirit of God with them, they will be clothed with it, and when they seek to magnify their office, God will magnify them before the people and will show them and the people that they are indeed His chosen servants and that their ministrations are acceptable unto Him, that He confirms them by the outpouring of His Spirit and the bestowal of His gifts. . . .

The Spirit and power of God will rest upon a man if he listens to it. It will impel him to action. If he cherishes it, it will be his constant companion. It will be with him in times when he will need it, and when he does need it, if he magnifies his calling, the Spirit and power of the Almighty—that spirit and power and those gifts which belong to his particular office—will rest upon him, and he will be made equal to every emergency, to every trial and will come off victorious. (Dec. 14, 1884, JD 26:55-59)

Does the corruption of a church officer invalidate his acts? A man holding the Priesthood and in good standing in the Church may nevertheless be a sinner and a violator of the laws of God. There have been such cases in the Church; yet, while they held the Priesthood and performed acts such as the ordination of men under proper circumstances, those ordinations have not been void. A man properly ordained by another who is in this condition would receive the Priesthood conferred upon him, although it might be subsequently discovered that he who did the ordaining was in transgression at the time. That would not invalidate that ordination, neither would it be necessary for the person thus ordained to be ordained a second time.

To deprive a man legally of his Priesthood, there must be action on the part of proper authority. There have been Apostles who have fallen into sin, but they held their Apostleship until they were legally deprived of it by action of their own council or the action of the Church. When they were excommunicated by the Council, they lost all the authority which had been conferred upon them; and so also, when excommunicated by the Church, they lost the fellowship of the Saints and all the promises which had been made unto them as members of the Church. (Dec. 15, 1891, JI 26:768-69)

Excommunication takes away Priesthood. When a person has been legally cut-off from the Church of Christ, all the rights and privileges and authority which that person may have enjoyed as a Saint or servant of God are forfeited, and he or she becomes, to all intents and purposes, an alien to the covenant. On this point there can be no doubt.

There may be extenuating circumstances in some cases which, in the sight of the Lord, may have a tendency to lighten the condemnation which follows such action, for where persons know but little and their ignorance is not their own fault, the Lord may view them with pity and mercy, as He has said that "unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required;" "but he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes" (Luke 12:48); yet, when proper action has been taken with a member of the Church and he is excommunicated, whether he knows much or little matters not; he is deprived of every claim to blessings which, by virtue of his being a recognized member of God's Church, he may have enjoyed.

If he should afterwards repent and come forward confessing his sins and desiring to be baptized, the ordinance of baptism, when administered properly, will be administered to him as though he were being baptized for the first time and so also with the ordinance of laying-on-of-hands; the Elder will not say "I re-baptize thee," or "I re-confirm thee;" but, "I baptize thee," etc., or "I confirm thee," etc.

If a person were renewing his covenant, as the Church was required to do at the time of the reformation in the years 1856-7, then re-baptism and reconfirmation would be proper, and all the blessings and promises and authority which such a person held at the time of his re-baptism would with propriety be sealed upon him again. Not so, however, with a man who has held the Priesthood and been cut-off from the Church; he cannot claim the Priesthood by right of having once held it; he is as a new member and should receive authority of Priesthood as he received it the first time—if he received it properly then—that is, through the spirit of revelation in the man or men who have the authority to call him to bear the Priesthood and to bestow it upon him. . . .

Suspension of Priesthood authority. While upon this subject we will allude to another misconception which is entertained by some who hold the Priesthood. It is that when a man has had the Priesthood bestowed upon him he cannot be suspended therefrom while he remains in the Church. The view of such persons seems to be that the presiding Priesthood can ordain and bestow authority but cannot recall or suspend that authority without excommunicating the man who holds it. . . . The power which bestows authority can, if authority be misused or not properly magnified, withdraw or suspend it; and it does not necessarily follow that because a man is suspended from acting in some office in the Priesthood, he is therefore cut-off from the Church or deprived of any of the privileges of membership. (Nov. 7, 1863, MS 25:713-14)

Youth in the deacon's office. "Why do we ordain boys twelve or fourteen years old to the office of Deacon, when Paul says . . . 'Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife'?" (1 Timothy 3:12.)

Paul in referring to the branches of the Church as then organized had in mind adults who had been ordained. Probably, in those branches the most of the members, if not all, were newly converted; none had been born in the Church who were at that time old enough to hold the Priesthood. With our Elders even in these days it is a very uncommon thing to ordain, while out in the world, very young men to any office. Mature men are frequently ordained as Deacons and act as such.

The circumstances which surround us here in Zion are entirely different from those which surrounded the Saints in the days of Paul and of which he wrote. There is no impropriety whatever in young men, even as early as at the age of twelve or fourteen years, acting as Deacons. They receive a training that is very valuable to them, and we know of many who have been and are greatly benefited by acting in this position, meeting with the Deacons' quorum and receiving such instructions as are proper to be imparted to them in this capacity. The cases to which Paul refers, therefore, and those that exist in Zion are not at all parallel.

All who have had experience among the young Deacons of the Church are doubtless convinced of the propriety of ordaining our boys early, if worthy, that they may become thoroughly familiar one by one with the duties of the various offices and grades of the Priesthood. (Jan. 15, 1899, JI 34:48-49)

High priests must be ordained. It is true that "the office of an Elder comes under the Priesthood of Melchizedek," and "an Elder has a right to officiate in his (High Priest's) stead, when the High Priest is not present." (D&C 107:7, 11.) But "the offices of Elder and Bishop are necessary appendages belonging unto the High Priesthood," just as "the offices of Teacher and Deacons are necessary appendages belonging to the Lesser Priesthood." (D&C 84:29-30.) "Wherefore from Deacon to Teacher, and from Teacher to Priest, and from Priest to Elder, severally as they are appointed, according to the covenants and commandments of the Church. Then comes the High Priesthood, which is the greatest of all." . . . (D&C 107:63-64.)

An Elder is not a High Priest until he is ordained to the High Priesthood. He cannot legally act in that office by being merely set apart; he must be ordained, and the High Priesthood must be bestowed upon him. (Oct. 15, 1891, JI 26:622)

Priesthood is paramount. I cannot too strongly impress upon you the propriety of acting in harmony with those in authority in the Priesthood. Do not imagine that prominence in [any] organization gives you rights over the Priesthood. It does not. . . . The Priesthood is paramount always, under all circumstances; and we must honor it if we wish to be honored ourselves. (Nov. 13, 1900, JI 36:267)

Ward teaching an important calling. It is a very important calling and one that the Lord will hold those responsible for who receive it. . . . Now it is just as honorable in the sight of God and is as productive of reward to act as a teacher in a Ward as it is to go abroad and preach the Gospel. Your name may not be published in the papers; nevertheless, the Lord, who is the Rewarder of the children of men, will reward you if you labor wherever you are appointed, and do so faithfully.

You should not allow your manual labor to prevent you from doing your duty as teachers. . . . And let me say to the sisters, when the teachers come to your houses, gather your families together. If you know beforehand that they are coming, take pains to keep the children at home. Show the teachers proper respect when they come to visit you. The man of the house really surrenders, for the time being, his family into the hands of the teachers; and if the teachers are wise men, they leave the household in a far better condition than they found it because they will say words of encouragement and will teach the children; and the words of the teachers when added to the words of the parents will have great influence with the children.

Therefore, to have well governed households you must have teachers. And teachers should go filled with the Spirit of God. They may be able by the influence of that Spirit to say something that will arrest some young person in his career that is likely to lead to evil. Boys and girls may be out late; they may not regard the entreaties and counsels of their parents. Teachers could help create an influence with these children that would be of great assistance to the parents.

It is proper that parents should gather their families together when the teachers come. I make it a rule, as soon as I know the teachers are at my place and I am there, to gather all my family together, and I sit with them; and if the teachers do not ask questions that are searching enough to bring out what I want, I suggest to them certain lines of inquiry; for I want my children to be benefited by the visit of the teachers. I know it is of great good, and I am pleased always when they come to my house. I try and give them all the honor I can, and I thank them with a grateful heart for their visit because I know that they come at inconvenience to themselves very frequently.

I do not care how searching they are in their inquiries. Of course, I would not want them to ask impertinent or indelicate questions. No wise man will do that. But those questions that are necessary to find out my true condition I want them to ask; and I want them to ask each member of my family and search them and find out their true feelings. Teachers do come to my house and ask me as freely as they would a member of the Church that held no office. They ask me concerning my faith, whether I sustain the authorities of the Church, whether I believe President Woodruff is the man to lead the Church, what my feelings are concerning the principles of the Gospel, whether I attend to my family and secret prayers, whether I help the poor and pay my tithing and whether I attend meetings regularly. My teachers are encouraged by me to ask these questions of me and my family to find out our true condition; and if they see anything in us that is not right, they may check it and tell us.

This is the way teachers should do. If men will follow this up, they will get a spirit, a power, a light and a testimony from God that will be of immense advantage to them. I would like to see the teachers in all the stakes zealous. Wherever the teachers are active there is a good condition. In this way the teachers maintain the morale of the Ward; that is, they teach a standard of purity that everyone with right feeling will strive to attain to. (June 20, 1892, DW 45:259)

Ward teachers must live gospel. Experience has proved that no one can teach a principle with any success who does not practice it. . . . We hear of teachers in Wards who are called upon to visit the Saints who do not themselves perform the duties that as teachers they are required to enforce upon the attention of the families whom they visit.

It is said that there are brethren who act as ward teachers who do not pay their tithing. How any man in this condition can act conscientiously and sincerely as a teacher it is difficult to understand. One of the chief duties which devolves upon a teacher, in visiting the families of the Saints, is to inquire concerning the payment of tithing, fast offerings, etc. Now, how can any man discharge this duty in proper manner who himself neglects these requirements?

Can a man who is guilty of neglecting his prayers enforce upon families whom he may visit the importance of prayer and the benefits which flow from prayer? Can a man who is dishonest teach honesty? Can a man whose own life is that of a sinner teach others to be saints?

Everyone can answer these questions for himself. It is when men feel the importance of duties so strongly that they never fail to perform them that they are capable of teaching others their importance and of showing them the benefits which flow to those who observe them. (Feb. 1, 1898, JI 33:124-25)

Teachers to seek for spirit of revelation. Teachers, do you inquire where these girls and boys are at night? Do you inquire of the parents if the children keep good hours? Do you inquire if they are at parties at improper hours and with improper companions and improper surroundings? You should do this. It is well enough to inquire how they feel toward the Presidency of the Church or to the Twelve or to the Presidency of the Stake or to their brethren and sisters. But there are other questions which may be asked, and which are equally as important as these. And if you live as you should do, the Spirit of the Lord will suggest these to you when you enter into the house.

You can very properly inquire concerning the habits of the young people, and perhaps by doing so you may stop some soul from committing some more deadly sin and be the means of rescuing some young person, either girl or boy, from pursuing the downward path that leads to destruction. Teachers, therefore, should be exceedingly careful, when they enter the houses of the Saints, to endeavor to obtain the spirit of revelation that the Lord will suggest to them the very things to ask and to say. (May 19, 1889, DW 18:18-19)

Power of Priesthood in right hand. When one hand only is used, it should be the right, for in the right hand is the power of the Priesthood. You who have received your endowments will, doubtless, know this. Therefore, when you lay your hands upon the head of an individual—whether it is to heal the sick, to ordain to the Priesthood or to confirm upon him the Holy Ghost—let your right hand always be used; and when you administer with one hand alone, let it be with your right.

Again, when you lay your hands upon the heads of persons, for any purpose which I have mentioned, do so in the name of Jesus Christ and by the authority of the Priesthood which you have received. Do not be content with expressing your intention "to confirm" the individual or "rebuke disease" or "to ordain" to such and such office in the Priesthood; but say that you do confirm the individual a member in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, etc., and so, also, in regard to other ministrations. (Jan. 5, 1864, MS 26:210-11)

Words used in ordinances. Where the Lord has condescended to reveal the exact words to be used in the performance of any ordinance of the Church, these words should be used without change or deviation, but where the Lord has not done so, it is improper, not to say impious, for men to trench upon the authority of the Holy Ghost and undertake to write or dictate forms when the Lord Himself has not thought it well so to do. It is the privilege of every man who is called to officiate in the ordinances of the Church to enjoy a portion of the Spirit of the Lord. On that Spirit he should rely when called upon to administer as a servant of the Lord, and we look with great disfavor on the tendency shown by some to have set forms prepared and used whenever there is an ordinance to be performed. We regard it as a dangerous departure from the Lord's way, one that is likely to result in grievous errors.

If a man holding the holy Priesthood is called upon to officiate in any of the duties of his calling, he should be sure that he does that which he intends, and if the Lord has given no exact formula, let him trust to the Spirit of the Lord to fill his heart and inspire his tongue, and if he is doing his duty, he will not go far wrong. Our Heavenly Father will not hold him a transgressor for a slip of the tongue or a verbal inaccuracy caused by nervousness or misapprehension; on the other hand, every officer should do his very best when ministering in the things of God; carelessness or slovenliness in the handling of holy things or the performance of sacred rites is very displeasing to Him in whose name we are officiating. (Nov. 15, 1898, JI 33:764)

How to bless children. Of course, where children are of a sufficient age to sit up alone, it is proper for the Elders to lay their hands upon them. But it has been a practice where infants are blessed for the Elders to take them up in their arms and bless them without laying their hands upon their heads. There is a power and efficacy in the laying on of hands, and where it is convenient, it is well for the Elders, if there are more than one, to lay their hands lightly upon the infant's head. Where there is only one, it is not a difficult thing for a man to hold the child so that its head will rest in his hands. There has been no fixed rule upon this point, so far as we know; but it has been the practice among the Elders, where they could lay their hands upon the heads of the children in blessing them, to do so.

When children were brought unto the Lord Jesus, "he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them." (Mark 10:16.) It seems from this reading that He not only took them up in His arms, but He put His hands upon them. (May 1, 1891, JI 26:276)

Some advice regarding blessings. Every Elder who lays his hands upon a child to bless it should be careful that he is not led by fancy or by a desire to say some wonderful things instead of being prompted by the Spirit of the Lord. For when the Spirit of the Lord does not dictate, however many blessings an Elder may promise and fine things he may say, disappointment is sure to follow. The parents of the child have their expectations raised only to be dashed again to the earth. It is too often the case that in blessing children the Elders entertain the idea that they ought to pronounce upon its head every good thing they can think of. . . .

We would not have the Elders check the spirit of prophecy; but we would wish them to know that they have it and that whatever promises they may make are uttered by its promptings. A child may be blessed, and the power of God may be invoked in its behalf in a prayer offered up in the name of Jesus and in the spirit of faith, which shall be recorded on high, and yet heaven and earth not be ransacked for blessings to be pronounced upon its head.

Be the blessings ever so great and important that are placed upon the heads of children, it should ever be remembered that they are all conditional. Their fulfillment depends to a very great extent upon those who have the children in charge. If they train them up in the fear of the Lord, there is a far greater likelihood of their receiving and enjoying such blessings than if they had trained them up in a total disregard of His commandments and the truth. (Feb. 15, 1862, MS 24:106-7)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 365.)
