Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 20

The Apostleship—Prophets, Seers, and Revelators

Living Prophets rejected by world. The world entertain certain ideas concerning truth; they entertain certain ideas concerning God and concerning His servants, and when men come to them with something that conflicts with these ideas, they are led to reject them, and it is not until a man has died, not until in many instances his blood has been shed that he is recognized as a Prophet of God. . . . It takes time to bring men to esteem Prophets. It has taken centuries to sanctify the memory of the Son of God; centuries have rolled on before He was recognized by the world as the being whom his disciples testified He was. . . .

In the same way it will take time to make the merits of the predictions of Joseph Smith recognized. Will they be recognized? Yes. (June 12, 1881, JD 22:177-78)

The sin of this generation. This is the condemnation of our present generation. A great Prophet has arisen in their midst. They do not believe it. They do not believe that Joseph Smith was a prophet of God. They basely and cowardly slew him. Yet, he was a Prophet of God, just as much as Elijah or as Isaiah or as any of the ancient Prophets. . . .

This is the sin of this generation. This man came in their midst bringing to them gifts from God, bringing to them a message of love and salvation, and they cruelly and basely slew him in the most abominable manner. But like all the Prophets, his blood has not been avenged. . . . God will hold this generation to a strict accountability for these acts, just as sure as He did the generation who slew the Apostles and those who lived contemporaneous with the Apostles. (May 27, 1883, JD 24:139-40)

Never at any previous time in the world's history has a Prophet come forth having stronger evidence to support him in claiming to be a servant of God in possession of the Spirit of the Lord than has this Prophet (Joseph Smith). It was necessary that it should be so that this generation might be left without excuse. The work was to be a great and mighty one; and though in the commencement the means seemed inadequate to produce it, yet, like the tree grown from the mustard seed of which Jesus spoke, it is destined eventually to overshadow the earth and afford shelter to all who are willing to accept it. (Liahona 30:543)

Apostolic succession. The Scriptures plainly teach that the Apostleship was an office of the Priesthood as necessary to be filled as that of the Evangelist, Pastor or Teacher. . . . Paul, himself an Apostle, though not one of the Twelve, says, in his Epistle to the Ephesians, that these officers—Apostles, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers—were to be placed in the Church "for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. . . . " (Ephesians 4:12-13.) The Pastors and Teachers were not the only officers necessary in the Church to accomplish these desirable results—the Apostles and Prophets were also needed.

Paul, in another epistle, when writing to the Corinthians about the organization of the Church, says that God had set in the Church, "first apostles, secondarily prophets,"etc. (1 Corinthians 12:28.) These were the principal officers in the Church, the foundation, with Jesus Christ as the chief cornerstone, and the Church of Christ could not exist without them. If Paul, then, can be relied upon as a competent judge of the nature of the office of an Apostle, we may be assured that it is the nature of their office to have successors and that, inasmuch as mankind are not in the situation which they are to be brought into by the aid of Apostles, Prophets, Pastors and Teachers, they ought to be in the Church at the present and will have to be continued in the Church, or this happy state of things will never be brought about. . . .

Quorum to be perpetuated. We find that in ancient days when a vacancy occurred in the quorum of the Twelve Apostles selected by Jesus, the remainder of the Apostles chose one to fill his place as a witness of Jesus, and he was numbered with them. If it was not the nature of the office to have succession, why was Matthias chosen to fill the place of an apostate? Why did not the eleven act without attempting to fill the place of him who had forfeited his office?

If it were necessary that the eleven should ordain one, to make the number complete of those whom the Lord had chosen as His special witnesses, and they had the power to do so, if there had been eleven vacancies instead of one and but one man holding the Apostleship left, he also would have had the right, by parity of reasoning, to have ordained the eleven. The fact that one was ordained, however, is in itself a sufficient evidence that the nature of the office demanded succession and that so long as Christ's Church remained upon the earth, while there was a soul to be saved, a heathen to be converted, or a testimony to be borne to the world that Christ was the Son of the Eternal Father and had indeed risen and they were His witnesses, so long the Apostleship would be necessary. . . .

It is His will that Apostles should be in His Church whenever it is organized upon the earth; and it is through the want of them and their teachings that we now witness the disunion and strife so prevalent around us and, most of all, among the sects who profess to be His. It is for want of these officers that the inhabitants of the earth have not arrived at the unity of the faith, have not attained unto the knowledge of the Son of God and are tossed to and fro and carried about by every wind of doctrine, as they have been and are at the present time. (July 12, 1856, WS 160-62)

Prophets and Apostles necessary. If the Scriptures the Jews had and the Scriptures we at present have are examined, it will be found that there is a greater amount of evidence in our possession in favor of the idea of living oracles or Prophets and Apostles being raised up and inspired in these days than there was among the Jews in the days of the Apostles to support them in believing that they would make their appearance at that time. In fact the Scriptures cannot be fulfilled until these things take place. . . .

Since the creation of man and the first revelation of God's will unto him, we have no account of the Lord ever having a people upon the earth or a system which He recognized as being His without also having men of this description—men with whom He could communicate and through whom His mind and will could be made known to the people. They were the living oracles possessing living Priesthood through which they could obtain light and intelligence from the Almighty to expound with authority to the children of men; and their words, whether delivered orally or written, were equally binding upon the people with the words of any preceding servant of God. That this was the case all sacred history bears abundant evidence.

The necessity of inspired men, in order that the prophecies may be fulfilled, must be apparent. Man has always been the instrument which the Lord has used to accomplish His purposes. But apart from the prophecies which set forth in unmistakable language that the days of revelation and intercourse between the Deity and man will again be restored, there is an abundance of evidence to prove that there cannot be a Church of Christ on the earth without having Prophets and Apostles as its officers. . . .

Meaning of scriptures distorted. Men instead of making their belief conform to the Bible have endeavored to distort it and make it correspond with their ideas and systems; when the plainly written word would not admit of that, they have endeavored to hide their errors and the incorrectness of their position by stating that the Scriptures have a spiritual meaning, and they do not literally mean what their language denotes, but they require to be spiritualized to be understood.

Miserable subterfuge! What a cunning device of the adversary of souls and his agents to entrap and deceive mankind! Impress upon the people that these are no longer necessary, and they will cease to took for them; persuade them to believe that the word of God has a different meaning from the one apparent on its face, and they will see nothing condemnatory of sin and the commission of gross wrong; Satan's victory and triumph will then be easy. . . .

If men believe the Bible, they must believe as Latter-day Saints, and if there is a Church of Christ upon the earth there must of necessity be Prophets and Apostles, and if there are Prophets and Apostles, they have the right to teach and instruct mankind in the principles of the Lord's Kingdom, and their teachings and counsels are entitled to consideration and obedience. (Apr. 26, 1856, WS 82-85)

Joseph Smith a Prophet before ordination. It is a remarkable fact that Joseph Smith had gifts before he was ordained. He was a Seer, for he translated before he was ordained; he was a Prophet, for he predicted a great many things before he was ordained and before the Church was organized; he was a Revelator, for God gave unto him revelations before the Church was organized. He, therefore, was a Prophet, Seer and Revelator before he was ordained in the flesh. [^1] Did you ever think of it? Brother Joseph Smith was a Prophet, Seer and Revelator before he ever received any Priesthood in the flesh. . . .

He was ordained a Prophet, doubtless, before he came here; but that ordination did not give him the right to immerse men and women in the waters of baptism, neither did it give him the power to lay on hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. He had to await the authority from on high. (May 8, 1881, JD 22:267)

Limits of authority not overstepped. That authority was not conferred upon him when he first saw angels and had some of the gifts of which I have spoken. It required the laying on of the hands of some personage or personages who had the authority of the Holy Priesthood.

No, Joseph never ran until he was sent. He exhibited in this the qualities of the man that he was; there are few men, as we well know, who, if they had obtained the gifts that he possessed, would not have overstepped the limit of their calling and authority and done something beyond their province. But Joseph did not err in this way; he had been too well taught of the Lord, and therefore he waited. . . .

Keys and apostleship restored. He . . . received the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood under the hands of those who last held the keys of that Priesthood upon the earth. When Jesus, you will remember, took His three disciples into the mount, He was transfigured before them, and Moses and Elias administered unto them, and at that time Peter was ordained to hold the keys of that dispensation. He held the keys in conjunction with his brethren, James and John.

They came and unitedly laid their hands upon the heads of Joseph and Oliver and ordained them to the authority that they themselves held, namely, that of the Apostleship. In this way they received the authority of the Melchizedek Priesthood and could administer in the ordinances that belong to that Priesthood, one of which is the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy Ghost. Until that time they had not received that ordinance. . . .

There is no doubt in my mind that Joseph Smith was called just as the Son of God, our Lord and Redeemer, was called before the foundation of the earth, as Jeremiah in his record says he was, and was ordained to be a Prophet, Seer and Revelator and to stand at the head of this last dispensation. Although this was the case, it was still necessary that he should be baptized and have hands laid upon him for the reception of the Holy Ghost and also be ordained to the Priesthood of Aaron and Melchizedek. . . .

Keys of other dispensations bestowed. In addition to this the Prophet Joseph informs us in his letter addressed to the Saints when he fled away from Nauvoo to escape the hands of his enemies that "It is necessary in the ushering in of the dispensation of the fullness of times, which dispensation is now beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the days of Adam even to the present time." He, therefore, received the ministration of divers angels—heads of dispensations—from Michael or Adam down to the present time, every man in his time and season coming to him, and all declaring their dispensation, their rights, their keys, their honors, their majesty and glory, and the power of their Priesthood.

Prophet Joseph presides over dispensation. Joseph, the head of this dispensation, Prophet, Seer and Revelator, whom God raised up, received from all these different sources, according to the mind and will of God and according to the design of God concerning him; he received from all these different sources all the power and all the authority and all keys that were necessary for the building up of the work of God in the last days and for the accomplishment of His purposes connected with this dispensation. He stands at the head. He is a unique character, differing from every other man in this respect and excelling every other man.

Because he was the head, God chose him, and while he was faithful, no man could take his place and position. He was faithful and died faithful. He stands, therefore, at the head of this dispensation and will throughout all eternity, and no man can take that power away from him. If any man holds these keys, he holds them subordinate to Joseph Smith.

Other Prophets subordinate to Prophet Joseph. You never heard President Young teach any other doctrine; he always said that Joseph stood at the head of this dispensation, that Joseph holds the keys, that although Joseph had gone behind the veil, he stood at the head of this dispensation and that he himself held the keys subordinate to him. President Taylor teaches the same doctrine, and you will never hear any other doctrine from any of the faithful Apostles or servants of God, who understand the order of the Holy Priesthood.

Salvation with his permission. If we get our salvation, we shall have to pass by him; if we enter into our glory, it will be through the authority that he has received. We cannot get around him; we cannot get around President Young; we cannot get around President Taylor; we cannot get around the Twelve Apostles. If we ever attain to that eternal glory that God has promised to the faithful, we shall have to pass by them. If we enter into our exaltation, it will be because they, as the servants of God, permit us to pass by, just as the revelation says, "pass by the angels, and the Gods, which are set there" (D&C 132:19), to our exaltation.

You know that Jesus said to His Apostles in ancient days that they should "sit upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel." (Matthew 19:28.) And Paul says, "The saints shall judge the world." (1 Corinthians 6:2.) This is true. Joseph, then, stands at the head and then every man in his place after him until you come down to the Elder, the most humble Elder of the Church who has proclaimed the Gospel of the Son of God to the inhabitants of the earth. He will sit as a judge to judge those who have received or those who have rejected his testimony. He will stand as a swift witness before the judgment seat of God against this generation.

He will lift up his voice testifying as to that which he has done, and men will be condemned, and men will be justified and women will be justified according to the testimony of the faithful servants of God, each one in his place and station, but Joseph holding the keys and presiding over all, subordinate, however, to him from whom he received the keys, as he (Peter) will be subordinate to the Son of God who placed them upon him, each one in his dispensation, each one in his place, each exercising the authority of his Priesthood, each man honoring God according to his faithfulness and diligence in magnifying that Priesthood and calling that God has placed upon him, and each woman in her place receiving her share of glory and honor according to her faithfulness in keeping the commandments of God and honoring the Priesthood. . . .

Joseph possessed all keys at death. When Joseph died, he had embodied in him all the keys and all the authority, all the powers and all the qualifications necessary for the head of a dispensation to stand at the head of this great last dispensation. They had been bestowed upon him through the providences of God and through the command of God to his faithful servants who lived in ancient days. There was no end scarcely, in many respects, to the knowledge that he received. . . . In this respect he stands unique. There is no man in this dispensation can occupy the station that he, Joseph, did, God having reserved him and ordained him for that position and bestowed upon him the necessary power. . . .

All keys bestowed on Twelve. While he was in possession of all his faculties and likely to live for many years to lead the Church—in fact the people believed that he would live to redeem Zion—when he was thus situated, impressed by the Spirit and power of God, he called together our leading men, and he bestowed upon the Twelve Apostles all the keys and authority and power that he himself possessed and that he had received from the Lord. He gave unto them every endowment, every washing, every anointing and administered unto them the sealing ordinances and taught them the character of those ordinances. . . .

And filled with the power of God, he blessed them and placed those keys and this authority upon them and told them that he had thus ordained them to bear off the Kingdom. There was no key that he held, there was no authority that he exercised that he did not bestow upon the Twelve Apostles at that time. Of course, in doing this he did not divest himself of the keys; but he bestowed upon them these keys and this authority and power so that they held them in their fullness as he did, differing only in this respect that they exercised them subordinate to him as the head of the dispensation. He ordained them to all this authority without withholding a single power or key or ordinance that he himself had received.

Thus, you see, these men whom God chose to hold the Apostleship received all this authority from Him. Hence, he told the people before he was taken, "I roll this kingdom off on to the shoulders of the Twelve. . . ."

Desired Hyrum to succeed to presidency. I was but a boy at the time, but I remember it very distinctly. He evidently wanted his brother Hyrum also to be preserved, and for some time before his martyrdom talked about him as the Prophet. But Hyrum, as you know, was not desirous to live away from Joseph; if he was to be exposed to death, he was resolved to be with him. (Oct. 29, 1882, JD 23:359-63)

Life preserved until work completed. God preserved his life until every key, every authority, every power and every gift that he had received from the eternal worlds, through the ministration of angels, from the days of Adam down to the days of Moroni, was again restored to the earth and sealed upon the heads of men, and then it proved more difficult for Satan to accomplish his purpose. He slew Joseph; but it was too late to prevent him communicating that authority which he had received; and the Church organization was preserved on the earth.

Joseph lived long enough, as did our Elder Brother Jesus, to accomplish the work God sent him to do. He laid the foundation of the Church. He laid it so deep that it will never be overthrown. He bestowed upon man the everlasting Priesthood, with all its authority, from the Apostleship down to the authority of a Deacon, with every key, every endowment and every ordinance necessary to accomplish the work of God upon the earth. (Sept. 2, 1883, JD 24:375)

Relation of Nephite Twelve to Twelve at Jerusalem. You remember reading in the Book of Mormon that the Twelve on this continent, whom the Savior chose after His resurrection, are to be judged by the Twelve Apostles that were at Jerusalem. It was with Peter, who was the senior Apostle there, that the keys rested. He was at the head of that dispensation; therefore, those that received the Apostleship on this land were to be judged by the Twelve at Jerusalem. There the keys were; and it was right and proper that Peter, with James and John, should come and bestow them upon him who was to be the head of this dispensation, namely, Joseph Smith. (Oct. 29, 1882, JD 23:360)

Joseph Smith held Apostleship. My views are that the Lord chose in the first place an Apostle, Joseph Smith, to commence the building up of the Kingdom of God; and he did not organize the Church till he received the Apostleship. And as the work progressed he chose High Priests and other Apostles and Seventies to go forth to the nations and act for him as he could not leave Zion himself. But he needed aid in building up the Kingdom—helps in the work of the ministry—and he called these men and bestowed upon them a portion of the Priesthood he himself held, to go forth and act for him. He could not divide himself up and have a part go here and another part go there; therefore, he sent them with authority to act in his stead and he acted in the place of Jesus. The authority, then, originated in the Apostleship; and as he was the first Apostle, by the virtue of that authority he presided in every place where there were Saints. (Jan. 3, 1862, MS 24:113-14)

Prophets, Seers and Revelators. The question has been asked as to why the Twelve Apostles are sustained as Prophets, Seers, and Revelators.

In Section 21 of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, the Lord says that a record shall be kept, and in it Joseph shall be called a Seer, a Translator, a Prophet, an Apostle of Jesus Christ and an Elder of the church.

In the 4th, 5th and 8th paragraphs the Lord says:

Wherefore, meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and commandments which he shall give unto you as he receiveth them, walking in all holiness before me;

For his word ye shall receive, as if from mine own mouth, in all patience and faith.

For by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your good, and His name's glory.

In Section 28, paragraphs 2, 3 and 7, the Lord says:

But, behold, verily, verily, I say unto thee, no one shall be appointed to receive commandments and revelations in this church excepting my servant Joseph Smith, Jun., for he receiveth them even as Moses;

And thou shall be obedient unto the things which I shall give unto him, even as Aaron, to declare faithfully the commandments and the revelations, with power and authority unto the church. . . .

For I have given him the keys of the mysteries and the revelations which are sealed, until I shall appoint unto them another in his stead.

In the 43rd Section, paragraphs 2-7, the Lord says:

For behold, verily, verily, I say unto you, that ye have received a commandment for a law unto my church, through him whom I have appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations from my hand.

And this ye shall know assuredly—that there is none other appointed unto you to receive commandments and revelations until he be taken, if he abide in me.

But verily, verily, I say unto you, that none else shall be appointed unto this gift except it be through him, for if it be taken from him, he shall not have power except to appoint another in his stead.

And this shall be a law unto you, that ye receive not the teachings of any that shall come before you as revelations or commandments;

And this I give unto you that you may not be deceived; that you may know they are not of me.

For verily I say unto you, that he that is ordained of me shalt come in at the gate and be ordained as I have told you before, to teach those revelations which you have received and shall receive through him whom I have appointed.

The same principle is set forth quite fully in paragraph 7, of Section 132, in which the Lord says; "And I have appointed unto my servant Joseph to hold this power in the last days, and there is never but one on the earth at a time on whom this power and the keys of this priesthood are conferred."

These quotations from the revelations clearly show that while the Prophet Joseph lived he alone had the authority to give written commandments and revelations to the Church. Oliver Cowdery was ordained, as Joseph was, to the Apostleship, and was the second Elder in the Church; yet the Lord clearly defined how far he could go in the exercise of the authority that he had received. In paragraphs 4, 5 and 6, Section 28, speaking to Oliver, the Lord says: "And if thou art led at any time by the Comforter to speak or teach, or at all times by the way of commandment unto the church, thou mayest do it. But thou shalt not write by way of commandment, but by wisdom; and thou shalt not command him who is at thy head, and at the head of the church."

Oliver Cowdery could speak or teach by way of commandment to the church, but he was not authorized to write commandments.

In Section 68, paragraphs 4 and 5, speaking to some of the Elders, the Lord says: "And whatsoever they shall speak when moved upon by the Holy Ghost shall be scripture, shall be the will of the Lord, shall be the mind of the Lord, shall be the word of the Lord, shall be the voice of the Lord, and the power of God unto salvation."

So, not only had Oliver Cowdery the right to speak and teach by way of commandment to the church, but all the Elders who spoke by the Holy Ghost had the same right; yet they did not have the authority to write commandments or to give laws for the government of the church.

In the 42nd Section, paragraphs 12-17, the Elders, Priests and Teachers of this Church were informed by the Lord the manner in which they should teach, and He authorized them to lift up their voices by the Comforter, an they were to speak and prophesy as seemed good unto the Lord. There was no limit placed upon them in speaking and prophesying, so long as they did so under the influence of the Spirit of God. But they were expressly commanded that they were not to teach if they did not receive the Spirit.

These revelations show very clearly the distinction which exists between the head of the Church and the other officers of the Church. The latter might prophesy and teach and instruct and even write by way of wisdom to the Church; but it is the privilege of the head alone to give written revelations and commandments to the Church, for the guidance and government of the Church. This distinction should always be kept in mind so that it may be understood that though men may hold the same authority, as in the case of the Apostles, yet there is only one who has the right and privilege to hold the keys and to exercise the authority belonging thereto.

Now, to turn to the question: "Can a number of men be Prophets, Seers and Revelators and yet not interfere with the rights of him who stands at the head?"

There is no reason why this should not be the case. By reference to Section 124, paragraphs 91-95, it will be seen that the Lord, by His own voice, appointed Hyrum Smith to be "a prophet, seer and a revelator unto my church, as well as my servant Joseph." . . .

Hyrum was to have the same blessing and glory and honor and Priesthood and gifts of the Priesthood that were once put upon Oliver Cowdery. Oliver Cowdery had received these gifts and powers from the Lord; but he fell away, and the Lord by this revelation selected Hyrum Smith to receive all that Oliver Cowdery had lost, so he was, to all intents and purposes, a Prophet, Seer and Revelator the same as the Prophet Joseph. But, as in the case of Oliver Cowdery, he had to look to Joseph as his head and did not have the authority to write commandments to the Church; for this belonged only to the President of the Church.

There are many now living who can doubtless recall how frequently the Prophet Joseph mentioned in public that Hyrum was a Prophet. He led the Saints to understand by his remarks that Hyrum had received this power and authority. Here, then, were two Prophets, Seers and Revelators, both appointed by direct revelation from the Lord, and these revelations are written.

But, in addition to these, on March 27, 1836, the Prophet Joseph Smith called upon the "quorums and congregation of Saints to acknowledge the Twelve Apostles who were present as Prophets, Seers and Revelators" (History of the Church 2:417), and they were thus sustained. Their being ordained to this authority and sustained as such does not lead to confusion nor to the least conflict of authority, any more than the reception of the gift of prophecy by the Elders leads to any conflict between them and the President of the Church. The remark of the Prophet Moses upon this point is so applicable and so beautifully expresses the correct idea that we insert it. Two young men had been prophesying in the camp of Israel, and Joshua asked Moses to forbid them. Moses replied: "Enviest thou for my sake? would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that the Lord would put his spirit upon them!" (Numbers 11:29.) (Jan. 1, 1891, JI 26:26-28)

Apostleship embodies all authority. President Brigham Young, during his lifetime, set forth with great plainness the authority of the Apostleship. We do not quote his exact language; but he said that when a man was ordained an Apostle he received all the authority of the Priesthood that a man could hold on the earth in the flesh. It comprehended all the offices of the Priesthood. . . .

The Prophet Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were ordained Apostles before the organization of the Church. By virtue of that authority Joseph acted. (July 1, 1890, JI 25:404-5)

The Apostleship, now held in this Church, embodies all the authority bestowed by the Lord upon man in the flesh. . . . The Lord has given unto His people and to His Church every gift and every qualification and every key which is necessary to lead this people into the Celestial Kingdom of our Father and our God. There is nothing wanting.

When the Lord restored the Apostleship to the earth, he restored all the power that was possible for a human being to hold in the flesh. . . .

Authority that saves. The same spirit of revelation that Moses had, concerning which God speaks through the Prophet Joseph Smith, has rested upon men that have held the keys of this Kingdom, whether it was during President Young's life or at the present time—that same spirit of revelation rests upon him who holds the Presidency as senior Apostle in the midst of the people of God. The Apostles of this Church have all the authority; they have all the keys, and it is within the purview of their office and calling to have all the spirit of revelation necessary to lead this people into the presence of the Lamb in the Celestial Kingdom of our God. (Nov. 2, 1879, JD 21:269-70)

Ambassadors for Christ. The Prophet Brigham . . . acts in his present position by virtue of his authority as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ. That Apostleship makes a man an ambassador in Christ's stead unto the people. He has power to bind on the earth, and the Lord, whose ambassador he is, will ratify it in the heavens; he has power to loose on the earth, and it will be loosed in heaven. Every act necessary to be performed for the salvation of man he has the right to attend to, and it will be equally as legal and binding as though the Lord Jesus himself had done it, because he is His legally authorized and empowered ambassador. This is the power of the Apostleship as plainly set forth in the Scriptures, and anything less than this is not. (Apr. 24, 1857, WS 392)

Only one channel for receiving Priesthood. The Priesthood which the Lord bestowed upon His Prophet Joseph is the only Priesthood that any man can receive. What I mean by that is that it must come to us in that direct channel, and it cannot be received through any other channel. There have been men who have professed to have had the ministration of angels and to have received revelations and to have authority to lead the Church and to give revelations to the Church, having been called to do this as they have claimed outside of the Priesthood given to the Prophet Joseph Smith. I wish to impress upon the minds of my brethren that all such pretensions, you may know for yourselves, are false. No man can, no man ever will, receive this Priesthood of which we are the bearers unless he receives it through the channels which God has appointed. . . .

Suppose any number of men should pretend that they had been visited by holy messengers and had received manifestations from God, can you for a moment imagine that God would give any authority, except it were given in the line or channel which He has prepared and through which the Priesthood has already come? Can anyone think that the Lord would send His holy angels from heaven to lay hands upon Joseph and Oliver—chosen vessels for this purpose—and restore the everlasting Priesthood, as He did, and then allow some side person to receive it in some surreptitious and illegal manner? . . .

No power lacking. Some have got the idea that there is something lacking, some absence of power which some great Prophet, a Prophet greater than anybody we have ever had, will have to restore. Such ideas unsettle people in their minds and faith and produce dissatisfaction and discontent. I am looking for great manifestations of the power of God; but I am not looking—I never have been—for any great and wonderful thing of this kind to occur. Prophets will undoubtedly continue to arise. We shall have men with various gifts. The Prophet Joseph was succeeded by the Prophet Brigham, who . . . was one of the mightiest Prophets that ever lived.

Few ever gifted like Prophet Joseph. Of course, there is a difference in men's gifts. Very few men have ever lived on the earth who have been gifted like the Prophet Joseph. We would not make any comparison between any Apostle and the Savior, and it is scarcely right to make a comparison between any Prophet and the Prophet Joseph. He was chosen expressly to lay the foundation of this great work, and the Lord gave him wonderful power and wonderful revelations. He received a continued stream of revelation from the time that the Father and the Son visited him until the time of his death, He was a great and mighty spirit. I always try to avoid making comparisons between servants of God; but I doubt whether there ever was a Prophet who received so much light in the same length of time, for he died in comparative youth, being only thirty-eight years of age. (Mar. 3, 1889, DW 38:386-87)

No Priesthood authority outside Church. At the death of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and probably for many years subsequent to his death, some people seemed to have the feeling that when he died there died with him some power and some authority and some knowledge that could not be regained very readily and was out of the possession of those who presided over the Church.

This feeling may prevail to some extent at the present time—the feeling that some great one has to arise in our midst in order to revive the old power and restore it to the Church and to perform the mighty works that God has promised shall be performed in connection with His Zion of the last days. I do not believe that all the Latter-day Saints understand as they should—I speak now in general terms—the authority, the gifts and qualifications which God bestowed upon His servant Brigham; and there were many who, after the Prophet's death, were not disposed to accord to President Young the same rights, the same authority, the same gifts that they were willing to accord to the Prophet Joseph. . . .

Those who look for some increased manifestation of power to come in some form outside of that which we recognize as the governing authority of the Church are in danger of being deluded and being led astray. Such persons . . . are in just the condition that the adversary would like people to be in that he may have influence with them. . . .

Where there is a feeling to look for some authority outside of our present organization of the Holy Priesthood, you can readily see how the adversary could take advantage of it and puff vain, weak men up with the idea that they are to be some great ones. No greater mistake can be indulged in than for any person to suppose that there is not that authority in the Church at the present time that is necessary for the establishment, for the government and guidance and for the building up and complete control of the Church and Kingdom of our God upon the earth according to the pattern which He has given. (Oct. 29, 1882, JD 23:357-59)

The keys of the Apostleship. Every man who is ordained to the fullness of Apostleship has the power and the authority to lead and guide the people of God whenever he is called upon to do it and the responsibility rests upon him. . . . And while it is the right of all the Twelve Apostles to receive revelation and for each one to be a Prophet, to be a Seer, to be a Revelator and to hold the keys in the fullness, it is only the right of one man at a time to exercise that power in relation to the whole people and to give revelation and counsel and direct the affairs of the Church—of course, always acting in conjunction with his fellow-servants.

And while we say that the Twelve Apostles have the right to govern, that the Twelve have the authority, that the Twelve Apostles are the men who preside, we do not mean that every one of the Twelve is going to give revelation to this great people, that every one of the Twelve has the right to counsel and dictate and regulate the affairs of the Church as emergencies may arise, independent of the rest. The Church is not governed like Zion's Co-operative Institution, by a Board of Directors; this is not God's design. It is governed by men who hold the keys of the Apostleship, who have the right and authority.

Any one of them, should an emergency arise, can act as President of the Church, with all the powers, with all the authority, with all the keys and with every endowment necessary to obtain revelation from God and to lead and guide this people in the path that leads to the celestial glory; but there is only one man at a time who can hold the keys, who can dictate, who can guide, who can give revelation to the Church. The rest must acquiesce in his action; the rest must be governed by his counsels; the rest must receive his doctrines. . . .

When revelation comes to this people, it is he who has the right to give it. When counsel comes to this people, as a people, it is he who has the right to impart it; and while the Twelve are associated with him, one in power, one in authority, they must respect him as their President, they must took to him as the man through whom the voice of God will come to them and to this entire people. . . .

No ordination required to preside. In relation to ordination a great many people have imagined that it was necessary to ordain a man to succeed another, that it would impart a particular efficacy or endow him with some additional power. Ordination is always good and acceptable; blessings and setting apart are always desirable to those who have to go forth to prepare them for God's service; but it is not necessary that an Apostle should be ordained to stand at the head of the people. When the exigency arises, he has already got the fulness of authority and the power of it. . . .

If every man of the Twelve but one were slain, the remaining one would have the right to organize a First Presidency of the Church, to choose Twelve Apostles and to organize the Church in its fulness and power and to preside over it. And his acts would be accepted of the Lord and binding upon the people. This is the authority of the Apostleship. If every Apostle anciently had been slain but John the Revelator, as they all were, and there had been faith and men enough left, he would have had the right to ordain other Apostles and set in order the entire Church and carry forward the work as the Lord should dictate it. So in our day. As I have stated, it is not necessary for a man who has received this power and these keys to be ordained and set apart to act; he can act in any position.

Counselors not set apart. President Young, when he chose Brother George A. Smith to be his First Counselor in the place of Heber C. Kimball, did not lay his hands upon his head to confer upon him any additional power or authority for the position because Brother George A. held the Apostleship in its fulness, and by virtue of that Priesthood he could act in that or in any other position in the Church. He chose other Assistant Counselors; he did not set them apart; there was no necessity for it as they already held the Apostleship. And if he had, he could only have blessed them; he could not bestow upon them any more than they already had because they had all that he himself had, that is when he chose them from the same Quorum. He did choose several of his Assistant Counselors from the Quorum of the Twelve; he did not put his hands upon them to set them apart nor to give them the authority and power to act as his Counselors; they already held it.

It is well for the Latter-day Saints to understand the principles of the Holy Priesthood and the power thereof that it may be known by you where the authority rests, who has the right to teach and guide and counsel in the affairs of the Kingdom of God. The Lord has revealed it in plainness so that a wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein.

Was it necessary that Elder Taylor should be set apart to preside over this people? Was it necessary that the Twelve Apostles should be set apart to preside over this people? No, it was not for they already possessed the power, authority and ordination. Was it necessary for the Prophet Joseph Smith to set apart Brigham or Heber or Willard or any of the rest of the Twelve Apostles? No, for the same reason; they had received the fulness of the Holy Priesthood, the full endowment and the keys and the authority and the fulness of the Apostleship; therefore, it was not necessary.

No impropriety in a blessing. It might have been done; there would have been no wrong in doing it; there would be no impropriety in blessing a man; there would be no impropriety in a man like Joseph or Brigham, favored of God with the power to move the heavens to bring down blessings upon the children of men, I say, there would be no impropriety in such men laying their hands upon any man and blessing him; the Lord would bless him, if he were thus blessed. But I am now speaking of the authority and power of the Holy Priesthood. The blessing of such men or by such men would not bestow upon him any additional authority or any more keys, presuming that he already had received the fulness of the Apostleship. (Oct. 8, 1877, JD 19:233-36)

Great responsibility rests on General Authorities. Our history, as a Church, has been like a drama. No scenes acted upon the theatrical stage ever possessed more engrossing interest than have the scenes of our lives as Latter-day Saints. And there is a constant change of circumstances. We are invironed by new difficulties, and it requires constant watchfulness on our part to avoid taking a wrong step or committing ourselves in some direction that might be injurious to us.

Therefore, God has ordained that there shall be Prophets and Apostles, whose duty it is to guide and counsel, to instruct, to reprove when necessary, to warn; and great responsibility rests upon them in connection with these duties. I tremble at the very thought of it. I am filled with feelings that cause me to shrink when I think about the great responsibility that God has placed upon the leading Elders of this Church.

The welfare, the future happiness and the prosperity of the people are to a great extent entrusted to those men who are called to be the shepherds of the flock of Christ. I often ask myself, how can I appear before the Lord Jesus, my Master, if He should call me to account for the charge that He has placed upon me; can I stand up and say I have not obstructed the work with which I am connected; I have not obscured the light of heaven; I have not acted in any way to divert the rays of truth from shining in the midst of the children of men—I ask myself, can I stand in this position and look upon the face of God without feeling condemned and that my garments are unstained with the blood of this generation, that I have been a faithful minister of the Lord, a faithful shepherd of the flock of Christ, a watchman who has never slept at his post, who has never failed to utter the cry of warning when danger has menaced the Zion of God? This is a feeling it seems to me every man who bears the holy Priesthood ought to have. (Sept. 2, 1889, DW 39:461)

Shepherds and watchmen. Great responsibilities rest upon the officers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The souls of the children of men are entrusted to their care. They are called shepherds of the flock of Christ, and if the sheep of the flock are injured or destroyed, the blame rests upon the shepherds. They are also called watchmen. They must stand and give warning of the approach of danger. They tell the people to prepare to escape threatened evil. If they are not watchful and vigilant, trouble may fall upon those whom they are appointed to guard and care for. (July 1, 1886, JI 21:200)

Shepherds over the flock. I cannot lift my hand against this people and be prospered in it, nor can any other man. No man can join with the enemies of this people and hope to succeed; for God will desert him no matter how high his standing may be, and all who follow in his footsteps will find themselves dreadfully deceived.

We may as well warn you of this and tell you the truth, whatever may be said about it. We do not want any of your blood clinging to our garments. We do not want to stand in the positions we do and hold our peace and see the people misled and going astray. God has placed us as shepherds over His flock, and if we do not look out for the flock, He will smite us and remove us. We are placed as watchmen upon the walls of Zion, and if we do not give warning when we see danger, then we are culpable and will be condemned of God.

Now, if you want to know why we talk this way, understand that this is the reason: We are responsible to the Lord for you, and we cannot shirk that responsibility. Our opponents may be offended at these remarks and misquote them; but that does not make a particle of difference. Must we stand and let the people go astray and not lift up our voices in warning? Why, we might as well die today and be done with it and let somebody else come and take our places and do the work. What is the use of our being in this position unless we are men and have the willingness to declare the whole counsel of God as it comes to us? (Apr. 5, 1897, DW 54:675)

Only one to guide ship of Zion. It is my privilege as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ to have the revelations of Jesus. It is my privilege to live so as to have the gift of prophecy and to have wisdom and knowledge from God. It is my privilege to have all these gifts and blessings resting down upon me by virtue of my calling. If I am faithful thereto, they will rest upon me. But it is not my privilege to guide this ship. It is not my privilege to write revelations or commandments to this Church. Much as I may rejoice in the knowledge of God, much as I may be possessed of the revelations of Jesus, that is not a privilege which has been accorded unto me, nor has it been accorded unto any other Apostle or officer or member of this Church but one, and that is the man whom God has chosen to hold the keys.

Watch the captain. Therefore, in times of danger, whatever my own feelings may be—and as those who are acquainted with me know, I have pronounced opinions generally upon every subject that is brought up—notwithstanding this characteristic, I look always, and always have looked, to the man whom God has placed to preside over His people. I watch his demeanor. I know that it is for him to give the signal. It is for him to direct the movement of the crew of the Ship Zion. It is for him to direct how she shall be steered, so far as human power is necessary for this purpose; and when there are no indications of fear on his part, when he feels serene and confident, I know that I can do so with the utmost safety and that this entire people can trust in that God who has placed a Prophet, a Seer, and a Revelator to preside over His people upon the earth. (Dec. 2, 1883, JD 24:366-67)

I look at our President—I always did watch the captain of the ship with peculiar interest, when on the ocean surrounded by icebergs or when in the midst of great storms, as I have been a few times. I watched his eye and his demeanor, and I fancied, and I think very correctly, that I could form a good idea of our peril by watching him. I have been in storms when everybody on board excepting the Elders expected to go down.

I did the same thing when a boy, watching the Prophet Joseph, the few opportunities that I had of doing so. I did the same with President Young when he lived. In times of threatening danger and of anxiety I noticed the spirit that moved upon him as well as its operations upon myself. I do the same today with President Taylor; I have watched his bearing and have listened to his words; and I have taken notice of his spirit, as I have also of the brethren associated with him.

I have witnessed but one spirit and felt but one feeling and have had but one thought impressed upon me by their demeanor; and this spirit and the impression it makes corresponds exactly with my own. I feel that I am in accord with him and with them, and while this is the case, I feel that there is no real danger for Zion. (Oct. 8, 1882, JD 23:276)

Uphold the living Prophet. The trouble is, the Prophets of God walk around among you, and you see them all the time. "Why I saw Lorenzo Snow today, and he is just like any other man. I saw Joseph F. Smith, and if I had not known, I might have taken him for anyone else. I saw some of the Apostles, and they are like other men." And because they are like other men, therefore, they must be rejected. It is not supposed that they have more power than others. That is a mistake that the world has always made.

There was Moses, one of the mightiest Prophets that ever lived. Did the children of Israel see anything particularly mighty in Moses? No; he was one of them, and they saw nothing exceptional about him. Then there was Nephi, another mighty Prophet. Did Nephi's brethren see anything mighty in him? Why, no; there was nothing to distinguish him particularly; and yet he was a mighty Prophet whom God had raised up. So it was with the Son of God himself, the mightiest being that ever trod the earth. He descended from the throne of His Father and came to earth; but men saw nothing in Him different to other men, and they crucified Him. Thus it has been in every age. There have only been a few who have ever discovered the power of God as manifested through His servants.

It is so today. Who recognized Joseph Smith as one of the mightiest Prophets that ever lived? Why, the Saints themselves received with reluctance the truths he taught; and men slew him and may possibly have thought they were doing God's service in doing so. So it has been with those who have followed him and have held the keys of authority. They have passed among their fellow men and received but little recognition. Men could see all their faults and failings and could talk about them one to another; but they could not see the divinity in them. It is the same with the servants of God in our midst today. They are but mortal men, and we see their weaknesses and their defects of character. These become magnified in our eyes, and we talk freely about them. The result is, we receive their words with reluctance; we question the word of God that comes through them and wonder if it is not alloyed with something of their own.

What we all need is faith—faith in God, faith to believe that which He tells us. (Oct. 8, 1899, CR 50-51)

Purpose of Apostles. The Apostle Paul says that the Apostles were placed in the Church expressly to keep the Saints from being carried away by every wind of doctrine and by the cunning craftiness of men. You watch the men that listen to the Apostles, to the authority that God has placed in His Church, and you will find that they are not carried about by cunning craftiness of men nor by every wind of doctrine. But the people that neglect and deride that authority, they are carried about in that manner.

Men may say it is wrong to obey the Priesthood. I tell you the world will not be saved unless it is through the exercise of the authority of the Priesthood of the Son of God under His own direction. We may as well look that squarely in the face as not. (Nov. 22, 1896, MS 59:66)

Necessity of visits by authorities. There is a constant necessity for the visits of those whom God has called to preside over the affairs of His Church and to hold the Apostleship of the Church in the midst of the various Stakes of Zion. . . . The Lord has not left His people without proper care, and He has not left His servants destitute of His word and of a knowledge of His will but has given these to them at the very time when they have been needed. No evil or difficulty has ever occurred in the Church or outside of the Church affecting us that we have not been warned of by the servants of God and prepared for by their teachings, their counsels and their warnings. (Sept. 2, 1883, JD 24:368-69)

Future Apostleship revealed. It is a very responsible station for a man to stand as an Apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ, to stand as one upon whom the responsibility rests of counseling the people, of directing them and of imparting to them such instructions as are needed by them, and I naturally shrink from this responsibility. I never did desire prominence among men. The Lord revealed to me when I was quite young that I at some time would be an Apostle. I never told it to any human being; but on more than one occasion I have gone out and besought the Lord to choose some one else and to relieve me of that responsibility. I have besought Him earnestly, time and again, that if I could only get my salvation and exaltation without being called to that high and holy responsibility, I would much rather He would choose some other person.

These have always been my feelings concerning responsibility in this Church; yet I have endeavored to the best of my ability when responsibility has been placed upon me to bear it off with the help of God the best I could. . . . I feel that it is one of the greatest blessings a human being can have bestowed upon him to be chosen a servant of Jesus Christ and to enjoy the power and the gifts and the blessings that ought to rest upon those who are thus chosen.

Lord sustains those called. There is this to comfort all those upon whom this authority is bestowed—the Lord is always able and always willing to sustain His servants in the performance of all the labors and duties which He assigns unto them. He does not leave men to themselves when He calls them to office; but He gives them gifts and graces and qualifications and the Spirit suited to the duties devolving upon them and the labors which they may have to perform.

Notwithstanding my own weakness and the realization of my own incapability, I can testify to you this day that the Lord has always, through my life and my varied labors, blessed me beyond what I, in many respects, could have expected. And I have seen that this has been the case with my fellow servants; He has been exceedingly kind to them. He has bestowed His Spirit upon them, and He has given unto them knowledge and wisdom, revelation and counsel to impart unto the people and to guide them in the performance of the various labors that have devolved upon them. So it has been with this entire people. (Feb. 23, 1890, DW 40:377)

Leaders don't aspire to offices. Honor the Priesthood of the Son of God. Let no word be spoken in your streets or in your dwellings or in your associations derogatory to the work and the servants of God or that would in any manner grieve the Spirit of God.

It is true, His servants are fallible men. No one knows their fallibility better than they do themselves, speaking generally. They know how much they shrunk from bearing the responsibility which God has placed upon them. Joseph F. Smith and George Q. Cannon, who are here today, never wanted the office that they hold. We both would have avoided it if we could. We did not seek for power but have endeavored to protest against receiving it. Nothing but the command of God would have induced us to have taken it. But God did command; He did make this requirement of us, and we are here today, standing in the position we do, unsought for by us.

So it is with all of us. All you who know Wilford Woodruff know that that man never had any aspiration to preside over this Church. He presides today because God required it at His hands. Therefore, should you not uphold these men? Should you not pray for them? Should you be envious of them? Should you speak evil of them and be jealous of them? I say, No; for if you do, God will be angry with you.

I have spoken about the First Presidency of the Church; but I need not confine these remarks to them; they apply with equal force to the Twelve Apostles, and to the Presidents of Stakes. . . . The same thing applies, no doubt, to the High Council and to the Bishops and to all the servants of God. Men do not obtain place in this Church because they seek for it. If it were known that a man was ambitious to hold a certain office in the Church, that fact itself would lead to his defeat because his desire would not be granted unto him. This is the case with the officers of this Church. . . . We are responsible to God. God chose us and nominated us, and it is for Him to straighten us out when we do wrong. (Apr. 17, 1898, DW 56:707-8)

First Presidency chosen by God. When I was first called to be a counselor to President Taylor, I besought him and the Council with all the energy of my soul not to call me to act in that position but to call some one else; I felt that everyone of the Council was more fitted for that position than I. And when President Woodruff called President Joseph F. Smith to be his counselor, he expressed himself in the same manner and besought President Woodruff not to choose him, or at least to select someone else in preference to himself. In this spirit we have accepted the duties of our position—not for personal gratification, not to give us prominence but to do that which we have felt to be the will of God. And I do know that God chose Wilford Woodruff, that God chose Joseph F. Smith and that God chose George Q. Cannon to be the First Presidency of this Church. I can bear testimony to that with all my heart. . . .

Opposing authority a deadly sin. Whoever arrays himself in any manner against the authority which God has placed in His Church for its government, no matter who it is—one of the Twelve Apostles even or any number of them—unless he repents, God will withdraw His Spirit and power from him; and He will show the world; He will show the Church; He will show the officers of the Church that that which He has spoken in the past concerning the authority of the Holy Priesthood and the respect and honor which He requires His servants and people to show to it is true and must be carried out, or He will withdraw His Spirit and power from those who take a different course. If any of you have indulged in the spirit of murmuring and faultfinding and have allowed your tongues to give utterance to thoughts and words that were wrong and not in accordance with the spirit of the Gospel, let me say to you here today that you ought to repent of it with all your hearts and get down into the depths of humility and implore Him for the forgiveness of that sin—for it is a most deadly sin.

The men who hold the Priesthood are but mortal men; they are fallible men; they are sinners. No human being that ever trod this earth was free from sin, excepting the Son of God, from the beginning throughout all the ranks of the Priesthood in every generation. Every human being has been a sinner and has been forced to confess before the Lord that he was a sinner. None is exempt in this respect; there is no exception, aside from the Lord Jesus Himself. This is true concerning the Presidency of the Church; it is true in relation to the Apostles.

Nevertheless, God has chosen these men. He has singled them out. They have not done it themselves; but He has selected them, and He has placed upon them the authority of the Holy Priesthood, and they have become His representatives in the earth. He places them as shepherds over the flock of Christ, and as watchmen upon the walls of Zion. And He holds them to a strict accountability for the responsibility and for the authority which He has given to them, and in the day of the Lord Jesus they will have to stand and be judged for that which they have done and the manner in which they have exercised this authority. If they have exercised it wrongfully and against the interests of His work and the salvation of His people, woe unto them in the day of the Lord Jesus! He will judge them, and, if worthy of condemnation, He will condemn them.

But He does not give the authority to judge and condemn to man, only in the regularly constituted councils of His Church; and those who lift their voices and their heels against the authority of the Holy Priesthood, I tell you today, as a servant of God—and I wish these young men and young women to hear my testimony this day and to remember it as long as they live—they will go down to hell, unless they repent.

Examples of opposing Prophet. There are many examples in this Church of a character to prove what I here state. Oliver Cowdery, who received the same blessings and the same ordinations as the Prophet Joseph, ordained to the Lesser Priesthood at the same time as Joseph, ordained to the Melchizedek Priesthood by the same angels who visited Joseph, afterwards in the Kirtland Temple beheld the Son of God Himself and received the keys of the gathering from Moses and the gospel of Abraham and the promises that were made to Abraham from Elias and afterwards the keys for the turning of the hearts of the fathers to the children and the children to the fathers from Elijah—this man, so favored of God, after all this, lost the Spirit of God through opposing the Prophet Joseph!

He might in one sense, and doubtless did in his feelings, rank himself as the peer of the Prophet; but God had given to Joseph the keys of the Priesthood and the authority to preside, and because Oliver Cowdery did not honor that Priesthood and that authority, God withdrew His Holy Spirit from him, and he lost his standing in the Church, and his Priesthood was taken from him and given to another, as you will find by reading the revelations. God gave the same authority that Oliver Cowdery held to Hyrum Smith, the brother of the Prophet Joseph and the father of Brother Joseph F. Smith here. Before his death Oliver Cowdery came back, humbly penitent, and was baptized into the Church again.

Not only this man but no less than six of the Twelve Apostles lifted their heels against the Prophet of God; they murmured at him, questioned his authority, told lies about him or believed lies about him, and as a result they lost their standing, and others were chosen to take their places.

Sidney Rigdon, whom God designated as a spokesman for the Prophet Joseph, a man of great eloquence and of many gifts, a man who was favored of the Lord with that wonderful vision which is recorded in the 76th Section of the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, who with Joseph beheld the glories of the Celestial, the Terrestrial and Telestial Kingdoms, . . . this man fell. Why did he fall? Because he not only murmured against the Prophet of God, but he even murmured against God because of the afflictions the Lord permitted to come upon him in Missouri.

William Law, who was a counselor of the Prophet Joseph, took the same course, and he lost his Priesthood and became one of the bitterest enemies of the Church of God. There is scarcely any room to doubt but what he was guilty of contributing to the shedding of the innocent blood of the Prophet and the Patriarch of the Church. (Feb. 16, 1896, DW 52:385-86)

Don't speak evil of Lord's anointed. There is one thing that the Lord has warned us about from the beginning and that is not to speak evil of the Lord's anointed. He has told us that any member of the Church who indulged in this is liable to lose the Spirit of God and go into darkness. The Prophet Joseph said time and again that it was one of the first and strongest symptoms of apostasy. [^2] Have we not proved this? Have not his words upon this subject been fulfilled to the very letter? No man can do this without incurring the displeasure of the Lord. It may seem strange, in this age of irreverence of iconoclasm, to talk in this way. Nevertheless, this is the truth.

God has chosen His servants. He claims it as His prerogative to condemn them, if they need condemnation. He has not given it to us individually to censure and condemn them. No man, however strong he may be in the faith, however high in the Priesthood, can speak evil of the Lord's anointed and find fault with God's authority on the earth without incurring His displeasure. The Holy Spirit will withdraw itself from such a man, and he will go into darkness. This being the case, do you not see how important it is that we should be careful? However difficult it may be for us to understand the reason for any action of the authorities of the Church, we should not too hastily call their acts in question and pronounce them wrong. (Oct. 6, 1896, DW 53:609)

Consenting to death of God's anointed unforgiveable. It is a terrible thing for a man to consent to the death of God's anointed—to shed innocent blood or to be accessory thereto. It were better for such a man never to have been born or if a millstone had been tied around his neck and he had been cast into the depths of the sea, for such a sin can never be forgiven in this world nor in the world to come; and the heaviest of woes are pronounced upon those who commit such crimes. The men who were guilty of this crime towards him placed it out of Joseph's power to render them the aid which they will yet require. (Jan. 1, 1880, JI 15:11)

Leaders not dependent on people for support. There is one thing about the leading men of this Church, they do not depend upon the people for their support. It is not necessary for them to tickle their ears by fine speeches and pleasant things. They can say rough things, unpleasant truths because they are independent; they can live without the aid of the people by the industry of their own hands, and they are not afraid of some of their Deacons or some of the congregation taking exceptions to their manner of speech and cutting off their salary.

Why, if such unpleasant truths were told as have been told to the Latter-day Saints by ministers of different denominations, who do you think would give them a call? Would they receive a call to some other place and be paid a higher salary? No, their style would be too unpleasant to be popular. Well, I have hope for this people while this is the case, and I pray that we shall always have men here who are not afraid to tell you and me our faults and warn us of them and reprove us, for "better the reproof of a friend than the kiss of an enemy." (Oct. 6, 1879, JD 20:338-39)

Brigham Young's policy. It is true that God has designed that the tithings shall be used, among other things, for the support of the Priesthood. But I should deplore the day when the Priesthood of the Son of God would depend upon the tithings of this people for their support. It would be something that I should dread. I always admired the policy of President Young in this respect. During his lifetime he never would allow any man to draw a fixed amount from the tithing for his support; but he allowed the tithing to be administered, under the direction of himself and counselors, to the brethren as they might need so that no thought should enter into the minds of a certain class that because they held official position in the Church they would therefore have a right to live upon the tithings of the Church.

It is incumbent upon all who hold the Priesthood or any portion of it to labor freely in the offices to which they are ordained. . . .

Not a salaried Priesthood. The Lord is determined to have a Priesthood that will not be a salaried Priesthood. Because a man gets an office in the Church—for instance, one of the Seven Presidents of Seventies or an Apostle—he should not imagine that immediately he is ordained to that office he will have a fixed salary or that he can depend upon the tithing for his support or, because he is a Bishop, that he will think, "Well, this office of Bishop has a fixed salary, and I will depend upon that to sustain me." This would reduce the Priesthood to the level of political office.

It is not the design of God that such a condition should exist in His Church. When men are ordained to office in the Priesthood, they should seek to honor the office regardless of pay. If the idea of the emoluments which might be attached to an office were in their minds, they would show themselves unworthy of the office. But, when men are devoted to the work of the ministry and their whole time is occupied and they are likely to need assistance, shall they not be helped? Certainly; for the Lord has given authority for the tithing to be used in such cases—to that extent and no more, not for a fixed amount to be attached to an office but for help to be rendered according to the needs of the individual. Thus, if Elders are in want, help them; but if they can sustain themselves, let them do it by their own labor and then pay their tithing just as other folks do. That is the true law of the Lord in regard to this people. (Nov. 12, 1893, MS 56:34, 36)

Our theory is that a man who can not sustain himself and also teach others how to sustain themselves is unfit for a leading position, and he becomes a drone in the great hive. On that account we compel or require every minister in this Church to sustain himself. Jesus said that he who is greatest among you let him be the servant of all, and we have carried this into effect—the servant of the whole people is the President of the Church. (Sept. 8, 1872, JD 15:152)

Footnotes

---
Notas:
[^1] "Every man who has a calling to minister to the inhabitants of the world was ordained to that very purpose in the Grand Council of heaven before this world was. I suppose that I was ordained to this very office in that Grand Council." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, p. 365.)
[^2] "I will give you one of the Keys of the mysteries of the Kingdom. It is an eternal principle, that has existed with God from all eternity: That man who rises up to condemn others, finding fault with the Church, saying that they are out of the way, while he himself is righteous, then know assuredly, that that man is in the high road to apostasy; and if he does not repent, will apostatize, as God lives." (Teachings of the Prophet Joseph Smith, pp. 156-57.)
