Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 21

Succession in the Presidency

Saints didn't understand coming martyrdom. Though he [Joseph Smith] had spoken for some time past in a manner to convey the idea that he was not to remain long in their midst and had often remarked in public and in private that the authority and the burden and responsibility which rested upon him he had transferred to the Twelve Apostles, yet none seemed to realize that the time for his departure from this life was drawing near. For some reason it seemed as though the minds of the people were incapable of comprehending such an event.

Joseph and the work of God which he had established appeared so inseparably connected in their minds that they had not conceived it possible for that work to progress without him. Hence, his words, in reference to his leaving them, were not understood and were almost passed unheeded; and another consequence was, he was not watched over with that vigilance and shielded with that care that he should have been. His friends did not perceive this then, but afterwards they did and sorrowed over it. (Jan. 8, 1870, JI 5:6)

Joseph desired Hyrum to be his successor. Joseph wrote to those of the Twelve Apostles who were absent on missions to come home immediately, as he was anxious to have them with him; he felt that trouble was thickening around him; and no doubt he desired to have his friends—the men he could rely upon—near to him in the hour of difficulty. He was anxious to get Hyrum, his brother, out of the way. He advised him to take his family on the next steamboat to Cincinnati. If anything happened to himself, he was anxious that Hyrum should live. Said he: "I wish I could get Hyrum out of the way, so that he may live to avenge my blood; and I will stay with you and see it out." But Hyrum could not be moved. If Joseph suffered and died, he was determined to suffer and die with him. Said he to the Prophet: "Joseph, I cannot leave you."

Joseph saw from a letter of the Governor's and by the spirit that was manifested that there was no feeling of mercy towards the Saints or disposition to treat them with any degree of fairness. He was well convinced that if he and his brother Hyrum could get out of the way and the Saints would be still and go quietly about their business, trouble would be avoided. In speaking upon this point he said: "There is no doubt they will come here and search for us. Let them search; they will not harm you in person or property, not even a hair of your heads." He remarked to Brother Stephen Markham that if he and Hyrum were ever taken again, they would be massacred, or he was not a Prophet of God. He added: "I want Hyrum to live to avenge my blood, but he is determined not to leave me." (History of the Church 6:546.) (Jan. 22, 1870, JI 5:14)

Twelve are endowed with keys. By virtue of the ordination he received, Joseph had the right and the authority to confer this Priesthood upon others. He called Twelve Apostles, and they were ordained under his authority by the direction of the Lord, and those Twelve were endowed with the keys. Previous to his death the Prophet Joseph manifested great anxiety to see the temple completed, as most of you who were with the Church during his day well know. "Hurry up the work, brethren," he used to say, "let us finish the temple; the Lord has a great endowment in store for you, and I am anxious that the brethren should have their endowments and receive the fullness of the Priesthood." He urged the Saints forward continually, preaching unto them the importance of completing that building, so that therein the ordinances of life and salvation might be administered to the whole people but especially to the quorums of the Holy Priesthood; "then," said he, "the Kingdom will be established, and I do not care what shall become of me."

These were his expressions oft repeated in the congregations of the Saints, telling the brethren and sisters of the Church and the world that he rolled the Kingdom on to the Twelve, and they would have to round up their shoulders and bear it off, as he was going to rest for awhile and many other expressions of a like nature, the full meaning of which the Saints did not realize at the time.

Prior to the completion of the temple, he took the Twelve and certain other men, who were chosen, and bestowed upon them a holy anointing similar to that which was received on the day of Pentecost by the Twelve, who had been told to tarry at Jerusalem. This endowment was bestowed upon the chosen few whom Joseph anointed and ordained, giving unto them the keys of the Holy Priesthood, the power and authority which he himself held, to build up the Kingdom of God in all the earth and accomplish the great purposes of our Heavenly Father; and it was by virtue of this authority on the death of Joseph that President Young, as President of the Quorum of the Twelve, presided over the Church. (Dec. 5, 1869, JD 13:49)

Apostles had warnings of dreadful happenings. On the day of the murder of the Prophet and Patriarch those of the Twelve Apostles who were on missions, as well as other Elders, had warnings that something dreadful had happened. They felt cast down, and a spell of horror seemed to rest upon them. Some wept without knowing why they should do so except that they were filled with unaccountable sadness and gloom. The succeeding night was a miserable one to them. When they received the news of the death of Joseph and Hyrum, the cause of these feelings was explained, though it was difficult then for several of them to believe that they were dead. (Aug. 6, 1870, JI 5:127)

Martyrdom of Prophet Joseph Church's darkest hour. Even when Joseph was slain—probably as dark an hour as the Church ever saw—and when men cast about not knowing where to look and whom to follow, there was in the hearts of the people of God an unshaken faith that the Lord would not leave His people and suffer the work that He had established to be overthrown.

Up to the time of the Prophet's martyrdom the anticipation of the Latter-day Saints was that he would live to lead the people of God until Jesus should come. I suppose that there was not a feeling in the Church, not a thought among the faithful Saints that the Prophet would not live, not only to be the means in the hands of God of laying the foundation of the work but, if I may so speak, of laying its capstone and completing the work and witnessing the redemption of Zion as the leader, the Revelator and the Prophet of God.

Those of you, therefore, who are not familiar with those times can well imagine what a shock it was to the people to find that the enemy had obtained power to take his life and how it naturally tried their faith and would have caused them to have despaired had it not been for this promise . . . which was given to the Prophet in the beginning, namely, that the work that he was the instrument in the hands of God of founding should never be overthrown. And from that day to this, through all the vicissitudes and changes which have occurred, that promise has shone out brightly and filled the hearts of the Saints with hope, and they have never yielded to despair. (Dec. 23, 1894, DW 50:321)

People not left without a shepherd. When Joseph was taken, how was it then? Were the people left without some man or men to stand up in their midst to declare to them the counsel of their Almighty Father? No! The Lord did not leave His people without a shepherd. He had anticipated the dreadful tragedy which would rob us of His anointed one, rob us, the Church of Christ, of our Prophet and Patriarch. He had anticipated this, and previous to this horrid tragedy He inspired His servant Joseph to call other men, upon whom He bestowed all the keys, all the authority, all the blessings, all the knowledge so far as endowments were concerned, so far as the power to go unto God and ask Him in the name of Jesus and obtain His mind and will was concerned. . . .

A body of men were endowed with this power when Joseph was taken, and the earth was not robbed of that Priesthood which God had sent His angels from heaven to restore once more to the children of men and to act on the earth in the plenitude of its power. There was no more need, therefore, for angelic visitation to restore it. It was not taken back to God by the slaying of the Prophet and Patriarch but remained with mortal men here on the earth. (Dec. 14, 1884, JD 26:60)

Incidents following the martyrdom. After the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph Smith several persons arose claiming to be the successor to the Prophet. Prominent among these was Sidney Rigdon, who had been with the Prophet Joseph as his counselor and spokesman. He claimed that the Church was then fourteen years of age and should have a guardian and plainly stated that he was the man who should be that guardian.

All the Twelve Apostles were absent on a mission to the Eastern States excepting Elders John Taylor and Willard Richards, who were with the Prophet and Patriarch in the jail at the time of their death. Brother John Taylor was shot in a number of places and for weeks his life trembled in the balance. Rigdon was also absent from Nauvoo when the Prophet was killed; but, as he was nearer to Nauvoo than the Twelve were, he reached there first and held several meetings before the Twelve arrived.

It was at this time that he appointed a day for the Church to meet and choose a guardian. The people felt like a flock without a shepherd. The general feeling had been that the Prophet Joseph would live to preside over the Church, at least till old age, and some thought that he would live till the Savior would come. No one looked for his death. It was, therefore, a most unexpected blow, and as no one had thought of such a thing, the bulk of the people were at a loss to know who should take the presidency of the Church. (Oct. 1, 1877, JI 12:222)

Brigham Young assumes mantle of Joseph. President Brigham Young was in the stand and arose and addressed the people. . . . It was the first sound of his voice which the people had heard since he had gone east on his mission, and the effect upon them was most wonderful. Who that was present on that occasion can ever forget the impression it made upon them!

If Joseph had risen from the dead and again spoken in their hearing, the effect could not have been more startling than it was to many present at that meeting. It was the voice of Joseph himself; and not only was it the voice of Joseph which was heard, but it seemed in the eyes of the people as though it was the very person of Joseph which stood before them.

A more wonderful and miraculous event than was wrought that day in the presence of that congregation we never heard of. The Lord gave His people a testimony that left no room for doubt as to who was the man He had chosen to lead them. They both saw and heard with their natural eyes and ears, and then the words which were uttered came accompanied by the convincing power of God to their hearts, and they were filled with the Spirit and with great joy. There had been gloom and in some hearts, probably, doubt and uncertainty; but now it was plain to all that here was the man upon whom the Lord had bestowed the necessary authority to act in their midst in Joseph's stead. . . .

On that occasion President Brigham Young seemed to be transformed, and a change such as that we read of in the Scriptures as happening to the Prophet Elisha, when Elijah was translated in his presence, seemed to have taken place with him. The mantle of the Prophet Joseph had been left for him. . . . The people said one to another, "the spirit of Joseph rests upon Brigham;" they knew that he was the man chosen to lead them, and they honored him accordingly.

In his remarks to the congregation he alluded to the fact that instead of himself and brethren finding them mourning the death of their great leader, as Israel did the departure of Moses, they found them holding meetings to choose his successor. But if they wished to obtain the mind and will of the Lord concerning this subject, why did they not meet according to the order and have a General Assembly of the several quorums, which constitute the spiritual authorities of the Church, a tribunal from whose decisions there was no appeal. In a moment the few words he spoke upon this subject threw a flood of light upon it. The Elders remembered then the proper order. He desired to see an Assembly of the quorums at two o'clock that afternoon, every quorum in its place and order, and a general meeting also of the members.

The tones of his voice, his appearance, everything he said and the spirit which accompanied his words, convinced the people that the leader whom God had selected to guide them stood before them. He was the master spirit on the occasion. . . . Probably no few words that were ever uttered by a servant of God gave greater relief and satisfaction than those spoken that morning by President Young; for at no other period in the history of the Church had the people beheld such a crisis. (Oct. 29, 1870, JI 5:174-75, 182)

Brigham Young foreordained to preside. Look at the singular combination of circumstances which caused Brigham Young to be President of the Twelve. Reflect on the remarkable combination of events which made him the leader of Israel, showing plainly, in my mind, that long before he was born, yes, probably before the earth was organized, Joseph Smith and Brigham Young were chosen, the same as Jeremiah was. (Dec. 5, 1869, JD 13:52)

Brigham Young led Church by revelation. God has borne testimony to the acts and teachings of His servant Brigham and those of his servants, the Apostles, who received the keys in connection with him. God sustained him and upheld him, and He blessed all those that listened to his counsel. No man that ever obeyed all his counsel and teachings was ever cursed but was always blessed of God, while those who disobeyed his counsel did not prosper. We have all seen this.

He led the people by the power of God into this wilderness, taking upon himself such responsibility as no other man dare take, which, of course, he was inspired of God to do. In various ways God sustained him to the time of his death. All the authority, all the power, all the keys and all the blessings that were necessary for the guidance of this people he held. He held them as his fellow-servants, the Apostles, held them; only he, being the senior, had the right to preside and did preside, God sustaining him in so doing.

No manifestation required at his death. Then, when he died, there was no need for any peculiar or overpowering manifestation such as was witnessed when the Prophet Joseph died because the authority of the Priesthood was recognized, and among the Twelve there was no dissent. We all knew the man whose right it was to preside, there being no doubt upon this matter. We knew he had the authority. We knew that there was only one man at a time upon the earth that could hold the keys of the Kingdom of God, and that man was the presiding Apostle.

Other names had at one time preceded President John Taylor in the order of the Twelve. There were various reasons for this. Two of the Apostles had lost their standing and upon deep and heartfelt repentance had been again ordained to the Apostleship. In both instances this had occurred after the ordination of President Taylor to that calling. Still, for many years their names were allowed to stand in their old places and preceded his in the published list of the Twelve. . . . For some years attention was not called to the proper arrangement of the names of the Twelve; but some time before President Young's death they were arranged by him in their proper order. Not long before his death a number of the Twelve and leading Elders were in Sanpete when, in the presence of the congregation in the meetinghouse, he turned to President Taylor and said, "Here is the man whose right it is to preside over the Council in my absence, he being the senior Apostle."

Therefore, as I have said, when President Young died there was no doubt in the minds of those who understood principle as to who was the man—it was the then senior Apostle. He was the man who had the right to preside, he holding the keys by virtue of his seniority, by virtue of his position in the Quorum, and he became the President of the Twelve Apostles and became President of the Church.

Priesthood rightful authority to lead Church. Now, let me ask you, is it necessary that somebody should rise up outside of this Priesthood to be a Prophet, Seer and Revelator to the Church? Is it not consistent with the wisdom and government of God to acknowledge His servants who have been faithful all their lives, who have proved their integrity before Him, who have never swerved to the right or the left and whose knees have never trembled and whose hands have never shaken—is it not within His power and His wisdom to endow them with all the gifts and qualifications necessary for the guidance of His Church? Certainly it is.

There has never been a moment since this Church was organized, since the 6th day of April, 1830, when God has been without ministering servants through whom He has revealed His mind and will to the people. President Young might have received and given revelations to the people in the same manner as the Prophet Joseph did. He had the authority, and he did give his revelations to the people; he gave his counsel. President Taylor has done the same. The Twelve in their labors have done the same. They have taught the people the word of God. The Twelve have the right, every Apostle has the right, to teach the people by the spirit of revelation, by the spirit of prophecy and the power of God.

This people have been led by that power and spirit; and it was in this way that ancient Israel was led when Moses stood at their head. He had the authority; he held the keys, and he received revelation from God concerning all the people. It has been so in our day. We have had revelations; and we have revelations still. (Oct. 29, 1882, JD 23:364-66)

Only one has keys to preside. I rejoice that God still continues to manifest His power through His anointed one and through the channel of the Holy Priesthood, having but one man at a time on the earth unto whom He gives the keys to preside over the Church and give revelations to the entire Church, as a Church and as a people. He has chosen him from among the Prophets, Apostles, Seers and Revelators to bear the keys of the everlasting Priesthood upon the earth in the flesh, he having the power and authority to act for the entire people and to receive the mind and will of God for the entire people. (Dec. 14, 1884, JD 26:61)

Succession in presidency. We should all be grateful for the mercy which God has shown to us in raising up such men as He has called to preside over us and over His Church, men in whose mouths has been found no guile, who have pursued the path of duty without turning to the right hand or to the left, who have been true and faithful to every trust reposed in them and who have never flinched in the hour of trial. . . .

When the Prophet Joseph Smith died, the Council of the Apostles with President Brigham Young at their head led the Church for some years before the First Presidency was again organized. There was a reason for this. After the martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph there was intense feeling against the Church. The spirit of persecution raged. There being no First Presidency, hatred was not concentrated against any one man as it would have been, doubtless, had the First Presidency been organized. The Twelve, therefore, presided over the Church until we had left Illinois and come West.

After the death of President Brigham Young, again some time elapsed before the First Presidency was organized. At the death of President John Taylor the Twelve again acted as the presiding council until the First Presidency was organized with President Wilford Woodruff at the head. And thus, it might be said, a precedent had been established, and the general feeling was that no immediate action would be taken in organizing the First Presidency.

But on September 13th [1898] at a meeting of the Apostles, while discussing the necessity for the appointment of a trustee-in-trust for the Church, the necessity also of organizing the First Presidency appeared clear to the brethren, and one after another of the Twelve spoke in favor of such action being taken at that time. After hearing their views, President Snow then arose and stated to the brethren that he had, since the death of President Woodruff, felt led to present himself before the Lord, clothed in his priestly robes, in the Temple, and the Lord had revealed to him that the First Presidency should be organized and also revealed to him who his counselors should be. He did not give any expression to this, however, until after the Apostles had spoken on the subject.

This statement of President Snow was evidence to them that the Spirit of God had inspired the remarks which they had made and approved of the work which they had proposed to do, and it caused them to rejoice greatly. For myself it was very unexpected to me for action to be taken at that time, though I was heartily in favor of it and have always felt that the First Presidency should be organized as quickly as possible or as soon as the Lord would inspire such action.

President Lorenzo Snow was called of God to occupy the position in which he stands today, and he will be sustained by the Lord as His mouthpiece to the Church and also by his counselors and the Apostles, and the whole Church will approve of the action taken and sustain it fully. . . . I can say that President Wilford Woodruff, shortly before his decease, expressed his desire that there should be no delay after his death in perfecting the organization of the Presiding Quorum. The action taken was inspired of the Lord, and it is a matter of gratification and rejoicing that this has been so soon accomplished.

Keys continue with Church. It is wonderful how the Church moves forward without a jar or a break in its course, notwithstanding the departure of its leading spirits. The authority of the Holy Priesthood remains; the keys continue with the Church; the order of the Priesthood is maintained, and the revelations of God are given through the designated authority for the guidance of His people. Nothing that occurs will interfere with its progress or with the consummation of the purposes for which the Lord designed it. This authority and the keys will remain with the Church, no matter what may happen or who may be taken from us, for this is the work of the Lord, and it will not be hindered by any power beneath the heavens. What an impressive lesson it must be to the world to see the Church moving thus steadily forward. (Sept. 18, 1898, DW 57:514)

More thoughts on succession. Men vary in their organizations. Joseph possessed gifts that no man in this age possessed. Brigham Young, having a different organization, had gifts which the Prophet Joseph did not have, and he arose in the power of his Priesthood and calling, with the authority to stand as the senior Apostle at the head of the Church and to declare the word of God to the people. . . .

The revelation says that the Twelve are "equal in authority and power to the three presidents," and the Seventy "form a quorum equal in authority to that of the Twelve." (D&C 107:24, 26.) But the Twelve are equal to the First Presidency only when the First Presidency are absent; and if the First Presidency and Twelve were absent, the Seventy would be equal. At the time I am speaking of the First Presidency were absent. Joseph had been stain; one of his counselors had apostatized, and the other was not as he should be. Therefore, there was no First Presidency. It fell then to the Quorum of the Twelve to preside; for they held the authority equal to the First Presidency, and the First Presidency were absent. The Quorum of the Twelve has no right to preside when the First Presidency is there.

Brigham Young stepped forward with the Twelve and took the Presidency of the Church. And through his unwillingness to push himself forward, the Twelve governed the Church for three years. But the Church is not perfectly organized unless there is a First Presidency and a Twelve and a Seventy. Now, every one of the Twelve held the same powers as the Prophet Joseph, but they had no right to exercise them only in their own place and station. No one of them could rise up and exercise the authority of leading the Church.

As the Lord has plainly revealed, there is only one man on earth at a time who has the right to hold the keys and to preside, though others may have equal power, authority and ordination and be equal in every other respect. Only one man is called to lead. There were twelve men with Brigham, but Brigham held the keys. He was the senior Apostle and had the right to exercise that authority. When the First Presidency was organized, he still, with his counselors, had the right to preside over the Church. (DEN, July 14, 1900)

The man for the hour. There has been a peculiar providence in the selection by the Lord of the men who have been called to occupy the leading places in this great work. We look at Joseph; he filled a sphere that was exceptional among the sons of men. He was perfectly adapted for the work he was called to do. Probably few Prophets ever were so endowed with gifts and graces as was he. Everything connected with his history gives evidence of the fact that he was inspired far beyond many of the Prophets of whom we have read and that he was especially fitted for the performance of his great mission.

The Lord permitted his enemies to take his life. He fell a martyr; and, at the time it seemed that no one could be found to fill his place. But the Lord raised up another—Brigham Young. He had his peculiar gifts and endowments, and he filled his sphere and accomplished a mighty work. He was a man remarkable for his talents, and the Lord sustained him. He passed away, and then President Taylor succeeded to the Presidency. A man who had been a martyr, it may be said, for he bore to his grave wounds received when the Prophet Joseph was killed; but he was spared to become a champion of liberty. A man who was always full of integrity and zeal and who carried on the work, while he lived, in such a manner as to show the people that the Lord had made no mistake in his selection.

Next came Wilford Woodruff. We all know how well he filled the place. A more childlike man, I do not believe, ever lived. Free from show, free from ostentation, free from the defects which beset many men. I never knew a man so childlike, unassuming and free from jealousy and vanity. He was the embodiment of childlike simplicity of faith and, at the same time, a man of undaunted courage. It required a man of such peculiar gifts to do what he did. As natural men, neither Brigham Young nor John Taylor could have issued the Manifesto. They would have required to have been changed by the influence of the Spirit of God. Wilford Woodruff, because of his peculiar organization, could do it and did it. I think it one of the bravest acts a man could perform. I cannot believe that Brigham Young or John Taylor could have done it as he did, and it has always seemed to me that the Lord chose him specially to do this work, and he did it in a manner to please God and the people.

Now I look at Lorenzo Snow. His life has been prolonged, and the Lord has raised him up to fill his sphere under the peculiar circumstances in which the Church is situated; and there can be no doubt that he will perform the work in a manner to please the Lord, he having those peculiar gifts and graces which will enable him to glorify God. (Nov. 10, 1900, Era 4:143-44)

Lack of reverence for Priesthood. My mind of late has dwelt considerably upon the want of reverence there is among us for the Priesthood of the Son of God. Now, I may say some things in this connection that may not be suitable in the opinion of some; but I have strong feelings on this subject. I have felt that too much reverence can not be shown to the Priesthood of the Son of God. I think it has been a characteristic of my life to entertain extreme reverence for the men who bear the Priesthood.

The Prophets were perfect men. I had this feeling when a boy in the days of Joseph. To me Joseph was perfect. I could not see, and I did not hear anything that ever made any impression upon me to the contrary. It was so with my feeling for President Young. I was intimately associated with him the last twelve years of his life. I saw him in private and in public. I saw him when he laid aside, it might be said, his reserve and would unbend and talk with familiarity. There was one feature in his character that won my admiration, and I have not lost it to this day—I never heard President Young utter an expression that would weaken anybody's respect for the Prophet Joseph. He admired him; he looked upon him as the Prophet of God, as he was. I do not think that anyone else ever heard an expression from him that would tend in any manner to weaken respect or reverence or love for the Prophet Joseph Smith. I admired that in his character. And though I was closely associated with him, I never saw a fault in Brigham Young. I expect many would think this very foolish in me and that I must have been very blind. Perhaps I was; at any rate, I wanted to be. I never wanted to see his faults. I think it was Pope who said:

Be to her faults a little blind And to her virtues over kind.

That was the feeling I had concerning President Young. I wanted to be blind to the faults of the man of God. I knew he was a fallible man, a human being; but I did not want to sit in judgment upon him nor to criticize his words and acts. To me he was God's servant. God had chosen him out of all the men on earth to hold the keys—that power, awful in some respects, which God commits to one man on earth at a time. He had chosen him, and who was I that I should sit in judgment upon him and criticize him? I never felt as though I dared do it. I never had the disposition to do it.

The Lord took him, and He gave us another man to hold the same authority, to occupy the same position, to exercise the same powers; and I felt towards him as I did towards Brother Brigham. I knew him intimately also, had known him, I may say, all my life; but during his Presidency over the Church we were thrown very closely together because we both had to go into exile. I might repeat the same in regard to Wilford Woodruff, who succeeded President Taylor. I knew these men as intimately as one man could know another, and I can only say this: more angelic characters, men of sweeter dispositions I do not believe ever lived. They were men who were as perfect as human beings could be. They loved God supremely. They loved their Priesthood and the cause of God with all their hearts. They would have been willing, if necessary, to have laid down their lives at any time for the truth. . . .

This is my testimony this day in the presence of these assembled thousands, that a more perfect man than President Young I never knew. So I may say of his two successors.

Now we have a man who has taken the same place by selection and appointment of the Almighty—President Lorenzo Snow. He is a man who has proved himself through long years of fidelity to the work of God. He stands here in our midst as the Prophet of God, the man holding the keys, the man who can bind on earth and it will be bound in heaven, the man who can loose on earth and it will be loosed in heaven, the man who has the power (which, however, he exercises very rarely, if at all) to forgive sins, to curse and they shall be cursed, to bless and they shall be blessed.

I have said it is an awful power. It is; and it ought to be and is exercised with the greatest care and discrimination. God has chosen this man; He has delivered him from perils and from death and has brought him at his present age to be the President of His Church. Had He a purpose in this? Undoubtedly He had. God foreknew who should hold the keys after Wilford Woodruff passed away, and he selected this man—a perfect man, as far as we know, as far as fidelity to the truth and willingness to submit to anything, even to death if necessary for the truth—to hold the same position and to exercise the same authority. . . .

Revere and sustain the Prophet. I tell you that there never was in this Church within my recollection such an absence of respect and reverence for the authority of God as there is now among this people. . . . Why is it? Many men seem to think that their way is better than any one's else; and though we believe and testify that God has a Prophet in our midst through whom we can get the word of the Lord, we despise that word, so much so at least that we will not ask for it for fear we should be told something that does not agree with our feelings and with that which we desire to accomplish, I tell you, as sure as God lives there will have to be a change in this respect or some men will go to hell. God will not put up with it.

We have come here today to hear the word of God, and I am going to tell you what I think, if I do offend you. As a servant of God, I want to warn you of the danger you are in and of the consequences of the spirit that is being yielded to. I would no more dare to do anything of an important character without consulting the man of God than I would think of putting my hand in the fire, especially to do something that I knew he felt differently about what I did.

As I have said, God has chosen him to stand where he does—not you or me; and He knows every secret thought of men's hearts. His all-piercing eye has penetrated the innermost recesses of his heart, and He has seen all there is about him, inside and out. He knows him thoroughly, because He created him. He knew his past history; He knows his present history. And knowing this He has chosen him. What can we do better than to show respect to our God by listening to His servant, by treating him with reverence, asking his counsel and seeking for his guidance? I know we pray to God for him that he may be inspired from on high. Do you believe your prayers? Do you believe that God will and does inspire him? I hope you do; and I hope that having this feeling, you will be prompted to different action.

We are dependent for guidance. Men may talk as they please about one man power, and they may fight us and seek to destroy us because we listen to the man of God, but the fact still remains that this whole people are dependent for guidance, when they are guided aright, upon the man who holds the keys. Our settlement in these valleys was due to the recognition of that authority; the building of these settlements throughout these valleys is due to that. And, shall we say that in some things we are willing to be guided; we think it right to be guided in matters of doctrine, etc.; but in other matters, just as important and necessary for the salvation and preservation of this people, we are not willing?

Latter-day Saints, you cannot do it. You cannot get away from this authority and remain Latter-day Saints for you sever yourselves from the Church of God, because everything you have is based on the recognition of this authority. . . .

Exercise our free agency. We have a right to exercise our free agency in doing right, in being obedient, in listening to counsel and in doing that which God wants. I think that I am as much of a free agent when I obey God as I would be in rebelling against Him and obeying Satan. . . .

You cannot show reverence to the Priesthood without showing it to the men who bear it. . . . You who have been in sacred places know one thing, that you cannot speak evil of the Lord's anointed and be justified, and if you break your covenants in that respect, you are of course incurring severe condemnation. (April 1900, CR 11-14)

Joseph Smith most remarkable man of his age. Joseph Smith, the Prophet of the nineteenth century, was the most remarkable man of his age. He was only thirty-eight years old when he was martyred. Yet, inspired of God, he had revealed a sublime system of theology and had given to the world the most magnificent organization that had been witnessed since the days of the Redeemer. Truths which had been hidden by false traditions and men-like theories of salvation were brought to light by him with astonishing plainness and simplicity. Men wondered, in hearing them, how they could have been misunderstood—they seemed so simple, in such perfect agreement with Scripture and appealing so strongly and convincingly to the human mind. He was the incarnation of great qualities. A more self-sacrificing man, with the exception of the Lord Jesus, never lived.

Among the earliest communications which he received from the Lord was one which foreshadowed his probable martyrdom. But with unflinching courage he pursued the path which God had marked out. He was undaunted in the deadliest peril and in face of the most formidable opposition. He had entire confidence in the success and future triumph of the system which he was the instrument in the hands of God of founding.

He has been credited with having given to the world a new religion. In one sense, this is true. It was a new religion to our age. But it was the old religion restored in primitive purity and power—the old religion which has been taught by the Son of God Himself. A more fitting instrument to accomplish this wonderful work cannot be imagined. The youthful Prophet possessed every quality necessary for the accomplishment of the labor assigned him. His character stands out in bold relief as a beautiful example of all that is great and heroic in man for Latter-day Saints to admire and imitate. (Jan. 27, 1890, MS 52:52)

A marvelous work performed. When we recollect that Joseph was only thirty-eight years of age at the time he was killed, the work which he was the instrument in the hands of God in accomplishing seems truly wonderful. Alone, with no one to help him but the Lord, he had started out with the determination to obey the commands which he received from heaven. He had not learning; he had not wealth; powerful friends he had none; but he had what were of greater value to him than all these—he had the truth and the authority from God to proclaim it. And the Lord whom he served made him mighty in word and in deed. He performed a marvelous work, and in the face of obstacles, too, that would have frightened the most of men and which he himself could never have overcome had the Lord not given him help. (Aug. 20, 1870, JI 5:131)

Joseph Smith proved a Prophet by world. The Prophet Joseph Smith's name has been known for good and evil among all the inhabitants of the earth, being regarded by some as a man divinely inspired, a Prophet of the living God, his words treasured up as the words of a Prophet should be; and by others he is looked upon as an imposter, an ignoramus, a man in fact too bad to live. This Joseph Smith, who is thus known and has this repute among various people, is gradually being lifted up and made prominent. . . .

Joseph Smith is being proved to be a Prophet, not by the Latter-day Saints alone, for we are doing comparatively little towards the vindication of his prophetic views, of this divine calling. . . . The inhabitants of the earth, numerous as they are, by their words and acts are establishing the divinity of his mission and proving that he is the man that we have testified he was from the beginning. (April 3, 1881, JD 23:115-16)

No man ever chosen to do a greater work. When we reflect upon the work which has been accomplished through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith, our hearts are filled with thanksgiving and praise to God that we have been permitted to live in the earth at a time when we can enjoy the fruits of the labors that he performed. It has been said that probably no man, excepting the Son of God himself, ever accomplished so great a work in so short a time.

Of course, a complete history is not before us of all that men of God have done in various dispensations. We know but little concerning Enoch or Noah; and especially is our knowledge very limited concerning those who lived upon this continent. After the death of our Savior and His visit to the people of this land a reign of righteousness was ushered in, and no doubt very many mighty men lived during that period. But, we think it is not too much to say that no man, always excepting our Redeemer, was ever chosen to lay the foundation of a greater work than that which has been accomplished in our time. . . .

That which has been wrought out by the Lord through this man of God is exeedingly difficult to comprehend. The work that he accomplished is so magnificent, so far-reaching, so grand in every respect that it is not easy for the human mind in a brief space of time to grasp the great results that have been achieved. (Dec. 23, 1894, DW 50:321)

A remarkable man of God. Probably no man that ever lived left his impress more deeply upon his people, for the length of time he resided among them, than our departed President [Brigham Young]. He was a man of extraordinary will and great firmness of purpose. He was prudent in counsel and wise in action. No hesitation, no vacillation of purpose but great tenacity and firmness in carrying out his views of right marked his course. His courage was wonderful; he never knew what it was to have moral fear. The only question in his mind was, is it right? When this was decided, he pressed forward to its accomplishment, and no obstacle could deter him.

He was the man for the times. A man more yielding and pliant could not have filled the situation he occupied as he did. The Lord raised him up and inspired him and gave him the necessary qualifications for the discharge of his high calling. He never took the glory to himself for what he did but always gave the Lord the glory and acknowledged his weakness, inability and entire dependence upon Him.

With all his strength of character, firmness of purpose and driving power, he was a modest man and a man of tender feelings. His heart was easily touched. No one ever went to him and related real causes of sorrow without exciting his sympathy. But he was one who frequently concealed his own feelings in order that he might nerve up others and make them view their difficulties as being light. (Sept. 15, 1877, JI 12:210)

The greatness of Brigham Young. Brigham Young has been credited with having contributed greatly to the strength and success of what is called Mormonism. It is true that he was adapted to take up the work where Joseph, through martyrdom, laid it down. He possessed wonderful powers of organization and government and executive ability of a superior character—a statesman in the highest sense of the word. But he always asserted that it was Mormonism that made him. Whatever greatness he possessed was due to the principles which Joseph Smith was the means in the hands of God of revealing. It was the fruit and product of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. He embodied in his life and character those principles, and he is but a type—a superior type, it is true, in many respects—of all the people who have embraced and carried out practically in their lives the principles which are taught by the Latter-day Saints.

Possessing unbounded influence, he used his power most temperately, and his whole aim was to promote the welfare of the people. The evidences of his superior wisdom and genius are seen in every settlement that has been made throughout these mountains. Salt Lake City, through his prescience, was laid out as a metropolis. He never had any doubts as to its future or the commanding position of the territory which had been settled, and he made preparations in consonance with his expectations.

Some of his contemporaries viewed him as, in many respects, the greatest living American. Only those who are ignorant of his true character will deny to him the possession of the highest powers of statesmanship, government and philosophic wisdom. History is dealing more justly with him since he died than during his lifetime. The time is not far distant when Joseph Smith and Brigham Young will be considered the most remarkable men of their age. (Feb. 3, 1890, MS 52:66)

Greatness of Brigham Young recognized. It is said, and with more or less truth, that the generation in which a great man lives is rarely able to fully appreciate him. Of course, his immediate circle of associates, those who know his plans and motives, are competent to judge his abilities with some accuracy. But, the great majority of his fellow men, not alone those who enjoy a casual acquaintance with him but also those who know him only by hearsay, are in the very nature of things deprived of the insight into his character and achievements that would enable them to correctly estimate his influence upon the times in which he lives. When his plans see fruition, when the foundation he laid is found to possess the strength and solidity necessary to bear any superstructure that may be erected upon it, then mankind come without much hesitation to the agreement that he was a master spirit, possessed of the wisdom, foresight, energy and integrity that constitute true greatness.

Brigham Young was a man who during his lifetime received but small honor, save from his own people, for the splendid abilities with which he was endowed. By the world the very attributes which made him the conspicuous figure he was were quoted as proving that he was a man of dangerous ambition. His influence in the community was deemed conclusive evidence that he lacked but opportunity to become a despot. His clearness of judgment, quickness of decision and courageous adherence to what he believed to be the right were considered to be traits of character which, however admirable in themselves, were exceedingly menacingly in him. In short, the world which could not understand his impulses and which always misconstrued his motives would yield but a meager tribute to the qualities that in another man they would have been happy to acknowledge with the most generous applause.

As Utah has become better known, and as his life-work has been exhibited before a generation that is more willing to forget prejudice in judging a dead man, Brigham Young is coming to be regarded at something near his true stature. Men see in the greatness and stability of the Territory a testimony to the care and thoroughness with which he as its chief founder built. The consummate foresight that prompted him to select these valleys as a resting place for his people, to the rejection of more inviting regions on either side, can be admired today by thousands who come from curiosity or speculation to visit the mighty community he established. Every year adds luster to the record he made; every day brings fresh assurances that his services to his people and to the country are at last receiving their just recognition from a reluctant world. (Mar. 15, 1892, JI 27:179-80)

Brigham Young recognized as great statesman. The labors of President Brigham Young and the leading men of the Church in founding the commonwealth of Utah are gradually being recognized and looked at in their true light. . . .

There has been gradually dawning upon the minds of observing people, and especially on publicists, the fact that President Young was a statesman of a high order and that in all his labors among the people he laid the foundation for their future happiness and prosperity. Among unprejudiced people, who look dispassionately at that which he accomplished, it is now conceded that he possessed qualities of the highest order and that he was a statesman in the truest and highest sense of the word.

Men can now perceive and freely admit that his counsel to the people to cultivate the earth and to make sure their living, instead of running around the mountains hunting for silver and gold, displayed the highest wisdom because it is now acknowledged that had the people deserted their farms, neglected the production of food and devoted their time and energy to mining, the settlements of Utah, if not a failure, at least would not have been a success. After the lapse of years this is readily seen and is frequently admitted because experience has proved the correctness of his policy. Had his strong and powerful influence not been used in this direction and had the people been permitted to go hither and thither, prospecting through the mountains, instead of the happy homes and the strong and healthy settlements with which Utah is now filled there would be starving villages and poor mining camps scattered throughout the state.

The Latter-day Saints in Utah have great reason to be thankful to the kind Providence which gave them such a leader as Brigham Young, and inspired him to give the wise counsels that he constantly imparted unto them.

His expressed views as to the proper methods of managing municipal and county affairs, as well as the affairs of the Territory, had much weight with public men. He used his great influence while he was Governor of the Territory to keep down expenses, and to check all tendency towards extravagance or the contracting of public debts. (Feb. 1, 1898, JI 33:128-29)
