Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 22

Revelation—The Rock Foundation of the Church

A God of revelation. We are a people who seek to live by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. I am frequently asked, "What is the great difference between your belief and the belief of other denominations in Christendom?" The great radical difference is this, that though we believe in God and Jesus Christ as they profess to believe in them, we believe in a God who can and does now give revelation, impart wisdom and bestow blessings as at any previous time when His servants were upon the earth. This is the point of divergence, and from it we continue to differ on many points. (Aug. 10, 1862, MS 24:562)

Blind leaders of the blind. Puny man, especially if exalted by a little learning, is prone to reject that which is beyond his ability to grasp. Instead of the true spirit which alone leadeth to a knowledge of the things of God, your leader of modern theological thought aims to get more and more of the spirit of man. That which is the completest key to knowledge the sectarian world refuses to accept. Instead of revelation, by which alone they may know the Lord and His truth, they cling to tradition and become confused in the discrepancies and differences that they find. They are blind leaders of the blind; and it is no wonder that they move about in a maze of doubt and are all the time striving to harmonize the Word with their limited reason, tearing it away piece by piece until the children of men reach a state of utter skepticism and unbelief.

In contrast with this, how firm and clear and comforting is the faith which enables the Saints to say: "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God!" (Article of Faith 9.) Is there anything in all the world to compare in value with this belief, coupled with the absolute knowledge that the Lord lives and that His own plan for the salvation of His children has been restored to man? (Apr. 1, 1899, JI 34:218)

Spirit of revelation not mysterious. Men's ideas differ very much in relation to what a Prophet is or should be; they have certain ideas and opinion as to how he should receive the gift of prophecy and revelations, and if a man professing to be a Prophet or servant of God does not conform to those ideas, he is, of course, set down as an imposter.

The spirit of revelation is not so mysterious and incomprehensible as many imagine it to be. Men have imagined that it is something they cannot understand and that men in possession of it must differ very remarkedly from those who are destitute of it. But the Lord in His dealings with the children of men never did produce these monstrosities.

His servants were not so remarkable in appearance as to strike everybody who saw them with surprise, but on the contrary they were natural men, similar in form, feature and apparel and speaking the same language as others, and because of this men could not entertain the idea that they were the servants of God or were intimate with His purposes or that they could possess more wisdom than man obtains by the exercise of his natural mind. (April 21, 1867, JD 12:41-42)

Revelation to all people. God in ancient days was a God of revelation, and He communicates His mind and His will unto those who seek after it; not to the President of the Church alone, not to the High Priests or Seventies or any of the officers or all of them alone, but He communicates His mind and His will to all who seek after Him in humility and meekness and lowliness of heart, obeying His commandments.

To the Latter-day Saints alone? No, not even to them alone for there is no human being that is born of woman, there is no son or daughter of Adam that has ever lived upon the face of the earth who has not the right and who has not obtained at some time or other in his or her life revelations from God, but who may not have understood what those revelations were. The Latter-day Saints are not so cramped in their feelings as to imagine that they are the only and peculiar people above all others who have, in this sense, received revelation. . . .

All truth comes from God. God has revealed Himself at various times and in various ways to many people. The heathen have had communication from Him. All the light that exists, all the truths that are taught and all the correct principles and knowledge that have been communicated and existed among the children of men have come from God; He is the author of all. Socrates, Plato, Confucius, the heathen philosophers who knew nothing about Jesus Christ and the plan of salvation received important truths from Him, and so did many other people to a greater or less extent, according to their abilities in improving upon the knowledge communicated to them. . . .

Scientific discoveries God inspired. The remarkable discoveries that are being made in the world of science, in fact, all the remarkable discoveries that have been made from time to time are produced by the operations of an unseen influence upon the mind of the children of men. . . . The truth is that God is the Author; it is God that moved upon the minds of those individuals. It was God that inspired them to do as they did; it was He who led on from step to step until they achieved the results which have made them famous, and sometimes quite unexpectedly to themselves.

What is this which has led these famous men in the path of discovery? The Latter-day Saints call it the spirit of revelation, the spirit of revelation resting down upon the children of men. Some men possess it to a greater extent than others. Some have the gift in one direction, and they are capable of receiving communication from God in a direction that others are not; their minds are better prepared to receive revelation upon a given subject than are the minds of others. Some will receive great moral truths, and these men differ in their organisms; but the light they receive all comes from our Heavenly Father; it is He who gives the inspiration. And so man has progressed from one degree of knowledge to another. . . .

The fountain of all knowledge. We acknowledge God as supreme, the fountain of all knowledge, the fountain of all power, the fountain of all intelligence, the fountain of everything that is good. Who are men? The creatures of His workmanship, if you please, His descendants, His own children begotten by Him, descended by lineal descent from the God we worship. The same being whom we worship is our God, is our Creator, is our Father. When I worship Him, I worship Him as my Father.

That which I possess, if there be anything godlike in it, I attribute to Him as having come from Him by lineal descent. Every aspiration, every noble thought, every pure desire, everything that is good and holy and pure, elevating, ennobling and godlike comes from our Father, the God of the universe, the Father of all the children of men. In Him we move; in Him we have our being. He can extinguish life; He can create life; He can perpetuate life. There is no power that human beings can conceive of which He does not possess. The light that now shines comes from Him.

The revelation we may get, imperfect at times because of our fallen condition and because of our failure to comprehend the nature of it, comes from God. The Latter-day Saints glorify Him for it. If there is anything good or great or noble, if there is anything to be admired, it comes from God, not man. Man is but the medium, but the instrument, but the conduit through which it flows. God is to be worshipped; God is to be adored; God is to be glorified and He will be. . . .

A duty to receive revelation. We believe in revelation. It may come dim; it may come indistinct; it may come sometimes with a degree of vagueness which we do not like. Why? Because of our imperfection; because we are not prepared to receive it as it comes in its purity, in its fullness from God. He is not to blame for this. It is our duty though to contend for more faith, for greater power, for clearer revelations, for better understanding concerning His great truths as He communicates them to us. That is our duty; that is the object of our lives as Latter-day Saints—to live so near unto Him that nothing can happen to us but that we will be prepared for it beforehand. . . .

We have got to seek after God with an earnestness, a fervor and devotion that we at the present time cannot comprehend. It is our duty as Latter-day Saints to seek for knowledge. Will God bestow it upon us if we do not seek for it? (Oct. 5, 1879, JD 21:74-77)

Reformers inspired of God. Yes, millions of people have received the Holy Spirit to a certain extent, although not in its fulness. Luther had it when he was inspired to war against the iniquities that existed in the Romish Church. He was raised up especially to prepare the way for the manifestation of the work of God in the last days. Calvin and Melancthon had a portion of the Holy Spirit, and so had all the Reformers who followed them; and though they had not the authority to build up the Church of God in its ancient purity, they still had a work to do, and they have come in their days and generations and have labored zealously, indefatigably and fearlessly, regardless of death, inspired of God to do the work which they performed in the various lands in which they labored—Germany, France, England, Scotland and various parts of Europe and also in our land—America. John Wesley, also, was raised up and inspired of God to do a work, and he did it.

Founding Fathers also inspired. Not only have these religious reformers been inspired to do a work in preparing for the advent of the Kingdom of God upon the earth; but others have been raised up for the same purpose. Columbus was inspired to penetrate the ocean and discover this Western continent for the set time for its discovery had come; and the consequences which God desired to follow its discovery have taken place—a free government has been established on it. The men who established that government were inspired of God; George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, John Adams, Benjamin Franklin and all the fathers of the Republic were inspired to do the work which they did. We believe it was a preparatory work for the establishment of the Kingdom of God.

This Church and Kingdom could not have been established on the earth if their work had not been performed or a work of a similar character. The Kingdom of God could not have been established in Asia amid the despotisms there, nor in Africa amid the darkness there; it could not have been built up in Europe amid the monarchies which crowd every inch of its surface. It had to be built up on this land; hence, this land had to be discovered. It was not discovered too soon; if it had been, it would have been overrun by the nations of the earth, and no place would have been found even here for the Kingdom of God. It was discovered at the right time and by the right man, inspired of God not to waver or shrink; but, undaunted by the difficulty with which he was surrounded and contending with a mutinous crew, he persevered and continued his journey westward until he discovered this land, the existence of which God had inspired him to demonstrate.

It was necessary that George Washington should be raised up, that the battles of the Republic should be fought, that the Colonies should be emancipated from the fetters of the mother country and declared free and independent States. Why? Because God had in view the restoration of the everlasting Gospel to the earth again, and in addition to this the set time had come for Him to build up His Kingdom and to accomplish the fulfillment of His long deferred purposes. . . .

Yes, glory and honor and blessings and immortality will rest upon men who have been instruments in the hands of God in bringing to pass his great and marvelous purposes. We have the greatest charity for them; we know that God will save and bless them. We know, further, that their sins were sins of ignorance. Where there is no law, it is said, there is no transgression. (Aug. 15, 1869, JD 14:55-56)

Inspired men in all nations. There have been many faithful men in all nations and among all people unto whom God has given great light and knowledge. He gave light and knowledge to Luther and Calvin and Melancthon and Cranmer and George Whitefield and John Wesley and Edward Irving and Alexander Campbell and to Confucius, Socrates and Plato and many other philosophers and teachers. He did not confine His knowledge to one nation or to one people or to one sect but has given faithful men considerable knowledge among all nations. There have been men among the Catholics who have had knowledge concerning the things of God, and also among the Protestants and among the Mahometans and among the fireworshipers and idolaters who lived up to the best knowledge they had.

Confucius and other Chinese philosophers who knew little about the worship of the true God possessed a knowledge of many important principles. Great moral truths were communicated unto them and they taught them. They were just as true, many of them, as if they had been taught by an inspired Prophet of God. So with Mahomet, he taught many grand truths. So with Socrates, he possessed principles of truth which were divine in their origin. And there is no sect or party upon the face of the earth that we have ever read or heard about that does not possess some principles of truth.

What, then, is the difference between these men and their teachings and the teachings of the Apostles and Prophets? Did the latter comprehend all the truth and no one else comprehend any? No, certainly not. God has been merciful to all His children and has rewarded all men according to their diligence and faithfulness before Him. But this is the superiority that the Gospel of the Lord Jesus possesses. Its great Teacher is the Redeemer of the world. He came with power and authority from the Father to teach the truth in its fullness, in its perfection, unmixed with error. There was no falsehood in His teachings or doctrines and so also with His Apostles and inspired servants.

Inspired men lacked Priesthood. God has placed in His Church the Holy Priesthood and given unto man the keys thereof. It is true that some of His servants who bear the Priesthood may go astray and teach incorrect doctrines, but the authority and power are bestowed by which error can be discarded and truth established and taught in all its plainness and purity. Thus, there being at the head of the Church a man who bears the Holy Priesthood and who holds the keys thereof and others associated with him who bear the Apostleship, they know the truth in its purity and can discern false teachings and expose the false doctrines which they propagate. This is the superiority of the Church of Jesus Christ over all other churches now upon the face of the earth. This is the advantage that the Prophet Joseph and the Prophet Brigham have over wise men of antiquity, the philosophers and teachers and leading men who did not possess the keys of the Holy Priesthood.

Confucius, Socrates, Mahomet, Plato and the noted men of antiquity, as well as those who had lived in modern days, who taught truth, had not the keys of the Holy Priesthood nor the power and authority thereof to guide them in their teachings; hence, they ran into errors, and this gave rise to a great variety of views and doctrines and to schools of divinity that have existed and that still exist among the children of men. The truth which they had was not unmixed with error, and many times the error was in larger proportion than the truth. This of course made everything uncertain, and the great cause of thankfulness which we as a people now have is the removal of this uncertainty and the bestowal of reliable knowledge, pure unadulterated truth. (Feb. 1, 1877, JI 12:30)

Mahomet led by Spirit of God. I believe myself that Mahomet, whom the Christians deride and call a false prophet and stigmatize with a great many epithets, was a man raised up by the Almighty and inspired to a certain extent by Him to effect the reforms which he did in his land and in the nations surrounding. He attacked idolatry and restored the great and crowning idea that there is but one God. He taught that idea to his people and reclaimed them from polytheism and from the heathenish practices into which they had fallen. . . . But while this was the case it was the Spirit of God that did it. (Sept. 2, 1883, JD 24:371)

Many wise men in all nations. Many wise men were raised up, and though they did not have the Priesthood, the Lord gave them clear views of truth.

Zoroaster, if all accounts be true of him, was a great reformer, if he was not a Prophet. Much pure truth was given to him, but his followers have departed from his teachings. So with the followers of the religious teachings of Chinese sages including Confucius.

There can be no doubt that Mahomet had much truth revealed to him, and he was raised up to do a great work; but his followers have departed in many directions from his teachings.

Buddha, also, was no doubt inspired of the Lord to teach many important principles, and his doctrines have had vast influence; but his followers, like the followers of other great reformers have departed from the original truths which he taught.

In every nation men have been raised up and been called of the Lord to effect reforms among their fellow-men and to teach important truths. Many of the so-called Christians arrogantly believe that they have been favored above all the rest of the world. In some respects they have been; for they believe in Jesus as the Son of God, and they have His teachings in considerable purity. But other nations and races have not been forgotten by the Lord. They have had great truths taught to them; and in many instances they have profited by them. There have been millions of people, probably, whom the Christians call pagans, whose lives have been as acceptable to the true God as the lives of the same number of so-called Christians. The reason of this is plain; they lived up to the light which God had given them, and this is all that He could require of them. (Aug. 15, 1886, JI 21:248)

God responsible for scientific discoveries. This is termed a scientific age, an age of discovery and improvement, and it is without question rightly named; but to whom shall the credit of these discoveries and wonders be attributed? It is fashionable, we know, in the world at the present time to attribute them to the genius of man and to view them as the fruits of his intellectual progress. It needs but a little reflection, however, to convince us that man is but the unwitting agent of a higher and, to some extent, unseen power who operates through him for the accomplishment of His purposes.

Man is, as yet, but at the threshold of the chambers which contain inexhaustible stores of knowledge of every kind; he is but just commencing to learn his A-B-C's in the great science of life. As he progresses, his comprehension expands, his faith increases, and he is prepared to make more rapid advancement in the boundless field of knowledge that is spread out before him. This advancement will not, however, be confined to the knowledge necessary for man's temporal progress but will also include every thing that pertains to his spiritual improvement.

There has not only been an extraordinary revelation of scientific truths during the last twenty-five or thirty years, but there has also been a wonderful outpouring of religious truths. The last dispensation, of which Prophets have written and poets sung when God would again make bare His arm in the deliverance of His people, has been ushered in. To thoroughly disseminate this knowledge, scientific truths were revealed, and science assumed her proper position as handmaid to religion. It was necessary that this should be the case that the accomplishment of the designs of the Almighty might be brought about with the requisite speed.

In making and perfecting their discoveries, therefore, the scientific men of the age are but instruments in the hands of a superior power that is operating with them for the accomplishment of His plans. Viewed in this light, the sudden and wonderful stride that has been made in discoveries and improvements is easily accounted for; but how few there are who will thus view it!

Mormonism aided by science. It would be very difficult to persuade men that they are really building up and forwarding the interests of the Kingdom of God, or what they term "Mormonism," (indirectly, it is true, but still forwarding it) by their labors in the cause of science. . . . Yet, it is the truth. That under rated and despised system called "Mormonism" has to spread, conquer and triumph and gather together from all nations those who are willing to serve God and keep His commandments. For it to do this speedily the aid of science and the resources of wealth are required. Through the triumphs of science those bearing the Priesthood of the Almighty and going forth in obedience to His commands prove indeed "swift messengers" (Isaiah 18:2) and are enabled to traverse sea and land with an ease and celerity unknown to previous generations. . . .

The Lord is rapidly bringing His designs to pass; and though the world may not feel to acknowledge His hand in all these things that are transpiring in their midst, yet it is His hand nevertheless, and they will hereafter know that in revealing this flood of light, by which men are enabled to make such progress in scientific truth, He had in view the rolling forth and establishment of His great Work. (Jan. 10, 1857, WS 300-301)

Dead Prophets honored. Magnificent structures are reared to the memory of the men who once talked with God. There is not a city in Christendom where there are no temples reared bearing the names of the men who suffered martyrdom because they were the servants of God—St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Mark, St. Andrew; and all these sainted personages were once despised, derided, persecuted, cast out and finally killed.

What was their crime? They professed to have received revelation from God, to be His servants and to have received authority to act in His name; and because they did this, men sought to kill them. Not many generations had passed away, however, when they became the honored among men. They were extolled and held up as examples. Sanctity was attributed them. Miraculous power was attributed to anything that had been in their possession. The places of their martyrdom were considered sacred. And anything that could be done has been done by different generations to show that if they had lived contemporary with them they would not have persecuted them or slain them. (Dec. 13, 1891, MS 54:51-52)

The rock foundation. The rock upon which this Church is built and the foundation stone thereof is new revelation from God to men, and that revelation being of divine origin it must of necessity agree with the revelations which have already been given; hence, the doctrines taught by the Prophet Joseph Smith and the organization of the Church as he was directed to accomplish it was all in perfect harmony with the truths contained in this book (the Bible). It can not be otherwise and be what it professes to be.

It made no difference to Joseph Smith whether he read and was familiar with every doctrine taught by the Apostles; he was under no necessity of framing his teachings therewith that there should be no difference between that which he taught and that which had been taught, because the same spirit that revealed to the ancient Apostles and Prophets, and inspired them to teach the people and leave on record their predictions and doctrines taught him also and enabled him to teach exactly the same truths.

Joseph Smith surprised at Bible evidences. I remember hearing related Brother Parley P. Pratt's first interview with the Saints at Fayette, Seneca County, where the Church was organized. Those of you who remember Brother Parley know his familiarity with the Scriptures, especially with the prophecies. On that occasion he was called upon to speak; the Prophet Joseph was not present at the time. He brought forth from the prophecies of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel and other Prophets abundant proofs concerning the work which the Lord had established through His servant Joseph; a great many of the Latter-day Saints were surprised that there were so many evidences existing in the Bible concerning this work. The Church had been organized some five months, but the members had never heard from any of the Elders these proofs and evidences which existed in the Bible. And, if I remember correctly, he told me that Oliver Cowdery and the Prophet Joseph himself were surprised at the great amount of evidence there was in the Bible concerning these things.

Leaders taught revealed doctrine. The Prophet Joseph was inspired of God to teach the doctrines of life and salvation, and he did so without reference to what the ancient Prophets had said. I have heard President Young make the same remarks. He said that he never consulted the Book of Covenants; he never consulted the Bible or Book of Mormon to see whether the doctrines and counsels which he was inspired to give corresponded with these books or not. It was a matter that gave him no particular concern from the fact that he endeavored always to be led by the Spirit of the Lord, to speak in accordance therewith; hence, these men have had very little care resting upon their minds as to whether their doctrines and counsels were in harmony with the doctrines and counsels of those who preceded them.

It was for them to seek to know the mind and will of the Lord and comprehend His Spirit as it rested upon them, to speak in accordance therewith; and the doctrine that has been taught under the inspiration of that Spirit will be found to be in perfect harmony with the doctrines which have been taught by men inspired of God in ancient days. (Sept. 16, 1877, JD 19:104-5)

The nature of revelation. There is a passage in one of the revelations which the Lord gave to the Prophet Joseph Smith before this Church was organized that explains to some extent the nature of the Spirit by which this people have been and are led. It is in a revelation given through the Prophet to Oliver Cowdery in relation to the translation of old records. The Lord said: "Yea, behold, I will tell you in your mind and in your heart, by the Holy Ghost, which shall come upon you and which shall dwell in your heart. Now, behold, this is the spirit of revelation; behold, this is the spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground." (D&C 8:2-3.)

In this manner the Church has been built up from the beginning. . . . But a great many people have imagined that when the Holy Ghost descended upon men or women they were completely transformed and that it was a supernatural influence which could be witnessed and felt by those surrounding the person receiving it. On this account many misapprehensions have arisen in regard to the way this Church has been governed. Some members of the Church have imagined that it has been necessary for angels to come and point out to the leaders of the people every step they should take or that some other supernatural power had to be exhibited to enable the servants of God to do as they have done in leading the people.

The gift of the Holy Ghost. There is a higher gift than the gift of the ministering of angels, and that is the gift of the Holy Ghost. This is the Spirit described in this revelation which I have quoted to you. It is with the Prophet and becomes, so to speak, a part of him. God dwells with His servants through the Holy Spirit, which manifests unto them the very things they should do. As this revelation says: "This is the Spirit by which Moses brought the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground."

This people have been led to these valleys by the same Spirit. Every step that has been taken in building up the Church has been under the influence of that Spirit. It is that that has constituted the strength of the people of God, because when the servant of God gave forth the mind and will of God as revealed to him through the Holy Spirit, those who were with him, being possessed of the same Spirit, were led to understand that that was the very thing that should be done. . . .

Brigham Young led by Holy Ghost. When the people of God first came to this land, as soon as the Prophet Brigham gazed upon this valley, he said this was the place. How did he know that? By the influence of the Spirit of God, which rested down upon him. Under that influence he was able to say to his companions with entire certainty and confidence that they should make this their stopping place, that this was the place designated by the Lord where His people should build a city.

Did an angel manifest that to him? I will not say that an angel did not come to him, but I will say that it was the inspiration of the Holy Ghost that rested upon him. His mind was light and clear, and he could see plainly that this was the right spot; whereas, if this had not been the place designated by the Lord, his mind would have been dark, and he would have had no assurance that this was the place designed of the Lord as the place of settlement.

This is not the experience of the leading men of the Church alone; it is the experience of all the Elders. . . . In a thousand ways, the Spirit of God manifests unto the servants of the Lord the course that they should take. This is a very remarkable fact with the history of this people. . . .

Revelation to lead the Church. President Young passed away. President Taylor then, being the senior Apostle, took the lead, and the spirit of revelation and of leadership rested upon him. He received revelations (some of which he wrote) for the Church. Previous to the death of President Young he had no right to receive revelation for the Church, but after President Young had passed away he did have that right, because he was the senior Apostle and held the keys of presidency. When he passed away, then the power and the gifts rested upon President Wilford Woodruff, and he was filled with the spirit to lead the people—the same spirit by which Moses led the children of Israel through the Red Sea on dry ground. He could tell the people what to do and how to do it, because God was with him and gave him the necessary light for that purpose.

Now, the same authority, gifts and powers rest upon President Lorenzo Snow and he has the right to stand as the mouthpiece of the Lord to the Church to tell the people what to do and how to do it; in other words, to give them the mind and will of the Lord as they may need it. He has the spirit today, just as Brother Brigham had the spirit when he said to this whole people, "Let us move South." By the Spirit of God he saw that that was the right move to take, and he foresaw what the results would be, if not entirely, at least in part. Under the influence of the same spirit the whole people responded to the call.

So it has been in all the great movements that have been made in the history of this Church. . . . The spirit . . . rests upon the man who presides, and he has the right to say what course shall be taken. If a move is made, he has the right to say whether it is right or wrong. If it is right, the Spirit of God makes it plain to him, and he sees it just as clearly as I see this path in the center of this building. If it is wrong, everything is dark, obstacles appear in the way, and he is made to know that it is not the right move to take.

A united action required. As I have said, there is but one man who has this right. If it were otherwise, confusion would ensue. . . . At the same time, when the Presidency and the Twelve meet together, they have a perfect right to express their views freely, as they may be led; but because they express their views and perhaps are positive in their expression, it does not follow that their views should of right be adopted. No, it is the right of the man who presides, after hearing all that may be said, to say what the mind and will of the Lord is; and though his decision may be contrary to all the views expressed, it is nevertheless his right to say what is the thing to do. No limit is placed upon the expression of views concerning all questions affecting the policy of the Church, but there must be union of action and concentration of faith and obedience to the law which God has revealed. . . .

The assurance of revelation. How the possession of this gift relieves the man of God. What an appalling responsibility it would have been for President Young to have led the Latter-day Saints into the wilderness if he had not had this spirit of revelation with him. Think of thousands of people following him, taking his advice and counsel, and he uncertain as to what to do. No, Brigham was never uncertain. A faithful Prophet of God is never uncertain. He is not assailed by doubts. Everything he does is decisive because he knows what he is doing is right. The sense of responsibility is taken from him to that extent.

So it has been in every move that has been made. As a people we have done most daring things—things which have startled the world. Why? Because the man at the head has known the mind of the Lord. He has known the voice of the Spirit of God and has given heed to its munitions. In doing so he has felt perfectly safe in whatever action he has been led to take, knowing that the Lord would control it for good. (DEN, July 14, 1900)

The right to individual revelation. Every individual has a right to a personal knowledge of the truth and of the mind and will of God concerning his own personal affairs. Our Father does not ask you to walk in darkness nor by another's light, but it is His good pleasure to give each one of you the light of His Holy Spirit in your own souls. By this light you have a right to examine all things that you may hold fast to that which is good. It is your privilege to know for yourselves, not only if Joseph Smith was a true Prophet but whether Wilford Woodruff is God's own choice of a leader in His Church, if the Twelve Apostles are approved of Him and all things whatsoever which concern you to know.

I would not give much for a Latter-day Saint who does not know these things because the want of this knowledge proves that individual slothful and lax; they who have it are awake and active, ready at all times to put a shoulder to the wheel and aid in rolling forth the great work of the last dispensation; herein lies the strength of the latter-day work. . . .

God raises up and inspires suitable leaders. In the days of Joseph Smith many of the Saints were so firmly persuaded that none but the Prophet could lead the Church of God that when he had laid down his life for his testimony, they actually looked for him to be resurrected at once and sent back to his earthly duties; but we may all rest assured that the Lord always knows where to lay His hand on the tool which this work requires. He has given the keys and powers of His Holy Priesthood to his servants on the earth and has promised that they shall never be taken away from now until the Savior shall come. . . . Thus God will continue to raise up and inspire suitable men, so that we shall never be without an efficient leader. . . .

Seek to receive the Holy Spirit. It is indeed our right and privilege to have the companionship of the Holy Spirit of the Lord, and we need it. Even children may have it if they will and need not be left to walk alone on earth. Every woman should win and keep it for herself and never try to walk by another's light. If she puts her whole trust in another, even if he be her husband and a good man, he will surely some time fail her. Let her learn to stand alone so far as human aid is concerned, depending only on God and the Holy Ghost.

Put trust in no man. Do not, brethren, put your trust in man though he be a Bishop, an Apostle or a President; if you do, they will fail you at some time or place; they will do wrong or seem to, and your support be gone; but if we lean on God, He never will fail us. When men and women depend on God alone and trust in Him alone, their faith will not be shaken if the highest in the Church should step aside. They could still see that He is just and true, that truth is lovely in His sight and the pure in heart are dear to Him.

Perhaps it is His own design that faults and weaknesses should appear in high places in order that His Saints may learn to trust in Him and not in any man or men. Therefore, seek after the Holy Spirit and the unfailing testimony of God and His work upon the earth. Rest not until you know for yourselves that God has set His hand to redeem Israel and prepare a people for His coming. . . .

A rule to judge revelation. I will give you a rule by which to judge if you have received the Holy Ghost. It gives strength; it gives hope; it gives wisdom; it gives joy; it gives love of God and man; and if you follow its guidance, it will lead you into the presence of God because it is the Spirit of God and the power of God. All that His servants know of His will comes to them by that Spirit because it is the spirit of revelation and the only source whence such knowledge can come. It dwells in the hearts of men and does not mask a man outwardly nor change his appearance so that he may be known in that way to possess it, and this we may know from the fact that even the Savior was with difficulty recognized as the Son of God, even by His own disciples. (Feb. 15, 1891, MS 53:658-59, 673-75)

Revelation a right and a duty. It is my duty, as a servant of God, to qualify myself by faith for the office that God has given to me. It is the duty of the First Presidency to do this that we shall not be stagnant and that the Church will not stand still but that we shall be alive and filled with the spirit, power and gifts of our office and calling that the revelations of Jesus will be given to us and the Twelve Apostles, also, until angels will minister to us, the heavens be opened to us, the revelations of God be multiplied upon us, until everything necessary for the guidance of this people to redemption will be revealed to us. This is our duty.

It is also the duty of every officer in the Church in his place and station . . . to live in such a way that there will be constant communication between the heavens and each soul. In this respect this Church is different from all others. Every member of this Church in his place has as much right as the President of the Church to have knowledge from God. . . . Every member is stirred up and exhorted to seek for knowledge for himself and herself. If all would do this, then the Church would be easily guided because the people would know for themselves and would be of one heart and mind and understand alike. And that will be the case sooner or later. But the thing that prevents it now is the commission of sin. People will commit sin and darken their minds and thus weaken their faith and their hold upon the truth, and they fall away. (Dec. 12, 1897, DW 56:67)

The faithful to be taught by the Lord. As a people we do not live up to our privileges. We do not have the knowledge of the things of God that we should have. There is not that amount of revelation enjoyed by us which there should be. . . . Now, if we live as we should, there is no event of any importance that could occur but we would have some intimation respecting it; we would be prepared for it. We would be prepared for every public event that affected us; every private event, everything of this character that could occur to us that would affect us in the least degree would be known by us at the very time. . . . All who belong to this Church and have taken the course which God has pointed out and have humbled themselves in obedience to the commandments of God and endeavored to carry out these commandments have this promise made unto them that they will be taught of the Lord. . . .

The still small voice. This is a gift of itself, to be able to distinguish that which suggests itself to our own hearts and that which comes from God. And we are misled sometimes by our own feeling because of our inability to distinguish between the voice of the Spirit of God and the suggestions of our own spirit. There is a still, small voice in the heart of every human being. There is an influence comes with every son and daughter of Adam that is born into the world. What! Outside of the Latter-day Saints? Certainly, we are all the children of God. There is an influence born with every person that to a certain extent is a spirit of revelation. . . .

Walking in the light. I proclaim it as a truth that when a man or a woman enters into this Church and is baptized, repents of his or her sins, humbles himself and herself in the depth of humility before the Lord determined with His help to forsake their sins, to put them away from them, I say, when a man or a woman comes to the Lord in the spirit and lives so that the Holy Ghost will rest upon them, there will be no event of any importance from that time forward but what they will have some intimation respecting it, some premonition, and they will walk in the light, some to a greater extent than others, because some are more gifted than others; some live in such a manner as to have this developed within them to a greater extent. But if they continue to cultivate this spirit, to live in the light of it, it will become a principle of unfailing revelation to them. . . .

It is the design of God that it should be so. But it is dim within us because of the generations of unbelief and wickedness of heart which have existed. We have inherited a great amount of unbelief from our fathers; it has come down to us. (July 25, 1880, JD 22:103-5)

All may receive personal revelation. It is the privilege of every one to receive revelation. It is the privilege of every mother to receive revelation from God for guidance in the training of her children, to be in communication with the Father through the Holy Spirit. It is the privilege of children to have the same Spirit and to have knowledge from God through that Spirit. What for? To teach the parents? No! If their parents are in the path of duty, it is not so, but it is, as I have said, the privilege of every man, woman and child in the Church to have revelation, to have knowledge, to be instructed of the Lord. (Dec. 14, 1884, JD 26:63)

Only one channel of revelation. Now, there is only one way in which the commandments of God can be revealed unto us. God has not left this in doubt. He has not left us to grope in the dark respecting His methods of revealing His mind and will unto His children. In the very beginning of the work of God in these last days, to remove all doubt upon this subject, God gave revelations unto this Church in exceeding great plainness, and there was one principle that was emphatically dwelt upon and enforced, namely, that there was but one channel, one channel alone, through which the word of God should come to this people.

The word of God was not to come from the people up. It was not vox populi, vox dei, but it was to be vox dei, vox populi—that is, the voice of God and then the voice of the people—from God downward through the channel that He should appoint, by the means that He should institute, that word should come to the people, and when obeyed by the people would bring the union and the love and the strength consequent upon union and love. . . .

A promise of faithfulness. It is through this source that commandments must come to the people of God. It is through this source that the word of God has come to this people during the years that have now elapsed. The prosperity of this people, their success, and the triumphs that have attended this work are due to this, that God has chosen one man and through him has given His word unto His people. . . . I am willing to stake my reputation—I never claim to be much of a Prophet, I do not talk much about prophecy—but as a servant of God I am willing to stake my reputation in making this statement, that if you will listen to the voice of God as manifested through His servant who stands at our head, you never will, from this time forward until eternity dawns upon you, you never will be overcome by your enemies or by the enemies of God's Kingdom. (Dec. 2, 1883, JD 24:362-65)

Only one source of authority. He that cometh in by any other way than by the door, you know what is said of him; he that climbeth over the wall, he that receiveth authority from some source outside of that which God recognizes, we as a people are not bound to receive anything that may be communicated to him. Out of that which is communicated in that way, there may be nineteen truths out of twenty statements; but there will be error, there will be falsehood, there will be something that will mislead, because there is not the authority from God to lead and to act. (Dec. 14, 1884, JD 26:64)

Scriptures an insufficient guide. As Latter-day Saints, we need constantly the guidance of Jehovah. We have the Bible, the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants; but all these books, without the living oracles and a constant stream of revelation from the Lord, would not lead any people into the Celestial Kingdom of God. This may seem a strange declaration to make, but strange as it may sound, it is nevertheless true.

Of course, these records are all of infinite value. They cannot be too highly prized, nor can they be too closely studied. But in and of themselves, with all the light that they give, they are insufficient to guide the children of men and to lead them into the presence of God. To be thus led requires a living Priesthood and constant revelation from God to the people according to the circumstances in which they may be placed.

Many revelations not suited to present conditions. A great many people fall into error very frequently by quoting and seeking to apply to present conditions revelations which were given to the Church in early days and which were especially adapted to the circumstances then existing. Of course, it is appropriate to quote from the revelations concerning principle; but in many instances the revelations that are contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants are not, I may say—and I say it with some degree of care—suited to the circumstances and conditions in which we are placed. They were given to the Church at a time when just such revelations were required. Nor must we fall into the idea that the world has adopted, that the Bible is all that is necessary for man's salvation.

The Bible is of exceeding great value to us. The Book of Mormon is likewise of inestimable value. The Book of Doctrine and Covenants is also beyond price. And these records are of great advantage to the people. . . .

We need the living word. It is of infinite importance that we should value and preserve these records because in them is contained the revelations of God to His children in former times. But with all these there is still something more needed for our salvation, and that is the living word of God. We need the revelations of Jesus adapted to our condition and circumstances day by day and for the guidance and control of the Church of Christ in the various circumstances in which it is from time to time placed.

Only applicable revelations are binding. When men get into the dark, through committing adultery or some other sin that grieves the Spirit of God and causes it to be withdrawn from them, you will frequently find them falling back upon the Book of Mormon and the Book of Doctrine and Covenants and quoting therefrom to show how the authorities of the Church are departing from the word of God as revealed in these books. I have often noticed it, and no doubt you all have. They appear to be oblivious to the fact that the Lord gives revelations suited to the circumstances and conditions of the people.

There are revelations in that book concerning counsel and the management of affairs that are not binding upon us only so far as they are applicable to us. When, however, it comes to the revelations concerning principle, then those revelations are unalterable and they will stand as long as heaven and earth will endure, because they are true.

I wish you would see this distinction and in reading the book have it in your minds. Seek to become familiar with the conditions of the people at the time and with the circumstances in which they were placed, and then you will see that many things that are said there were necessary in those days but are not intended for us at the present time.

Counsel of leaders is revelation. As I say, we need continued revelation. It is needed today and will be until we are led back into the presence of the Lord Jesus. Now, Elders come and ask for counsel. That counsel, when given under the inspiration of the Lord, is revelation just as much as if it were written.

There are some people that attach a great deal of importance to something that is written. We have heard it stated by men who are in the dark that the leaders of the Church do not have the same revelation now as in the days of the Prophet Joseph. I have not heard it about President Woodruff, but I have about other leaders. Now, this is a great mistake. We err when we indulge in any such idea as this. I want to say to you that this Church would stand still; it would not progress; we would lose the power of God if the spirit of prophecy and revelation were not with us now.

Not all revelation written. Brother Brigham Young used to say—and I always have appreciated his remark—that he did not want to write revelations because the people would be held to a stricter accountability than they were. The Prophet Joseph wrote enough for the guidance of the Church in many directions. At the same time the spirit of revelation is wanted constantly in addition to these written revelations.

What written revelation is there concerning the organization of these Stakes as we see them? Here is this Davis Stake with a Presidency and High Council; what is there written in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants to sustain this? In the 102 Section we find a plan given for the organization of the High Council and over that High Council the Presidency of the Church presided. But as we are now organized there is nothing specially written concerning it. How then have these Stakes been organized? Did President Young organize them out of his own mind, or did he organize these Stakes according to the revelation of God? He organized them by revelation just as much so as if he had written the revelation. God did not require him to write it, and yet the Stakes are organized. And Zion is now as perfectly organized as circumstances will admit.

We have our Ward organizations and our Stake organizations, and they extend throughout the length and breadth of Zion, and everybody is brought within their compass. These Ward organizations have become quite perfect. How has this been done? Has it been done by written revelation to the Church? Has it been done by anything that is recorded in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants? No; there is scarcely anything in that book that gives any clear idea of the Ward organizations that at present exist. How have they been organized? By the spirit of revelation in and through the man whom God chose to hold the keys.

Church kept perfect by revelation. And so there are constantly arising reasons why there should be revelation from God. Does it come? Certainly it comes and at the time it is needed. In this way the organization of the Church is kept perfect; and it will continue to be so until Christ comes. The books would not do it; the knowledge in the books would not do it. It is not designed that they should. Changes are necessary from time to time, and it requires supreme and divine wisdom to make these changes in accordance with the plans of Jehovah. Therefore, there is in the Church this spirit and gift of revelation.

God gives to every man according to his office and calling. It is not given to one man alone, (only so far as the guidance and control of the Church is concerned); but every man that has the Priesthood, from the President of the Church down to the Deacon in his office and calling, has the right to revelation and also has the spirit of revelation if he is living as he should do. . . .

Counsels of Priesthood leaders are binding. God has placed this Priesthood in His Church for the express purpose of teaching the Church, and the Church should listen to the teachings of the servants of God. They should give heed to those teachings strictly, and if they do not, they incur a grave responsibility. The counsels of the servants of God may not be written; nevertheless, they are binding; and there will be a day come, a solemn day for all mankind and one which we ought to think about occasionally, when everyone will have to answer for the deeds done in the body.

We will have to stand at the bar of the Great judge to be judged. All the writings of the men of God testify to this fact. And if we have disobeyed the Lord, and if we have not listened to His counsels, those who gave those counsels will stand as swift witnesses against this generation. . . .

This generation blessed with much teaching. I have questioned very much whether there ever was a generation that lived upon the earth that had the amount of teaching and persuasion and every kind of inducement held out to them to serve God and to be true and faithful to their covenants as have these Latter-day Saints. It has been, so to speak, a constant stream flowing from God through His servants, who have risen early and labored late and have worn themselves out in teaching the people, telling them the counsels of God and giving unto them the word of God in the greatest simplicity and plainness. . . .

What will be the effect if these counsels that have been given in such profusion are rejected? The consequences will be most serious to those who reject them. Already we see the operation of the judgments of God in this respect. Many men whom I knew in boyhood in the Church have gone into oblivion. Whole families have disappeared, and their names are no longer numbered among the Saints of God. Instead of having a posterity that shall be numbered with the righteous, their children are unknown among us. What a dreadful fate! Why is this? The cause is easily ascertained. It is because they have not listened to the counsels which God has given; they have rejected His word; they have departed from the path of righteousness; they no longer are numbered with the Saints of God, and they and their children will perish.

And it will be so with us if we do not keep the commandments of God, for God has prophesied through His servants that there shall be great calamities and great destruction among the children of men. I say, we already see the operation of those things among ourselves and the dreadful results of disobedience. And so it will be from this time onward.

The Lord has said that His Spirit will not dwell in unholy tabernacles. We may be baptized; we may be ordained; we may have our endowments; we may have the sealing ordinances; we may have all the blessings that pertain to the Gospel and to the Priesthood, but if we do not live so as to enjoy these and to receive the fulfillment of the promises, they will only prove a condemnation to us, and they will prove our eternal damnation; the Lord has not spoken in vain concerning these things. Therefore, we should give heed to the words of light and salvation which God reveals to us through His servants from time to time, and we should teach our children to do the same. (DEN, Sept. 21, 1895)

Written revelations not necessary. Is it always necessary to write revelation? Sometimes it is necessary; sometimes it is not necessary, just as God willeth. When the word of God is given through His servants, as, for instance, this morning through President Taylor making a certain promise, that promise is just as binding as if written. If we live for it, it will be fulfilled just as much as if it were written. God has bestowed the spirit of revelation upon His servants. (Oct. 29, 1882, JD 23:366)

Brigham Young spoke by revelation. Talk about revelation! You go and read the sermons of President Young, and if you do not believe now that he was a Prophet, I think after you have read them you will be sure he was, because he talked as a Prophet to this people concerning their future, and his words were full of godlike wisdom, and he poured them out in a constant stream during his lifetime. (Apr. 6, 1891, MS 53:450)

Unwritten revelation binding. Though we do not receive written revelations (the men who have held the keys have not always felt led to write revelations as the Prophet Joseph did), the servants of the Lord do receive revelations, and they are as binding upon the people as though they were printed and published throughout all the Stakes of Zion. The oracles of God are here, and He speaks through His servant whom He has chosen to hold the keys. . . . We have been blessed as a people with an abundance of revelation. Some have deceived themselves with the idea that because revelations have not been written and published, therefore there has been a lessening of power in the Church of Christ. This is a very great mistake, as we will find out sooner or later.

Conference addresses are word of Lord. This Church has been continually led by the spirit of revelation. The spirit of revelation has been here in our conference. The addresses that have been delivered have been made under the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and they are the word of God unto this people, binding upon them, and they will be judged by these words that we have heard. If we do not listen to these instructions and counsels and abide by the word of God as it is given to us from time to time, we shall be held to a strict accountability. (Oct. 7, 1900, MS 63:18)

Many unprepared to receive higher truths. I recollect upon one occasion previous to the death of the Prophet Joseph hearing him make a remark from the stand which made a deep impression upon my mind at the time. He said that if he were to reveal unto the people the principles and the doctrines which God had revealed unto him, there were men upon the stand that would go around the streets of the city seeking to shed his blood. I do not give his exact words but the idea. I was young at the time, and I immediately began investigating my own feelings to know what doctrines brother Joseph could possibly teach that would have that effect upon my mind. Although I did not fully comprehend his remark, I believed it, for I believed every thing he said. Yet, not many months elapsed before I comprehended his words; for, soon afterwards one of the men who sat on the stand and heard that declaration and whose name he mentioned went about the city plotting to shed his blood. (Oct. 23, 1864, JD 10:343)

The Lord commands and then revokes. There is a certain class of individuals who think, because it is said that the Lord is the same "yesterday, today and forever." (D&C 20:12.) His course of action towards the human family never changes and that He never gives a revelation to His servants or a command to His people which He revokes afterwards. It is certainly true that the Lord is unchangeable in His justice and mercy; but He may deem it wisdom and more compatible with His designs and purposes to reverse tomorrow that counsel which He may give to His people today. To think that the Almighty acts otherwise is but a narrow comprehension of His power and greatness.

The Lord controls the affairs of the earth according to the varied and changing circumstances of the inhabitants; and what may be necessary—whether in the character of His revealed will or the judgments He may see fit to send upon the earth—in one generation or dispensation may be necessary to change in another generation or dispensation that His purposes may be effected to His honor and glory. It is a lesson we have had from the Prophet Joseph. He has told us that we should not set our stakes. (Jan. 2, 1864, MS 26:182)

Revelation according to capacity to receive. There are differences in spirits. There are different grades of intelligence among the spirits of men. We are not all on a dead level. God sends forth occasionally a man that towers like a giant in the midst of his fellow men. The Prophet Joseph was of that kind. There have been innumerable examples of men not of our Church of that kind, whose knowledge, foresight and intelligence were so far ahead of their compeers and those who lived contemporaneously with them that they could not come up to them. This Church could not come up to Joseph. He towered above us. He would have revealed things to us, if we had been prepared, that would have been far greater than those that we have received.

But the Lord deals with His children mercifully. He gives them intelligence according to their capacity to receive it. Therefore, wise men such as Joseph and others give the counsel that is adapted to the conditions and circumstances of the people though they may see that it is not exactly what ought to be. Better to give the people something they will obey, if it is not the fullness of the law of God; better to lead them on until their capacity is enlarged and they are prepared to receive higher principles and truths. That is the way God has done with His people.

Line upon line revealed. There are many things that the leading men of this Church can see and understand that they cannot impart to the people nor ask the people to do. Why? Because they know that the people would not come up to the requirement and that therefore they would be disobedient. Better to give them line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little than to give them something that they could not receive and that they would rebel against. This is the manner in which the Lord deals with His children, and it is the manner in which wise men inspired of the Lord deal with their fellow men.

Speaking as a First Presidency, if we could have our way, there are many changes that we would make; but you know how difficult it is to have people see alike upon many points. (Apr. 7, 1895, DW 50:643)

Many truths waiting to be revealed. The heavens are full of truth and of everything that is good and noble, and many things are revealed to the servants of God which they are commanded not to reveal to the people. Why? Because it would try their faith. Joseph had things revealed to him that he did not make known. . . . There are things which God reveals pertaining to the celestial glory and the higher worlds that the people are not yet prepared to receive. We will all have to grow in faith before these things can be made known. . . . The heavens are full of knowledge. (April 1900, CR 57)

Many truths yet to be revealed. The Lord has not yet revealed to us all that is to be revealed. There are many great and glorious principles and truths pertaining to exaltation in the Celestial Kingdom of God which we are not yet prepared to receive. . . . From the day that God established this Church to the present the stream of revelation has continued to flow uninterruptedly. It flows pure for us to drink at until we are filled to repletion; and if we do not drink, it is our own fault. The servants of God are not to blame for they have been laboring by day and by night from the beginning with us, as a people, to prepare us for the great things that are at our very doors and that God intends to perform in this generation. . . .

Discourses filled with revelation. Men talk about revelation—I said a few moments ago that men compared the present day with the past and compare it unfavorably. When I look at what God has done for us up to the present, instead of there being room for unfavorable comparisons between the past and the present, I am pleasingly astonished at what has been and is being done. It has been one constant stream of revelation from that day to this.

Read the discourses of the First Presidency and the Twelve, and you will see that they are filled with revelation, with light, with knowledge, with wisdom and with good counsel unto this people. Have this people ever seen the day when the counsel of God's servants has not been sufficient to guide them in the midst of difficulties? No; we never have. There has not been a single minute that this people has been left without the voice of God; there has not been a single minute since this Church was founded to this time that the power of God has not been plainly manifested in our midst. . . .

Revelations to Brigham Young. When I contemplate how we have been led, how the revelations of God have rested upon His servant Brigham, and how he has been enabled to guide this people safely through the difficulties which laid in their path up to this time, I am filled with gratitude to God our Father for raising up Prophets in this our day. Posterity will look with wonder upon the Work which has been accomplished in this day. (Oct. 23, 1864, JD 10:344-45)

Acceptance of revelations. It seems nonsensical that the Prophet of God could not deem the revelations he received authentic until they had the approval of the different quorums of the Church. They were authentic and divinely inspired whether any man or body of men received them or not. Their reception or non-reception of them would not affect in the least their divine authenticity. But it would be for the people to accept them after God had revealed them. In this way they have been submitted to the Church to see whether the members would accept them as binding upon them or not. Joseph himself had too high a sense of his prophetic office and the authority he had received from the Lord to ever submit the revelations which he received to any individual or to any body, however numerous, to have them pronounce upon their validity. (Jan. 1, 1891, JI 26:14)

Proper course to take in Priesthood meetings. What is the proper course for officers and Elders in this Church? Why, if I were going to a Priesthood meeting where there were important matters to attend to, it is my duty, as a servant of God, to go to that meeting with my mind entirely free from all bias. I have my views; but I should not be set in my views; I should not be wedded to them. I should enter that assembly with my mind entirely free from all influence that would prevent the operation of the Spirit of God upon me, I should go in a prayerful spirit, asking God to write upon my heart His will, not with my own will already prepared and determined to carry out my will regardless of everyone else's views. If I were to go and all the rest were to go with this spirit, then the Spirit of God would be felt in our midst, and that which we would decide upon would be the mind and will of God because God would reveal it to us. We would see light in the direction where we should go, and we would behold darkness in the direction we should not go. . . .

Applies to families. Now in the family this same thing applies. There are many things arise in families. The father and the mother get together. They want to come to some conclusion respecting some enterprise, perhaps; it may be respecting a son or a daughter—the course to take in relation to that son, the best advice to give to that daughter. How should they come together? Should it be with their minds fixed, the mother determined that she is going to have her way, the father determined that he is going to have his way, he being the head? No; the father and the mother should come together, and every member of the household, with a spirit to wait upon the Lord, to wait for the manifestation of His mind and will, not with any preconceived ideas and a predetermined plan; when that is the case, then the manifestation of the mind of the Lord is withheld so that we cannot, under such circumstances, receive the light of the Spirit.

How to receive revelation. It is the privilege of the Latter-day Saints to have revelation; it is the privilege of fathers, of mothers, of children, of every member of this Church, young or old, to receive revelation, under proper circumstances and when needed. And this is the way to receive it. This is the way that the Church of Christ is guided. Many suppose that the Lord, when He wants a thing done, sends His angels to tell us what to do. He may do so under certain circumstances. But the guide that God has given unto the Presidency of this Church and unto the Apostles and unto all who stand in responsible stations is the Spirit of God, the Holy Ghost. It is by its guidance and by the light which it gives that this Church is led. And it is obtained by waiting patiently for the Lord to make known His will and preparing ourselves for it, asking Him to give it. It comes then in power. It comes with the clearness of the light of the sun. It comes overpoweringly so that there can be no doubt left in the mind as to the correctness of the course.

In this way this Church has been led from the beginning. It is being led in that manner now, and it will be led in that manner until Jesus himself shall come. If the Church is led in this manner, then, of course, you can see that every department of the Church ought to be led in like manner and by the same influence. When the Holy Ghost is with you, then God is with you, and the power of God is with you for the Holy Ghost is one of the Godhead. This is the precious privilege that God has given unto those who have entered into covenant with Him. It may not come with any outward demonstration.

A still small voice. You remember about the Prophet Elijah. He stood upon the mount before the Lord. "And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the Lord was not in the wind; and after the wind an earthquake; but the Lord was not in the earthquake; and after the earthquake fire; but the Lord was not in the fire; and after the fire a still small voice." (1 Kings 19:11-12.) It was in the "still small voice" that God manifested himself.

So it is with us. When that still small voice is heard in our hearts and we listen to it, it will guide us in the way of truth and reveal unto us everything necessary for our salvation and exaltation. If we follow it carefully, we will walk in the path that will lead us to the presence of God. Then, when we dwell in His presence, we shall see as we are seen and know as we are known. But now we have to walk by faith and not by sight, and the Holy Ghost is given to guide us in the path that God has marked out. (Aug. 3, 1890, DW 41:484-85)

No guarantee of faithfulness. It would appear, looking at matters naturally, that if men and women had tested the word of God, had received revelation from God, had knowledge poured into their souls concerning this being the work of God, they would always be faithful to the truth; but it is not so, and this is evidence of the great power which the adversary exercises over the hearts of the children of men. Men may behold the heavens opened and see Jesus, they may see visions and have revelations given to them, and yet if they do not live as they should do and cherish the Spirit of God in their hearts, all this knowledge and these revelations and wonderful manifestations fail to keep them in the Church, to preserve them from the power of the adversary and to deliver them from the snares that he spreads for the feet of all the children of God. (Oct. 6, 1875, JD 18:83-84)

The Urim and Thummim. There is no record of transmission of the Urim and Thummim from one continent to another. It is in the highest degree improbable that the Urim and Thummim that the Jaredites had was the same that was had among the children of Israel. It seems entirely clear that the Jaredites, and after them the Nephites, had the Urim and Thummim that the brother of Jared used and that the Urim and Thummim used among the children of Israel was one that had been prepared for use among them.

The continent of America, as we now call it, was as though it were a distinct world, so far as the other hemisphere was concerned. Its existence was unknown. There was no connection between the people that dwelt on this land and the people that dwelt on the other continents. While, therefore, it is but reasonable to assume that the Lord permits the use of but one Urim and Thummim at a time on the earth, in the case of the Jaredites and the Nephites such a rule might not apply because, as we have said, they were as widely separated from the rest of the world and as unknown to those who lived on the eastern hemisphere as if they dwelt on a different planet. (Jan. 15, 1897, JI 32:52)
