Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 23

Testimonies—The Strength of the Church

This generation held accountable. Jesus said when he was upon the earth: "And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather than light." (1 John 3:19.) They were held to a strict accountability after light was revealed. . . . When God communicates His mind and will unto His children by the medium of angels, by the medium of Prophets, by the medium of holy men whom He has raised up, those who hear that testimony, those unto whom that message is communicated are held to a strict accountability to obey the same or be held in great condemnation for their rejection of it.

If you will read the history of God's ways of dealing with the children of men throughout all ages, you will find that it is invariably the case that judgments and calamities, the fiery indignation of the Almighty always follow the rejection of His truth when that truth is proclaimed by his authorized servants, such as are Apostles and Prophets. . . .

Joseph Smith's testimony binding. It is a remarkable fact abundantly sustained in the history of God's dealings with the children of men that He does not hold mankind guiltless because there are only a few who are the oracles of truth in their midst and who have the authority to proclaim that truth. If there was but one Prophet on the face of the earth and he had no followers but stood alone in the midst of the nations of the earth, his warnings would be followed by terrible results if they were disregarded by those who heard them. The Lord does not look upon men according to their numbers; the importance of His work and His dealings with the children of men is not to be measured by the number of those who adhere to the principles that He proclaims.

When Joseph Smith stood alone, when he had only two or three followers and he declared unto those by whom he was surrounded that God had spoken to him from the heavens, that God had revealed the everlasting Gospel in its ancient purity and power, that God has sent His holy angels to him and that those angels had laid their hands upon his head and upon the head of Oliver Cowdery and ordained them to the everlasting Priesthood, his testimony was as binding upon those who heard it as if millions of men had testified to the same truths. His testimony was binding from the moment that he commenced to bear it to those by whom he was surrounded, and the accountability of the people who listened to him and heard his voice and heard his testimony began from the moment that He opened his mouth and bore testimony of these things. . . .

The testimony of the Holy Ghost. God has not left the inhabitants of the earth without a witness; God has not left them without some testimony which they can obtain to assure them that the words of God's servants—that is the true servants of God—which they hear are from Him. When He called Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery and when He sent his angels to lay their hands upon their heads to ordain them to that Priesthood which had been withdrawn from the earth, He also sent His Holy Spirit to accompany their words and to seal the testimony with power upon the hearts of all that were honest and who prayerfully sought for a knowledge from God concerning the truth of their words.

When Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery laid their hands upon other men's heads and ordained them to the same Priesthood which they had received from heaven, God confirmed the ordination by bestowing the Holy Ghost upon them, and when they went forth and proclaimed the truth, the Holy Ghost accompanied their words; those who were desirous of knowing from God respecting the truth of their testimony had the opportunity of receiving a knowledge direct from heaven that it was of God, and on this very account condemnation commences because light hath come into the world, and when men reject it, they reject it because they love darkness rather than light. . . .

The duty of mankind. What is the duty of the inhabitants of the earth when a man comes as Joseph Smith did and as the Elders of this Church are doing proclaiming the truths which I have alluded to? Why, they being in ignorance of God, they have no revelation from God, they not having heard the voice of angels, they being split up into parties and sects and divided and quarreling respecting the points of doctrine which Christ revealed, they being in this position should humble themselves and ask God in the name of Jesus and in mighty prayer to reveal unto them whether the testimony of these men who come with this new revelation be true or false.

That is the duty of every living soul upon the face of the earth who hears the testimony of God's servants concerning this truth, and there never has been, from the time that Joseph Smith made his first proclamation until this day, a time when a man who took this course did not receive a witness from on high, the testimony of Jesus Christ, that these truths proclaimed by the servants of God are divine and from heaven. . . .

Condemnation on those who reject Gospel. Who have rejected this Gospel? The indifferent, those who would not take the trouble to investigate it, those who would not take the trouble to bow in submission before the Lord and ask His testimony concerning it, those who thought it beneath them, those who have been too proud or too rich or too well situated or who, for some other reason, have failed to take any interest in this work; these are they who are not members of this Church and who have failed to obey this Gospel when they heard it preached in its simplicity and its purity amongst the nations of the earth.

Well, now, will this generation escape condemnation? I say unto you, nay. There will be a heavy condemnation fall upon this generation because of their inattention to these things. Judgments and calamities will be visited upon the inhabitants of the earth in consequences of neglecting the word of God written in the Scriptures and also the word of God to His servants in these days. (Aug. 3, 1879, JD 20:245-48)

Testimony accompanies words of truth. There is a testimony accompanying the words of truth spoken in soberness that carries conviction to the heart of every honest person who hears it, and there is no man or woman to whom it is declared but what has a secret conviction that there is something more in it than they are willing to allow. (Apr. 21, 1867, JD 12:40)

People condemned by testimonies. The testimonies of the servants of God . . . ought to make an impression upon the minds of those who hear them—they ought to have weight for the reason that those who bear them declare in solemnity in the presence of God that they know that which they testify is true; and when a man or any number of men arise in the presence of their fellow men and declare in words of truth and soberness that certain things are true, that they know them to be true, that they are willing to bear testimony of them before God and the people and to suffer all things for their truth, even to death itself, it should make an impression upon the human mind and inspire those who hear these testimonies with a disposition to at least investigate and withhold their condemnation. Because, unless a man knows something to the contrary, unless he has had a testimony that these things are false, he is not justified in condemning them.

There is only one way in which they can be fairly condemned and that is by proving their falsity, by obtaining knowledge that is directly in contradiction to that which is borne testimony to. In this consists the condemnation of the inhabitants of the earth at the present time as it has consisted in every age when God has had a work to do upon the earth. (Jan. 6, 1884, JD 25:22-23)

Individual testimonies—strength of Church. In the Church of Christ there is a fountain opened, so to speak, at which not only the head of the Church may drink but every individual member also in the Church; and while the head of the Church holds the keys by which revelation is obtained for the Church as a whole, still every member has the privilege of receiving revelation also for himself and through such means knowing that that which the head of the Church teaches or is empowered to reveal does indeed come from the Almighty. It is this that makes every faithful member of the Church a witness of the truth, and it imparts a strength and unity which cannot be obtained in any other way. . . .

In The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints the members not only have this in their favor, but in addition they themselves have a testimony, through the Spirit, concerning that which is taught. This brings every individual member in close relationship, through the Holy Ghost, with the Father and the Son. There is no man to stand between his fellowman and the Creator; but each has access to Him through the same gift or power that every other has. In this way and by this means man is uplifted, and all can stand upon the same plane as the children of a common Parent and all have direct communication with Him. (Jan. 1, 1893, JI 28:18)

Therein lies the strength of this Church. One man alone does not govern and control. He gives the word of the Lord, and in every heart the Spirit of the Lord bears testimony that that is the word of the Lord. (Feb. 18, 1900, MS 62:245)

In this way the Prophets Joseph and Brigham led the Church. The Lord told them His will, they told it to the people, and if the people had the Spirit of the Lord, they knew it was true. (Mar. 1, 1878, JI 13:54)

God's spirit accessible to all. The Gospel of Jesus Christ or "Mormonism," as it is termed, teaches men that the Lord is accessible to all who humbly seek Him in the appointed way. The head of the Church is not the only privileged person, though he stands as Prophet, Seer, and Revelator to the people. No man that is faithful to his God and his religion, whether he be in Utah or called by duty to minister in foreign lands, will be unprepared for the reception of principles which are being revealed to the head of the Church. He possesses that Spirit which Jesus said should lead men into all truth. That Spirit, if sought after and cherished, reveals these principles to him, and he thereby becomes a living witness of their truth. This is what constitutes the potency of "Mormonism," or, more properly, the Gospel, and is the means by which its believers are bound and cemented together from the head downward. Elders faithful in their callings, then, are not kept in ignorance by the head of the Church not letting them know too much. (July 3, 1857, WS 465)

A duty to walk in the light. It is every person's duty in this Church, and it is the constant exhortation of the leaders of the people to seek for and enjoy the presence of the Spirit of God so that none will be wholly dependent upon another human being for enjoyment and happiness and for a knowledge of the truth but that each may receive a testimony that this is the Church of God, that the Priesthood has really come from Him and that the men who exercise this Priesthood are not pretenders but are indeed that which they profess to be. This is the bounden duty of all the members of this Church so that they may not be assailed by doubts but that they will walk in the light. In this way a great people can be built up, for these are the elements of greatness.

It seems to be one of the faults of human beings, however, to lean upon others and to do that which others do regardless of their own convictions instead of developing their own qualities that God has endowed them with. How often you see men and women justify themselves for doing things because somebody else does them. (Oct. 14, 1894, MS 56:754)

Testimony of Holy Ghost most convincing. Some people think, "If I had only the ministration of an angel, it would satisfy me." Do you know that when you receive the Holy Ghost you receive something that is greater than an angel? The Holy Ghost is one of the Godhead. When we are baptized, we are baptized in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost. Jesus, therefore, instead of visiting the Gentiles Himself, sent the Holy Ghost to them, His companion, so to speak, in the Godhead, the ministering Spirit of the Father and the Son; and when He gives it unto you, you receive God; and it is a much more powerful testimony and ought to be a more convincing one than the ministering of an angel. The ministering of an angel appeals to our outer senses. We see with our eyes. But we may be deceived, for Satan, it is said, is able to transform himself almost like an angel of light. But not so with the Holy Ghost. When that descends upon a man, he knows it, and the testimony which it gives cannot be taken away. . . .

When the Holy Ghost descends upon a man, God is with him as long as he retains that Spirit, and it is a Spirit that will always bear testimony to him. (Sept. 4, 1892, DW 45:388)

A testimony a precious gift. If you know of any young persons who think they have no testimony, just say to them that if the Lord were to withdraw His Spirit from them they would be apt to find the awful condition they would be in.

I heard of one man who thought he did not have any testimony of the authenticity or divinity of the Book of Mormon, and he asked the Lord, if the Book was true, to withdraw from him His Spirit for a space of time as a testimony to him that he might know by that evidence that it was divine. The Lord answered his request. The effect was of the most startling kind. His experience was of such a terrible nature that he prostrated himself in supplication before the Lord for a speedy return of the precious gift he had voluntarily cast from him. After suffering past description the Spirit returned; he knew for himself then that the Book of Mormon was true and that this Gospel was the plan of life and salvation. Such an experience was awful, and it ought to be a lesson to every member of the Church.

Many undervalue, if they do not despise, the precious gift which God has given them. Instead of cherishing and cultivating it, they think it of no worth. Of course, where this is the case, the gift does not grow. Faith does not increase, neither does it blossom into knowledge, and gradually the Spirit of the Lord is withdrawn. (Young Woman's Journal 4:124-25)

A testimony that grows. The presence of the Holy Ghost will give every man and woman who possesses it a testimony concerning the truth of the Gospel. Full knowledge may not dawn upon the mind at once, but it will grow and increase until the person will have perfectly satisfactory evidence that this is the work of God. Some people, however, are not satisfied with this. They want something of a more marvelous character. And because they do not receive or witness it, they become a prey to doubt. This should not be. Whenever it is the case, there is something wrong in the individual, Either he has not obeyed the ordinances in the right spirit, or he has not understood the nature of the blessing God has given him. (Sept. 15, 1892, JI 27:562)

Why testimonies are lost. I have heard some people express wonder why individuals deny the truth who have once borne testimony to it; but, if we understand truly the spirit of the Gospel, we will know that while under the influence of the Spirit of God we can bear testimony to the truth, but when that Spirit takes its departure from us, we are left to ourselves, and we do not really see it as we once did for the darkness in our minds makes it impossible to do so.

I have known those whose faith did not grow beyond a certain point. Up to that point they could say Joseph Smith was a Prophet of God and that everything was right, but beyond that they would deny him and the doctrines he taught because they had lost the Spirit of God.

We would, perhaps, think that if we ever had the Spirit of God sufficiently to see the truth that we would ever afterwards know it was of heaven; but it is only by retaining the Spirit of God, by cultivating it and by keeping it bright in our bosoms that we or they can remain true. Those who have seen holy angels have afterwards denied the truth, though they would not deny that which they had seen and known while they had the Spirit. There are no circumstances in life in which we can be placed where we will not require the Spirit of God to guide us safely through them—there is no point of our lives, present or to come, that we do not want the light of that Spirit. (July 17, 1863, MS 26:501)

A key to retain a testimony. The only way to maintain our position in the Kingdom of God is to so conduct ourselves that we may have a living testimony of the truth continually dwelling in our bosoms, to live so that the Spirit of the Lord may be a constant and abiding guest with us, whether in the privacy of our chamber, in the domestic circle or in the midst of the crowded thoroughfares, the busy scenes and anxious cares of life. He who will pursue this course will never lack for knowledge; he will never be in doubt or in darkness, nor will his mind ever be clouded by the gloomy pall of unbelief; on the contrary his hopes will be bright; his faith will be strong; his joy will be full; he will be able each succeeding day to comprehend the unfolding purposes of Jehovah and to rejoice in the glorious liberty and happiness which all the faithful children of God enjoy.

It is not enough that we knew the truth of this work yesterday or the day before or a week or a month or a year ago; we ought to and must, in order to be happy, know it to be true today. . . . We can only retain the testimony of the truth in our heart by living near unto God. If we call upon Him in faith to bless us and seek to enjoy the companionship of the Holy Spirit, so ordering our lives that God can, consistently, bless us and the Spirit of the Lord can abide with us, we receive strength to overcome every evil and our minds instinctively recoil from the commission of any act which might grieve that Spirit or bring a stain upon our own character or upon the divine cause in which we are engaged. (Apr. 5, 1863, MS 25:275-76)

Gospel compared to a seed. The best evidence that men can get, so far as I know, concerning the divinity of the work of God is to take the course recommended by the servant of God. . . . He compared the word of God to a seed. (Alma 32:28.) If it were received in the heart and it began to swell and to sprout and to grow, those who received it might know that it was a good seed.

This is the effect that the preaching of the Gospel has had upon the honest in heart in every land where the Elders of this Church have gone. The word of God has been like seed. It has fallen in many instances in good ground, and where it has thus fallen, it has sprouted and grown and brought forth fruit which, as the Prophet said, is sweeter than all sweetness, whiter than all whiteness and purer than all purity.

I am sure the Latter-day Saints will see the appropriateness of the figure used by the Prophet in their own case. When they heard the Gospel, they knew but little about the power of God; but they received it in their hearts; they cherished it; they nursed it; it began to swell and to sprout and to grow; it has filled them with light, with joy and with peace, and they know beyond all question that the seed which they have received in their hearts is a good seed and that the fruit it has borne has been good fruit. It has satisfied the longing of their souls, and they testify before God and angels that it is the truth that they have received.

They may never have seen an angel; they may never have seen the dead raised to life; they may never have seen the blind made to see or the deaf made to hear; they may not have even seen the sick healed by the laying on of hands; but because they have not seen these mighty works, it has not deprived them of a knowledge concerning that which they have received. That has rested upon them in power, and they know for themselves it is of God. They have cherished the seed; they have dug about it and nourished it, and it has grown in their hearts until it has produced most precious fruit, filling their souls with joy, with peace and with a heavenly feeling. And this is a greater testimony than visions or dreams or angelic manifestations or the power of God manifested through the healing of the sick because it is a living testimony in the soul of man.

Seed grows under influence of prayer. There are instances, however, such as this Prophet alludes to, where men do not cultivate the seed and do not watch over it; they do not, in other words, pray. Prayer is to the soul like the irrigating stream to our dry and parched fields and orchards. Prayer nourishes, strengthens and imparts vitality to the seed. The seed grows under the influence of prayer. But where prayer is neglected, the results are just as we see them when we neglect to irrigate our fields and orchards. That which is planted there begins to wither and dry up.

So it is with the word of God in the human soul; it must be watered by the Spirit of God. Prayer must be exercised in order to invoke the power and blessing of God to rest upon it. Then the seed grows; the tree grows and flourishes; its branches spread abroad and fill the whole man, and he knows that it is the word of God that he has received. He has a living and abiding testimony in his heart concerning it, and doubt has no room within him. But let him neglect his prayers, let him neglect to cultivate the seed and to watch over it, then it begins to wither, and he begins to doubt and to ask himself whether this is indeed the work of God. This is not because the seed was not good; it is because of the neglect of the individual. (Feb. 17, 1895, DW 50:418)

The strength of the Church. There is no counsel given by the Presidency of the Church, no step taken nor no policy pursued that they have to depend upon their personal influence to have the people believe because the people can go to God themselves, if they have doubts upon any point, and call upon Him, in the name of Jesus, to reveal to them whether that which is done or taught is from Him or not. They need not be in doubt. They need not run around asking questions about matters which may appear mysterious to them; they can go to the Lord in their secret places, and He will remove their doubts and answer their questions; He will throw light upon their minds respecting the matters about which they may be disturbed. . . .

The way the Church is led. So it will be to the end. The Presidency of the Church have to walk just as you walk. They have to take steps just as you take steps. They have to depend upon the revelations of God as they come to them. They cannot see the end from the beginning as the Lord does. They have their faith tested as you have your faith tested.

So with the Twelve Apostles. All that we can do is to seek the mind and will of God; when that comes to us, though it may come in contact with every feeling that we have previously entertained, we have no option but to take the step that God points out and to trust to Him, as we were often told by President Young, for the results. That is the way this Church is led. There is no being, save the Lord himself, who knows the end from the beginning. Who of us would be tested if we were in that condition?

It is just as necessary that the Presidency and the Apostles should be tried as it is that you should be tried. It is as necessary that our faith should be called into exercise as that your faith should be called into exercise. We can see a certain distance in the light of the Spirit of God as it reveals to us His mind and His will, and we can take these steps with perfect security, knowing that they are the right steps to be taken. But as to what the result will be, that is for the God of Israel to control. That is the way in which the Church of God has always been led, and it will always be led in that way until He comes who is our King, our Lawgiver and our President, even Jesus Christ. (Oct. 5, 1890, DW 41:649-50)

Every man a Prophet. The genius of the Kingdom with which we are associated is to disseminate knowledge through all the ranks of the people and to make every man a Prophet and every woman a Prophetess that they may understand the plans and purposes of God. For this purpose the Gospel has been sent to us, and the humblest may obtain its spirit and testimony, and the weakest of the weak may obtain a knowledge respecting the purposes of God. . . .

If we do anything, let us do it understandingly. If we hear any principle taught from the stand that we do not understand, let us seek to comprehend it by the Spirit of God. If it be not of God, we have the privilege of knowing it. We are not required to receive for doctrine everything that we hear. We may say, "I do not know whether this is true or not; I will not fight it, neither will I endorse it, but I will seek knowledge from God, for that is my privilege, and I will never rest satisfied until I have obtained the light I require."

If you hear a doctrine that does not agree with your feelings or that you do not believe, take this course; do not reject nor endorse hastily without knowing or understanding. By taking this course you will develop the principle that God designs we should possess, and we will thus become a wise and understanding people, for we will be based on the rock of revelation. (Apr. 21, 1867, JD 12:46)

We are independent witnesses. Every man and woman who has joined this Church ought to be and is in the most of instances standing as an independent witness of the truth of that which God has done. You divide this entire congregation into units and let each one stand alone, surrounded by those not of their faith, and he or she is, though solitary, still a witness independent of all others of the truth. Then you bring these individuals together, each one understanding the Gospel and having received a testimony of its divinity, and they constitute a body which, in some respects, is entirely incomparable. (Nov. 22, 1896, MS 59:65)

Spiritual truths not discerned by outer senses. We are asked whether it is possible for a man, by means of his five senses alone independent of the Holy Ghost, to know that Joseph Smith is a Prophet of the living God. . . .

To begin with the perfect use of our senses is only given to us by the aid of the Spirit of God and the light that cometh from Him; and while it is possible for men to reason upon various subjects and satisfy their minds concerning truth, still the highest testimony that a human being can have respecting Joseph being a Prophet or of our Lord Jesus being the Savior is the testimony of the Holy Ghost. The Lord has given light and intelligence to His children by means of which they are able to arrive at a knowledge concerning many things. This is done through the instrumentality of the Spirit of God. Men can satisfy themselves that Jesus is the Savior of the world by reasoning upon it and adducing evidences that are open to the outer senses, and yet they cannot reach such a conclusion without the aid of the Spirit of God. Paul says: "No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost." (1 Corinthians 12:3.) The same may be said in relation to the knowledge of Joseph Smith being a Prophet of God.

For a man to say he knows a spiritual truth by the aid of his outer senses, is a rash and ill-considered expression, and it should not give rise to discussion. (Oct. 15, 1890, JI 25:627)

The value of the testimony meetings. These Fast-day meetings which are being held on Sunday give every member of the Ward who feels desirous to bear testimony the opportunity of doing so, and it will lead to the people becoming better acquainted with each other and being greatly strengthened in their faith and encouraged by the testimonies of their brethren and sisters which they listen to. These can be made the most interesting meetings in the Church. They always have been noted as being exceedingly beneficial to the people. Men and women are led, in listening to the testimonies of their brethren and sisters, to examine the grounds they have for their own faith in the Gospel. It gives an opportunity also when there is anything improper advanced for the presiding officer to correct it, thus removing wrong impressions and belief in unsound doctrines from the minds of the people. . . .

Testimony meetings differ from the other public meetings in that they give the members of the Church an opportunity of expressing themselves concerning their religion and making their religion much more practical—at least, to them—than it would be if they were merely hearers of the word. Those who attend these meetings become interested in them. They are not mere listeners, but they have the opportunity of expressing their own feelings and views, and by this they feel themselves more identified with the work of God than they otherwise would. . . .

When a man or a woman stands up to bear testimony concerning the work of the Lord and set forth the evidences furnished of its divinity, it causes the other members who are present to think and search themselves for the proofs they possess of this being the Church of Jesus Christ. They are thus led to bear their testimony, too, in the hearing of others; or, if they have not the evidence they think sufficient to enable them to bear this testimony, they may be prompted to seek for it. This of itself has an excellent effect. They become witnesses; and having borne testimony to the work, it strengthens their faith and attaches them more closely to the principles of the Gospel. . . . When children hear testimonies of this kind from their seniors, they remember them, and they tend to strengthen their faith and to give them experience in the things of God. The gifts of the Spirit will be manifested in these meetings, and children in witnessing these and partaking of the spirit of the meetings will be greatly strengthened in their desire to do right and to keep the commandments of God. (Feb. 1, 1897, JI 32:78-79)

Testimony bearing by children. I hear of little children bearing testimony in the Sunday Schools and doing so by the Spirit of God, and by that they are made to feel their individual responsibility before the Lord. In my opinion this is a good thing. I believe our future will be greatly enhanced by this kind of training, and we shall have a class of people grow up among us different from all others. It may be gradual—so gradual that we will scarcely notice its growth—but the growth will take place. (Apr. 9, 1899, CR 64)
