Jerreld L. Newquist, George Q. Cannon, Gospel Truth: Discourses and Writings of President George Q. Cannon ( 1957)

CHAPTER 24

Obedience to Counsel—The Path of Safety

The path of safety. We have to learn, if we have not already learned it, that obedience to counsel is the policy for us to pursue and that when we indulge in thoughts of an opposite character, we suffer ourselves to be led astray by the power of the adversary. Hence, it has become almost proverbial among the Saints that the path of counsel is the path of safety. Those who have had years of experience in the Church have arrived at the conclusion that the path marked out for us to walk in by those who have authority to counsel and dictate is invariably the path of safety to those who adopt it. But our traditions interfere with this. . . .

Our religion comprehends spiritual and temporal. There is that terrible tradition, that has such strong hold of all our minds, that the Priesthood of God and the religion of Jesus Christ have nothing to do particularly with temporal matters. It is a tradition almost as old as Christianity. It has come down to us for generations and centuries and is fully interwoven in the hearts, minds and feelings of the children of men, and it is an exceedingly difficult thing to get them to comprehend that temporal things and spiritual things are alike in the sight of God, that there is no line of demarcation between the two, that the religion of Jesus Christ applies to one as much as another and comprehends within its scope temporal equally with spiritual matters. (Nov. 13, 1879, JD 13:370-72)

Blessings result from obedience to counsel. Now, the day has come when we, as a people, will have to listen to the voice of the servants of God, to the instructions of the Almighty through his servants and obey them as implicitly as though God was in our midst. . . .

When the counsel of God comes through his servants to us, we should bow to that no matter how much it may come in contact with our preconceived ideas; submit to it as though God spoke it, and feel such a reverence towards it as though we believed that the servant of God had the inspiration of the Almighty resting upon him. . . .

I know that if we follow implicitly the counsel of God's servants when they are inspired to give counsel, even if they may not know everything about the matter, we will be blessed if we bow to it; God will overrule everything for good, and it will result as God wishes it.

It is a great thing for us to have the counsel and instruction of the Almighty in our midst. The servants of God are inspired by the power of the Holy Ghost, and the revelations of Jesus are within them; and if we follow their counsels strictly, we shall be led into the presence of God, and I know that they are the only men on the earth who have this power, authority and knowledge. If we take a course of this kind, you can readily perceive how harmoniously everything connected with the work of God will roll forth; beauty and order will be witnessed in all the ramifications of the Kingdom of God at home and abroad, and salvation will be extended unto us. (Jan. 1, 1865, JD 11:71-72)

Follow counsel of presidency. When I respect and honor Wilford Woodruff, I bow to God who has chosen him. My neck does not nor never did bow to man. Those who know me know that I am unbending in that respect. I may get along quietly; I do not like to quarrel; but I never yet bowed to man. I only bow to proper authority. If I listen to Wilford Woodruff, if I look to him to see how the Spirit of God moves upon him, if I ask his counsel and take it, it is because God has commanded me. God has given him the keys of authority. Let anybody else try it and see what effect their action would have.

When Joseph F. Smith obeys Wilford Woodruff, he does it upon the same principle. We reverence him as the Prophet of God and as our leader. We listen to him and are guided by his slightest wish. It is because we know that he is the servant of God, chosen by the Almighty to fill that place, and that he holds the keys of the Priesthood to this generation on the earth at the present time. I can say truthfully that we strive to consult his slightest wish and honor him in this position, because we know that God has chosen him.

Who are we that we should withstand God? Who are we that we should withstand that which God reveals? Does this sacrifice our independence? Not in the least. And these Twelve Apostles are in precisely the same position. When they accept the counsel of the First Presidency, they do it because they believe the First Presidency to be chosen of God. They may have different views on many things, but when the First Presidency gives counsel, every man that has the Spirit of God accepts that counsel. This does not prevent him from entertaining his views and expressing them, and it does not detract from his influence. (Oct. 4, 1896, DW 53:738)

Obedience in temporal matters. We have to progress till we reach that state when all our labors will be under the dictation, guidance and direction of those whom God has appointed to preside over us. . . . That obedience which characterizes us in spiritual things will have to be manifested in temporal things.

Many of the people think, "I know more about this matter than my Bishop does," when some temporal matter is agitated. That feeling is running through the minds of numbers of the people; and while this is the case, your Bishops will probably not be as wise as they might be; they have not your faith to sustain them. But when the time comes that you have implicit faith and confidence in God and in those whom He appoints to preside over you, in things temporal as well as spiritual, your Bishops will have all the wisdom needed to give you the counsel you require.

This time must come; and not only must it be the case with the brethren, but it must be so with their families also for family government is the foundation of all government. Show me a community where children are brought up in holiness and purity and trained in the fear and knowledge of God, and I can prophesy future greatness and prosperity for that people. If I see a family where the children are obedient to their parents and listen to their voices as to the voice of an angel and where wives are obedient to their husbands, meeting their wishes and seeking to gratify them in everything in the Lord, I know there is greatness before that family. So with this entire people. (Mar. 3, 1867, JD 11:338)

Power and wisdom in temporal affairs. Let men reflect a moment on the position assumed by the Latter-day Saints. They profess to be sent of God and endowed with the same Priesthood and power as the ancient Prophets. Could they hold or exercise this and not have authority to meddle with municipal and civil as much as doctrinal points? Is there less wisdom, less farsightedness or penetration needed to give instruction on spiritual than on temporal subjects? To make this admission would be to give a superior importance to affairs of the body over those of the spirit.

We do not now remember an instance of a man holding the power and authority claimed by the Latter-day Saints who failed to exercise it on every occasion when necessity demanded in municipal and civil affairs as much as on doctrinal points or affairs pertaining to the spiritual improvement and salvation of mankind. . . .

There certainly would be great cause to apprehend danger from a fusion of spiritual and temporal arrangements by an illegitimate priesthood, a priesthood unauthorized by God. . . . When men are selected by the Almighty and made the recipients of His Priesthood, enlightened and taught by His Spirit, they have power and wisdom to act in spiritual affairs; and as temporal affairs require no greater amount of intelligence and authority, they can, of course, with all propriety, act in them also whenever necessity may demand. (Jan. 3, 1857, WS 293-94)

We are stewards. God our Eternal Father has placed all these possessions and blessings—that is, the possessions of the earth and the blessings connected with the earth—He has placed them in our hands merely as stewards, and we hold them subject to Him—in other words, in trust for Him—and if He calls upon us to use them in any given direction He may indicate, it is our duty as His children, occupying the relationship that we do to Him and with the hopes in our breasts that we have, to hold them entirely subject to Him. . . .

If we are expecting to reach a glory and an exaltation such as we think about and talk about and pray for, it seems to me that there should be something to be done on our part commensurate with the expectations and hopes and desires that we entertain, and I do not know myself any better test that can be brought to bear upon human beings than this test . . . of holding ourselves—that is our individual persons, with our time and the ability that God has given unto us, our wives, our children and the possessions that God has placed in our hands to control—to hold all these subject to His dictation and to His approval. . . .

Authority in temporal matters. There is an authority in the Church to whom God has given the right to counsel in the affairs of the children of men in regard to temporal affairs. When Joseph Smith lived upon the earth, it was his prerogative to do that. He stood as God's ambassador, not clothed with the attributes of God, for he was a mortal man; but he stood as the representative of God upon the earth, holding the keys of the Kingdom of God upon the earth, with the power to bind on earth and it should be bound in heaven. He occupied that position when he lived, and on his departure another took his place upon the earth and stood in precisely the same capacity to us as a people that Joseph Smith did.

That was Brigham Young. When he passed away, another stepped forward and took the same position and holds the same keys and exercises the same authority and stands precisely in the same position to us that the Prophet Joseph did or that the Prophet Brigham did when he lived upon the earth. . . .

God chooses the man for the hour. When he spoke by the power of God, it was the word of God to this people. When he sealed a man up to eternal life, he bestowed upon him the blessings pertaining to eternity. . . . When he delegated others to do it in his stead, God in the eternal world recorded the act. . . . There is but one man at a time on the earth who holds this authority. . . .

God places him there. It is not man's act. It is God's providence. God knows the hearts of the children of men. By His overruling Providence He brings this man to the front, or He keeps him in the rear, just as it pleases Him. I believe that His providence is over all of us, and He can kill or remove as He pleases, or He can preserve in life as seemeth good to Him. And He has done so. . . .

It is His privilege to choose whom He pleases. The man whom He wants preserved is preserved. . . . I believe God manages all the affairs of this Church. I know if I do my duty He will save me. He will exalt me, and I know if you will do your duty, He will do the same for you. And if men whom He chooses are fallible, that is His business. He requires on our part obedience to His will as it is made manifest through the man whom He has chosen.

Obedience to Priesthood a vital test. Now, this is a great point. I look upon it as one of the most vital points connected with our existence in these mountains. I took upon it as a test. It may be said that it will test the Latter-day Saints as they never have been tested—this vital doctrine of obedience to the Priesthood of the Son of God. . . .

With my feelings today I never can consent for any man to go in and receive a fullness of the blessings of the everlasting Gospel in . . . those buildings (the Temples) unless I know him to be a man who is willing to yield implicit obedience to the Priesthood of the Son of God. And further, I am not willing, with my present feelings—I do not pretend to dictate in this matter; I am merely stating my own personal feelings—for any man to go into these buildings who is not willing to hold all he has got subject to the Priesthood of the Son of God and be willing to do with it as that Priesthood shall dictate. (Aug. 12, 1883, JD 24:272-77)

Following counsel of presidency assures celestial glory. God has chosen us to be your shepherds, and if we do not do our duty, we shall be held responsible in the day of the Lord Jesus. But with the help of God we have been and are still striving to lead the people and teach them aright, and if you will listen to our counsels, God will save you. I know that. It may not be thought proper for me to say that, occupying the position I do, but it is the truth. If you will listen to the counsel of the First Presidency of this Church, you will be led into the Celestial Kingdom of our God. I bear this testimony to you this afternoon. (Aug. 26, 1894, DW 49:451)

Disobedience to counsel incurs fearful responsibility. When men whom God has chosen to act in authority are led to give certain counsel or to take a certain course, the person who seeks to change that counsel or to divert them from that course incurs a fearful responsibility. Yet, it is frequently done. There are many people who are not willing to have the man who has the authority dictate what shall be done; they can not trust him; they have some better plan to suggest. In this way counsel is darkened; the Spirit of God is grieved, and trouble follows.

We have noticed . . . that whenever men were reluctant to adopt the plans and counsel of those in authority and urged their own in the stead that God's blessing did not rest upon them. When a man has the right to counsel and to decide what shall be done and his mind is clear on the point, there should be no division on the subject, and men who do not have the authority should never presume to suggest other plans as superior to that of the man who presides. (Feb. 5, 1870, JI 5:21)

We do not now remember an instance of trouble or difficulty experienced by any of the Saints that has come within the range of our observation but what originated either in their total disregard of plain, pointed counsel or in their hasty, unadvised action without first seeking to obtain counsel from those who had the spirit and the authority to impart it. And in every instance of this kind, if the feeling actuating them at the time had been traced to its source, it would have been found that it sprang from distrust in the integrity or ability of those placed to counsel them. . . .

The Lord requires His Saints to be obedient to his Priesthood. If any who bear it do wrong, He attends to them. We never saw an instance of an Elder acting dishonestly or taking a wrong course of any kind that did not himself suffer to a far greater extent than the obedient Saints connected with him or under his care. He injures himself far more than he can possibly injure them. When the Saints are obedient to the requirements of the Lord on this point, He overrules everything for their good so that in the end they are not the losers. (Feb. 2, 1861, MS 23:72-73)

Seek counsel from leaders. There was a time in our history when it was the prevalent fashion for the Latter-day Saints to undertake no important enterprise without first asking counsel upon the subject. . . . Experience proves that no one ever received injury through asking counsel of those who hold the Priesthood. In business affairs it can be no harm to consult friends who have experience, and if those friends are servants of God, why should not their advice be sought? The Lord having chosen them and given them the spirit of counsel and instruction and made them leaders among His people qualifies them in a high degree for this important service.

When a man has sought and obtained counsel of the Lord through His servants, he has strength and confidence that he would not have otherwise. His reflections are pleasant for he has a consciousness that he has done his duty. If embarrassment should follow, he can go to the Lord and ask for His blessing with a faith that he could not possibly exercise if he had undertaken his enterprise in utter disregard of or indifference to counsel.

It does not necessarily follow, because men seek counsel from their Bishops or their Presidents or from the Apostles or the First Presidency, that they sink their individuality or in any manner impair their own agency. I am as free a man when I ask counsel of those whom I know to be servants of God as I would be if I were to talk of my affairs to a man who is not a member of the Church. If I present to my brother or brethren my circumstances and changes which I contemplate making or enterprises which I think of undertaking, it does not follow that I have no choice of action. I am as free a man after receiving their counsel as I was before asking it, and I do not lose my individuality or merge it in the person of anyone else. (Dec. 1, 1893, JI 28:733)

The blessing of seeking counsel. If I knew a man who has the counsel of God and I wished to obtain counsel, I feel as though it would be the greatest blessing I could have given unto me, under the circumstances, to be able to go to him to ask counsel concerning the course I should take. This has been my course throughout life, and I know it has been attended with blessing. . . .

Shall we, let me ask, feel ashamed of asking counsel? If a Teacher came to my house and I were in doubt concerning any matter that I wished to have counsel upon, I would gladly ask that Teacher what his views were and in this way, if possible, obtain his counsel, looking upon the Teacher as a man of God.

If an Elder were to come to my house or a Bishop or a High Priest or a Seventy or an Apostle and I were in doubt concerning something I contemplated and I wished to obtain more light upon it, I would gladly submit my case to him and ask his counsel. And if he did not come to my house and I could have access to him, I would not engage in any important enterprise without taking such a course.

In the primitive days of the Church this was universally the case. We sought counsel at the hands of the servants of God just as they did in ancient times. Kings did not go to war without seeking counsel. . . .

An enlightened Priesthood. One is not a sequence of the other. Every man has the right to seek unto God in the appointed way, to seek unto Him in prayer, and besides calling upon Him in prayer, to obtain His words through His appointed servants. Members of Wards should teach their children to ask counsel concerning all matters they wish to undertake, all enterprises upon which they desire to enter.

When a Bishop is living up to his duty, he has the word of the Lord for his people, and he cannot give correct counsel to his people if he is not living as he should live. The same with regard to the President of a Stake. And when the High Council come together with the President of the Stake, it is their privilege to know for themselves concerning matters and to give counsel pertaining thereunto. So it is with every council in this Church.

The light of heaven that comes from God to enlighten the minds of the children of men is not confined to one individual, to one class or to one council or quorum; on the contrary that light is diffused through the whole body of the Priesthood and the whole body of the Church according to the faithfulness of the members. We should understand this. The light of heaven—that is, the light that enlightens our minds—is as free as the light of the sun, as free as the atmosphere we breathe.

We should seek for and enjoy these privileges. I would like to see the Latter-day Saints so impressed with its importance that whenever we take a serious or grave step, we would seek the counsel of God. We should do this on our knees in our chambers, alone; and it is our privilege to seek for and obtain it elsewhere so we may walk aright before God and acceptably before Him. In this way the Kingdom of God will be built up. (Oct. 6, 1889, DW 39:592-93)

A higher duty to follow counsel. Another point connected with our religion which is trying to some people is their fondness of carrying out their own will in relation to temporal affairs. . . . If I have property, it is my duty to take care of it; if I have means, it is my duty to husband it and carefully use it in a way that shall be beneficial to others as well as myself. But there is still a higher duty devolving upon me and upon every member in this Church and that is to do as we are told by the servants of God. . . .

It is necessary for our salvation and exaltation that the men who hold the Apostleship should administer unto us the ordinances in order that we may derive the full benefits which flow from them. . . . Shall we say that this same authority shall not dictate us in regard to these perishable things by which we are surrounded? . . . We must hold ourselves entirely subject to that authority which God has placed in this Church to lead and guide us. (Oct. 31, 1880, JD 22:127)
